                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               THE EVOLUTION OF HIGH INCOMES IN CANADA, 1920-2000

                                            Emmanuel Saez
                                            Michael R. Veall

                                          Working Paper 9607
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9607


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




We thank Tony Atkinson, David Card, Deb Fretz, Bruce Meyer, Thomas Piketty, and numerous seminar
participants for helpful discussions and comments. We also thank Claude Bilodeau, Eric Olson and Hélène
Roberge of Statistics Canada for their assistance with computations from the Longitudinal Administrative
Database, Emmanuel Manolikakis of Statistics Canada for additional national accounting data, Josée Begin,
Gioia Campagna, Kevin Kennedy and Ron Naylor of the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency for
additional taxation data and Alan Macnaughton, Mohammad Rahaman, Matthew Stewart and the Canadian
Tax Foundation library for assistance and expertise. Financial support from NSF Grant SES-0134946 and
from the Social Sciences and Humanities Research Council of Canada to the SEDAP program is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Emmanuel Saez and Michael R. Veall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.
The Evolution of High Incomes in Canada, 1920-2000
Emmanuel Saez and Michael R. Veall
NBER Working Paper No. 9607
April 2003
JEL No. H2, N3

                                           ABSTRACT


This paper presents new homogeneous series on top shares of income from 1920 to 2000 in Canada
using personal income tax return data. Top income shares display a U-shaped pattern over the

century, with a precipitous drop during World War II, followed by a slower decline until 1970. Since
the late 1970s, top income shares have been increasing steadily and the very top shares are now as
high as in the pre-war era. As in the United States, the recent increase in top income shares is the

consequence of a surge in top wages and salaries. As a result, series on the composition of incomes
within the top income groups from 1946 to 2000 show a dramatic increase in the share of wages and
salaries. The parallel evolution of top income shares in Canada and the United States, associated
with much more modest marginal tax rate cuts in Canada, suggests that the upward trend in top

shares in Canada since the late 1970s cannot be explained by tax cuts. Further evidence suggests that
the upward trend in Canada derives from the United States, perhaps because many Canadians have
an emigration option.


Emmanuel Saez                                         Michael R. Veall
University of California                              Department of Economics and SEDAP
549 Evans Hall #3880                                  McMaster University
Berkeley, CA 94720                                    Hamilton, Ontario, Canada L8S 4M4
and NBER                                              veall@mcmaster.ca
saez@econ.berkeley.edu
1. Introduction

       The evolution of inequality during the process of development has
attracted enormous attention in the economics literature. Many authors have tried
to analyze whether changes in inequality are mostly due to changes in technical
progress. The Kuznets curve theory is perhaps the most famous example of such
an analysis. Kuznets (1955) proposed that income inequality should follow an
inverse-U shape along the development process, first rising with industrialization
and then declining, as more and more workers join the high-productivity sectors
of the economy. In contrast to this technological explanation of inequality
patterns, many studies have analyzed whether macro-economic business cycles,
government interventions such as tax policy and redistributive programs, or more
generally labor market institutions (such as unions) and regulations can have a
sustained impact on inequality or explain the time or cross-country patterns in
inequality. Understanding better the forces driving inequality is of critical
importance to assess the role of government in regulating or shaping the
distribution of income and welfare but requires analyzing long-term series of
inequality. This study proposes to cast light on this issue by constructing and
analyzing income inequality series for Canada over the 20th century.
       In many instances, income tax statistics are the only source on income
distribution available on a regular annual basis for extended periods of time
before micro-economic surveys on incomes became available in the 1950s or
1960s, and remain the best source to study upper income groups. However,
income tax statistics cover only taxpayers and thus for some earlier years only
the top of the income distribution can be analyzed using tax return data, for
example the share of total income accruing to the top decile or top percentile.
       Recent studies have used income tax statistics to construct inequality time
series for various countries over the course of the 20th century (Piketty 2001a, b
for France, Piketty and Saez, 2003 for the United States, and Atkinson, 2001 for
the United Kingdom). All these studies have found dramatic declines in the top
income shares in the first part of the century but the pattern has been different in


                                         1
the last two or three decades: an almost complete recovery in the United States,
some recovery in the United Kingdom and no recovery in France. The timing of
the downturns and upturns suggests that pure technological explanations cannot
account for the facts, although other explanations are still tentative.
       An important and controversial question that arises is whether the level of
top income shares is mainly driven by changes in the tax system. The Canadian
situation might cast interesting new light on these issues because of the
proximity and similarity of the Canadian and American economies associated
with a substantially divergent tax experience in these countries over the last three
decades. Therefore, analyzing the Canadian case may offer a good opportunity
to assess whether fiscal developments are the main factor driving the pattern of
top income shares.
       This study uses Canadian income tax statistics from 1920 (the first year
such statistics were produced) to estimate homogeneous series of income
shares for various upper income groups within the top decile. As personal
income taxes in Canada are based on individual income (and not family income),
our series measure inequality among individuals (which may be different from
inequality among families). In order to understand the evolution of these top
income shares, it is important to analyze changes in the composition of these top
incomes. We carry out such an analysis from 1946 (the first year details on
composition of incomes by income bracket became available). Finally because
the evolution of top incomes over the last 20 years is driven mostly by changes in
labor income, we also construct shares of total wages and salaries accruing to
top wage earners since 1972, primarily using a large micro-economic data set
based on tax returns that is only available for more recent years.
       Our estimated top shares series show that, similar to the French, British,
and American experiences, top income shares in Canada experienced a
dramatic drop during World War II with no recovery during the next three
decades. However, in contrast to the U.S. experience, top income shares in
Canada were not negatively affected by the downturns of the inter-war period.
Over the last 20 years, top income shares in Canada have increased



                                          2
dramatically, almost as much as in the United States. However, this drastic
evolution has remained largely unnoticed because it is concentrated within the
top percentile of the Canadian income distribution and thus can only be detected
with tax return data covering very high incomes. As in the United States, this
dramatic increase is largely due to a surge in top wages and salaries. As a result,
the composition of income in the top income groups has also shifted dramatically
in Canada since World War II: many more high income individuals derive their
principal income from employment instead of as a return to capital.
        There is a controversy in the United States regarding the role of
reductions in marginal income tax rates in the dramatic surge in top incomes.
Many authors have argued (see e.g., Slemrod (1996, 1998) and Gordon and
Slemrod (2000)) that the surge in top incomes reported on tax returns may not
reflect real changes in inequality but rather changes in the way incomes are
reported for tax purposes. The Canadian experience casts doubt on this view
because Canada experienced a much more modest reduction in tax rates than
the United States and yet experienced a very similar surge in top incomes. We
present further evidence suggesting that the surge in top incomes in Canada
might have derived from the United States as many Canadians have an option to
leave Canada to work in the United States. If this brain drain threat explanation is
correct, this would imply that the surge in top incomes in the United States has
been real as well because it could not have impacted top incomes in Canada
otherwise.1
        To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that the full set of
Canadian income tax statistics has been exploited to construct long-term series
on inequality in Canada.2 Buse (1982) is a related study, which used Canadian


1
  The question of whether the surge in top U.S. incomes is due to supply side effects following the
tax cuts (Feldstein, 1995) or to non-tax related effects (Slemrod and Bakija, 2001, Piketty and
Saez, 2003) is still debated and the Canadian evidence could be consistent with either
explanation.
2
  Professor A.B. Atkinson has recently and independently produced preliminary distributional
series within the top decile of the Canadian income distribution since World War II using Income
Tax Statistics. Atkinson’s series focus on inequality within the top decile (such as the share of the
top decile income accruing to the top percentile) and not on top income shares relative to the
average in the population as we do here.


                                                 3
tax statistics from 1947 to 1978. However, his focus was whether the business
cycle and the aggregate labor force participation rate could explain the time
variation of inequality measures such as the Gini coefficient and various decile
shares. In more recent studies, Baker and Solon (1999) use a 1% sample of
employer tax records of payouts to employees and Beach, Finnie and Gray
(2003) use a 10% version of the same 20% microdata tax return sample we use
below. The evidence in both of these studies suggests higher earnings inequality
in the late 1990s as opposed to the early 1980s, particularly for males. They also
find that most of this trend is due to an increase in permanent earnings variation
as opposed to increased earnings instability. In each case, there is no focus is on
top shares.
      Goldberg and Poduluk (1957) compare census data (only available for
wage income) between 1930-31 and 1951 and conclude that income inequality
fell during this period. Blackburn and Bloom (1993) summarize a number of other
studies that examine both individual and family income inequality in Canada in
the post-war period. The view that emerges from their summary, their own
research as well as the earlier research of Podoluk (1968) and Vaillancourt
(1985) is that during the 1950s, 1960s, 1970s, and 1980s there were alternating
increases and decreases in family income inequality with not much overall
change. None of these studies examines high incomes or the war/pre-war period
because they use survey data.
      Heisz, Jackson and Picot (2001) summarize more recent Canadian
inequality research, including the well-known contribution by Beach and Slotsve
(1996). They find that there is some evidence of growing male and family
earnings inequality but also emphasize the findings of Wolfson and Murphy
(2000) that with respect to income after tax and transfers, the inequality "gap"
between Canada and the United States grew between 1974 and 1997.
      Our study is in part about the response to tax changes in Canada. Bird
and Smart (2001) note only two previous empirical papers on this topic. Sillamaa
and Veall (2001) use four years of the same 1982-2000 microdata set that will be
used as part of this study and estimate that the response to the 1988 tax cut (the



                                        4
single largest cut for high-income individuals) over the 1986 to 1989 period was
small at lower incomes but large for high-income individuals. Gagné, Nadeau and
Vaillancourt (2000) use provincial level data over 1972-1996 and find a large tax
responsiveness for high-income individuals, but only for the 1988-1996 period.
       The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our data sources
and outlines our estimation methods. In Section 3, we present and analyze the
trends in top income shares and the evolution of the composition of these top
incomes. To cast further light on the recent period, Section 4 presents series of
top wages shares since 1972. Section 5 discusses to what extent income tax
changes can explain the patterns we obtain and compares these results with the
American experience. Finally, Section 6 offers a brief conclusion. All series and
complete technical details about our methodology are gathered in appendices.


2. Data and Methodology


       In this section, we describe briefly the data we use and the broad steps of
our estimation methodology. Readers interested in the complete details of our
methods are referred to the extensive appendices at the end of the paper.
       Our estimates are from personal income tax return statistics compiled
annually by the Canadian federal taxation authorities since 1920.3 Before World
War II, because of high exemptions, only about 2 to 8 percent of individuals had
to file tax returns and therefore, by necessity, we must restrict our analysis to the
top 5% of the income distribution.4 Beginning with World War II we can extend
our analysis to the top decile, which we divide into finer fractiles. Following
Piketty (2001a, 2001b) and Piketty and Saez (2003), in addition to the top decile
(denoted by P90-100), we have constructed series for a number of higher
fractiles within the top decile: the top 5% (P95-100), the top 1% (P99-100), the
top 0.5% (P99.5-100), the top 0.1% (P99.9-100), and the top 0.01% (P99.99-

3
 Personal income taxation started in 1917 in Canada. However, the fiscal administration did not
produce distribution statistics for the first three years 1917 to 1919.




                                              5
100). This also allows us to analyze the five intermediate fractiles within the top
decile: P90-95, P95-99, P99-99.5, P99.5-99.9, P99.9-99.99. Each fractile is
defined relative to the total number of adult individuals (aged 20 and above) in
the Canadian population. This number is computed using population census
statistics and should not be confused with the actual number of tax returns filed.
Column (1) in Table A reports the number of adult individuals in Canada from
1920 to 2000. The adult population has increased from about 5 million in 1920 to
almost 23 million in 2000. In 2000, for example, there were 22.8 million adults
and thus the top decile is defined as the top 2.28 million income earners, the top
percentile as the top 228,000 income earners, etc. Column (2) in Table A reports
the actual number of returns filed.
        The income definition we use is a gross income definition before all
deductions and including all the income items reported on personal tax returns:
salaries and wages, self-employment and small business net income, partnership
and fiduciary income, dividends, interest, other investment income, as well as
other smaller income items. Realized capital gains are not an annual flow of
income (in general, capital gains are realized infrequently in a lumpy way) and
form a very volatile component of income with large aggregate variations from
year to year depending on stock price variations. Moreover before 1972, capital
gains were not taxable and hence not reported on tax returns. Therefore, we
focus mainly on series excluding capital gains.5 It is important to note that our
income definition is computed before personal income taxes and personal payroll
taxes but after employers’ payroll taxes and corporate income taxes.6



4
  We can provide estimates for the top 5% for all years because it is always the case that more
than 5% of singles file a return, as opposed to married for whom the exemption threshold was
much higher. (See the appendix for details).
5
 In the appendix, in order to assess the sensitivity of our results to the treatment of capital gains,
for the period 1972 to 2000, we compute for each fractile (defined by ranking incomes excluding
capital gains) the percentage of additional income reported in the form of realized capital gains.
We also recompute our top income shares including realized capital gains in income (both for the
ranking and the levels and shares computations). For the period 1972-2000, series with and
without capital gains display about the same general pattern.
6
  Using the tables on average income tax paid for each group, one could easily infer the after-tax
income shares from the pre-tax income series we report.


                                                  6
        Our principal data consist of tables of the number of tax returns, the
amounts reported, and the income composition (since 1946), for a large number
of income brackets.7 As the top tail of the income distribution is very well
approximated by Pareto distributions, we can use simple parametric interpolation
methods to estimate the thresholds and average income levels for each of our
fractiles. For illustration purposes, Table 1 displays the thresholds, the average
income level in each group, along with the number of tax units in each group all
for 2000, the latest year available. For comparison purposes, in 2000, one US
dollar was approximately 1.5 Canadian dollars.
        We then estimate shares of income by dividing the income amounts
accruing to each fractile by total personal income computed from the National
Accounts.8 Our income denominator is taken as equal to 80% of Personal
Income not including transfers from the National Accounts.9 The total income and
average income (per adult) series are reported in Columns (4) and (5) of Table A.
These series are reported in real (2000) Canadian dollars. Our CPI deflator used
to convert current incomes to real incomes is reported in Column (6).10 The
average income series along with the CPI deflator is plotted in Figure 1. Average
real income per adult has increased by a factor of five from 1920 to 2000.11 The
Great Depression decreased real income by about one third. World War II was a
period of very high growth in income. Average income grew steadily from 1950 to
1976. Since then, average income has increased very little with sharp downturns
from 1981 to 1983 and from 1990 to 1993.

7
   However, since 1981, the top bracket is for annual incomes above $250,000. Therefore, in
2000, the top bracket covers about 0.5% of the total adult population, and the published tax
statistics would not allow the study of very small top income groups. Thanks to the microfiles
available since 1982 (see below), we can carry over our study of very top incomes up to 2000.
8
   This methodology using tax returns to compute the level of top incomes, and using national
accounts to compute the total income denominator is standard in historical studies of income
inequality. For example, Kuznets (1953) adopted this method in his famous study on American
inequality.
9
   Personal Income is higher than total income from tax returns because it includes non-taxable
items such as imputed rent, imputed interest, etc. In the recent years in which virtually all adults
with income file tax returns, total income from tax returns has always been very close to 80% of
personal income net of transfers.
10
    Columns (7) and (8) report the average net tax (including both federal and provincial income
taxes) and the average realized capital gain per adult.




                                                 7
        After we have analyzed the top share data, we will also analyze the
composition of income, concentrating on the period since 1946 when
composition data were first published. Using this published information and a
simple linear interpolation method, we decompose the amount of income for
each fractile into six components: salaries and wages, professional income,
business income, dividends, interest income, and other investment income.
        Large microfiles of tax returns (covering 20% of the total population) are
available beginning in 1982. These microfiles allow us to produce top wage
shares series for the period 1972 to 2000.12 In this case, fractiles are defined
relative to the total number of individuals with positive wages and salaries.
Wages and salaries include exercised stock options. Estimating the pattern of top
wage shares is critical to understanding the pattern of top income shares over
the last two decades in Canada.
        There are variations in the presentation of published data from year to
year and a number of changes in tax law over the period 1920-2000. Therefore,
in order to construct homogeneous series, we make a number of adjustments
and corrections. The microfiles available from 1982 to 2000 allow us to do exact
computations of all our statistics for that period and are a precious source to
check the validity of our adjustments for the other periods.


3. Top Income Shares


3.1. Trends


        The basic series of top income shares are presented in Table B1. Figure 2
displays the income share of the top 5% (P95-100) from 1920 to 2000. The top
5% share displays sharp fluctuations up to the end of World War II (between 30
and 40% of total income) and is much more stable afterwards (around 25%).


11
   Average income during the same period in the United States has multiplied by a factor of four.
Population in the United States has also grown more slowly.
12
   Top wage shares for 1972 to 1981 are estimated using the number of tax returns reporting
wages and the amount of wages reported by income brackets (see appendix).


                                               8
Before World War II, the fluctuations are strikingly counter-cyclical. The top share
increases sharply during each downturn episode of the inter-war period: the
sharp depression of 1920-1921, the Great Depression from 1930-1933, and the
pre-WWII downturn of 1937-1938. The top 5% share tends to decrease during
the recoveries from the downturns (1921-1923, 1933-1935, and WWII), although
the pattern is less pronounced than for the downturns. The top 5% share
declines drastically during the World War II years from almost 40% in 1938 to
less than 25% in 1945.13 This drastic reduction implies that the average income
in the top 5% dropped from 8 times the average income before WWII to just 5
times the average income in 1945. After World War II, the top 5% share declines
very slowly (with very small fluctuations) from 25% to 22% by the mid 1980s.
However, in the last 20 years, the top share has gone up substantially to about
29% in 2000, but is still substantially below its level just before World War II.
        Therefore, the Canadian evidence suggests that the twentieth century
decline in inequality took place in a very specific and brief time interval, namely
the World War II years. This evidence is very much in line with the French
(Piketty, 2001a,b), American (Piketty and Saez, 2003), and British (Atkinson,
2001) findings. Moreover, the pattern of the sharp upturns and downturns in the
pre-war period suggests that the business cycle was the main driving factor in
these fluctuations. As a result, the traditional Kuznets inverted U-curve theory of
inequality does not fit well with the Canadian experience over the century. The
smooth increase in the top 5% share over the last 20 years seems to fit better
with the skilled-biased technology explanations put forward in the case of the
United States (see the survey by Acemoglu, 2002). However, even for this later
period, we will present further evidence that tends to contradict the technology
explanation.
        In order to understand the overall pattern of top income shares, it is useful
to decompose the top decile into three groups, P90-95, P95-99, and the top
percentile P99-100. The share of income accruing to these three groups is


13
  As we will see in Section 5, in the United States, the fall in top income shares does not start
before 1941, providing further evidence that the fall is closely related to the war.


                                               9
depicted in Figure 3. Three important facts should be noted. First, the counter-
cyclical pattern before World War II appears to be stronger for P95-99 than for
the top percentile. Second, the drop during World War II is much more
substantial for the top percentile (from 18% in 1939 to 10% in 1945) than for the
groups P90-95 and P95-99. Third, the upturn during the last two decades is
concentrated in the top percentile (which increased from about 7.5% in the late
1970s to 13.5% in 2000). It is striking to note that the P90-95 share did not
increase at all from the late 1970s and even the P95-99 share increased by less
than one percentage point during the same period.
      Examination of the very top groups (P99.9-100 and P99.99-100) in Figure
4 reinforces these three empirical findings. The higher the group, the sharper is
the decline during World War II, and the sharper the recovery since the late
1970s. The very top group shares experience a drop of more than 50% from
1938 to 1945. Moreover, and in contrast to lower groups, the drop continues after
World War II until the mid-1970s. As a result, the average individual in the top
0.01% had an income more than 200 times the average income in the adult
population in 1920. In 1972, that individual had an income only 40 times higher
than average. However, since the late 1970s, the very top groups have almost
recovered their pre-World War II levels. The top 0.01% share has been multiplied
by almost five from 1972 to 2000. In 2000, average income in the top 0.01% is
about 190 times the average income.
      The fact that the rise in top shares is concentrated in the very top groups
within the top percentile explains why this surge in inequality at the top appears
to have gone unnoticed in the literature on inequality in Canada. Tax returns are
the only data that allow the analysis of groups within the top percentile. This
surge in top incomes concentrated within the top groups, as opposed to gains
spread more evenly across skilled workers, casts doubt on the skill-biased
technology explanation. We will come back to this issue when we focus our
analysis on the pattern of top employment income shares in the last two
decades. We can also note that there is a short-term spike in top shares in 1989,
and that this spike is bigger for the very top groups. We believe that this is



                                       10
evidence of a (transitory) response to the marginal tax rate flattening consistent
with the findings of Sillamaa and Veall (2001). We will discuss in more detail the
important issue of the effects of taxation on reported top incomes in Section 5.
Finally, the very top groups do not display the same counter-cyclical behavior as
other high income groups. The top 0.01% share actually declined during the
1920-1921 downturn and did not increase during the Great Depression.
       The remainder of the paper will be aimed at understanding the three key
facts: the counter-cyclical pattern of top shares (except the very top share) in the
pre-war period, the sharp fall of top shares during World War II (with the most
dramatic decline at the very top) with no recovery after the war, and the surge in
top income shares over the last 20 years (characterized by an extreme
concentration at the top). In order to make progress in our understanding, we
now turn to the analysis of the composition of incomes reported by the top
groups.


3.2. The Composition of Top Incomes


       Canada started publishing detailed information on the composition of
incomes by income brackets in 1946. In the early period 1920 to 1945, only
tables showing the distribution of occupations for all tax returns were published.
Tax returns were classified according to the main source of income reported,
such as employment income (employees), professional income (professionals),
capital income (financial), and business income (merchants, manufacturers, etc.).
These published tables display the number of tax returns in each occupation, and
the total amount of taxes paid by each of these groups. The amount of taxes paid
can be used to estimate roughly the average income in each category.
Therefore, these tables are useful to cast light on the composition of incomes
before World War II. Some of this evidence is summarized in Table C1. Important
findings emerge from this table.
       First, at least two thirds of tax filers are classified as employees during the
inter-war period. During and after the Great Depression, the proportion of



                                         11
employees goes up to more than 80%. During those years, the proportion of tax
filers in the adult population was around 3 to 4%. This suggests that well
compensated employees formed a very important fraction of the top income
earners. Moreover, we expect the fraction of employees to be larger in the
bottom groups (within the top decile) than in the very top groups. This is the
pattern that arose in the analysis of France (Piketty 2001a,b) and the United
States (Piketty and Saez, 2003) and will be confirmed in our analysis on income
composition after World War II. This can also be seen in Table C1: when the
fraction of tax filers increases in 1930-1932 and 1939-1941 (due to a decrease in
exemption levels), the fraction of employees goes up significantly. Therefore, it
seems likely that group P95-99 is primarily composed of highly compensated
employees during the pre-war period. This explains why the P95-99 share is so
clearly counter-cyclical. The sharp downturns of the pre-war period were
associated with sharp deflations (see Figure 1). Assuming wages are in general
nominally rigid in the short-run, those who are able to keep their jobs during the
recession experience a relative gain.14 This might explain why the P95-99 share
increases so much during the downturns (and goes down during the recoveries).
As we move up the income distribution, wage earners are replaced by
businessmen and rentiers whose incomes are much more pro-cyclical. This
explains why the very top shares within the top 1% do not display the same
counter-cyclical pattern as the P95-99 share.
           Second, the occupation tables also suggest that the very top of the
income distribution in the pre-war period was formed of rentiers, as in the United
States and France. In order to avoid personal income tax evasion through the
accumulation of wealth within corporations (which were taxed at a flat rate
substantially lower than the top personal income tax rate) and to provide some
relief from double taxation, Canada issued a ruling creating Personal
Corporations (see McGregor, 1960) in 1925. Personal Corporations are defined
as corporations controlled by a single individual or family and deriving at least a
quarter of their profits from passive investments. Therefore personal corporations

14
     We provide further evidence on this point in the following section.


                                                   12
are clearly entities created by passive investors and not owners-managers of
businesses. Starting in tax year 1925, Personal Corporations were taxed directly
at the personal level (as S-corporations in the United States today). The
occupation tables show that taxpayers classified as personal corporations had
very large tax liabilities and hence very large incomes, and thus formed a
substantial part of the top 0.01% group. Self-employed professionals and
entrepreneurs form an intermediate category between the highly compensated
employees and the rentiers with personal corporations. Beginning in the tax year
1942, occupation tables were published by income brackets. Table C2 reports
the composition of occupations (employees, entrepreneurs, and rentiers) for
each fractile. It shows that the fraction of employees is indeed very high for
groups below the top percentile and that rentiers formed the majority at the very
top. However, the important fact to note is that the fraction of employees remains
high, even within the very top fractiles, explaining why even the top shares did
not follow the downturns of the pre-war period. This is in contrast with the
American and French experiences where the fraction of employees was very
small at the top. In those two countries, the share of capital income was much
more important at the very top and thus the very top income share dropped
during the pre-war downturns.
        Our Canadian top share series display a sharp drop during World War II,
and that drop is larger for the very top groups. This fall can be in part explained
by the fiscal shock in the corporate sector. As part of financing the war, Canada
increased substantially taxes on corporations.15 Moreover, corporations reduced
drastically their payout ratios during the war because of the high demand for
investment, and perhaps also to avoid the personal income tax which imposed
extremely high marginal tax rates (in excess of 90%) on the highest incomes.
This is illustrated in Figure 5. Panel A displays the real aggregate value of profits
before and after taxes, along with dividend distributions of Canadian corporations


15
  While during the war the corporation income tax itself increased modestly from 15% to 18%, an
additional tax was introduced of the greater of 22% of total profits and 100% (part refundable after
the war) of profit increases.


                                                13
from the National Accounts for the period 1926 to 1955.16 The figure shows that,
in spite of a two-fold increase in profits from 1938 to 1945, real dividend
payments actually decreased. This explains why top income rentiers experienced
a drop relative to the fast growing average adult income (see Figure 1) during the
World War II episode. Panel B in Figure 5 displays the share of total capital
income (excluding capital gains), and the share of dividends from Canadian
corporations in total personal income in the Canadian economy from 1926 to
2000. Consistent with the evidence in Panel A, the share of domestic dividends
in personal income falls by more than 60% from 1938 to 1945. Moreover, the
share of total capital income (including interest income and distributions from
Canadian-owned foreign stock) falls from over 12% in 1938 to about 6-7% at the
end of the war. Therefore, these figures show clearly that capital income accruing
to individuals was drastically reduced during the War and this might explain why
top incomes (composed in large part of capital income) fell so much in relative
terms. The other interesting evidence from Figure 5 is that real dividends fell by
only a small amount during the Great Depression, even though corporate profits
fell to almost zero in 1932 (Panel A). In other words, in the aggregate, firms
smoothed their dividend payments and the shock of the Great Depression was
almost entirely absorbed by reduced retained earnings. As a result, the share of
domestic dividends or more generally capital income in personal income actually
grew during the Great Depression (Panel B). This feature is in sharp contrast
with the US experience where the share of dividends in personal income fell
during the Great Depression and might explain why top income shares (within
the top 1%) fell in the United States during the Great Depression while they
either increased or remained stable in Canada.
          However, the shares of lower income groups (such as P90-95 and P95-
99) also fell during World War II, and the evidence from 1942 (and from 1946 on,
see below) from Table C2 shows that these groups are composed largely of
employees. Therefore, salaries of highly compensated employees must have
fallen relative to average earnings in the economy. Unfortunately, there are no

16
     National Accounts series in Canada start in 1926.


                                                 14
data on wage earnings distributions during World War II that we could use to
document this on an annual basis.17 Piketty and Saez (2003), using tabulations
of tax returns by size of wage and salaries, were able to show that top wage
shares fell significantly exactly during the years of the war. It is very likely that the
same phenomenon was taking place in Canada as well, and led to a drop of the
bottom groups’ shares within the top decile. We present indirect evidence on this
issue in Section 4.
       From 1946 on, detailed tables on the composition of income were
published annually. Therefore, for each fractile within the top decile, we were
able to construct series on the composition of incomes. These series are
presented in Table C3. Figure 6 shows the composition of income for each
fractile in 1946 (Panel A) and 2000 (Panel B). As expected, Panel A shows the
share of wage income is a declining function of income and that the share of
capital income (dividends, interest, and other investment income) is an
increasing function of income. The share of entrepreneurial income (professional
and business income) presents an inverted U-shape, and peaks for fractile
P99.5-99.9. Thus, individuals in fractiles P90-95 and P95-99 rely mostly on labor
income (capital income is less than 25 percent for these groups) while individuals
in the top percentile derive most of their income in the form of passive capital
income (mostly dividend and estate income). However, it is important to note, as
was found in the occupation tables for 1942, that even within the very top groups,
wage and salary income remains important. In France and the United States at
that time, the share of wages and salaries was much lower at the top than in
Canada.
       Panel B shows that the income composition pattern has changed
significantly from 1946 to 2000. In 2000, the share of wage income has increased
for all groups, and this increase is more dramatic at the very top. Entrepreneurial
income (professional and business income) has fallen dramatically, especially at
the top. The share of capital income (dividends, interest, and other capital


17
  Census earnings distributions are only available on a decennial basis since 1931 in Canada.
Earnings for the Prairies provinces are also available for 1936 and 1946.


                                             15
income, excluding capital gains) has slightly increased below the top 0.5% and
fallen significantly for the very top groups. Therefore, both the self-employed or
small business owners in the bottom of the top percentile, and the rentiers in the
very top, have been in large part replaced by highly compensated employees.
Figure 7 shows the evolution from 1946 to 2000 of the share of wage income for
various fractiles. The wage share for the groups P90-95 and P95-99 has always
been large (around 90% and 75% respectively). However, the wage share within
the very top groups has steadily increased over the period. For example, the
wage share in the top 0.1% has doubled from 34% to 72% over the period.
Interestingly, there has been a reversal in the level of shares between the groups
within the top percentile. In 1946, the share of wages was lowest at the top while
in 2000, the share of wages (within the top percentile) is higher for the top 0.1%
group than for groups P99-99.5 and P99.5-99.9. In 2000, more than two thirds of
incomes reported by the top 0.01% individuals is composed of wages and
salaries, showing that the working rich have become the main group at the very
top and have to a large extent displaced individuals with large capital incomes.
      Finally, it should be emphasized that the decline of the share of capital
income above the top 0.5% reflects a fall in large capital holdings (relative to the
average) rather than a decline in the aggregate capital income in the economy.
First, the share of capital income actually increases for the groups P90-95, P95-
99, and P99-99.5, showing that top capital income earners have indeed lost
relative to the other groups. Second, the series depicted in Panel B of Figure 5
shows clearly that the share of capital income and dividends in personal income
from the National Accounts is not lower in 2000 than it was in the pre-war period.
We will come back to this in Section 5.
      We saw in Section 3.1 that top income shares have increased dramatically
over the last 20 years in Canada, and that this increase was concentrated within
the top 1%. At the same time, we have shown that the share of wages has also
increased dramatically within the top 1% groups. Therefore, there is a strong
presumption that the recent upturn in top shares is the consequence of an
unprecedented surge in the compensation of the top compensated employees. In



                                          16
order to cast direct light on this issue, we analyze in the following section the top
of the wage income distribution since 1972.


4. The Evolution of Wage Income Inequality


4.1 Wage Inequality in the first part of the century


As we discussed above, Canada did not produce annual statistics on the
distribution of wage income in the first part of the century. Therefore, we have to
rely on indirect sources to confirm our hypotheses on the evolution of wage
income inequality, namely that downturns are favorable to highly compensated
employees (relative to the average), and that World War II produced a strong
compression in the wage distribution. We use statistics published in The Canada
Yearbook and Urquhart and Buckley (1965) showing the number of salary
earners (supervisory and office employees with a compensation contract
determined at the annual level), and the number of non-salaried employees
(workers employed with a compensation contract determined either at the hourly,
daily, or weekly level), as well as the total employment income for these two
categories of workers. These statistics are based on the manufacturing sector
only. Figure 8 displays the ratio of the average compensation of salaried to non-
salaried employees (left y-axis), along with the fraction of salaried employees
(right y-axis) from 1915 to 1948. It is important to note that the fraction of salaried
workers trends upward over time (from 10% in 1915 to 17% in 1948). It seems
likely that most of the expansion in the number of salaried workers was low-
salary workers, so even in the absence of changes in inequality, we would expect
the average salary to fall relative to average non-salary employment earnings.
Thus, these series should be used with much caution to analyze long-term trends
in inequality. However, two clear facts emerge from the Figure.
       First, during the downturns of 1920-21 and the Great Depression, both the
fraction of salary earners and the ratio of salary to non-salary employment
earnings go up, showing that salaried workers benefited in relative terms from



                                          17
the downturns. The raw series show that the downturns reduced drastically the
number of non-salaried employees while the number of salary earners remained
fairly stable. Therefore, this evidence lends credence to our interpretation in
Section 3 of the increase of the upper middle income share (P95-99) during the
interwar downturns. In contrast to non-salaried employees, well compensated
salaried employees were able to retain their jobs during the downturns and
experienced only a modest fall in their nominal earnings.
       Second, during World War II, Figure 8 shows that both the fraction of
salaried employees and the salary to non-salary employment earnings ratio go
downward, showing that the relative position of salaried employees clearly
declined.18 The ratio of salary to non-salary earnings decreases from 1.8 in 1939
to a low of 1.3 in 1943 and rebounds only a little to 1.5 in 1946. Therefore, as for
our top income share results, the fall is concentrated in the early part of the war
(1939 to 1943) and there is only a very partial recovery after the war. The drastic
reduction in inequality during the war could be either due to the change in the
relative demand for skilled versus unskilled labor to meet the demands of the
expanding war economy or to wartime labor regulations and wage controls. The
latter explanation is the most direct one and was put forward in The Canada
Yearbook, 1948 to explain the trends in salaried versus non-salaried earners
observed during the war. The war labor regulations set strict bounds on the
raises that corporations were able to give to their “salaried officials” (see Canada,
Department of National Revenue, The Wartime Salaries Order, 1945). The
higher the salary, the more difficult it was for the firm to provide a raise. For
example, raises for employees with salaries above $7,500 (corresponding
roughly to percentile P99.5) required a direct approval of the Minister. These
controls, targeted primarily at highly compensated employees, fit well with the
evidence showing that the average salary increased very modestly during World
War II while average non-salaried earnings rose by more than 50%. The fact that
the drop in income shares during the war of the upper middle-class groups




                                         18
composed mostly of well compensated employees (P90-95 and P95-99) is not
followed by a recovery after the war (Figure 3) suggests that the short-term
regulations of the war which forced a compression of the wage structure had
persistent effects on the distribution of wages many years after the regulations
were lifted. This evidence is very similar to the U.S. experience (Piketty and
Saez, 2003) and thus gives support to their interpretation that government
regulations were very powerful tools to modify the distribution of employment
income.
        Finally, in light of the U.S. debate on whether inequality dropped during
the inter-war period (Williamson and Lindert, 1980, Goldin and Margo, 1992, and
Goldin and Katz, 1999), it is interesting to note that both the fraction of salaried
workers and the ratio of salary to non-salary earnings are very close in 1922 and
1939. This suggests that, for Canada, wage inequality was stable overall during
the inter-war period. Our Canadian series are consistent with the recent
occupational ratios (skilled versus unskilled labor) constructed by Goldin and
Katz (1999) for the United States over the first part of the century. They show
that these ratios fell during both World Wars but were stable during the inter-war
period (with a spike during the Great Depression as in Figure 8). This evidence
again casts doubt on the technology driven explanations of the pattern of
inequality during the process of development (such as the Kuznets inverted U-
shaped curve). Our series suggest that external shocks or sharp downturns are
the primary events affecting labor income inequality.


4.2 The Recent Surge in Top Wages and Salaries


The microfiles of tax returns, available from 1982, allow a detailed analysis of the
wage income distribution where wage income is taken as the employment
income of both wage and salary earners. We supplement these with
extrapolations based on composition tables published for the years 1972 to 1981

18
  A similar phenomenon takes place during World War I. The ratio of salary to non-salary
earnings falls drastically from 2.2 in 1915 to 1.5 in 1918 while the fraction of salary earners goes



                                                19
to estimate top wage shares by computing the share of total employment income
accruing to various upper groups of the wage income distribution since 1972.
Our top groups are now defined relative to the total number of individuals with
positive wages. Table D1 reports the total number of wage earners, the total
wages reported, and the average wage per wage earner for the period 1972 to
2000. Table D2 reports top wage income shares series for the same period. We
also report in Tables D1 and D2 the same statistics computed at the family level
(instead of the individual level) for the period 1982 to 2000.19
        Figure 9 displays the share of wages accruing to the top decile of the
wage distribution. The top 10% wage share has increased steadily over the
period from about 25% in the 1970s to 33% in 2000. This increase parallels
closely the increase of about 6-7 percentage points in the top 10% of the total
income distribution that we analyzed in Section 3.1.20 Figure 10 decomposes the
top decile into three groups (P90-95, P95-99, and P99-100). It shows that,
exactly as with the total income shares, the increase is concentrated within the
top percentile. The shares of P90-95 and P95-99 are almost flat and increase by
less than one percentage point while the top 1% share doubles from around 5%
in the late 1970s to over 10% in 2000. This probably explains why this dramatic
increase in wage inequality has remained unnoticed in the literature on inequality
in Canada. Survey data, on which almost all wage inequality studies in Canada
have been based, do not allow analysis of the top percentile because of the top
coding of reported earnings and because there are very few individuals in the top
income groups. Panels A and B of Figure 11 illustrate the extreme concentration
of this top wage surge phenomenon. The top 0.1% wage share (Panel A)
increased more than four fold from about 1% to 4.3% over the period and the top

up very slightly from 12% to 13.5%.
19
   It is possible to compute those statistics with the microfiles. Families are defined as married
couples or single individuals. In that case, the top groups are defined relative to the total number
of families (reported in Table D1, col. (2)) with positive wages and salaries. The U.S. wage series
of Piketty and Saez (2003) are also defined at the family level.
20
   It is interesting to note as well that the level of the top 10% wage share is significantly lower
than the level of the top 10% income share. This is due to the fact that non-wage income is more
unequally distributed than wage income and that the top 10% income share is computed based
on all adult individuals, a significant fraction of which have no incomes (for example non-working
spouses), while the top 10% wage share is based on employed individuals only.


                                                20
0.01% wage share (Panel B) increased even more dramatically from 0.2% to
1.5%. Therefore the top 0.01% of wage earners in 2000 (comprising about 1,400
individuals) earned about 150 times the average wage; the comparable ratio in
1972 was 20. This dramatic change follows closely the evolution of top income
shares that we documented in Section 3.1. The spike around the year 1989 is
also present in the wage data. Therefore, this evidence shows that the surge in
top wages led to a drastic shift in the composition of top incomes away from
capital income and toward labor income, as well as to a dramatic increase in top
income shares. The series computed at the family level and reported in Panel B
of Table D2 display almost exactly the same pattern. Figure A2 in the appendix
shows that the increase for the top 1% has been almost identical for individuals
and families while the increase for the top 10% has been slightly more
pronounced for families. These results show that the increase in the correlation
of earnings between spouses is negligible relative to the increase in individual
top wage incomes.21, 22
        The fact that the rise in top wage shares is so concentrated is a problem
for the simple skill-biased technology explanation. It suggests rather that the
change in inequality is driven by a change in the compensation practice for highly
ranked officers and executives. The comparison with the United States (where
the same series have recently been constructed by Piketty and Saez, 2003) is
instructive. The United States experienced a similar (both in timing and
magnitude) surge in top wage incomes. However, the surge in top wage shares
in the United States started earlier (in the early 1970s), was not as concentrated
as in Canada and was significant for the upper middle class P95-99 group as
well. As a result, in contrast to the Canadian case, studies using survey data
such as the Current Population Survey were able to document to a large extent


21
   The wage series of Piketty and Saez (2003) are estimated for families only (as tax returns are
family based in the United States), but in the light of the Canadian findings, it is very likely that the
U.S. experienced a surge of similar magnitude in individual top wage shares.
22
   The fact that the top decile share increased more at the family level shows that there has been
an increase in the correlation of earnings across spouses (especially below the top 1%). Such a
phenomenon has been discussed in Canada (e.g., Wolfson and Murphy, 2000) and in the United
States (Karoly, 1993).


                                                   21
the surge in high wages (see Katz and Autor, 1999 and Acemoglu, 2002 for
recent surveys of these studies in the United States).23
        There seem to be two direct explanations for the similar patterns in the
United States and Canada. The first explanation relies on the fact that the two
economies have experienced very similar technological change and thus we
should expect the distributions of earnings in both countries to follow a similar
path. This explanation, however, is not very useful, without defining more
precisely what is meant by technology. The second explanation for the parallel
pattern at the top might be competition for highly skilled executives driven by the
surge in executive compensation in the United States. Top salaries increased
enormously over the last three decades in the United States. Moreover,
Canadian executives can relatively easily move and find jobs in the United States
as part of what is sometimes called the brain drain. Therefore, the only way for
Canadian firms to retain their best executives might be to increase their
salaries.24
        The brain drain threat explanation seems more convincing to us than the
technology explanation for a number of reasons. First, European countries
experienced the same change in technology as did Canada and the United
States. However, a number of these countries, such as France (see Piketty
2001a, b) have not experienced an increase in inequality at the top of the wage
distribution.25 Second, if the migration threat explanation is true, then groups with
higher mobility costs (or smaller benefits from moving) should experience a
smaller rise in their compensation. Three pieces of evidence suggest that this is
the case.



23
   Another very important difference between the United States and Canada is the pattern of
inequality at the bottom. Low income earners have lost dramatically in the United States relative
to Canada, explaining why overall inequality measures such as the Gini coefficient have
increased much more in the United States than in Canada (see Blackburn and Bloom, 1993, and
Wolfson and Murphy, 2000).
24
   Of course, this explanation does not help answering the question of why such a surge in top
wages took place in the United States in the first place.
25
   British top income shares have increased significantly as well since 1980 although less than in
the United States or Canada (see Atkinson, 2001). We expect higher mobility between the United
Kingdom and the United States than between continental Europe and the United States.


                                               22
        First, the surge in inequality at the top is more concentrated in Canada
than in the United States. The benefits from moving are clearly higher for the
very top wage earners (who experienced the greatest increase in compensation
in the United States, both in absolute and relative terms). Therefore, a model with
fixed costs of moving would suggest that those at the very top in Canada are
more likely to move than those in the upper middle class (below the top
percentile). As a result, U.S. driven competition should be stronger at the top,
producing a more concentrated rise in inequality in Canada than in the United
States, as we observed in the data. Finnie (2002) finds that international
migration is in fact much more likely among those with high incomes.26
        Second, the surge in top income shares started earlier in the United
States than in Canada. Figure 12 displays the top 0.5% wage share for the
United States (from Piketty and Saez, 2003) and Canada since 1972. The top
wage shares were very similar in the United States and Canada in the early
1970s. They started increasing almost 10 years earlier in the United States and
are slightly higher in the United States than in Canada today. Iqbal (1999)
documents the brain drain and notes that emigration of highly skilled Canadian
workers to the United States increased during the 1980s and especially after
1995 when NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) allowed high skilled
workers to receive temporary work visa permits much more easily. The brain
drain pressures from the United States therefore correspond closely to the
increase in top wage shares in Canada, suggesting that the latter might well have
been driven by the former.
        Third, the French speaking community in Quebec may be more reluctant
to move to the United States because of language and perhaps also because of
other cultural differences. Finnie (2002) finds that Quebec francophones are
much less likely to migrate internationally than residents of other provinces and

26
   This is in contrast to the small and mixed income effects he finds for interprovincial migration
(Finnie, forthcoming) but consistent with the bivariate comparisons in Graph 7 of Finnie (2001)
where he reports that for 1996, 0.89% of Canadians with incomes in excess of $150,000 migrated
internationally, compared to an average for all incomes of 0.12%. See Zhao, Drew and Murray
(2000) for similar evidence.



                                                23
than Quebec anglophones. This is consistent with earlier research (Finnie,
forthcoming), which finds a similar pattern in interprovincial migration. As a result,
we would expect brain-drain pressures to be weaker for Quebec francophones
than for others in Canada. Figure 13 displays the top 1% wage share for
francophones in Quebec and for Canadians in all other provinces from 1982 to
2000.27 Figure 13 shows indeed that the rise in the top 1% share has been much
more modest for francophones in Quebec (from about 4.5% to 6.5%) than for the
rest of the provinces (from less than 6% to more than 11%). Complete series for
each group within the top decile (reported in Table D4) display similar patterns.28
Even though top shares start at a higher level in 1982 for Canadians outside
Quebec than for francophones in Quebec, the increase in top shares from 1982
to 2000 is larger, even in relative terms, for the former group than for the latter.
Interestingly, in contrast to francophones, anglophones in Quebec as a group
experience a surge in top wage shares as in the rest of the provinces.29
Therefore, this evidence is consistent with the brain drain threat explanation and
would be more difficult to reconcile with the pure technological change
explanation as we would expect technological change to spread very quickly
from province to province in Canada.


4.3 The Development of Stock Options


        The surge in top executive compensation in the United States is due in
large part to the development of stock options. In Canada, the development of
stock options has been slower because they do not receive a favored tax



27
   Francophones are defined as those who complete their income tax returns in French.
28
   Very top incomes have also increased significantly for francophones (although much less than
for non-Quebec residents). A model where francophones have a higher fixed cost of moving than
Anglophones on average would produce such results if the fixed cost (measured in dollars) is
independent of income.
29
   Actually, the surge in top wage incomes for anglophones is even larger than for the rest of the
provinces. The top 1% share increases from less than 7% to over 14%. However, part of this
change is due to the fact that the fraction of anglophones within Quebec shrunk from 14.3% in
1982 to 11.5% in 2000. If lower income anglophones left disproportionately, then we would
expect the top shares of anglophones to increase mechanically through a compositional effect.


                                               24
treatment (Klassen and Mawani, 2000).30 In contrast to the United States, profits
from stock-option exercises can be separated out from wages and salaries on
Canadian income tax returns. In spite of the unfavorable tax treatment, evidence
presented in Table D5 and Figure 14 shows the dramatic development of stock
options since 1995.31 Column (1) in Table D5 shows that, in 1995, stock options
represented only 0.26% of total employment income but this number has
increased to about 1.5% by 2000. Panel A in Table D5 reports the fraction of the
value of stock option exercises in total wages reported by top wage income
groups (those fractions for years 1995 and 2000 are also depicted on Panel A of
Figure 13). The evidence shows that the fraction of the value of stock-option
exercises in total wages reported by top wage groups has also increased
dramatically since 1995. For example, the fraction of stock options in wages
reported by the top 1% of wage earners increased from 3.3% in 1995 to almost
13.5% in 2000.32 It is also interesting to note the extreme concentration of stock
options in the earnings distribution: the top 0.1% wage earners exercise about
two thirds of all stock options in each of the years from 1995 to 2000.
        It is important to note, however, that stock options, like realized capital
gains, are not an annual flow of income. As a result, top income and wage
shares produced by ranking taxpayers including stock options might be upward
biased as those with stock options have incomes that are unusually high in that
particular year. As Canadian tax statistics report separately the value of stock


30
  In the United States, profits from stock-option exercise are treated like wage income (and hence
are deductible from profits for the corporation and taxed like wage income for the individual). In
Canada, stock options profits are not deductible for corporations and are in effect taxed very
similarly to capital gains for most individuals upon exercise (but are fully reported and included in
wages and salaries in the income tax statistics we have used). In effect, 75% of stock-option
exercise gains are taxable from 1990 to 1999 (50% before 1988, and 66.6% in 1988 and 1989).
Over the course of 2000, the share of taxable stock-option gains was reduced to 50%.
31
  Published statistics in Taxation Statistics on aggregate stock options show that they
represented less than 0.1% of total wages up to the year 1992. Hence stock options can clearly
not explain the spike of 1987-1989 when top wage shares increased by more than one
percentage point. We present evidence only since 1995 because we have to rely on special
computations prepared for this study directly by the Canadian Customs and Revenue Agency.
Note also that one reason for the increase in the value of stock-option exercises in the late 1990s
is the increase in stock market prices at that time.
32
   It is therefore very likely that stock options in the United States, which receive a more favorable
treatment than in Canada, also represent a large share of wages and salaries reported at the top.


                                                 25
option exercises, we can cast light on this phenomenon.33 We can first re-
compute top wage shares by excluding exercised stock options (both in the
numerator and denominator). These top wage shares excluding stock options are
reported on panel B of Table D5. However, stock options do represent
compensation for labor services and excluding them completely leads to an
underestimation of top employment income shares. Therefore, the most
satisfactory way to proceed is perhaps to exclude stock options in the ranking of
individuals but add back stock options (both in the numerator and denominator)
when computing shares. This method eliminates the upward bias due to
lumpiness of stock option exercises while taking into account stock options. The
top wage shares computed in this way are reported in Panel C of Table D5 and
the fraction of stock options for each group (groups defined by ranking of
employment income excluding stock options) is reported on Panel D. The salient
findings of Table D5 are illustrated in Figure 14. Panel A of Figure 14 shows that
the fraction of stock options in employment income is much lower when
individuals are ranked by employment income excluding stock options. Even in
2000, the fraction of stock options is only around 10% for the top wage groups
when ranked excluding stock options. Interestingly, the share of stock options
peaks for group P99.9-99.99 and decreases at the very top. This is in stark
contrast with the case where stock options are included in ranking. In the latter
case, the share of stock options is steadily increasing as we move up toward the
top. This shows that there is substantial re-ranking when stock options are
excluded.34 The concentration of stock options, while still substantial, is less
extreme when individuals are ranked excluding stock options. The top 1% wage
earners (ranked excluding stock options) exercise about two thirds of stock
options.



33
   Such an analysis is unfortunately impossible for the United States where stock option exercises
are never reported separately in tax or earnings statistics.
34
   The dotted graphs on Panel A of Figure 16 show that the same phenomenon was present in
1995 even though stock options were a much smaller fraction of employment income, suggesting
that the distributional characteristics of stock options have not changed much from 1995 to 2000,
in spite of a dramatic increase in volume.


                                               26
        Panel B of Figure 14 depicts the top 0.1% wage income shares for the
three treatments of options we discussed (fully included as in our previous
analysis, included in shares but not in ranking, and fully excluded) from 1995 to
2000. As expected, the increase in the top 0.1% wage share is not as dramatic
when ranking excludes stock options and even less so when stock options are
completely excluded. However, the general pattern shows a steady increase in
all three cases. Since 1978, the top 0.1% share would have increased by a factor
of 3.5 if stock options were completely excluded instead of by a factor of 4.3 with
stock options fully included. When stock options are included only in shares and
not in ranking (perhaps the most meaningful economically), this factor is 3.85.
Therefore, it is clear that the development of stock options can only explain a
small fraction of the rise in top wage shares although it can explain a larger
fraction of the surge since 1995. In any case, the re-ranking due to lumpiness in
stock option exercises is only a minor element contributing to the surge in
Canadian top wage shares over the last 25 years that we documented.35


5. The Role of Taxation and Comparison with the United States


        As the empirical literature on behavioral responses to taxation has shown,
income taxes can have a substantial impact on incomes reported for tax
purposes, on which our top income and wage shares are based. Therefore, it is
important to analyze, in parallel to the evolution of top income shares, the
evolution of the income tax system. One key measure of the burden of the
income tax system is given by the marginal rate of taxation. Such rates, at
various percentiles of the income distribution, along with the top marginal tax




35
   As discussed in our introduction, Baker and Solon (1999) and Beach, Finnie and Gray (2003)
find that most of the recent increase in earnings inequality is due to an increase in permanent
earnings variation rather than increased earnings volatility. We leave the question as to whether
very high employment income has become more variable for future research.


                                               27
rate, are reported in Figure 15 from 1920 to 2000.36 A number of interesting
findings emerge.
        First, up to the early 1970s, the income tax in Canada had a very
progressive structure, with many brackets and a very high top marginal income
tax rate. However, the top marginal tax rate is a very imperfect measure of the
burden of taxation, as extremely few taxpayers had incomes large enough to be
in the top bracket. For example, in the early 1920s, the top marginal tax rate was
in excess of 70% but the taxpayer at percentile P99.99 (approximately the 500th
highest income in Canada at that time) faced a much more modest marginal rate
of about 25%. Over the last thirty years, the top marginal tax rate has declined
significantly to around 45-50%, but, in the year 2000, a significant fraction of the
population - around 5% - faced the top rate.37
        Second, the upper middle class below the top percentile (from P90 to P99)
has faced a continuously rising marginal tax rate (except the temporary surge of
World War II) from negligible rates before World War II, to rates around 20% in
the decades following World War II, up to around 35-45% in the last two
decades. In comparison, percentile P99.9 faced a rate of about 45% in 1950 and
about 48% in 2000. Over that same fifty year period, percentile P99.99
experienced a decline from 55% to 48% and only the super top (around 1,000
individuals within the top 0.01%) had a decline in marginal tax rates of 10
percentage points or more. This stands in contrast with the U.S. case where a
much larger fraction of taxpayers (the top 0.1%) experienced reductions in
marginal tax rates of more than 30 percentage points from the 1960s and 1970s
to the early 1990s.




36
   In Canada, provincial income taxes represent a very significant portion of total income taxes.
Therefore, Figure 13 displays marginal tax rates including both the federal and provincial income
taxes (see appendix for details).
37
   This evolution from many brackets extending very far into the distribution of incomes and a high
nominal top rate toward a much smaller number of brackets with a lower top rate is a common
pattern of most personal income tax systems of developed countries over the 20th century.
Income tax systems in the United States, and the United Kingdom, among many others, have
also followed the same path. It is an interesting political economy question as to the reasons for
this change.


                                                28
        As documented in Piketty and Saez (2003), the United States also
experienced a decline in top income shares from the pre-war period to the 1960s
and a recent surge in top income shares in the 1980s. Figure 16 depicts the top
0.5% share in both the United States and Canada. The two series are strikingly
parallel after World War II.38 The rise in top incomes since the 1980s has been
even more dramatic in the United States than in Canada. The rise in top wage
shares (within the top percentile) is of about the same magnitude in the two
countries since the 1970s (see Figure 12 in Section 4.2).
        There is a debate in the United States on the extent to which the rise in
top income shares is a tax driven phenomenon. Feenberg and Poterba (1993,
2000) and Feldstein (1995) note that the rise in top incomes has been associated
with very large decreases in marginal tax rates for the top groups. However, as
pointed out by Slemrod and Bakija (2001) and Piketty and Saez (2003), top
income shares in the United States have continued to rise since the mid 1990s in
spite of a substantial increase in marginal tax rates in 1993. Also within the
United States, various studies have pointed out that the dramatic surge in top
incomes in the 1980s might not reflect real income changes but rather changes
in the way incomes are reported (see e.g. Slemrod, 1998 and Gordon and
Slemrod, 2000). For example, Slemrod (1996) shows that about one third of the
jump in the top income shares in the United States from 1986 to 1988 is due to
shifts from the corporate sector to the personal sector (as the top personal tax
rate became lower than the corporate tax rate after 1987). The Canadian
experience casts interesting new light on these issues.
        As we saw, high income earners in Canada experienced much smaller
reductions in marginal tax rates over the last 20 years. Moreover, as Figure 15
makes clear, during the 1990s an earner at the 90th percentile threshold received
a much larger marginal tax rate reduction than thos higher in the distribution. Yet

38
   In the pre-war era, as explained in Section 3, the top share in the United States declines during
the Great Depression while it increases in Canada. This is explained by the larger share of wage
income in top shares in Canada and the fact that there was less change in aggregate dividends
in Canada than in the United States during the depression. Note also that the drop during World
War II starts earlier in Canada than in the United States as Canada enters World War II in 1939,
two years before the United States.


                                                29
as Figures 3 and 4 indicate, the dramatic increase in top income were
concentrated in the top percentile.39 As a result, it is less likely that there have
been drastic shifts in the way incomes are reported on personal tax returns due
to changes in the tax law. Therefore, the dramatic surge in Canadian top
reported incomes is more likely to be real and unlikely to be only the
consequence of changes in tax reporting behavior.40 If, as tentatively argued in
the previous section, some of the surge in Canadian top incomes is due to brain
drain threats, it must be the case that the surge in top U.S. wage incomes is real
and not entirely due to changes in the way incomes are reported for tax
purposes. Otherwise, those changes in the United States could not have
increased incentives for Canadian top earners to move to the United States. It is
important to note, however, that our results are not contradictory with the supply
side explanation stating that real changes in top incomes in the United States
have been driven by reductions in top marginal income tax rates.
        However, even if the long-term increase in top shares in Canada cannot
be fully explained by changes in marginal tax rates in Canada, it is interesting to
note that in Canada, as well as in the United States, there is clear evidence of
short-term response to the cut in marginal tax rates. The most striking example in
Canada is the flattening of the tax structure enacted in 1987, which reduced the
top rate from 52% (in 1987) to 46% (in 1988) (see Figure 15). The top shares
display a sharp increase from 1987 to 1989, which is partially reversed from 1989
to 1990. This spike is much more apparent at the very top than for lower income
groups (within the top decile) even though all groups experienced the same
decline in marginal tax rates. Actually, the spike occurs only within the top 0.5%
of the income distribution. Therefore, as in the United States (see Feldstein, 1995

39
   The corporate income tax rate remained relatively stable from the 1950s to 1987, slightly above
50%. The corporate income tax rate was decreased from 1987 to 1990 to about 45%, and has
remained stable until 2000. If anything, this small decrease should have induced a shifting out of
the personal sector toward the corporate sector.
40
   In contrast to the United States, the share of business income reported on high income tax
returns has been relatively stable and very low, between 1 and 3% of total income over the last
20 years in Canada (see Table C3). This shows that shifts between the corporate and non-
corporate sector cannot explain the surge in top incomes in Canada. It is also important to note
that, in Canada and in contrast to the United States, there is a dividend tax credit system, which
reduced double taxation of dividends over the period.


                                               30
and Gruber and Saez, 2002), the short-term response to tax changes is much
larger for top incomes than for the middle class. The top wage share series
display the same spike in 1989 (see Figure 11) suggesting that this short-term
response was in large part a wage income phenomenon, with highly
compensated employees shifting some of their compensation from the high rate
years (1986 to 1987) to the lower tax rate years (1988 and 1989). Such short-
term responses of wage incomes have been documented in the United States
around the tax rate increase of 1993 (Goolsbee, 2000). Sillamaa and Veall
(2001) analyzed the Canadian tax cut of 1988 by comparing incomes in years
1986 and 1989. Consistent with our results, they found significant and large
elasticities for high-income groups. However, our top share series show that their
elasticity estimates capture the short-term spike response but that this certainly
overstates the long-run response to the tax change.
      In Sections 3 and 4, we argued that the drop in top income shares during
World War II was a combination of a reduction in wage income inequality
(probably due to the wage controls during World War II) and a reduction in
distributed dividends because of the fiscal shock in the corporate sector during
the war. The same phenomenon took place in the United States (see Figure 16).
Therefore it is plausible that the same mechanisms were at play in both
countries. In 1946, very top Canadian incomes were composed to a large extent
of passive capital income (mostly dividends). The absence of recovery after
World War II suggests that the rentiers, after the income tax shocks of World War
II, were never able to reconstitute fortunes as large (relative to the average
income) as in the pre-war period. As argued in Piketty and Saez (2003) in the
case of the United States, the most natural and realistic explanation seems to be
the creation and the development of the progressive income tax (and of the
progressive estate tax and corporate income tax). The wealth that generated the
top 0.01% of incomes observed in the inter-war period was accumulated during a
time when progressive taxes hardly existed. The fiscal situation faced by wealth-
holders during and after World War II in Canada has been substantially less
favorable. As shown in Figure 15, groups within the top 0.1% consistently faced



                                       31
tax rates between 50 and 60% after the war (rates were temporarily much higher
during the war). In addition, the corporate tax rate was low before the war
(around 10 to 15%) and was consistently around 40-50% after the war.
Furthermore, Canada set in place a progressive estate tax with top rates around
50% in 1941 until its elimination in the 1970s.41
        Since the 1970s, the burden of taxation on large capital incomes has been
reduced with the repeal of the estate tax and the extension of the dividend tax
credit (which reduces substantially the burden of corporate taxation on distributed
profits), and the reduction of the top income tax rates. However, it is important to
recall that the recent surge in top income shares is mostly a wage income
phenomenon and top capital incomes have not yet recovered to their pre-war
levels. Nevertheless, the dramatic surge in top wages shares may allow the
working rich to accumulate large fortunes, especially given recent reductions in
taxes on capital income and estates. As a result, we may very well observe a
revival of top capital incomes in Canada within the next few decades.


6. Conclusion

        This paper has used personal income tax data to construct homogeneous
series of top income shares in Canada over the course of the 20th century. A
number of important findings have emerged. First and most striking are the close
parallels between the patterns and composition of top incomes in Canada and
the United States. Both countries experienced a sharp drop in top shares during
World War II with no recovery before the 1970s. However, during the last two
decades, the top groups have recovered their pre-war levels. Moreover both
countries have experienced the same shift in the composition of top incomes
(although this change is less dramatic in Canada than in the United States): until
the 1960s, top incomes in both countries were mostly composed of passive
capital income and the share of labor income was small. However, the dramatic

41
  The Federal government repealed the estate tax in 1972 and most provinces repealed their
estate tax over the course of the 1970s. Quebec was the last province to repeal estate taxation in
1986.


                                               32
increase in top income shares over the last 20 years is due to a surge in the top
wages and salaries. As a result, today the income earners have, to a large
extent, replaced rentiers at the top of the income distribution.
       The Canadian experience casts interesting light on the role of taxation in
explaining the pattern of top income shares. Although the drop in marginal tax
rates since the 1970s has been much more modest in Canada than in the United
States, the surge in top incomes has been almost as large in Canada as in the
United States. The analysis of top Canadian incomes is more transparent
because it is not plagued with shifts between the personal and corporate sectors,
which have made the U.S. results more difficult to interpret. Moreover, the
concentration of the surge in the last decade and among only the very top
income shares suggests that fiscal developments in Canada cannot explain the
facts. It should be noted, however, that clear evidence of short-term responses to
taxation, can be found in Canada as well but that it would be very misleading to
equate such responses to the permanent long-run effects of tax changes.
       The surge in top wage shares in the last two decades took place in both
the United States and Canada but not in other modern economies such as
France (Piketty, 2001a,b) or Japan.42 Therefore, simple skilled-bias technological
explanations cannot account fully for these facts. The surge in top wages in
Canada is more concentrated within very top groups than in the United States
and was much less pronounced for francophones in Quebec. This suggests that
the threat of migration to the United States by highly skilled Canadian executives
or professionals may have driven the surge in top wage shares in Canada (while
not affecting other countries such as France or Japan). If the migration threat
explanation is valid, then this implies that the surge in top reported incomes in
the United States since the 1970s must be real to a large extent and cannot be
the consequence of changes in the way incomes are reported for tax purposes.
The puzzle that still remains to be explained is why such a surge took place in
the United States in the first place.




                                         33
       The overall picture that emerges is that no deep technological forces
underlying the process of development seem to be driving changes in inequality
in Canada, as the famous Kuznets hypothesis suggested. On the contrary, World
War II, the development of progressive taxation and changes in top income
shares in the United States seem to be able to account for long term trends in
Canadian top income shares.




42
   Preliminary investigation of Japanese tax statistics on employment income suggests that top
wage shares have not increased at all over the last two decades and have stayed at a low level
(compared to the United States).


                                             34
APPENDIX

       The appendix describes the construction of our top income share series
based on tax return data. The Canadian federal income tax started in 1917 and
2000 is the most recent year for which data are available. Starting with the tax
year 1920, the Taxation Division of the Department of National Revenue started
publishing distributions of taxpayers. These statistics for years 1920 to 1940
were published in the Canada Yearbook and in Incomes Assessed for War
Income Tax in Canada (1920-1937) and in Dominion Income Tax Statistics
(1938-1939). Many of these statistics, as well as a detailed overview of the
income tax legislation for these years, are reproduced in Canadian Fiscal Facts,
1957. After World War II, a much broader set of statistics was published in the
annual publication Taxation Statistics covering the years 1941 to 2000. Finally,
microfiles of tax returns, based on a 20% random sample of the Canadian
population, are available since 1982. This micro dataset of tax returns is known
as the Longitudinal Administrative Databank (LAD). The microfiles allow the
computation of a much broader set of inequality statistics than the published
tables. Aggregate population and National Account statistics are from CANSIM
(Canadian Socio-economic Information Matrix) as maintained by Statistics
Canada.

A. Total Number of Individuals and Total Income

A.1. Total Number of Individuals

        The total number of individuals is computed as the number of individuals
in the Canadian population aged 20 and above. These series are based on
Census interpolations and provided by CANSIM. CANSIM provides two series for
the size of population, one from 1920 to 1971 and a second one from 1971 to
2000. We paste these series using the recent series as the base. The series is
reported in Table A, column (1). Upper income groups are defined with respect to
this total adult population. For instance, in 2000, with a total adult population
equal to 22.81 million, there are 2.281 million individuals in the top decile,
228,100 individuals in the top percentile, etc.
        Table A also indicates the total number of tax returns actually filed (col.
(2)), as well as the fraction of adult population filing a tax return (col. (3)). Before
WWII, due to the high exemption levels, this fraction was low, usually around 5%.
The top 5% is therefore the biggest fraction for which we can construct
homogeneous estimates for the entire period. We can provide estimates for the
top decile only after 1941. Exemptions have been drastically reduced during and
after World War II, and therefore the fraction filing have increased dramatically
and is around 95% today. Note that the fraction jumps from 80 to 90% in 1978
due a change in the rule for family allowances, which required spouses, even
without any income, to file in order to claim the allowances. As a result, in
Canada today, almost every adult, even if his or her income is below the
exemption thresholds, has an incentive to file an income tax return.


                                          35
        It is important to note that many individuals in the population have no
income (before transfers). The biggest group with no income is non-working
spouses. The size of this group has shrunk over the century as female labor
force participation has steadily increased. This secular phenomenon tends to
reduce the size of top income shares over time as income is spread over a larger
fraction of the population.

A.2. Total Income Denominator

        In order to compute top income shares, we need to estimate total income
that would have been reported on tax returns, had everybody been required to
file a tax return. We call this total income measure Gross Tax Income (GTI). As
only a fraction of the population was filing tax return in the pre-war period,
income tax statistics cannot be used to estimate the Gross Tax Income
denominator. The natural way to compute such a denominator is to use the
personal income series from the National Accounts. Personal income is a
broader definition of income accruing to individuals than total Gross Tax Income
(had everybody been required to file) for two main reasons. First, personal
income includes all transfers from the government (such as welfare benefits,
unemployment benefits, or family allowances) and many of these transfers are
either partially or not at all reported on tax returns. Therefore, we first subtract
transfers (reported separately in National Account series) from the government
from the personal income series. Second, various forms of income such as in-
kind labor income, imputed rental income of home owners, imputed interest on
non-interest bearing bank accounts, etc. are not reported on tax returns but are
included in personal income. As a result, it is not surprising that personal income
less transfers is systematically higher than Gross Tax Income even in the recent
period where practically all income earners file a tax return. Fortunately, the ratio
of GTI over Personal Income less transfers has been always around 80% (there
are relatively minor fluctuations between 78 and 82% with no trend) since the mid
1970s, when most individuals, even low income earners, started filing tax returns
systematically. Before the mid 1970s, because exemptions were larger (in real
terms), a number of individuals with small incomes were not required to file tax
returns and therefore the ratio of GTI over Personal Income less transfer was
smaller (the ratio increased smoothly from 50% in 1945 to around 80% in 1974).
        Presumably, a small fraction of individuals with very small incomes do not
file tax returns (as total tax returns account for only 96% of the adult population in
2000). On the other hand, a number of individuals below age 20 also file returns.
Therefore, we assume that GTI for the total adult population (age 20 and above)
had everybody filed a return would be around 80% of Personal Income less
transfers. Therefore, our total income denominator is defined uniformly over the
period as 80% of Personal Income less transfers from the National Accounts.
        The National Accounts provide series of Personal Income and Transfers
only since 1926. Therefore, we have extrapolated the series of Personal Income
(less transfers) for the period 1920 to 1925 (from Urquhart and Buckley, 1965),
assuming that the ratio Personal Income over Gross National Product stays



                                         36
constant (and equal to 78% as in 1926). This assumption seems reasonable
because the ratio Personal Income over GNP stays almost constant over the
period 1926-1939. Our total income denominator series (expressed in 2000
dollars) is reported in Column (4) of Table A. The average income per adult is
reported in Column (5). The CPI index (base 100 in year 2000) is reported in
Column (6).

B. Top Income Shares

       Our income definition includes all sources of income reported on tax
returns (except government transfers). With the exception of realized capital
gains, which became taxable in 1972 (see below), and various government
transfers (that are always negligible in the top decile), the definition of incomes
reported on tax returns has been very stable since 1920. Since the introduction
of the income tax, taxpayers had to report incomes from all sources: wages and
salaries for those employed, pensions for retired employees, self-employment
income for the self-employed such as doctors or lawyers, profits from sole
proprietorship and partnerships for owners of unincorporated businesses such as
farmers or retail store owners. Capital income such as interest income, royalties,
rents from real estate (as stated above, imputed rent from home ownership was
never considered as taxable income), dividend distributions for shareholders of
corporations, estate and trust income, and investment income on capital invested
abroad were always taxable.
       Since 1972, realized capital gains have been partially taxable. From 1972
to 1987, 50% of such gains were included in taxable income. In 1988 and 1989,
66.6% of gains were included in taxable income. From 1990 to 1999, 75% of
gains were included in taxable income. Finally, over the course of tax year 2000,
the amount of gains taxable has been reduced back to 50%. The later 2000
reform was enacted retroactively and may explain why we do not observe a
notable surge in realized capital gains in year 2000.
       Most of our series exclude capital gains completely. Tax returns are
ranked by income excluding capital gains, and top fractile incomes exclude
capital gains. Income shares were computed by using the total income series
(Table A, col. (4)), as described in Appendix A. However, to assess the sensitivity
of our income series to the exclusion of capital gains, for the period 1972 to
2000, we have also constructed series including full capital gains (i.e., not only
the fraction reported on tax returns but the full amount of realized gains). For
those series, we rank tax returns by income including full capital gains, and we
compute total incomes (including capital gains) accruing to our top income
groups. To compute income shares in that case, we add to the denominator
described in Appendix A the full capital gains reported on tax returns.
       In the text of this paper, we have focused on series excluding capital gains
because we cannot include capital gains before 1972. Excluding capital gains
also allows getting rid of the very strong short-term volatility induced by
lumpiness in capital gains realizations. As a result, to analyze the role of capital
gains, it is perhaps more useful to rank income excluding capital gains and see



                                        37
how much extra income accrues in the form of realized capital gains for each top
income group. Therefore, we present three series. The first one (on which we
focus in the text) excludes capital gains completely. The second series includes
full capital gains both for ranking taxpayers and defining top income groups and
in the amounts of income reported. The third series ranks taxpayers by income
excluding capital gains (as in the first series) but adds back capital gains in the
amount reported (both in the numerator and denominator) to compute top
shares. The top fractile incomes series used to compute our top fractile income
shares series are reported in real 2000 Canadian dollars in table B3 (for incomes
excluding capital gains). For instance, Table B3 indicates that the average top
decile income was $105,262 in 2000, and the top decile income share reported in
table B1 for 2000 (42.34%) can be computed by dividing $105,262 by the
average income reported in table A for 2000 (105,262/24,859=4.234). The top
shares series including capital gains for the period 1972-2000 are reported in
Table B2. Panel A reports the series where capital gains are included both in the
ranking and the amounts while Panel B reports the series where capital gains are
excluded for the ranking but added back to compute the income shares.
        The top fractile income series reported in tables B1, B2, and B3 were
constructed as follows. For the 1982-2000 period, the series were computed
directly from the LAD microfiles. The microfiles allow us to rank tax returns by
income excluding capital gains or by income including full capital gains and to
compute average incomes without capital gains or with full capital gains for each
of our top groups. For the 1920-1981 period, the series were estimated from the
published tax statistics tables, according to the following methodology (all
computations are available from the authors upon request).
        The published tables report the number of returns and tax paid by income
brackets. Starting in 1938, the reported income amounts by income brackets are
also available. In general, these tables display a large number of income
brackets (the thresholds P90, P95, P99, P99.5, P99.9 and P99.99 are usually
very close to one of the income bracket thresholds), and one can use standard
Pareto interpolation techniques in order to estimate the income thresholds and
income levels of the tax unit distribution of income.

B.1. Pareto Interpolation Technique:

        The general interpolation technique is based on the well known empirical
regularity that the top tail of the income distribution is very closely approximated
by a Pareto distribution. A Pareto distribution has a cumulative distribution
function of the form F(y)=1-(k/y)a where k and a are constants, a is the Pareto
parameter of the distribution. Such a distribution has the key property that the
average income above a given threshold y is always exactly proportional to y.
The coefficient of proportionality is equal to b=a/(a-1).
        For years before 1938, when the amounts by income brackets are not
reported, we first estimate the amounts reported by bracket as follows. We
assume that the distribution of income in each income bracket [s,t] is Pareto
distributed F(y)=1-(k/y)a. The Pareto parameters a and k are obtained by solving



                                        38
the two equations: k=s p(1/a) and k=t q(1/a) where p is the fraction of tax returns
above s and q the fraction of tax returns above t.43 Note that the Pareto
parameters k and a may vary from bracket to bracket. We then estimate the
amount reported in bracket [s,t] simply as Y=N ∫st ydF(y), where N is the total
number of adult individuals in the population (Table A, col. (1)). For the top
bracket, this method cannot be applied and we therefore assume that the top
bracket is Pareto distributed with Pareto parameters a and k equal to those of the
bracket just below the top estimated by the method just described. When data on
amounts reported are available (starting in 1938), we verify that our estimated
amounts Y are very close to the true reported amounts (in general the true and
estimated amounts differ by less than 2-3%).
       The first step consists then in estimating the income thresholds
corresponding to each of the percentiles P90, P95, P99, …, P99.99, that define
our top income groups. For each percentile p, we look first for the published
income bracket [s,t] containing the percentile p. We estimate then the parameters
a and k of the Pareto distribution for the income bracket [s,t] as described above.
Once the density distribution on [s,t] is estimated, it is straightforward to estimate
the income threshold, say yp, corresponding to percentile p.
       The second step consists of estimating the amounts of income reported
above income threshold yp. We estimate the amount reported between income yp
and t (the upper bound of the published bracket [s,t] containing yp) using the
estimated Pareto density with parameters a and k. We then add to that amount
the amounts in all the published brackets above t (either directly reported after
1938 or estimated in step one described above).
       Once the total amount above yp is obtained, we obtain directly the mean
income above percentile p by dividing the amount by the number of individuals
above percentile p. Finally, the share of income accruing to individuals above
percentile p is obtained by dividing the total amount above yp by our income
denominator series (Table A, col. (4)). Average incomes and income shares for
intermediate fractiles (P90-95, P95-99, etc.) are obtained by subtraction.

B.2. Adjustments to raw Pareto Interpolations:

   Published tax statistics tables rank tax returns by net income (1920-1945) or
by gross income (1946-2000). Gross tax income is defined as the sum of all
sources of income before any deductions. Net income is gross tax income less
deductions such as medical costs or charitable contributions allowed but before
deducting personal and marital status exemptions. From 1920 to 1928, no
deductions were allowed and net income is equal to gross tax income. From
1929 on, charitable deductions were allowed up to 10% of income, and medical
expenses (in excess of 5% of income and up to a relatively modest maximum
amount) were deductible from income. Starting in 1946, the level of deduction
can be computed for each group using the composition tables. In the 1940s and
1950s, this amount fluctuates around 2% for all the income groups within the top
43
  This is the standard method of Pareto interpolation used by Kuznets (1953) and Feenberg and
Poterba (1993).


                                             39
decile.44 Therefore, we increase our raw income thresholds, levels, and top
shares (based on net income) by 2% for all groups in the period 1929-1945.
        Starting in 1946, in order to report statistics more quickly, the fiscal
administration decided to compile tax statistics about one year after the filing
deadline. Because of late filing, a small number of returns were not included in
the statistics. To correct for this and based on the Taxation Statistics reports, we
increase the number of returns and amounts reported by bracket by 2% from
1946 to 1957 and by 1% from 1958 to 1963. After 1963, the number of missing
returns due to late filing is deemed to be extremely small and no correction is
made.
        For many of the pre-war years, the exemption levels were so high
(especially in the period 1925 to 1931) that less than 5% of adult individuals
actually filed returns (see Table A, col. (3)). However, the exemption level for
singles is always half of the exemption level for married individuals. Thus from
1920 on, it is always the case than more than 5% of single individuals are
actually filing returns, although for some years less than 5% of married tax units
are filing returns. As a result, the number of taxpayers in the bottom brackets is
too low for some years and needs to be adjusted upward. This problem of
missing returns is especially acute for years 1925 to 1931. We adjusted for
missing married returns using a simple extrapolation method, based on the
assumption that marital ratios (i.e. ratios of married individuals to single
individuals) across income brackets is constant over those years.45
        Starting in 1972, a fraction of capital gains is included in gross income and
the dividend tax credit is introduced. From 1972 to 1987, 50% of realized gains
were included in taxable income. In 1988 and 1989, 66.6% of gains were
included in taxable income. From 1990 to 1999, 75% of gains were included in
taxable income. Finally, over the course of tax year 2000, the amount of gains
taxable has been reduced back to 50%.46 The dividend tax credit works as
follows. First, dividends reported on tax returns are multiplied by a gross-up
factor. This factor was 4/3 for 1972 to 1977, 3/2 from 1978 to 1986, 4/3 in 1987,
and 5/4 from 1988 to 2000. Second, a tax credit proportional to the grossed-up

44
   The level of deductions was much lower in Canada than in the United States at the top because
the United States allowed unlimited charitable deductions as well as deductions for interest paid
on debt.
45
   More precisely, we assume that the ratio of marital ratios over two adjacent brackets is constant
from year to year. We verify this assumption comparing these ratios for years with low filing
thresholds and where missing returns is not an issue. We use the closest years for which the
filing threshold is low enough so that all the married tax units with income in that particular income
bracket file a return to compute these marital ratios. We then extrapolate the marital ratio for a
year with high filing threshold in a low bracket using the bracket just above for that year and the
marital ratios for the year with complete returns. We compute then the expected number of
married tax units in each bracket in high filing threshold years. We obtain thus the missing
number of returns in each bracket or equivalently a multiplier factor by which we must adjust the
actual number of returns to obtain the real number of tax units.
46
    More precisely, 75% of capital gains realized before February 28th, 2000, 66.6% gains realized
on or after February 28th and before October 18th, and 50% of the gains realized on or after
October 18th, 2000 are included in taxable income. Under the present tax law, for years 2001 and
after, 50% of realized gains are included in taxable income.


                                                 40
amount of dividends reported can be deducted from personal income tax liability.
This dividend tax credit approximately offsets the corporate income tax paid on
profits before distribution to shareholders in the form of dividends.47 The
important point for our study is that, after 1972, the income tax statistics rank
individual taxpayers by gross income, which includes the taxable fraction of
realized capital gains, as well as the grossed-up dividend amounts. The series
we want to estimate are based on gross income excluding capital gains and
including only the actual amount of dividends distributed.
        The raw series we compute are based on the income definition reported in
the income tax statistics, which include capital gains and grossed-up dividends.
Therefore, these raw series are an over-estimate of the income shares based on
income excluding capital gains and dividend gross-up. In order to compute our
series from the raw series, one could simply deduct for each group the share of
capital gains and the grossed-up extra amount of dividends estimated from
composition tables. The problem is that ranking according to the income tax
statistics and ranking according to our income definition might be different,
especially at the very top. For example, in the extreme case where very top
incomes of the income tax statistics distributions consist only of capital gains,
then the deduction of capital gains would lead to the conclusion that the very top
incomes of the income (excluding capital gains) distribution are equal to zero.
Therefore, deducting the full amount of capital gains and dividend gross-up
would provide an underestimate of the income shares we would like to estimate.
However, the LAD microfiles available since 1982 allowed us to compute the
magnitude of the corrections that one needs to apply in order to obtain unbiased
series from the Taxation Statistics tables for the period 1972 to 1981. More
precisely, we computed the correction coefficients to be applied to the thresholds
and average income levels for each fractile using the year 1982 for which we
have both the imperfect published data and the micro-data, which allows to do
exact computations. It turns out that those correction coefficients are pretty stable
over the years 1982 to 2000 (the correction coefficients are always in a plus or
minus 5% range) and therefore we are confident that the extrapolations we make
for years 1972 to 1981 are fairly precise. The top income shares are reported in
Table B1 and the income thresholds and income averages for each of our top
groups are reported in Table B3.
        From 1972 on, we have also computed two alternative series based on
income including full realized capital gains.
        In the first series, we rank individuals by income including full capital gains
and include capital gains in income. After 1982, we use the LAD micro-data to
rank individuals by income including capital gains and we compute top income
shares in that case by dividing the income amounts for each top group by our
total income denominator from Table A, col. (4) plus the total amount of realized

47
  The offset would be exact if the grossed-up factor and the dividend tax credit rate were equal to
the corporate income tax rate. Before 1972, there was no dividend gross-up and the dividend tax
credit was 10% of dividends from 1949 (the first year such a credit was introduced) to 1952, and
20% from 1953 to 1971. Since 1972, the dividend credit has fluctuated between 16.66% and
25%.


                                                41
capital gains corresponding to the amounts reported on tax returns. For the
period 1972 to 1981, we have again to deal with the re-ranking issue as only
50% of capital gains are included in gross income and as dividends included are
grossed-up. Let us call the sum of the 50% of realized gains excluded from gross
income net of the extra dividend gross-up the net missing amount.48 Again,
simply adding to the amounts estimated from the raw published series the net
missing amount would lead to series that are downward biased because of re-
ranking. We adopt the same methodology as above to make the corrections for
years 1972 to 1981. Namely, we use the year 1982 to compute correction
coefficients for each of our fractiles, and we apply those correction coefficients to
all years 1972 to 1981. We have also checked carefully that the correction
coefficients are stable over the period 1982 to 2000. The top income share series
including capital gains are reported in Table B2, Panel A.
        In the second series, we rank individuals by income excluding capital
gains (as in Table B1), but we add back capital gains in incomes (both in the
numerator and the denominator). Exact computations are possible from 1982 on
using the LAD micro-data. For the period 1972 to 1981, we adjust our raw series
using correction coefficients from the year 1982 (as above). The results are
reported in Table B1, Panel B.

B.3. Notes on the pre-war published statistics:

        Personal income taxation in Canada has always been assessed on a
calendar year basis, meaning that income taxes were based on income earned
during a calendar year from January 1st to December 31st. From 1920 to 1940
however, the income tax statistics are reported by fiscal years (ending March
31st) and not by taxation year. Fiscal year means that the amounts and number
of individuals were those for which income taxes were collected during the fiscal
year April 1st of year t to March 31st of year t+1. However, because income tax
returns and payments were due in mid-April of the following year, income taxes
assessed and collected during fiscal year ending on March 31st of year t+1
corresponded almost entirely to incomes earned during calendar year t-1 (see
Canadian Fiscal Facts, 1957, p. 190). Starting with tax year 1940, the
exemptions were lowered significantly in order to increase revenues for the war.
As a result the number of returns increased substantially and the fiscal
administration was only able to assess 63.7% of all the returns filed for calendar
tax year 1940 during fiscal year 1941/42. We assume that the returns assessed
were drawn uniformly from all income classes and we simply multiply the number
of individuals and amounts reported in the published table by a factor 1/0.637.
        The year 1942 saw the transformation of the income tax from the old
system with little or no withholding and where taxpayers paid their tax liability
when they filed tax returns in the year following the calendar tax year to a new
system of pay-as-you earn where the government implemented widespread
withholding as income was earned. In order to relieve taxpayers from having to

48
  Note that the net missing amount could be negative if the dividend gross-up is larger than the
capital gains exclusion.


                                              42
pay taxes for two years in 1942 (both for year 1941 under the old system and for
year 1942 under the new pay-as-you earn system), the tax liability for tax year
1942 was reduced by 50% relative to the nominal tax schedule.49

C. Composition of Top Incomes

C1. Occupation Data from 1920-1945

From 1920 to 1945, the fiscal administration published in The Canada Yearbook
tables dividing taxpayers in a number of occupational groups. A taxpayer was
assigned to a group by major source of income. For example, those who
reported wages and salaries as major source of income were classified as
employees. We report in Table C1 the fraction of tax returns in each category as
well as the fraction of the adult population filing tax returns for each year between
1920 and 1941. After 1941, the number of tax filers increased significantly and
thus the figures cannot be compared with the pre-war years.
        For tax year 1942, the fiscal administration first published occupation
statistics by income brackets (Taxation Statistics, 1947, pp. 108-110). Using the
income thresholds from our raw Pareto interpolations, we can estimate the
fraction of taxpayers in each occupation for our top income groups. We have
grouped occupations into three categories. The Employees category is defined
as employees and armed forces. The Entrepreneurs category is defined as
Agrarians, Professionals, Salesmen, and Business Proprietors. The Rentiers
category is defined as Financial, and Estates. The All Others category is
excluded. The results are reported in Table C2.

C2. Composition Data from 1946-2000

       We have constructed income composition series for each of our top
groups (Tables C3 and C4) for the post World War II period when tables
reporting the composition of income, by income brackets, started to be published.
The composition series reported in Table C3 indicate for each upper income
group the fraction of total income (excluding capital gains) that comes from the
various types of income (excluding capital gains). We consider 6 types of
income: wage income; professional income; business income; dividends; interest
income; and other investment income. Wage income includes wages and
salaries, commissions from employment, as well as pensions. Wage income also
includes profits from exercised stock options (which are reported as employment
income on Canadian tax returns). Professional income includes self-employment
income from professions such as doctors, lawyers, etc. Business income
includes income from sole proprietorships, partnership income, and farm income.
Dividends include only dividends distributed by Canadian corporations (and not
dividends distributed by foreign companies to individuals in Canada). Interest

49
   Higher incomes did not benefit fully from the 50% abatement as tax liabilities above a certain
high threshold were to be paid at the time of death of the taxpayer. This deferral rule still made
the tax burden for year 1942 much lower than the nominal rates.


                                               43
includes interest income from banks, mortgages, and annuity income. Other
investment income includes rents, fiduciary income, investment income from
foreign sources, as well as a number of smaller items. We have excluded from
these composition series a number of small income categories such as alimony,
taxable social security benefits, taxable unemployment insurance benefits, etc.
Taken all together, these small categories never make more 2% of the total
income of the top decile (they usually make less than 1%), and even less at the
level of the top percentile, and excluding them simplifies the reading of our
composition series (these small income categories were taken into account when
computing top income levels and top income shares in total income).50 For the
period after 1982, the composition series were computed directly from the LAD
microfiles. For the 1946 to 1981 period, the composition series were estimated
from the published tables in Taxation Statistics indicating for each income
bracket not only the number of taxpayers and the total amount of their total
income but also the separate amounts for each type of income, as well as the
deductions, and tax liability. The composition of income within each group was
estimated from these tables using a simple linear interpolation method. Such a
method is less satisfactory than the Pareto interpolation method used to estimate
top income levels (no obvious law seems to fit composition patterns in a stable
way), but microfiles show that the resulting estimates are still relatively precise:
estimation errors are always less than 2 percentage points, and they are usually
much smaller (thanks to the fact that published tables are usually based on a
very large number of income brackets).
       The composition series reported in Table C4 indicate for each income
group the fraction of total income (including capital gains) that takes the form of
capital gains for the period 1972-2000. The concept of capital gains used to
compute these series is again “full capital gains”, i.e. total pre-exclusion capital
gains. We provide two sets of estimates in Table C4 corresponding to the two
ways we treated capital gains to compute top income shares (see Panel A and B
in Table B2). In the left panel, we report the fraction of capital gains for incomes
ranked excluding capital gains (as in Panel B of Table B2). In the right panel, we
report the fraction of capital gains for incomes ranked including full capital gains
(as in Panel A of Table B2). For the period starting in 1982, these series were
computed using the LAD microfiles. For the period 1972 to 1981, a direct linear
extrapolation from published tables yields capital gains shares series for groups
of income (including the post-exclusion amount of capital gains), and one needs
to correct these raw estimates in order to take re-ranking into account (see
section above). That is, capital gains shares are smaller for groups ranked by
income excluding capital gains than for groups ranked by income including post-
exclusion capital gains (as in the published tables), and capital gains shares are
smaller for groups ranked by income including post-exclusion capital gains than
for groups ranked by income including pre-exclusion capital gains. Microfiles


50
  The fact that these small income categories almost do not matter for top incomes implies that
changes in tax law regarding those items (e.g. changes in the definition of family allowances or
unemployment benefits) have negligible consequences for our income levels and shares series.


                                              44
allowed us to compute the magnitudes of these correction coefficients.51 The
capital gains shares series reported in Table C4 demonstrate that re-ranking is
substantial at the very top. For example, in 2000, 26.6% of total income reported
by the fractile P99.99-100 of the distribution of income including capital gains
takes the form of capital gains, but the capital gains share falls to 6.7% when one
looks at the fractile P99.99-100 of the distribution of income excluding capital
gains.

D. Wages and Salaries Series

        Top wage shares are estimated by Pareto interpolation from the LAD
distribution tables from 1982 to 2000 and from Taxation Statistics published
tables from 1972 to 1981. The total wage denominator is taken as equal to total
employment reported on tax returns. Employment income on tax returns includes
wages and salaries, commissions from employment, and other employment
income. Wages and salaries include taxable allowances and benefits, bonuses
and directors’ fee as well as the value of stock-option exercises. Total
employment income on tax returns is always very close to 95% of wages and
salaries (excluding supplementary labor income) from National Accounts with
very little fluctuation over the period 1972-2000. The total number of wage
earners is also estimated from LAD (1982 to 2000) and Taxation Statistics (1972
to 1981) as the number of returns with positive wages and salaries. This statistic
fluctuates around 100% of the National Accounts estimate of the number of full-
time plus part-time employees with no trend over the period (the ratio is always
between 98% and 102%). Total employment income and the total number of tax
returns with positive wages and salaries amounts are reported from 1972 to 2000
in Table D1.
        We estimate two series of top wage income shares. The first series,
reported in Panel A of Table D2, are estimated at the individual level (as is our
income series). The second series, reported on Panel B, are wage income
shares estimated at the family level whereby we add employment income of
married couples. In that case, the total number of units (relative to which the
upper groups are defined) is the total number of families with positive wage
income in the LAD microfiles. The family series are limited to the period 1982 to
2000 when the LAD micro-data are available (as there is no information on
earnings by couples in the published statistics). We use the same type of Pareto
interpolation methods described in Appendix B to estimate these top wage
shares from distribution tables by size of employment income obtained from the
LAD microfiles beginning in 1982.
        Using the composition Tables published in Taxation Statistics from 1972
to 1981, we are able to extend our individual wage shares series back to 1972.
Starting in 1972, the composition tables by brackets of total income report not
only the amounts of wages and salaries reported but also the number of tax


51
  The correction formulas for capital gains shares that we inferred from microfiles are more
complex than those applied to correct income levels, and they are available upon request.


                                            45
returns with positive wages and salaries. We use this information to obtain a
preliminary distribution of wage income as follows.
        Average wage income for wage earners and average gross income for
each gross income bracket are computed. We then assume that each gross
income bracket corresponds to a wage income bracket with thresholds equal to
the actual gross income thresholds multiplied by the ratio of average wage
income to average gross income in that bracket. In order to generate brackets
fitting together, the final thresholds are taken as equal to the average of the
corresponding top and bottom thresholds of two adjacent brackets. We therefore
obtain a set of wage bracket thresholds where the number of returns and the
wage amount reported for each bracket is the same as in the original
composition table. This new distribution by size of wages is not perfectly accurate
because ranking in terms of gross income is not identical to ranking in terms of
wages. From this constructed wage income distribution, we compute average
income levels and shares for each of our top income groups. The levels and
shares are underestimated using this method because ranking in terms of total
income is not identical to ranking in terms of wages and salaries.
        This method is therefore reliable only if wage income is a substantial
fraction of income bracket by bracket. This is true below the top percentile but not
for the top wage income groups. However, using years 1982 to 2000 where both
the microfiles and the published composition tables are available, we can
estimate by how much levels and shares estimated from published tables for
each top income group should be adjusted to match estimates from the
microfiles. Fortunately, these multiplier factors are extremely stable from 1982 to
2000 (the maximum variation between multipliers is always less than 10%).
Therefore, we can use the multipliers from year 1982 to adjust the levels and
shares for years 1972 to 1981.52
        We repeat these computations for all provinces excluding Quebec and for
francophones in Quebec separately for years 1982 to 2000.53 Each tax return
identifies the Province of residence, and francophones and Anglophones within
Quebec are identified according to the language of their tax returns. For these
series, the total number of individuals is defined as the number of individuals in
the LAD microfiles in that particular group with positive wages and salaries, and
the total amount of employment income is defined as total employment income
reported on tax returns for that particular group. Canadians are free to choose to
file their tax returns in either English or French. Quebec is the only province with
a strong majority of francophones. Quebec residents filing tax returns in French
are almost certainly francophones. It might be the case, however, that some
Quebec francophones may file tax returns in English. However, our conclusions
on the differential trends for Quebec francophones and the rest of Canada


52
   Shares and levels are blown up by around 5% for groups P90-95 and P95-99, by around 10%
for groups P99-99.5 and P99.5-99.9, and by around 20% for groups P99.9-99.99 and P99.99-
100.
53
   Published tables in Taxation Statistics do not allow the estimation of these series for years
when the LAD microfiles are not available.


                                              46
remain valid as long as the share of top earner francophones who file tax returns
in French does not decline over time.
       Data on stock options exercised for the period 1995-2000 have been
provided by the Statistics Division of Canada Customs and Revenue Agency.
The Agency provided us with two set of statistics.
       First, wage earners were ranked by full employment income including
stock options and the number of individuals, the amount of employment income
they reported, as well as the amount of stock option they exercised was reported
for a range of full employment income brackets. From these statistics, we
estimated, using the methods described above, the share of stock options in
employment income for each of the top groups. Those statistics are reported in
Panel A of Table D5 (note that the share of employment income accruing to each
of these groups had already been estimated and reported in Table D2).
       Second, wage earners were ranked by employment income excluding
stock options and the number of individuals, the amount of employment income
they reported, as well as the amount of stock options they exercised was
reported for a range of employment income (excluding stock options) brackets.
From these statistics, we estimated the shares of employment income (excluding
stock options) accruing to each of the top wage groups (ranked by employment
income excluding stock options). These statistics are reported on Panel B of
Table D5. Keeping the ranking by employment income excluding stock options,
we estimated the share of employment income (including stock options) accruing
to each of these top groups (ranked by employment income excluding stock
options) by adding back the amount of stock options reported both in the
numerator for each group and the denominator. Those top wage shares are
reported on Panel C of Table D5. Finally, for each of these groups, we estimated
the fraction of stock options they reported (computed as the amount of stock
options divided by the amount of employment income including stock options).
Those statistics are reported on Panel D of Table D5.

E. Estimating Marginal Tax Rates and Average Tax Rates, 1920-2000

The Canadian income tax structure has gone through many reforms over the
course of the century. Perry (1955, 1989) provides a comprehensive description
of the development and evolution of taxation in Canada during the pre-war and
post-war periods respectively.
       Marginal tax rates reported in Table E1 have been computed as follows.
We consider each of the raw income thresholds P90, P95, etc. estimated from
the interpolation methods described in Section B. We then assume that the
taxpayer at each of these income thresholds is a married taxpayer (who can
claim the married exemption level) with two dependents (for example a married
couple with two children under 18). We therefore subtract from raw income the
married exemption and two dependent exemptions. We also subtract the
average level of deductions claimed on top of marital and personal exemptions at




                                       47
the corresponding percentiles to obtain net taxable income.54 Tax liability is then
obtained from taxable income from a standard tax schedule with increasing
marginal tax rates by income brackets, from which the marginal tax rate for any
taxable income level can be easily obtained. The marginal tax rate we report
includes all surtaxes, as well as the provincial tax rate (see below).
       For some years, surtaxes apply only to some forms of income such as
investment income. Similarly, dividends from Canadian corporations often face a
lower marginal tax rate. In those cases, we have assumed that the marginal
dollar earned by the taxpayer has the same composition as total income for the
average taxpayer in that percentile.55 For the period 1949 to 1971, we have
taken into account the dividend credit to reduce the marginal tax rate according
to the share of dividend income accruing at each percentile. Starting in 1972, in
addition to the dividend tax credit, dividends were grossed-up before being
included in income. As a result, for high income earners in a high tax bracket, the
net marginal tax of received dividends was very close to the marginal tax on
ordinary income and therefore we assume that dividends are taxed as normal
income when computing our marginal tax rates.
       Before 1942, some provinces and municipalities levied personal income
taxes. The two biggest provinces, Ontario and Quebec did not introduce
provincial income taxes before 1935 and 1941 respectively.56 Therefore, we do
not try to add these provincial taxes in our computations of marginal tax rates
and tax liability in the pre-war period. During World War II, the provinces agreed
to stop raising income taxes and let the federal government collect all income
taxes. After World War II and up to 1961, all Provinces (except Quebec) worked
on a tax rental agreement whereby the federal government would collect all
income taxes and redistribute part of income tax collections to each province.
Therefore before 1962, the federal income tax liability includes both federal and
provincial income taxes. Starting in 1962 and up to 1971, tax collection
agreements were passed whereby the federal government granted abatements
from federal income taxes and provinces would receive in provincial taxes
amounts equal to the abatement from federal income taxes. Therefore for years
before 1972, we simply use the federal income tax structure to compute marginal
tax rates, as well as tax liabilities reported in Taxation Statistics.
       Starting in 1972, the nominal federal tax rate was lowered but each
province defined a given percentage that the federal tax administration would
collect on behalf of the Province on top of the nominal federal income tax. In
Table E1, we have used the case of Ontario (the largest province containing

54
   For years 1920 to 1928, no additional deductions were allowed. For 1929 to 1945, we have
assumed that deductions amounted to 2% of gross income at all percentiles (which is true on
average for year 1946, the first year these details are available). From 1946 to 2000, the level of
deductions increases slightly over time and we have made approximate computations for each
year and percentile threshold using the available tables from Taxation Statistics.
55
   For example, if the taxpayer in percentile P99.9 reports on average 30% investment income,
and 70% labor income, and the marginal tax rate for investment and labor income are t1 and t2
respectively, we estimate the marginal tax rate as t=0.3*t1+0.7*t2.
56
   Some large cities in these provinces had, however, established modest income taxes since the
beginning of the century or even before.


                                                48
more than half of the highest incomes in Canada) to compute marginal tax rates.
Over the years, the Ontario provincial tax has changed many times and special
provincial surtaxes have been introduced as well that have in part offset the
decline in progressivity of the federal tax system. All these surtaxes have been
included in the estimation of marginal tax rates reported in Table E1. Marginal tax
rates for other provinces have followed a very similar time pattern as rates for
Ontario. Quebec in particular has almost always had marginal rates slightly
higher than Ontario (by 2 to 4 percentage points in general).
        Average tax rates have been computed as the sum of federal and
provincial tax liability (after surtaxes and net of all credits) paid by each group
divided by total gross income (including only the taxable portion of capital gains
for the 1972 to 2000 period) reported by each group. We have decided to include
the taxable portions of capital gains in the income denominator so that our
average tax rate measures reflect the average tax on ordinary income. For years
1982 to 2000, we have used the LAD microfiles to do these computations. In the
period 1920 to 1981, we have used the distribution tables, which always report
the amount of taxes paid by income brackets.




                                        49
References

Acemoglu, Daron (2002) “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market,”
Journal of Economic Literature, 40, 7-72.

Atkinson, Anthony B. (2001) “Top Incomes in the United Kingdom over the
Twentieth Century”, mimeo Nuffied College, Oxford.

Baker, Michael and Gary Solon (1999), “Earnings Dynamics and Inequality
among Canadian Men, 1976-1992: Evidence from Longitudinal Income Tax
Records”, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7370.
forthcoming Journal of Labor Economics.

Beach, Charles, Ross Finnie and David Gray (2003), “Earnings Variability and
Earnings Instability of Women and Men in Canada”, Canadian Public Policy 29
(supplement), S41-S63.

Beach, Charles M. and George V. Slotsve (1996), Are We Becoming Two
Societies? Income Polarization and the Myth of the Declining Middle Class in
Canada, C.D. Howe Institute, Toronto.

Bird, Richard and Michael Smart (2001), “Tax Policy and Tax Research in
Canada”, The State of Economics in Canada: Festschrift in Honour of David
Slater, John Deutsch Institute, Kingston.

Blackburn, McKinley L. and David E. Bloom (1993), “The Distribution of Family
Income: Measuring and Explaining Changes in the 1980s for Canada and the
United States”, in D. Card and R. Freeman (eds.) Small Differences that Matter,
The University of Chicago Press: Chicago.

Buse, Adolf (1982), “The Cyclical Behaviour of the Size Distribution of Income in
Canada: 1947-1978”, Canadian Journal of Economics, 15(2), 189-204.

Canada, Department of National Revenue, Taxation Division, Incomes Assessed
for War Income Tax in Canada, Ottawa, Various Years, 1924-1938.

Canada, Department of National Revenue, Taxation Division, Office
Consolidation, (1945) The Wartime Salaries Order, Ottawa, E. Cloutier, printer to
the King.

Canada, Canadian Customs and Revenue Agency (formerly Revenue Canada,
formerly Department of National Revenue), Taxation Division, Taxation Statistics,
Queens’ Printer, Ottawa, annual publication, 1948 to 2001.

Canada, Department of Trade and Commerce, Dominion Bureau of Statistics,
Dominion Income Tax Statistics, Ottawa, 1942-1944.



                                       50
Canada, Dominion Bureau of Statistics, The Canada Yearbook, Ottawa, annual
publication, 1905-1948.

Canadian Tax Foundation (1957), Canadian Fiscal Facts, Canadian Tax
Foundation.

CANSIM (2003), Canadian Socio-economic Information Matrix, Statistics
Canada: Ottawa.

Feenberg, Daniel and James Poterba (1993), “Income Inequality and the
Incomes of Very High Income Taxpayers: Evidence from Tax Returns”, Tax
Policy and the Economy ed. J. Poterba, MIT Press: Cambridge, 7, 145-177.

Feenberg, Daniel. and James Poterba (2000), “The Income and Tax Share of
Very High Income Households, 1960-1995”, American Economic Review, 90(2),
264-270.

Feldstein, Martin (1995). “The Effect of Marginal Tax Rates on Taxable Income:
A Panel Study of the 1986 Tax Reform Act” Journal of Political Economy, 103(3),
551-572.

Finnie, Ross (forthcoming)."Who Moves? - A Panel Logit Model Analysis of Inter-
Provincial Migration In Canada", Applied Economics.

Finnie, Ross (2001). "The Brain Drain: Myth and Reality - What It Is and What
Should be Done", Choices, 7 (6) 3-29, Institute for Research on Public Policy,
Montreal.

Finnie, Ross (2002, cited by permission). "Leaving and Coming Back to Canada:
Evidence from Longitudinal Data". manuscript, School of Policy Studies Division,
Queen's University.

Gagné, Robert, Jean-François Nadeau and François Vaillancourt (2000),
“Taxpayers’ Response to Tax-Rate Changes: A Canadian Panel Study”,
CIRANO Scientific Series 2000s-59, Université de Montréal.

Goldberg, Simon A. and Jenny R. Poduluk (1957), "Income Size Distribution
Statistics in Canada" in Milton Gilbert and Richard Stone (eds)., Income and
Wealth, Series VI, Bowes and Bowes: London, 155-202.

Goldin, Claudia and Robert Margo (1992), “The Great Compression: The Wage
Structure in the United States at Mid-Century”, Quarterly Journal of Economics,
107(1), 1-34.




                                      51
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz (1999), “The Returns to Skill across the
Twentieth Century United States”, NBER Working Paper No. 7126.

Goolsbee, Austan (2000). “What Happens When You Tax the Rich? Evidence
from Executive Compensation”, Journal of Political Economy, 108(2), 352-378.

Gordon, Roger and Joel Slemrod (2000) “Are ‘Real’ Responses to Taxes Simply
Income Shifting Between Corporate and Personal Tax Bases?”, in Slemrod, Joel
ed. Does Atlas Shrug? The Economic Consequences of Taxing the Rich,
Cambridge University Press.

Gruber, Jonathan and Emmanuel Saez (2002). “The Elasticity of Taxable
Income: Evidence and Implications”, Journal of Public Economics, 84, 1-32.

Heisz, Andrew, Andrew Jackson and Garnet Picot (2001), “Distributional
Outcomes in Canada in the 1990s” in Keith Banting, Andrew Sharpe and
France St-Hilaire (eds.) The Review of Economic Performance and Social
Progress ,The Longest Decade: Canada in the 1990s, McGill-Queen’s University
Press: Montreal.

Iqbal, Mahmood (1999) “Are We Losing Our Minds? Trends, Determinants and
the Role of Taxation in Brain Drain to the United States”, The Conference Board
of Canada, Paper No. 265-99.

Karoly, L. A. (1993) “The Trend in Inequality among Families, Individuals, and
Workers in the United States: A Twenty-five Year Perspective.”, in S. Danziger
and P. Gottschalk, eds. Uneven Tides: Rising Inequality in America, Russell
Sage Foundation: New-York, 99-164.

Katz, Lawrence and David Autor (1999). “Changes in the Wage Structure and
Earnings Inequality”, in Handbook of Labor Economics, eds. O. Ashenfelter and
D. Card, North-Holland, Volume 3A.

Klassen, Kenneth, and Amin Mawani (2000). “The Impact of Financial and Tax
Reporting Incentives on Option Grants to Canadian CEOs”, Contemporary
Accounting Research, 17(2), 227-262.

Kuznets, Simon. (1953), Shares of Upper Income Groups in Income and
Savings, National Bureau of Economic Research: New York.

Kuznets, Simon. (1955), “Economic Growth and Economic Inequality”, American
Economic Review 45(1), 1-28.

McGregor, Gwyneth (1960), “Personal Corporations”, Canadian Tax Papers, No.
18, Canadian Tax Foundation, Toronto.




                                      52
Perry, J. Harvey. (1955) Taxes, Tariffs, and Subsidies: A History of Canadian
Fiscal Development, 2 Volumes, University of Toronto Press: Canada.

Perry, J. Harvey. (1989) A Fiscal History of Canada – The Post War Years,
Canadian Tax Foundation, Canadian Tax Paper, No. 85.

Piketty, Thomas (2001a), Les hauts revenus en France au 20eme siecle –
Inegalites et redistributions, 1901-1998, Paris : Editions Grasset.

Piketty, Thomas (2001b), “Income Inequality in France, 1901-1998”, CEPR
Discussion Paper n°2876, forthcoming Journal of Political Economy.

Piketty, Thomas and Emmanuel Saez (2003), “Income Inequality in the United
States, 1913-1998”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(1), 1-39 (longer version
NBER Working Paper No. 8467, 2001).

Poduluk, Jenny R. (1968), Incomes of Canadians, Dominion Bureau of Statistics,
Ottawa, Canada.

Sillamaa, Mary-Anne, and Michael R. Veall, (2001), “The Effect of Marginal Tax
Rates on Taxable Income: A Panel Study of the 1988 Tax Flattening in Canada”,
Journal of Public Economics, 80, 341-356.

Slemrod, Joel (1996), “High Income Families and the Tax Changes of the 1980s:
the Anatomy of Behavioral Response.”, in Empirical Foundations of Household
Taxation, eds. M. Feldstein and J. Poterba, University of Chicago.

Slemrod, Joel (1998). “Methodological Issues in Measuring and Interpreting
Taxable Income Elasticities”, National Tax Journal, 51(4), 773-788.

Slemrod, Joel and Jon Bakija (2001), “Growing Inequality and Decreased Tax
Progressivity”,in Kevin Hassett (ed.), Inequality and Tax Policy, Washington DC:
American Enterprise Institute Press.

Urquhart, M.C., and K.A.H. Buckley (1965), Historical Statistics of Canada,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.

Vaillancourt, François (1985), “Income Distribution and Economic Security in
Canada: An Overview” in François Vaillancourt (research coordinator), Income
Distribution and Economic Security in Canada, University of Toronto Press:
Toronto.

Williamson, Jeffrey and Peter Lindert (1980),          American    Inequality–A
Macroeconomic History, New York: Academic Press.




                                      53
Wolfson, M. and B. Murphy (2000), “Income Inequality in North America: Does
the 49th Parallel Still Matter?”, Canadian Economic Observer, August, Statistics
Canada.

Zhao, J., D. Drew and T. S. Murray (2000), "Brain drain or brain gain: The
migration of knowledge workers from and to Canada", Education Quarterly
Review 6(3), 8-44, Statistics Canada.




                                      54
                                         Table 1
      Thresholds and Average Incomes in Top Groups within the Top Decile in 2000

                                                                          Number of tax       Average
   Thresholds           Income level                   Fractiles             units            Income
       (1)                  (2)                           (3)                 (4)               (5)
                                                   Full Population          22,807,585        $24,859
       P90                 $59,232                     P90-95                1,140,379         $66,310
       P95                 $75,670                     P95-99                 912,303          $95,982
       P99                $145,774                    P99-99.5                114,038         $171,728
      P99.5               $210,150                   P99.5-99.9               91,230          $303,035
      P99.9               $530,311                   P99.9-99.99              20,527          $923,385
      P99.99             $2,396,050                  P99.99-100                2,281         $4,695,923

Notes: Computations based on income tax return statistics (see Appendix Section A).
Income defined as annual gross income excluding capital gains and before individual taxes.
Amounts are expressed in 2000 Canadian dollars. 1 US dollar = 1.5 Canadian dollar.
Source: Table A and Table B3, row 2000.
                   Table A: Reference Totals for Population, Income, and Inflation, 1920-2000
                   Adult population                           Income                    Inflation
               (1)          (2)         (3)              (4)            (5)                (6)               (7)             (8)
          Population Number of        (2)/(1)      Total income Average income            CPI            Average tax   Average capital
          (aged 20+) tax returns       (%)       (millions 2000 $    (2000 $)         (2000 base)         per adult     gain per adult
            ('000s)      ('000s)                                                                          (2000 $)        (2000 $)
  1920       4,990        290.6        5.8            24,852           4,980             11.894              66
  1921       5,072        281.2        5.5            22,695           4,474             10.485              55
  1922       5,163        239.0        4.6            25,751           4,987              9.604              50
  1923       5,228        225.5        4.3            27,705           5,300              9.604              50
  1924       5,321        209.5        3.9            27,890           5,242              9.427              49
  1925       5,426        116.0        2.1            30,384           5,600              9.604              37
  1926       5,528        122.0        2.2            32,859           5,944              9.604              40
  1927       5,668        129.7        2.3            35,025           6,179              9.515              41
  1928       5,810        142.2        2.4            37,612           6,474              9.515              47
  1929       5,947        143.6        2.4            37,420           6,293              9.692              47
  1930       6,074        133.6        2.2            35,413           5,831              9.604              46
  1931       6,192        167.0        2.7            32,504           5,250              8.634              50
  1932       6,317        204.0        3.2            29,525           4,674              7.841              58
  1933       6,445        184.2        2.9            28,336           4,397              7.489              54
  1934       6,564        199.1        3.0            31,210           4,755              7.577              69
  1935       6,681        217.0        3.2            33,160           4,963              7.665              69
  1936       6,786        237.1        3.5            34,830           5,132              7.753              75
  1937       6,890        264.8        3.8            38,194           5,544              8.018              83
  1938       6,999        293.1        4.2            38,455           5,494              8.106              75
  1939       7,114        300.4        4.2            40,608           5,708              8.106              95
  1940       7,229        608.4        8.4            45,386           6,278              8.370             259
  1941       7,350        871.5       11.9            51,384           6,991              8.899             519
  1942       7,492        1,781       23.8            62,802           8,383              9.251             591
  1943       7,614        2,163       28.4            67,268           8,835              9.427            1,186
  1944       7,730        2,254       29.2            73,222           9,473              9.515            1,138
  1945       7,822        2,254       28.8            72,778           9,304              9.604             986
  1946       7,971        3,162       39.7            72,031           9,037              9.868             840
  1947       8,122        3,529       43.4            75,463           9,291             10.837             721
  1948       8,266        3,662       44.3            76,991           9,314             12.335             648
  1949       8,613        3,764       43.7            78,908           9,162             12.775             464
  1950       8,758        3,892       44.4            81,691           9,328             13.128             510
  1951       8,896        4,118       46.3            88,228           9,917             14.449             644
  1952       9,129        4,413       48.3            93,889          10,285             14.890             776
  1953       9,329        4,700       50.4            99,646          10,681             14.714             788
  1954       9,548        4,834       50.6            99,091          10,378             14.802             747
  1955       9,734        4,955       50.9           107,058          10,998             14.802             764
  1956       9,911        5,188       52.4           117,008          11,806             15.066             824
  1957      10,159        5,195       51.1           120,837          11,894             15.507             857
  1958      10,352        5,516       53.3           123,403          11,920             15.859             800
  1959      10,537        5,672       53.8           128,164          12,163             16.123             865
  1960      10,700        5,851       54.7           132,743          12,406             16.300             934
  1961      10,851        5,947       54.8           135,975          12,531             16.476             978
  1962      11,001        6,107       55.5           146,724          13,337             16.652            1,021
  1963      11,158        6,324       56.7           154,161          13,816             16.916            1,105
  1964      11,354        6,693       58.9           162,700          14,330             17.269            1,253
  1965      11,575        7,136       61.7           176,318          15,232             17.621            1,339
  1966      11,845        7,733       65.3           190,779          16,106             18.326            1,485
  1967      12,150        8,134       66.9           200,623          16,512             18.943            1,716
  1968      12,451        8,495       68.2           210,535          16,909             19.736            1,969
  1969      12,756        8,882       69.6           223,356          17,510             20.617            2,227
  1970      13,064        9,183       70.3           232,009          17,760             21.322            2,449
  1971      13,365        9,533       71.3           246,998          18,481             21.938            2,696
  1972      13,659      10,380        76.0           266,189          19,488             22.996            3,516              95
  1973      13,983      11,004        78.7           289,654          20,715             24.758            3,700             142
  1974      14,353      11,602        80.8           310,181          21,611             27.401            3,940             144
  1975      14,737      12,002        81.4           324,154          21,996             30.396            3,909             181
  1976      15,101      12,343        81.7           344,007          22,781             32.687            4,047             256
  1977      15,454      12,586        81.4           351,688          22,757             35.242            3,998             284
  1978      15,787      14,320        90.7           359,722          22,786             38.414            3,786             394
  1979      16,129      14,682        91.0           372,951          23,123             41.938            3,970             605
  1980      16,524      14,765        89.4           383,382          23,202             46.167            4,164             721
  1981      16,919      15,179        89.7           403,154          23,829             51.894            4,324             540
  1982      17,299      15,221        88.0           395,734          22,875             57.533            4,061             276
  1983      17,654      15,303        86.7           389,172          22,045             60.881            3,819             379
  1984      17,998      15,552        86.4           404,590          22,480             63.524            3,962             347
  1985      18,321      15,864        86.6           421,517          23,007             66.079            4,196             468
  1986      18,628      16,538        88.8           432,966          23,243             68.811            4,488             705
  1987      18,966      17,071        90.0           446,054          23,518             71.806            4,868            1,075
  1988      19,278      17,580        91.2           472,432          24,507             74.714            5,021             888
  1989      19,690      18,132        92.1           489,777          24,875             78.414            5,416            1,102
  1990      20,030      18,759        93.7           498,292          24,877             82.203            5,490             676
  1991      20,313      19,051        93.8           478,939          23,578             86.784            5,221             611
  1992      20,579      19,437        94.5           477,320          23,195             88.106            5,107             664
  1993      20,843      19,829        95.1           475,314          22,804             89.692            5,055            1,017
  1994      21,115      20,154        95.4           485,434          22,989             89.868            5,129             961
  1995      21,394      20,515        95.9           497,433          23,252             91.806            5,240             507
  1996      21,667      20,806        96.0           502,058          23,171             93.304            5,298             649
  1997      21,971      21,124        96.1           515,341          23,455             94.802            5,470             839
  1998      22,241      21,384        96.1           532,784          23,955             95.683            5,533             842
  1999      22,517      21,882        97.2           547,416          24,312             97.357            5,611             867
  2000      22,808      22,146        97.1           566,981          24,859            100.000            5,817            1,363
Notes: Population estimates based on census data, from CANSIM. Total income is 80% of personal income (less transfers) from National Accounts.
Consumer Price Index (CPI) from CANSIM series. Average tax per capita includes both federal (and provincial) individual income taxes.
Average capital gains per adult based on total capital gains (taxable and non-taxable) reported on tax returns since 1972. All details in Appendix Section A.
                                                  Table B1: Top Income Shares in Canada, 1920-2000
                                            (Groups are defined by total income (excluding capital gains))

              P90-100     P95-100     P99-100     P99.5-100 P99.9-100 P99.99-100               P90-95       P95-99     P99-99.5    P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99
                (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)                    (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)
   1920                    32.60       14.40        10.49     5.36       2.10                                18.19       3.91        5.13        3.26
   1921                    40.58       17.60        12.55     5.81       1.70                                22.98       5.05        6.74        4.10
   1922                    34.34       15.17        10.74     5.04       1.63                                19.17       4.43        5.70        3.41
   1923                    30.15       14.38        10.22     4.69       1.53                                15.77       4.17        5.52        3.16
   1924                    30.65       14.53        10.39     4.89       1.63                                16.11       4.14        5.50        3.26
   1925                    29.76       13.18         9.48     4.34       1.32                                16.59       3.70        5.14        3.02
   1926                    30.15       14.01        10.22     4.81       1.57                                16.14       3.79        5.41        3.23
   1927                    30.70       14.69        10.78     5.13       1.74                                16.01       3.91        5.65        3.40
   1928                    31.31       15.32        11.23     5.29       1.75                                16.00       4.09        5.94        3.54
   1929                    31.73       15.64        11.47     5.34       1.71                                16.09       4.17        6.14        3.63
   1930                    32.74       16.10        11.86     5.68       1.84                                16.63       4.24        6.18        3.84
   1931                    36.03       16.60        12.00     5.55       1.72                                19.42       4.61        6.44        3.84
   1932                    39.42       17.67        12.72     5.98       1.90                                21.75       4.96        6.74        4.08
   1933                    40.88       18.03        12.89     5.91       1.73                                22.84       5.14        6.99        4.18
   1934                    39.11       17.50        12.59     5.86       1.84                                21.61       4.91        6.73        4.03
   1935                    38.09       16.99        12.19     5.63       1.72                                21.10       4.79        6.56        3.91
   1936                    38.35       17.45        12.67     6.00       1.91                                20.90       4.78        6.67        4.09
   1937                    35.81       16.26        11.79     5.48       1.54                                19.55       4.46        6.32        3.94
   1938                    39.55       18.41        13.31     6.05       1.87                                21.15       5.10        7.26        4.18
   1939                    37.23       16.88        12.23     5.63       1.67                                20.34       4.66        6.60        3.96
   1940                    33.68       14.71        10.35     4.52       1.53                                18.97       4.36        5.84        2.99
   1941        45.31       30.74       13.30         9.46     4.24       1.29                   14.56        17.45       3.84        5.22        2.95
   1942        39.56       26.42       11.30         8.01     3.53       1.06                   13.14        15.13       3.29        4.48        2.47
   1943        39.29       25.84       10.72         7.51     3.23       0.92                   13.45        15.12       3.21        4.29        2.31
   1944        37.38       24.49       10.01         6.95     2.92       0.82                   12.89        14.48       3.06        4.02        2.11
   1945        37.27       24.63       10.12         6.99     2.89       0.78                   12.64        14.51       3.13        4.10        2.11
   1946        37.75       25.30       10.72         7.42     3.02       0.79                   12.45        14.57       3.31        4.40        2.22
   1947        38.14       25.66       10.99         7.61     3.09       0.82                   12.47        14.67       3.38        4.53        2.27
   1948        36.68       24.49       10.39         7.20     2.94       0.71                   12.19        14.10       3.19        4.26        2.23
   1949        38.22       25.37       10.69         7.38     2.91       0.69                   12.84        14.69       3.31        4.46        2.23
   1950        38.24       25.45       10.88         7.58     3.06       0.74                   12.79        14.57       3.30        4.51        2.33
   1951        36.31       23.96       10.03         6.94     2.80       0.65                   12.35        13.93       3.09        4.14        2.15
   1952        36.44       23.91        9.85         6.75     2.71       0.67                   12.52        14.07       3.09        4.04        2.03
   1953        37.36       24.37        9.88         6.75     2.70       0.66                   12.98        14.50       3.12        4.05        2.04
   1954        38.68       25.29       10.33         7.10     2.82       0.71                   13.39        14.96       3.23        4.28        2.11
   1955        38.08       24.90       10.19         7.00     2.86       0.75                   13.18        14.71       3.19        4.14        2.11
   1956        37.22       24.19        9.63         6.57     2.63       0.65                   13.04        14.56       3.06        3.94        1.98
   1957        37.76       24.50        9.64         6.54     2.59       0.64                   13.26        14.86       3.10        3.95        1.95
   1958        38.39       25.00        9.89         6.68     2.62       0.64                   13.39        15.11       3.21        4.06        1.98
   1959        38.44       24.94        9.74         6.55     2.54       0.61                   13.50        15.21       3.19        4.01        1.93
   1960        38.78       25.13        9.77         6.56     2.52       0.61                   13.65        15.36       3.21        4.03        1.92
   1961        39.35       25.53        9.93         6.63     2.55       0.63                   13.82        15.61       3.29        4.08        1.92
   1962        37.77       24.42        9.37         6.23     2.33       0.54                   13.36        15.05       3.14        3.90        1.79
   1963        37.37       24.11        9.14         6.06     2.24       0.51                   13.26        14.96       3.08        3.82        1.73
   1964        37.77       24.43        9.38         6.24     2.33       0.54                   13.34        15.05       3.14        3.92        1.78
   1965        37.23       24.04        9.20         6.12     2.28       0.54                   13.19        14.84       3.08        3.84        1.74
   1966        36.76       23.70        8.91         5.88     2.16       0.49                   13.06        14.80       3.03        3.73        1.66
   1967        37.06       23.91        9.00         5.93     2.15       0.47                   13.15        14.91       3.07        3.78        1.68
   1968        37.31       24.02        9.04         5.96     2.17       0.47                   13.28        14.99       3.07        3.80        1.70
   1969        37.34       24.01        9.01         5.91     2.13       0.46                   13.33        15.00       3.09        3.78        1.67
   1970        37.92       24.22        8.97         5.87     2.07       0.43                   13.69        15.25       3.10        3.79        1.64
   1971        37.83       24.08        8.87         5.79     2.00       0.40                   13.76        15.21       3.08        3.79        1.60
   1972        37.55       23.84        8.75         5.74     2.02       0.43                   13.71        15.09       3.00        3.72        1.59
   1973        37.02       23.65        8.80         5.78     2.06       0.46                   13.37        14.85       3.02        3.72        1.60
   1974        37.38       23.82        8.81         5.76     2.09       0.48                   13.57        15.01       3.05        3.68        1.61
   1975        37.28       23.71        8.74         5.73     2.11       0.51                   13.56        14.97       3.01        3.62        1.60
   1976        36.74       22.99        8.08         5.21     1.88       0.44                   13.75        14.91       2.87        3.33        1.43
   1977        36.18       22.43        7.74         4.98     1.79       0.43                   13.75        14.69       2.76        3.20        1.36
   1978        35.77       22.17        7.60         4.90     1.77       0.44                   13.60        14.57       2.70        3.13        1.33
   1979        35.57       22.11        7.72         5.06     1.86       0.48                   13.46        14.40       2.65        3.20        1.38
   1980        36.23       22.68        8.06         5.27     1.97       0.53                   13.56        14.62       2.79        3.29        1.44
   1981        35.39       22.10        7.80         5.08     1.88       0.50                   13.29        14.30       2.72        3.20        1.39
   1982        36.24       22.92        8.46         5.66     2.33       0.68                   13.32        14.47       2.80        3.33        1.65
   1983        36.19       22.71        8.21         5.44     2.13       0.57                   13.48        14.49       2.78        3.30        1.56
   1984        35.78       22.48        8.29         5.55     2.28       0.68                   13.30        14.20       2.73        3.28        1.60
   1985        35.25       22.20        8.21         5.51     2.26       0.67                   13.04        13.99       2.70        3.26        1.59
   1986        35.22       22.22        8.24         5.52     2.24       0.64                   13.00        13.97       2.72        3.28        1.60
   1987        35.05       22.22        8.40         5.69     2.38       0.70                   12.83        13.82       2.71        3.31        1.68
   1988        35.66       23.11        9.34         6.54     3.00       1.01                   12.55        13.77       2.79        3.54        1.99
   1989        36.36       23.83       10.01         7.15     3.44       1.29                   12.53        13.82       2.86        3.71        2.15
   1990        35.54       23.08        9.35         6.55     2.98       1.01                   12.46        13.73       2.80        3.57        1.96
   1991        36.31       23.47        9.37         6.51     2.91       0.99                   12.84        14.11       2.86        3.60        1.92
   1992        36.72       23.60        9.31         6.44     2.82       0.94                   13.12        14.29       2.87        3.62        1.89
   1993        37.31       24.03        9.56         6.64     2.97       0.99                   13.28        14.48       2.91        3.67        1.98
   1994        37.49       24.16        9.59         6.65     2.94       0.95                   13.33        14.57       2.94        3.71        1.99
   1995        37.85       24.65       10.00         6.99     3.13       1.03                   13.21        14.64       3.02        3.86        2.10
   1996        38.77       25.48       10.62         7.53     3.47       1.14                   13.29        14.85       3.10        4.06        2.33
   1997        39.78       26.51       11.52         8.32     3.97       1.33                   13.26        14.99       3.20        4.35        2.64
   1998        40.61       27.35       12.18         8.87     4.34       1.48                   13.26        15.17       3.31        4.53        2.85
   1999        41.17       27.89       12.62         9.25     4.61       1.68                   13.29        15.27       3.37        4.64        2.93
   2000        42.34       29.01       13.56        10.11     5.23       1.89                   13.34        15.44       3.45        4.88        3.34

Notes: Computations by authors based on tax return statistics. See Appendix Section B for details.
Series for P90-95 are estimated only for the 1941-2000 period because the tax return population does not cover that group in the pre-war period.
                                   Table B2: Top Income Shares Including Capital Gains in Canada, 1972-2000

                P90-100       P95-100       P99-100     P99.5-100     P99.9-100     P99.99-100           P90-95        P95-99       P99-99.5     P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99
                  (1)           (2)           (3)          (4)           (5)            (6)                (7)           (8)          (9)           (10)       (11)

Panel A: Groups ranked by income including full capital gains

    1972         37.81         24.11         8.92          5.85          2.08          0.46               13.70         15.19          3.07          3.76         1.62
    1973         37.27         23.92         8.98          5.90          2.14          0.50               13.35         14.94          3.09          3.75         1.64
    1974         37.61         24.07         8.97          5.86          2.15          0.51               13.54         15.10          3.11          3.71         1.64
    1975         37.48         23.96         8.91          5.84          2.19          0.55               13.52         15.05          3.08          3.65         1.64
    1976         36.90         23.23         8.29          5.36          1.98          0.49               13.67         14.94          2.93          3.39         1.49
    1977         36.36         22.71         8.01          5.18          1.93          0.49               13.65         14.70          2.83          3.26         1.44
    1978         36.49         22.95         8.10          5.17          1.96          0.51               13.53         14.85          2.94          3.21         1.45
    1979         36.42         23.11         8.46          5.52          2.20          0.63               13.31         14.66          2.93          3.33         1.57
    1980         37.23         23.84         8.88          5.84          2.39          0.68               13.39         14.96          3.04          3.45         1.71
    1981         36.47         23.25         8.55          5.56          2.23          0.64               13.23         14.70          2.99          3.32         1.60
    1982         36.58         23.35         8.89          6.05          2.59          0.78               13.22         14.46          2.85          3.46         1.81
    1983         36.66         23.29         8.76          5.91          2.43          0.70               13.37         14.53          2.86          3.47         1.74
    1984         36.11         22.92         8.73          5.94          2.54          0.78               13.19         14.20          2.79          3.40         1.75
    1985         35.87         22.94         8.88          6.09          2.63          0.83               12.93         14.06          2.80          3.46         1.80
    1986         36.22         23.35         9.15          6.26          2.67          0.82               12.87         14.20          2.90          3.58         1.85
    1987         36.57         24.01         9.88          6.87          3.03          0.97               12.56         14.13          3.02          3.83         2.06
    1988         37.07         24.72         10.74         7.70          3.66          1.20               12.35         13.97          3.04          4.05         2.46
    1989         38.20         25.93         11.90         8.76          4.40          1.60               12.27         14.03          3.14          4.36         2.81
    1990         36.33         24.03         10.18         7.21          3.30          1.07               12.30         13.85          2.97          3.91         2.23
    1991         37.16         24.49         10.29         7.28          3.32          1.10               12.67         14.21          3.01          3.96         2.22
    1992         37.80         24.87         10.47         7.40          3.32          1.03               12.94         14.40          3.07          4.08         2.29
    1993         38.95         25.95         11.26         8.04          3.65          1.16               13.00         14.69          3.23          4.39         2.48
    1994         38.56         25.64         11.21         8.07          3.61          1.09               12.93         14.43          3.14          4.46         2.52
    1995         38.64         25.60         10.93         7.77          3.54          1.14               13.04         14.67          3.15          4.24         2.40
    1996         39.63         26.53         11.64         8.40          3.97          1.31               13.10         14.89          3.24          4.43         2.65
    1997         40.83         27.79         12.75         9.37          4.59          1.56               13.04         15.04          3.38          4.78         3.03
    1998         41.63         28.61         13.40         9.91          4.92          1.70               13.02         15.21          3.49          4.99         3.23
    1999         42.28         29.22         13.88         10.33         5.18          1.87               13.06         15.34          3.56          5.15         3.31
    2000         44.04         31.07         15.50         11.76         6.16          2.20               12.98         15.56          3.75          5.60         3.95

Panel B: Groups ranked by income excluding capital gains

    1972         37.60         23.94         8.86          5.83          2.07          0.45               13.66         15.08          3.03          3.76         1.61
    1973         37.09         23.76         8.92          5.87          2.12          0.48               13.33         14.83          3.05          3.75         1.63
    1974         37.45         23.91         8.91          5.84          2.13          0.50               13.54         15.00          3.07          3.71         1.63
    1975         37.34         23.81         8.86          5.81          2.16          0.53               13.53         14.95          3.04          3.65         1.63
    1976         36.83         23.13         8.25          5.33          1.95          0.47               13.70         14.88          2.91          3.39         1.48
    1977         36.30         22.62         7.97          5.14          1.89          0.46               13.68         14.65          2.82          3.25         1.42
    1978         35.95         22.44         7.91          5.13          1.92          0.48               13.50         14.51          2.78          3.21         1.43
    1979         35.89         22.57         8.25          5.45          2.11          0.57               13.31         14.28          2.80          3.33         1.54
    1980         36.64         23.26         8.68          5.75          2.27          0.62               13.37         14.54          2.93          3.46         1.65
    1981         35.68         22.52         8.28          5.49          2.14          0.58               13.14         14.21          2.79          3.33         1.56
    1982         36.31         23.09         8.67          5.85          2.46          0.72               13.22         14.42          2.82          3.40         1.73
    1983         36.32         22.96         8.49          5.68          2.27          0.60               13.36         14.47          2.81          3.41         1.67
    1984         35.83         22.65         8.51          5.76          2.39          0.70               13.18         14.14          2.75          3.36         1.69
    1985         35.45         22.53         8.55          5.80          2.43          0.75               12.92         13.98          2.75          3.36         1.68
    1986         35.58         22.74         8.73          5.92          2.47          0.71               12.84         14.01          2.81          3.45         1.77
    1987         35.51         22.91         9.07          6.22          2.66          0.79               12.60         13.84          2.85          3.57         1.87
    1988         36.10         23.73         9.93          7.02          3.25          1.05               12.37         13.81          2.91          3.77         2.20
    1989         37.13         24.81         10.94         7.92          3.86          1.34               12.33         13.87          3.01          4.07         2.51
    1990         35.71         23.38         9.64          6.77          3.08          1.03               12.33         13.74          2.87          3.69         2.05
    1991         36.54         23.84         9.73          6.80          3.05          1.04               12.70         14.10          2.93          3.75         2.01
    1992         37.06         24.08         9.75          6.79          2.97          0.96               12.98         14.33          2.96          3.81         2.01
    1993         37.78         24.71         10.16         7.10          3.18          1.05               13.07         14.55          3.06          3.92         2.13
    1994         37.40         24.40         10.11         7.12          3.15          0.99               13.00         14.29          2.98          3.98         2.16
    1995         38.09         25.01         10.36         7.27          3.27          1.05               13.08         14.66          3.08          4.00         2.22
    1996         38.99         25.88         11.05         7.88          3.67          1.20               13.11         14.83          3.17          4.22         2.47
    1997         40.09         27.03         12.07         8.75          4.15          1.36               13.05         14.96          3.32          4.60         2.79
    1998         40.92         27.87         12.71         9.30          4.59          1.51               13.05         15.16          3.41          4.72         3.08
    1999         41.50         28.42         13.14         9.63          4.77          1.71               13.08         15.28          3.50          4.87         3.06
    2000         42.87         29.82         14.35         10.77         5.55          1.92               13.05         15.47          3.58          5.22         3.63

Notes: In Panel A, tax returns are ranked by total income including full capital gains, and shares are computed as total income and capital gains accruing to upper groups
divided by total income plus total capital gains in the economy (from Table A). In Panel B, individuals are ranked by income excluding capital gains (as in Table B1) but
capital gains are added back (in both the numerator and the denominator) to compute top shares. All details in Appendix Section B.
                                     Table B3: Top Fractile Income Levels (excluding capital gains) in Canada, 1920-2000

       P90-100   P95-100   P99-100 P99.5-100 P99.9-100   P99.99-100   P90-95   P95-99   P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99    P90      P95      P99      P99.5     P99.9    P99.99
         (1)       (2)        (3)      (4)       (5)        (6)        (7)       (8)      (9)      (10)        (11)        (12)     (13)     (14)      (15)      (16)      (17)
1920             32,469     71,733   104,519   267,051   1,045,891             22,653   38,947    63,886     180,513               17,311   34,101    45,662   110,173   418,867
1921             36,311     78,753   112,300   259,766    761,937              25,700   45,206    75,433     203,969               19,390   39,351    53,371   128,898   418,693
1922             34,248     75,650   107,134   251,252    813,402              23,897   44,166    71,104     188,791               19,273   38,588    51,905   119,336   402,114
1923             31,957     76,231   108,273   248,609    812,975              20,889   44,189    73,189     185,902               18,232   38,120    52,707   121,158   394,127
1924             32,130     76,184   108,925   256,324    854,937              21,117   43,444    72,075     189,811               17,948   37,488    51,787   121,332   408,624
1925             33,331     73,783   106,138   243,143    738,052              23,218   41,427    71,887     188,153               17,899   34,715    51,062   119,211   389,900
1926             35,841     83,283   121,498   285,793    935,604              23,980   45,068    80,424     213,592               18,034   37,245    56,539   137,099   449,063
1927             37,939     90,778   133,260   317,177   1,072,086             24,729   48,296    87,281     233,298               18,329   39,758    60,525   149,795   503,521
1928             40,541     99,151   145,395   342,674   1,131,672             25,888   52,906    96,076     254,935               18,655   43,605    66,064   163,731   546,411
1929             39,930     98,428   144,389   335,707   1,072,879             25,305   52,467    96,559     253,729               18,242   43,149    65,631   166,663   529,034
1930             38,173     93,884   138,348   331,235   1,074,576             24,245   49,420    90,112     248,642               17,638   40,712    61,880   156,424   533,934
1931             37,825     87,161   125,951   291,516    902,424              25,491   48,360    84,560     223,696               18,856   40,688    59,347   142,159   471,635
1932             36,851     82,585   118,853   279,302    888,476              25,417   46,317    78,741     211,616               18,913   39,421    56,013   131,514   464,851
1933             35,944     79,284   113,361   259,662    759,290              25,109   45,206    76,786     204,148               18,761   38,670    54,947   126,986   440,499
1934             37,194     83,231   119,759   278,784    873,014              25,684   46,703    80,002     212,759               18,992   39,712    56,777   133,364   458,506
1935             37,805     84,311   121,034   279,382    851,694              26,179   47,588    81,447     215,846               19,426   40,300    57,873   135,930   450,137
1936             39,362     89,549   130,044   307,839    978,228              26,815   49,055    85,608     233,294               19,889   41,416    59,977   145,337   501,019
1937             39,705     90,125   130,756   303,688    853,743              27,099   49,495    87,522     242,633               20,167   41,818    60,664   149,065   543,315
1938             43,465    101,124   146,227   332,244   1,025,799             29,050   56,021    99,723     255,183               20,984   46,459    69,134   165,112   517,246
1939             42,495     96,366   139,581   321,411    955,500              29,027   53,152    94,109     251,020               21,145   44,905    64,643   159,339   516,173
1940             42,286     92,330   129,976   283,533    959,970              29,775   54,685    91,586     208,374               22,198   46,296    66,045   145,424   383,178
1941   31,671    42,983     92,953   132,247   296,050    898,984     20,359   30,491   53,645    91,297     229,057      17,429   23,935   45,837    65,019   150,140   477,795
1942   33,165    44,301     94,704   134,263   296,174    891,122     22,029   31,701   55,127    93,786     230,162      19,425   25,219   47,238    67,139   152,135   476,240
1943   34,709    45,659     94,690   132,714   284,918    811,023     23,760   33,399   56,666    94,664     226,560      21,258   26,944   48,891    68,590   151,055   459,722
1944   35,407    46,393     94,814   131,598   276,893    772,989     24,421   34,287   58,031    95,274     221,771      21,871   27,588   50,247    70,026   150,037   443,584
1945   34,678    45,831     94,164   130,030   268,973    724,766     23,526   33,747   58,298    95,294     218,226      21,064   26,749   50,396    70,283   148,844   430,675
1946   34,111    45,724     96,914   134,074   272,649    717,546     22,497   32,927   59,753    99,431     223,216      20,085   25,790   50,902    72,436   156,354   424,514
1947   35,435    47,689    102,140   141,433   286,732    757,247     23,180   34,076   62,847   105,109     234,452      20,799   26,410   52,727    76,313   163,025   454,757
1948   34,163    45,619     96,774   134,105   273,836    665,031     22,708   32,830   59,443    99,173     230,370      20,195   25,740   50,207    71,812   155,955   439,619
1949   35,013    46,496     97,897   135,177   266,891    629,434     23,530   33,645   60,616   102,249     226,608      20,994   26,685   51,530    74,059   160,900   422,834
1950   35,672    47,480    101,471   141,320   285,532    686,545     23,865   33,982   61,621   105,267     240,975      21,412   26,881   52,003    75,686   165,197   442,924
1951   36,009    47,524     99,490   137,692   278,081    644,625     24,494   34,532   61,289   102,595     237,354      22,209   27,587   51,962    74,234   166,579   421,316
1952   37,475    49,188    101,258   138,892   278,525    693,226     25,762   36,171   63,625   103,984     232,447      23,311   29,147   53,868    76,488   162,599   445,520
1953   39,901    52,067    105,489   144,284   288,824    708,175     27,735   38,712   66,694   108,149     242,230      25,024   31,297   57,082    79,659   169,329   446,235
1954   40,144    52,494    107,220   147,353   292,361    731,681     27,793   38,813   67,086   111,101     243,548      25,051   31,388   57,418    81,016   173,524   444,318
1955   41,886    54,777    112,063   153,978   314,335    827,081     28,996   40,455   70,148   113,889     257,363      26,165   32,665   59,918    84,225   176,429   487,650
1956   43,947    57,108    113,633   155,131   310,617    767,392     30,785   42,977   72,135   116,260     259,864      27,857   34,827   62,372    86,506   181,296   478,780
1957   44,910    58,284    114,649   155,458   307,943    756,477     31,537   44,193   73,840   117,337     258,106      28,374   35,745   64,094    87,896   181,157   469,872
1958   45,760    59,594    117,880   159,183   312,073    761,706     31,925   45,023   76,576   120,961     262,114      28,791   36,162   66,328    90,863   185,037   468,832
1959   46,758    60,675    118,404   159,332   309,177    746,792     32,842   46,243   77,477   121,871     260,553      29,678   37,226   67,438    91,478   185,716   465,186
1960   48,106    62,350    121,183   162,718   313,129    751,808     33,861   47,642   79,647   125,115     264,387      30,577   38,362   69,429    93,975   189,202   475,098
1961   49,309    63,991    124,384   166,238   319,418    785,701     34,626   48,893   82,530   127,943     267,609      31,197   39,209   71,899    96,886   192,280   482,447
1962   50,378    65,133    124,982   166,181   310,622    721,540     35,624   50,171   83,784   130,071     264,965      32,344   40,608   73,805    98,631   192,956   466,689
1963   51,625    66,605    126,302   167,417   309,469    699,068     36,644   51,681   85,187   131,904     266,180      32,998   41,546   75,166    99,965   194,910   460,322
1964   54,127    70,017    134,446   178,898   333,464    778,130     38,236   53,910   89,994   140,257     284,056      34,490   43,280   78,997   106,503   206,845   496,485
  1965     56,705    73,242   140,151   186,533 347,294 816,445             40,167    56,515    93,769   146,343   295,166         36,207    45,378    81,806   109,948   213,399    507,094
  1966     59,206    76,356   143,473   189,504 347,569 795,641             42,056    59,576    97,442   149,988   297,784         37,641    47,277    84,934   113,140   216,801    500,622
  1967     61,195    78,959   148,563   195,739 355,183 779,389             43,431    61,559   101,387   155,878   308,049         39,091    49,332    89,051   119,179   227,947    517,421
  1968     63,078    81,243   152,770   201,687 366,411 796,399             44,913    63,361   103,853   160,506   318,635         40,495    50,877    91,467   122,355   237,100    532,448
  1969     65,384    84,076   157,730   207,108 373,664 805,461             46,692    65,663   108,352   165,470   325,686         42,072    52,787    94,383   126,371   246,253    535,568
  1970     67,341    86,040   159,290   208,397 368,166 769,011             48,641    67,728   110,183   168,454   323,628         43,805    54,990    96,220   128,023   247,758    526,095
  1971     69,919    88,985   163,851   214,008 369,433 744,779             50,852    70,269   113,694   175,152   327,727         45,888    57,394    99,184   132,204   253,542    523,234
  1972     73,170    92,920   170,477   223,834 393,453 839,912             53,419    73,536   117,081   181,429   343,630         48,295    60,084   103,422   137,654   261,632    569,864
  1973     76,683    97,975   182,211   239,302 426,940 946,684             55,392    76,915   125,078   192,392   369,191         50,024    62,420   109,872   147,169   277,333    613,789
  1974     80,789   102,949   190,433   249,128 450,798 1,039,472           58,634    81,078   131,739   198,710   385,390         52,619    66,074   115,762   153,918   286,468    666,746
  1975     81,990   104,318   192,266   252,029 464,774 1,119,592           59,662    82,331   132,503   198,898   392,016         53,892    67,160   116,966   154,912   286,913    695,411
  1976     83,690   104,755   184,023   237,238 427,139 1,004,630           62,624    84,938   130,807   189,763   362,720         56,656    70,346   116,245   149,956   271,640    625,313
  1977     82,325   102,085   176,188   226,710 406,221 967,192             62,565    83,560   125,667   181,832   343,891         56,736    69,939   112,408   144,101   257,338    600,746
  1978     81,512   101,050   173,218   223,255 403,081 993,461             61,973    83,014   123,180   178,299   337,230         56,076    69,446   111,222   141,376   252,057    595,647
  1979     82,252   102,257   178,397   234,194 430,559 1,116,863           62,248    83,216   122,647   185,045   354,303         56,128    69,550   110,773   143,486   268,957    633,595
  1980     84,070   105,239   187,007   244,362 457,310 1,222,741           62,905    84,797   129,652   191,068   372,262         56,824    70,522   116,412   149,806   281,558    679,990
  1981     84,328   105,329   185,866   242,245 447,984 1,181,916           63,328    85,200   129,486   190,810   366,701         57,186    70,877   116,010   149,484   276,425    666,223
  1982     82,892   104,861   193,412   258,905 533,228 1,548,671           60,922    82,724   127,920   190,324   420,401         54,956    68,441   114,034   147,839   284,221    868,025
  1983     79,779   100,120   181,078   239,629 470,000 1,254,361           59,438    79,880   122,526   182,037   382,848         53,606    66,602   109,279   141,709   267,553    741,082
  1984     80,438   101,088   186,246   249,662 511,868 1,524,140           59,788    79,798   122,830   184,111   399,394         54,083    66,713   109,058   142,482   275,368    798,859
  1985     81,091   102,161   188,980   253,584 518,810 1,532,272           60,021    80,456   124,376   187,278   406,203         54,335    67,156   110,273   144,762   280,133    836,173
  1986     81,849   103,281   191,613   256,645 521,100 1,494,503           60,417    81,198   126,580   190,532   412,945         54,558    67,588   112,082   147,540   283,722    812,886
  1987     82,441   104,520   197,483   267,450 558,558 1,646,277           60,362    81,279   127,516   194,672   437,701         54,541    67,544   112,595   149,078   295,924    888,355
  1988     87,393   113,265   228,770   320,597 734,711 2,472,727           61,522    84,389   136,943   217,068   541,598         55,472    69,276   119,505   161,990   344,180   1,229,108
  1989     90,447   118,548   248,996   355,908 856,437 3,208,841           62,346    85,936   142,084   230,775   595,059         56,194    70,133   123,433   169,449   371,951   1,390,897
  1990     88,404   114,829   232,553   325,744 740,598 2,522,562           61,979    85,398   139,363   222,030   542,602         55,777    69,757   121,607   165,217   349,771   1,215,448
  1991     85,622   110,681   220,811   306,754 686,128 2,331,894           60,563    83,149   134,868   211,910   503,266         54,383    68,269   117,966   159,102   329,009   1,109,688
  1992     85,169   109,484   216,013   298,795 654,325 2,168,714           60,854    82,852   133,231   209,913   486,060         54,717    68,435   116,400   157,569   323,488   1,060,636
  1993     85,092   109,602   217,895   302,932 677,059 2,259,905           60,582    82,529   132,858   209,400   501,188         54,346    68,179   116,215   156,774   326,131   1,105,608
  1994     86,176   111,076   220,515   305,806 675,660 2,179,401           61,276    83,716   135,224   213,342   508,578         55,081    68,942   118,176   159,967   332,208   1,126,661
  1995     88,010   114,607   232,562   324,871 727,543 2,387,939           61,412    85,118   140,254   224,204   543,054         55,202    69,470   122,149   166,491   355,236   1,210,910
  1996     89,831   118,072   246,173   348,776 803,817 2,646,178           61,590    86,047   143,570   235,016   599,110         55,166    69,815   124,424   171,713   381,630   1,348,195
  1997     93,299   124,377   270,296   390,338 931,868 3,128,899           62,221    87,898   150,253   254,956   687,753         55,641    70,646   129,178   182,008   428,509   1,634,284
  1998     97,273   131,011   291,703   424,918 1,038,460 3,554,959         63,534    90,838   158,488   271,533   758,849         56,551    72,345   135,170   192,393   458,368   1,799,985
  1999    100,093   135,586   306,740   449,765 1,119,794 4,074,630         64,601    92,798   163,715   282,258   791,479         57,483    73,638   139,473   198,915   478,918   1,931,959
  2000    105,262   144,214   337,142   502,556 1,300,639 4,695,923         66,310    95,982   171,728   303,035   923,385         59,232    75,670   145,774   210,150   530,311   2,396,050

Notes: Groups are ranked by total income excluding capital gains. All amounts are reported in Canadian 2000 dollars (one US dollar = 1.5 Canadian dollar in 2000)
Computations by authors based on income tax return statistics. All details in Appendix Section B.
                                      Table C1: Shares of Total Tax Returns in each Occupation, 1920-1941

                        Tax
                   returns/Adult                                                                                                Personal
                    Population       Employees      Agrarians     Professionals     Merchants     Manufacturers   Financial   Corporations   All Others
                        (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)             (5)             (6)           (7)           (8)           (9)

      1920             5.82%           71.33%         6.48%           5.90%            8.16%           0.56%                                   7.57%
      1921             5.54%           74.10%         2.92%           6.77%            7.53%           0.62%                                   8.06%
      1922            4.63%            73.67%         1.95%           8.60%            7.12%           0.54%                                   8.12%
      1923            4.31%            74.89%         1.36%           8.60%            6.58%           0.50%                                   8.07%
      1924            3.94%            75.52%         1.73%           8.38%            5.85%           0.43%                                   8.09%
      1925            2.14%            70.20%         2.80%           5.50%            7.72%           0.74%       3.79%         0.11%         9.14%
      1926            2.21%            68.14%         2.59%           4.99%            8.09%           0.74%       6.27%         0.39%         8.79%
      1927            2.29%            67.46%         2.40%           5.22%            8.21%           0.77%       6.67%         0.50%         8.77%
      1928            2.45%            67.06%         1.85%           5.23%            8.88%           0.80%       6.71%         0.64%         8.83%
      1929            2.41%            69.40%         1.58%           5.19%            8.17%           0.66%       6.46%         0.42%         8.12%
      1930            2.20%            72.05%         0.49%           4.87%            6.21%           0.62%       7.27%         0.43%         8.06%
      1931            2.70%            79.49%         0.15%           3.60%            4.01%           0.32%       5.83%         0.31%         6.29%
      1932            3.23%            82.24%         0.13%           2.91%            2.71%           0.23%       5.76%         0.30%         5.72%
      1933            2.86%            81.12%         0.23%           3.15%            3.11%           0.24%       6.34%         0.32%         5.49%
      1934            3.03%            80.35%         0.35%           3.30%            3.64%           0.27%       6.53%         0.27%         5.29%
      1935            3.25%            80.69%         0.43%           3.24%            3.83%           0.28%       6.42%         0.25%         4.86%
      1936            3.49%            80.03%         0.42%           3.25%            4.13%           0.29%       6.31%         0.24%         5.33%
      1937            3.84%            81.33%         0.49%           2.95%            3.81%           0.30%       5.97%         0.25%         4.90%
      1938            4.19%            77.54%         0.59%           4.04%            5.35%           0.58%       6.21%         0.31%         5.38%
      1939            4.22%            77.44%         0.62%           3.68%            5.59%           0.56%       5.09%         0.26%         6.76%
      1940            8.42%            87.44%         0.38%           2.00%            3.33%           0.26%       3.22%         0.13%         3.24%
      1941            11.86%           86.60%         0.85%           1.82%            5.11%           0.28%       3.07%         0.11%         2.16%

Notes: Computations based directly on published tax return statistics (see Appendix Section C for details)
Percentiles are based on average tax paid for each category.
        Table C2: Shares of each Occupation within the Top 10% in 1942

                         Number of
     Fractile            Individuals          Employees Entrepreneurs                   Rentiers
       (1)                   (2)                 (3)         (4)                          (5)

      P90-95                361,443              91.8%                6.9%                1.3%
      P95-99                289,154              83.2%               14.1%                2.8%
    P99-99.5                36,144               59.4%               33.5%                7.1%
   P99.5-99.9               28,915               52.0%               36.5%               11.5%
  P99.9-99.99               6,506                46.7%               30.0%               23.3%
 P99.99-99.999               651                 38.3%               18.1%               43.6%
  P99.999-100                 72                 27.3%                8.1%               64.6%

Notes: Computations based on interpolations from Taxation Statistics, 1947, pp. 108-110. See Appendix Section C.
Category Employees defined as employees and armed forces. Category Entrepreneurs defined as Agrarians,
Professionals, Salesmen, and Business Proprietors. Category Rentiers defined as Financial, and Estates.
Category All Others excluded. Tax returns are classified in occupation categories by main source of income.
                       Table C3: Income Composition by Sources of Income and by Fractiles of Total Income (excluding capital gains) in Canada, 1920-2000
                          P90-100                                                 P95-100                                                  P99-100                                             P99.5-100
       Wage    Prof.    Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.          Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.           Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.            Wage   Prof. Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.
1946    72.9   4.0      14.6     3.2     2.2     3.2     1946    65.2    5.5    17.9     4.5     2.7     4.2      1946    45.5   10.1    24.3     8.7     4.3     7.2       1946   41.0   11.3   23.8    10.9    4.8     8.3
1947    71.4   4.0      16.6     3.2     1.9     2.9     1947    62.6    5.6    21.0     4.5     2.5     3.9      1947    43.7    9.7    28.1     8.4     3.7     6.4       1947   38.9   10.7   28.6    10.5    4.1     7.3
1948    71.9   3.7      16.6     3.3     1.7     2.8     1948    62.8    5.3    21.1     4.7     2.2     3.8      1948    44.0    9.2    28.2     9.0     3.4     6.2       1948   40.2    9.8   28.1    11.2    3.7     7.0
1949    71.8   4.1      16.5     3.3     1.6     2.8     1949    62.9    5.8    20.8     4.7     2.1     3.7      1949    44.3   10.0    27.3     9.0     3.2     6.2       1949   40.3   10.9   26.9    11.3    3.6     7.2
1950    71.9   4.4      15.7     3.5     1.7     2.9     1950    63.0    6.2    19.7     5.0     2.2     3.9      1950    44.0   10.8    26.1     9.4     3.3     6.5       1950   40.0   11.7   25.8    11.6    3.5     7.4
1951    73.0   4.4      14.8     3.2     1.4     3.1     1951    64.3    6.3    18.7     4.6     1.9     4.2      1951    45.8   11.2    24.1     8.7     3.0     7.2       1951   42.1   12.3   23.5    10.5    3.2     8.4
1952    73.9   4.5      14.0     3.3     1.5     2.9     1952    65.2    6.4    17.7     4.7     2.1     3.9      1952    45.7   11.7    23.1     9.3     3.4     6.8       1952   42.0   12.6   22.4    11.5    3.8     7.8
1953    74.6   4.5      13.2     3.2     1.6     3.0     1953    66.3    6.4    16.6     4.6     2.1     4.1      1953    46.8   11.8    21.9     9.1     3.5     6.9       1953   43.4   12.7   21.0    11.2    3.9     7.8
1954    76.4   5.1      10.5     3.3     1.9     2.9     1954    68.3    7.4    13.2     4.7     2.5     3.9      1954    48.8   13.7    17.2     9.3     4.2     6.8       1954   44.6   15.2   16.2    11.5    4.7     7.7
1955    75.8   5.4      10.5     3.8     1.9     2.7     1955    67.3    7.7    13.4     5.5     2.4     3.7      1955    46.6   14.6    17.9    11.0     3.9     6.1       1955   42.2   16.0   17.1    13.7    4.3     6.7
1956    76.2   5.7      10.5     3.1     1.8     2.7     1956    68.0    8.2    13.2     4.5     2.3     3.8      1956    47.1   16.0    17.4     9.0     3.8     6.7       1956   43.1   17.6   16.4    11.0    4.3     7.7
1957    77.9   5.5       9.0     3.0     1.9     2.6     1957    70.4    8.0    11.2     4.3     2.5     3.6      1957    51.2   15.7    13.9     8.7     4.2     6.4       1957   46.3   17.9   12.8    10.7    4.8     7.5
1958    76.4   6.0       9.5     3.1     2.2     2.8     1958    68.6    8.7    11.6     4.5     2.9     3.8      1958    50.7   16.5    13.0     8.7     4.5     6.6       1958   45.9   18.9   11.6    10.7    5.1     7.7
1959    77.4   5.8       8.6     3.1     2.3     2.9     1959    70.0    8.4    10.4     4.4     3.0     3.9      1959    51.8   16.4    11.9     8.5     4.8     6.7       1959   46.2   19.3   10.5    10.6    5.4     8.1
1960    77.7   6.0       7.7     3.1     2.6     2.8     1960    70.4    8.8     9.1     4.4     3.4     3.9      1960    52.7   17.0     9.7     8.7     5.3     6.6       1960   46.4   20.4    8.4    10.9    6.1     7.9
1961    77.6   6.2       7.4     3.1     2.8     2.9     1961    70.3    9.0     8.6     4.4     3.7     4.0      1961    52.8   17.3     9.0     8.4     5.5     7.1       1961   46.2   20.6    7.9    10.5    6.3     8.6
1962    77.9   6.1       7.3     3.1     3.0     2.6     1962    70.7    8.9     8.5     4.5     3.8     3.6      1962    53.1   17.7     8.5     8.7     5.8     6.2       1962   46.6   21.3    7.2    10.8    6.7     7.4
1963    78.1   6.3       7.3     2.9     2.9     2.6     1963    71.0    9.2     8.5     4.2     3.7     3.5      1963    54.0   18.7     8.0     7.7     5.4     6.2       1963   47.4   22.9    6.6    9.4     6.1     7.6
1964    77.1   6.5       7.7     3.4     3.0     2.4     1964    69.7    9.6     8.9     4.9     3.8     3.3      1964    52.5   19.3     8.1     9.2     5.4     5.5       1964   46.8   23.1    6.5    11.2    6.0     6.5
1965    77.1   6.7       7.7     3.5     2.9     2.0     1965    69.8    9.9     9.0     5.0     3.6     2.7      1965    51.9   20.4     8.2     9.5     5.3     4.7       1965   46.1   24.5    6.5    11.5    5.9     5.5
1966    77.6   6.5       7.6     3.4     2.8     2.1     1966    70.5    9.6     8.8     4.8     3.6     2.8      1966    53.1   20.2     7.8     9.2     5.2     4.6       1966   47.4   24.2    6.0    11.1    5.7     5.5
1967    78.1   6.7       7.1     3.3     2.9     1.9     1967    71.3    9.9     8.1     4.7     3.5     2.6      1967    54.3   20.4     7.3     8.7     5.1     4.2       1967   48.2   24.9    5.8    10.6    5.7     4.9
1968    79.0   6.8       5.8     3.2     3.3     1.9     1968    72.4   10.0     6.6     4.5     4.1     2.5      1968    55.3   21.1     5.7     8.3     5.7     4.0       1968   48.6   26.1    4.5    10.0    6.2     4.6
1969    79.9   6.9       4.7     3.0     3.7     1.8     1969    73.5   10.2     5.3     4.3     4.4     2.4      1969    55.8   21.8     4.7     7.8     6.1     3.8       1969   49.3   26.3    3.9    9.4     6.7     4.5
1970    80.4   7.0       4.0     2.8     4.0     1.9     1970    74.1   10.4     4.4     3.9     4.8     2.5      1970    55.2   22.9     3.8     7.2     6.8     4.1       1970   48.7   27.4    3.2    8.6     7.5     4.7
1971    80.8   7.3       3.9     2.4     3.8     1.9     1971    74.4   11.0     4.3     3.3     4.5     2.5      1971    54.9   24.9     4.0     5.9     6.3     4.1       1971   48.8   29.6    3.5    6.8     6.8     4.6
1972    80.4   7.2       4.4     2.1     3.8     2.1     1972    73.9   10.8     5.0     3.0     4.6     2.8      1972    54.9   24.2     4.4     5.7     6.5     4.3       1972   47.8   29.9    3.6    6.8     7.1     4.8
1973    77.9   7.4       6.4     2.2     4.0     2.1     1973    70.9   11.2     7.4     3.1     4.8     2.7      1973    52.0   24.5     7.0     5.9     6.6     4.1       1973   46.5   29.0    5.7    7.0     7.1     4.7
1974    76.1   7.0       7.2     2.2     5.2     2.3     1974    68.5   10.5     8.8     3.1     6.3     2.9      1974    49.7   22.1     9.8     5.6     8.7     4.2       1974   44.7   25.8    8.5    6.8     9.5     4.8
1975    76.9   6.8       6.8     2.2     5.2     2.2     1975    69.7   10.2     8.2     3.0     6.2     2.7      1975    51.8   21.0     9.3     5.6     8.4     4.0       1975   47.3   24.1    8.4    6.6     9.1     4.5
1976    78.8   6.7       4.9     2.0     5.5     2.2     1976    72.1   10.0     5.8     2.9     6.5     2.7      1976    52.4   22.1     6.4     5.6     9.3     4.3       1976   46.7   25.9    5.5    6.7    10.2     5.0
1977    80.2   6.4       3.7     2.1     5.4     2.2     1977    73.9    9.7     4.3     3.0     6.5     2.7      1977    54.5   21.4     4.4     6.1     9.4     4.2       1977   49.4   24.6    3.8    7.3    10.1     4.9
1978    78.2   6.3       3.4     4.1     5.8     2.1     1978    71.2    9.5     3.7     6.1     6.9     2.5      1978    52.0   19.7     3.0    11.8     9.5     4.0       1978   48.7   20.8    2.5    13.4   10.1     4.6
1979    76.9   6.1       3.4     4.8     6.5     2.2     1979    69.6    9.2     3.8     7.1     7.7     2.7      1979    50.3   18.7     2.5    13.5    10.7     4.3       1979   49.6   17.6    1.8    14.8   11.2     5.0
1980    76.4   6.0       2.5     5.2     7.5     2.4     1980    69.5    8.9     2.4     7.5     8.8     2.9      1980    53.8   15.6     1.3    13.2    11.8     4.3       1980   51.5   15.3    0.5    15.1   12.6     5.1
1981    74.5   5.6       2.6     5.6     9.2     2.4     1981    66.9    8.3     2.9     8.1    10.9     2.9      1981    48.1   15.8     2.4    15.0    14.5     4.3       1981   44.4   16.2    1.4    17.2   15.6     5.1
1982    76.2   5.4       2.1     5.5     8.7     2.2     1982    69.7    7.9     2.3     7.4    10.0     2.7      1982    53.4   14.9     2.2    12.6    12.7     4.2       1982   49.3   15.9    1.7    14.8   13.3     5.1
1983    79.6   6.0       1.8     4.8     6.1     1.8     1983    73.7    9.0     1.9     6.5     7.0     2.0      1983    57.6   18.4     1.6    10.8     8.9     2.6       1983   53.4   20.9    1.1    12.3    9.3     3.1
1984    80.5   6.2       1.8     3.9     5.8     1.8     1984    74.8    9.3     1.9     5.3     6.7     2.1      1984    58.5   19.2     1.8     9.3     8.5     2.7       1984   54.2   21.5    1.5    11.0    8.8     3.1
1985    80.8   5.8       1.5     3.9     6.2     1.9     1985    75.4    8.6     1.5     5.3     7.1     2.2      1985    60.9   17.2     0.9     9.3     8.7     3.0       1985   57.5   19.0    0.4    10.8    8.9     3.4
1986    81.1   6.0       1.5     3.7     5.6     2.0     1986    75.8    8.9     1.5     5.1     6.4     2.4      1986    61.6   17.6     0.8     8.9     7.9     3.3       1986   58.4   19.0    0.3    10.4    8.2     3.7
1987    81.4   5.8       1.8     3.4     4.9     2.8     1987    76.0    8.5     1.8     4.5     5.6     3.5      1987    62.6   16.6     1.2     7.7     6.9     5.1       1987   60.6   17.6    0.8    8.9     7.1     5.1
1988    80.5   5.8       2.2     3.2     5.2     3.1     1988    75.3    8.3     2.3     4.3     5.9     3.9      1988    63.4   15.2     2.5     6.8     6.9     5.3       1988   62.5   15.3    2.4    7.5     6.9     5.4
1989    78.5   6.2       2.2     3.5     6.4     3.2     1989    72.7    8.9     2.4     4.6     7.4     4.0      1989    60.1   15.5     2.8     7.5     8.8     5.3       1989   59.2   15.4    2.7    8.4     9.0     5.4
1990    78.1   6.3       1.9     3.2     7.4     3.1     1990    72.1    9.0     2.1     4.3     8.7     3.9      1990    57.7   16.1     2.4     7.2    11.1     5.4       1990   55.9   16.6    2.3    8.1    11.7     5.4
1991    79.3   6.4       1.5     3.2     6.4     3.3     1991    73.1    9.2     1.7     4.3     7.5     4.2      1991    58.0   17.0     2.0     7.6     9.9     5.5       1991   55.7   17.8    2.0    8.9    10.5     5.0
1992    81.3   6.7       1.5     2.7     4.7     3.3     1992    75.4    9.7     1.7     3.6     5.6     4.1      1992    59.9   18.6     2.1     6.3     7.8     5.5       1992   57.3   19.9    2.1    7.1     8.4     5.2
1993    81.9   6.7       1.5     2.5     3.6     3.9     1993    76.2    9.6     1.6     3.4     4.2     4.9      1993    62.2   18.1     1.9     5.7     5.8     6.3       1993   60.5   19.4    1.9    6.4     6.2     5.7
1994    82.1   6.5       1.7     2.5     3.0     4.2     1994    76.6    9.4     1.9     3.4     3.6     5.1      1994    63.1   17.6     2.2     5.7     5.0     6.4       1994   61.4   18.6    2.2    6.4     5.4     5.9
1995    80.8   6.6       1.9     2.7     3.7     4.4     1995    75.2    9.4     2.1     3.5     4.3     5.5      1995    62.7   17.0     2.2     5.9     5.8     6.4       1995   61.5   17.9    2.2    6.8     6.2     5.5
1996    80.0   6.7       2.1     2.9     3.3     4.9     1996    74.5    9.4     2.4     3.9     3.9     6.0      1996    62.6   16.6     2.7     6.5     4.9     6.7       1996   61.7   17.0    2.6    7.5     5.2     5.9
1997    80.5   6.9       2.2     3.1     2.6     4.7     1997    75.2    9.6     2.5     4.2     2.9     5.6      1997    64.4   16.3     2.5     6.9     3.6     6.2       1997   64.0   16.3    2.4    7.9     3.8     5.7
1998    80.6   6.6       2.1     3.4     2.5     4.8     1998    75.4    9.1     2.3     4.5     2.9     5.8      1998    65.0   15.0     2.3     7.4     3.7     6.7       1998   64.5   14.6    2.0    8.6     3.9     6.4
1999    80.2   6.6       2.4     3.7     2.5     4.6     1999    75.1    9.1     2.6     4.9     2.9     5.4      1999    64.7   14.4     2.9     7.8     3.7     6.4       1999   64.0   14.1    2.8    9.0     4.0     6.2
2000    80.5   6.5       2.2     3.6     2.7     4.6     2000    75.7    8.8     2.4     4.6     3.1     5.4      2000    67.1   13.5     2.3     7.2     3.8     6.1       2000   67.0   12.9    2.1    8.2     3.9     5.9

Notes: Wage is defined as wages and salaries, pensions, and other employment earnings (such as bonuses, stock-option exercises, etc.). Prof. is professional income defined as self-employment income from professions
such as doctors, lawyers, etc. Busin. is business income defined as net profits from sole proprietorships, partnerships, and other small businesses (such as farm and fishing). Divid. defined as dividends from Canadian
corporations. Interest includes bond and bank interest income as well as annuities. Invest. includes all other investment income such as estate and trust income, foreign investment income, etc. All details in Appendix Section C.
The sums of all sources add up to 100%. Capital Gains are excluded.
           Table C3: Income Composition by Sources of Income and by Fractiles of Total Income (excluding capital gains) in Canada, 1920-2000 (continued)
                        P99.9-100                                                P99.99-100                                                 P90-95                                                  P95-99
       Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.            Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.           Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.            Wage    Prof.    Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.
1946    34.0   10.2    22.2    16.7     6.0    10.9       1946   27.2    5.6     14.3    28.8     7.6    16.6      1946    88.7    0.8     7.8     0.7     1.0     1.1       1946   79.6    2.2      13.3     1.4     1.6     1.9
1947    32.6    9.7    26.6    16.6     4.9     9.6       1947   25.1    4.2     20.6    29.2     5.9    15.1      1947    89.7    0.6     7.5     0.5     0.8     0.9       1947   76.7    2.6      15.7     1.5     1.5     2.0
1948    34.6    9.3    25.5    17.6     4.3     8.7       1948   28.2    3.0     24.2    27.7     5.8    11.1      1948    90.0    0.6     7.4     0.5     0.7     0.9       1948   76.7    2.5      15.9     1.5     1.4     2.0
1949    34.0   10.2    25.0    17.7     4.0     9.1       1949   28.8    4.8     20.2    29.3     5.2    11.8      1949    89.3    0.7     7.9     0.5     0.6     0.9       1949   76.5    2.7      16.0     1.5     1.3     1.9
1950    34.0   10.4    25.2    17.6     3.6     9.3       1950   32.3    7.1     18.0    27.4     4.0    11.2      1950    89.5    0.8     7.6     0.6     0.7     0.9       1950   77.2    2.7      14.9     1.8     1.4     2.0
1951    35.6   11.4    22.1    15.5     3.5    11.9       1951   26.7    6.9     23.9    22.0     4.7    15.8      1951    90.0    0.8     7.3     0.5     0.5     0.8       1951   77.5    2.8      14.8     1.7     1.1     2.1
1952    36.0   11.0    19.7    18.7     4.7     9.9       1952   28.0    6.8     16.5    33.1     5.6    10.0      1952    90.3    0.8     6.8     0.6     0.5     1.0       1952   78.9    2.7      13.9     1.4     1.1     1.9
1953    37.4   10.8    18.6    17.7     4.9    10.6       1953   33.4    5.6     15.0    27.0     5.1    13.9      1953    90.2    0.8     6.7     0.6     0.6     1.1       1953   79.6    2.7      13.0     1.5     1.2     2.1
1954    37.4   14.8    13.4    18.4     6.2     9.9       1954   30.3    11.5    13.7    25.2     7.3    12.1      1954    91.6    0.9     5.4     0.6     0.7     0.9       1954   81.8    3.0      10.4     1.6     1.3     1.9
1955    33.6   15.1    15.8    22.3     5.1     8.2       1955   25.9    11.1    16.3    32.7     5.7     8.3      1955    91.6    1.0     5.2     0.6     0.8     0.9       1955   81.6    3.0      10.3     1.6     1.4     2.0
1956    36.3   17.0    14.7    16.5     5.2    10.2       1956   26.2    11.5    18.4    23.8     5.9    14.2      1956    91.4    0.9     5.5     0.6     0.7     0.9       1956   81.6    3.2      10.5     1.6     1.3     1.8
1957    39.3   17.6    10.5    16.2     6.3    10.1       1957   29.4    12.7    10.4    24.8     8.4    14.3      1957    91.7    0.9     5.0     0.6     0.8     0.9       1957   82.9    3.0       9.4     1.5     1.4     1.8
1958    40.0   17.8     8.8    16.5     6.6    10.3       1958   30.0    11.9     7.3    26.3     9.3    15.2      1958    90.9    1.0     5.7     0.6     1.0     0.9       1958   80.4    3.6      10.6     1.7     1.8     2.0
1959    41.1   17.3     8.0    15.7     6.9    11.0       1959   32.0    9.8      7.6    24.8     8.9    17.0      1959    91.1    0.9     5.3     0.6     1.1     1.0       1959   81.6    3.2       9.5     1.7     1.9     2.1
1960    40.5   18.7     6.1    16.3     7.7    10.7       1960   31.0    10.1     5.7    26.8    10.2    16.2      1960    91.1    0.9     5.1     0.7     1.3     0.9       1960   81.6    3.6       8.8     1.8     2.1     2.1
1961    39.4   18.7     6.3    15.4     7.9    12.3       1961   28.4    9.8      6.4    25.5    10.2    19.7      1961    91.0    0.9     5.2     0.6     1.3     0.9       1961   81.5    3.7       8.3     1.9     2.5     2.1
1962    40.3   20.1     5.3    15.8     8.4    10.2       1962   30.3    12.8     4.2    25.4    11.5    15.7      1962    91.1    0.9     5.1     0.6     1.5     0.9       1962   81.6    3.5       8.5     1.9     2.6     2.0
1963    41.8   22.5     4.4    13.3     7.4    10.7       1963   35.4    14.4     3.0    20.7     9.0    17.6      1963    91.0    0.9     5.3     0.6     1.5     0.8       1963   81.3    3.4       8.7     2.0     2.7     1.9
1964    41.0   22.2     4.7    16.4     7.2     8.6       1964   32.5    13.2     4.3    27.6     9.3    13.1      1964    90.7    0.9     5.4     0.7     1.5     0.8       1964   80.3    3.5       9.4     2.2     2.7     1.9
1965    41.0   23.0     4.6    16.8     7.1     7.6       1965   32.0    14.0     5.7    28.4     8.5    11.5      1965    90.6    1.0     5.4     0.8     1.6     0.7       1965   80.8    3.4       9.4     2.3     2.6     1.6
1966    42.1   22.6     4.3    16.5     6.9     7.6       1966   31.8    12.8     4.6    30.4     8.7    11.8      1966    90.5    0.8     5.6     0.8     1.5     0.8       1966   81.0    3.2       9.4     2.2     2.6     1.6
1967    43.0   23.9     3.8    15.7     7.1     6.6       1967   34.0    13.2     3.1    30.2     9.2    10.3      1967    90.6    1.0     5.3     0.8     1.6     0.7       1967   81.5    3.5       8.5     2.3     2.6     1.6
1968    43.0   25.1     3.4    14.8     7.6     6.2       1968   35.0    13.6     4.6    27.1    10.3     9.4      1968    91.0    0.9     4.5     0.9     2.0     0.8       1968   82.7    3.3       7.1     2.2     3.1     1.6
1969    42.4   26.2     3.0    14.0     8.1     6.2       1969   35.7    13.5     5.5    24.9    10.3    10.0      1969    91.6    0.9     3.7     0.8     2.3     0.7       1969   84.1    3.3       5.7     2.1     3.4     1.5
1970    39.6   30.0     1.9    12.5     9.5     6.5       1970   33.0    17.9     1.9    22.7    13.6    10.9      1970    91.7    0.9     3.2     0.8     2.6     0.8       1970   85.2    3.0       4.7     1.9     3.6     1.6
1971    38.2   35.3     2.4     9.8     8.0     6.3       1971   31.9    23.3     3.2    18.6    11.2    11.8      1971    91.9    0.9     3.1     0.8     2.4     0.9       1971   85.7    3.0       4.5     1.8     3.5     1.6
1972    42.0   30.6     2.6    10.0     8.5     6.3       1972   40.5    16.8     2.6    18.2    11.9    10.1      1972    91.7    0.8     3.5     0.6     2.3     1.1       1972   84.8    3.1       5.3     1.5     3.5     1.9
1973    45.1   26.1     4.2     9.9     8.5     6.2       1973   45.1    14.2     4.0    16.1    11.4     9.4      1973    90.3    0.8     4.5     0.7     2.5     1.2       1973   82.0    3.4       7.6     1.5     3.7     1.8
1974    45.1   20.9     6.9     9.4    11.2     6.6       1974   45.4    9.0      6.1    14.4    13.8    11.2      1974    89.5    0.9     4.4     0.6     3.3     1.3       1974   79.4    3.8       8.3     1.6     4.9     2.1
1975    51.1   17.9     5.8     9.0    10.4     5.8       1975   58.3    8.2      3.3    12.1    11.1     6.9      1975    89.5    1.0     4.3     0.6     3.3     1.2       1975   80.0    3.9       7.6     1.6     4.9     2.0
1976    47.9   19.5     4.9     8.9    12.0     6.9       1976   49.5    8.9      6.4    11.6    14.3     9.3      1976    89.8    1.2     3.5     0.6     3.7     1.3       1976   82.7    3.6       5.4     1.4     5.1     1.8
1977    49.8   18.2     2.7    10.1    12.1     7.1       1977   53.6    6.8      3.1    13.6    13.5     9.5      1977    90.5    1.0     2.9     0.6     3.6     1.4       1977   84.0    3.5       4.2     1.4     5.0     1.9
1978    47.2   15.3     1.1    18.0    11.6     6.9       1978   49.7    6.8      1.4    21.0    12.1     9.0      1978    89.5    1.1     2.9     1.0     4.0     1.4       1978   81.0    4.3       4.1     3.2     5.6     1.8
1979    47.9   12.8    -0.4    19.2    13.1     7.4       1979   49.0    5.8     -1.1    21.8    14.4    10.1      1979    89.0    1.1     2.9     1.1     4.4     1.5       1979   79.5    4.3       4.4     3.7     6.2     1.9
1980    48.6   11.4    -1.3    19.2    14.5     7.7       1980   50.0    6.4     -1.9    20.6    15.4     9.5      1980    87.8    1.2     2.5     1.5     5.4     1.6       1980   77.9    5.4       3.0     4.4     7.2     2.1
1981    44.0    9.7     0.1    20.7    17.9     7.6       1981   44.7    6.0     -0.2    20.9    19.2     9.5      1981    87.1    1.2     2.1     1.5     6.5     1.6       1981   76.7    4.4       3.3     4.5     9.0     2.1
1982    49.6    8.7     0.5    19.1    14.1     8.0       1982   47.1    1.9      0.5    26.1    12.5    12.0      1982    87.4    1.1     1.7     2.1     6.3     1.4       1982   79.2    3.7       2.4     4.4     8.5     1.8
1983    55.1   14.1     0.3    15.4    10.3     4.8       1983   63.7    3.2     -0.7    18.1     9.6     6.0      1983    89.5    1.0     1.6     2.0     4.5     1.4       1983   82.8    3.6       2.1     4.0     5.9     1.6
1984    56.0   14.0     0.8    15.4     9.3     4.5       1984   59.8    2.0     -0.9    25.8     7.7     5.7      1984    90.2    1.1     1.6     1.6     4.2     1.4       1984   84.3    3.5       2.0     3.0     5.6     1.7
1985    60.9   11.1    -0.7    14.8     9.4     4.6       1985   64.3    1.2     -2.4    23.4     8.3     5.3      1985    90.1    1.1     1.5     1.5     4.6     1.3       1985   83.9    3.5       1.8     2.9     6.1     1.7
1986    61.1   11.6    -0.6    14.0     8.8     5.0       1986   65.9    2.0     -1.6    19.8     7.9     6.1      1986    90.3    1.1     1.6     1.4     4.1     1.4       1986   84.1    3.8       1.9     2.8     5.5     1.9
1987    65.0   10.2    -0.1    12.3     7.4     5.2       1987   68.9    1.9     -1.1    19.7     6.8     3.9      1987    90.7    1.1     1.8     1.3     3.6     1.6       1987   84.2    3.6       2.2     2.6     4.8     2.6
1988    69.4    6.9     2.5     8.6     6.9     5.7       1988   75.7    0.7      3.1     9.2     5.8     5.5      1988    90.1    1.2     1.9     1.3     3.9     1.8       1988   83.4    3.7       2.2     2.5     5.3     2.9
1989    66.3    6.4     3.0    10.0     8.8     5.6       1989   72.5    0.7      3.9    10.6     6.2     6.0      1989    89.4    1.3     1.7     1.2     4.6     1.8       1989   81.9    4.1       2.2     2.5     6.3     3.0
1990    60.5    8.7     2.5     9.9    12.7     5.8       1990   66.7    1.5      3.4    11.3    11.6     5.5      1990    89.4    1.3     1.4     1.1     5.1     1.6       1990   81.8    4.1       1.9     2.3     7.0     2.9
1991    59.8    9.7     2.0    12.2    12.2     4.1       1991   63.6    1.8      2.1    17.6    13.2     1.7      1991    90.5    1.3     1.1     1.1     4.3     1.8       1991   83.2    4.1       1.5     2.1     5.9     3.3
1992    62.9   11.2     2.5     8.8     9.9     4.7       1992   72.0    1.6      3.4    10.0    10.3     2.8      1992    91.9    1.2     1.1     1.0     3.0     1.8       1992   85.4    3.9       1.4     1.9     4.2     3.2
1993    68.7   10.0     1.6     7.7     7.2     4.8       1993   79.6    1.4      0.9     7.6     6.8     3.7      1993    92.1    1.3     1.2     1.0     2.4     2.1       1993   85.5    4.0       1.5     1.9     3.2     4.0
1994    68.3    9.5     2.3     7.9     6.4     5.6       1994   74.0    1.3      2.7     9.2     6.2     6.6      1994    92.0    1.3     1.4     1.0     2.0     2.4       1994   85.4    4.0       1.7     1.9     2.7     4.3
1995    68.4    8.9     2.0     9.1     7.3     4.3       1995   74.1    1.3      2.5    12.1     7.6     2.5      1995    91.1    1.4     1.5     1.0     2.5     2.6       1995   83.8    4.2       2.0     1.9     3.3     4.8
1996    67.8    8.4     2.7    10.4     5.7     5.1       1996   67.5    0.9      4.3    16.5     6.4     4.4      1996    90.7    1.4     1.6     1.1     2.3     2.9       1996   82.9    4.3       2.1     2.0     3.1     5.5
1997    70.9    8.1     1.8    11.0     3.7     4.5       1997   72.6    0.8      2.2    18.5     3.2     2.8      1997    91.0    1.4     1.7     1.0     1.8     3.0       1997   83.5    4.5       2.4     2.0     2.4     5.2
1998    70.3    6.5     1.5    11.9     3.9     5.9       1998   72.0    0.4      0.9    19.4     3.6     3.8      1998    91.3    1.4     1.8     1.1     1.6     2.8       1998   83.8    4.5       2.3     2.1     2.2     5.1
1999    68.1    6.6     2.5    12.7     4.1     6.0       1999   67.0    0.7      1.8    20.9     3.3     6.3      1999    90.9    1.5     1.9     1.4     1.6     2.8       1999   83.7    4.6       2.4     2.5     2.2     4.6
2000    72.4    5.8     1.7    10.9     4.0     5.3       2000   74.3    0.4      0.5    15.2     3.2     6.5      2000    90.9    1.5     1.8     1.2     1.9     2.8       2000   83.2    4.7       2.4     2.3     2.6     4.8

Notes: Wage is defined as wages and salaries, pensions, and other employment earnings (such as bonuses, stock-option exercises, etc.). Prof. is professional income defined as self-employment income from professions
such as doctors, lawyers, etc. Busin. is business income defined as net profits from sole proprietorships, partnerships, and other small businesses (such as farm and fishing). Divid. defined as dividends from Canadian
corporations. Interest includes bond and bank interest income as well as annuities. Invest. includes all other investment income such as estate and trust income, foreign investment income, etc. All details in Appendix Section C.
The sums of all sources add up to 100%. Capital Gains are excluded.
           Table C3: Income Composition by Sources of Income and by Fractiles of Total Income (excluding capital gains) in Canada, 1920-2000 (continued)
                        P99-99.5                                                 P99.5-99.9                                               P99.9-99.99                                           P99.99-100
       Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.            Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.           Wage    Prof.   Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.            Wage    Prof. Busin. Divid. Interest Invest.
1946    55.7    7.5    25.3     3.7     3.0     4.8       1946   45.8    12.0    24.9     6.9     4.0     6.5      1946    36.5   11.8    25.0    12.4     5.4     8.8       1946   27.2    5.6    14.3    28.8    7.6    16.6
1947    54.4    7.6    27.1     3.6     2.8     4.5       1947   43.2    11.4    29.9     6.4     3.5     5.7      1947    35.3   11.7    28.8    12.1     4.5     7.7       1947   25.1    4.2    20.6    29.2    5.9    15.1
1948    52.5    7.6    28.6     4.2     2.7     4.4       1948   44.1    10.2    29.9     6.7     3.2     5.9      1948    36.7   11.3    25.9    14.4     3.8     7.9       1948   28.2    3.0    24.2    27.7    5.8    11.1
1949    53.1    8.2    28.2     4.0     2.5     4.1       1949   44.4    11.3    28.1     7.1     3.3     5.9      1949    35.6   11.8    26.5    14.1     3.6     8.3       1949   28.8    4.8    20.2    29.3    5.2    11.8
1950    53.2    8.6    26.9     4.3     2.6     4.3       1950   44.1    12.5    26.2     7.6     3.5     6.1      1950    34.5   11.5    27.4    14.5     3.4     8.7       1950   32.3    7.1    18.0    27.4    4.0    11.2
1951    54.2    8.7    25.3     4.8     2.5     4.6       1951   46.4    13.0    24.5     7.1     3.0     6.0      1951    38.3   12.7    21.6    13.5     3.2    10.8       1951   26.7    6.9    23.9    22.0    4.7    15.8
1952    53.9    9.9    24.6     4.4     2.5     4.6       1952   46.0    13.6    24.2     6.7     3.1     6.4      1952    38.6   12.4    20.7    14.0     4.4     9.9       1952   28.0    6.8    16.5    33.1    5.6    10.0
1953    54.1    9.9    23.9     4.5     2.6     5.0       1953   47.4    14.0    22.6     6.8     3.2     6.0      1953    38.7   12.5    19.8    14.8     4.8     9.5       1953   33.4    5.6    15.0    27.0    5.1    13.9
1954    58.0   10.4    19.4     4.4     2.9     4.9       1954   49.4    15.5    18.1     6.9     3.8     6.3      1954    39.8   15.9    13.3    16.2     5.8     9.1       1954   30.3    11.5   13.7    25.2    7.3    12.1
1955    56.5   11.4    19.5     5.1     3.0     4.6       1955   48.1    16.6    18.1     7.7     3.8     5.7      1955    36.3   16.5    15.5    18.5     4.9     8.2       1955   25.9    11.1   16.3    32.7    5.7     8.3
1956    55.9   12.4    19.8     4.6     2.9     4.5       1956   47.7    18.0    17.4     7.2     3.7     6.0      1956    39.7   18.9    13.5    14.1     4.9     8.9       1956   26.2    11.5   18.4    23.8    5.9    14.2
1957    61.4   11.1    16.2     4.4     3.0     3.9       1957   50.8    18.1    14.4     7.0     3.9     5.8      1957    42.5   19.2    10.5    13.4     5.6     8.8       1957   29.4    12.7   10.4    24.8    8.4    14.3
1958    60.7   11.5    16.0     4.3     3.3     4.3       1958   49.8    19.6    13.5     7.0     4.2     6.0      1958    43.2   19.7     9.3    13.3     5.7     8.8       1958   30.0    11.9    7.3    26.3    9.3    15.2
1959    63.1   10.5    14.7     4.2     3.5     4.1       1959   49.5    20.5    12.0     7.3     4.5     6.2      1959    44.0   19.7     8.2    12.8     6.2     9.1       1959   32.0    9.8     7.6    24.8    8.9    17.0
1960    65.7   10.2    12.2     4.2     3.7     4.1       1960   50.1    21.4     9.8     7.5     5.1     6.1      1960    43.5   21.4     6.3    13.0     6.9     8.9       1960   31.0    10.1    5.7    26.8   10.2    16.2
1961    66.1   10.6    11.2     4.2     3.9     3.9       1961   50.5    21.7     8.9     7.3     5.2     6.4      1961    42.9   21.7     6.2    12.2     7.1     9.8       1961   28.4    9.8     6.4    25.5   10.2    19.7
1962    66.1   10.5    11.1     4.4     4.0     3.8       1962   50.4    22.0     8.4     7.8     5.7     5.7      1962    43.3   22.3     5.6    12.9     7.4     8.5       1962   30.3    12.8    4.2    25.4   11.5    15.7
1963    67.0   10.2    10.9     4.4     4.1     3.5       1963   50.7    23.2     7.9     7.2     5.3     5.7      1963    43.6   24.9     4.8    11.1     6.9     8.7       1963   35.4    14.4    3.0    20.7    9.0    17.6
1964    64.0   11.6    11.5     5.1     4.3     3.6       1964   50.2    23.7     7.5     8.2     5.2     5.2      1964    43.5   24.9     4.8    12.9     6.6     7.3       1964   32.5    13.2    4.3    27.6    9.3    13.1
1965    63.4   12.4    11.7     5.4     4.2     3.0       1965   49.2    25.3     7.6     8.4     5.2     4.3      1965    43.8   25.7     4.3    13.2     6.6     6.3       1965   32.0    14.0    5.7    28.4    8.5    11.5
1966    64.1   12.3    11.2     5.3     4.2     2.9       1966   50.5    25.1     7.0     8.1     5.0     4.3      1966    45.2   25.5     4.3    12.3     6.4     6.3       1966   31.8    12.8    4.6    30.4    8.7    11.8
1967    66.1   11.8    10.2     5.0     4.0     2.9       1967   51.1    25.4     6.9     7.6     5.0     3.9      1967    45.5   26.9     4.0    11.6     6.5     5.6       1967   34.0    13.2    3.1    30.2    9.2    10.3
1968    68.5   11.4     7.9     4.9     4.6     2.8       1968   51.8    26.6     5.2     7.3     5.4     3.7      1968    45.2   28.3     3.0    11.3     6.8     5.3       1968   35.0    13.6    4.6    27.1   10.3     9.4
1969    68.1   13.2     6.3     4.8     5.1     2.6       1969   53.2    26.3     4.3     6.8     5.9     3.5      1969    44.3   29.7     2.3    11.0     7.5     5.2       1969   35.7    13.5    5.5    24.9   10.3    10.0
1970    67.5   14.3     5.1     4.7     5.5     3.0       1970   53.6    26.0     3.8     6.4     6.4     3.7      1970    41.4   33.1     1.9     9.8     8.4     5.4       1970   33.0    17.9    1.9    22.7   13.6    10.9
1971    66.5   15.9     4.9     4.1     5.4     3.2       1971   54.4    26.6     4.1     5.2     6.1     3.6      1971    39.8   38.4     2.1     7.6     7.2     5.0       1971   31.9    23.3    3.2    18.6   11.2    11.8
1972    68.4   13.5     6.1     3.5     5.3     3.2       1972   50.9    29.5     4.1     5.1     6.3     4.0      1972    42.4   34.2     2.6     7.8     7.6     5.3       1972   40.5    16.8    2.6    18.2   11.9    10.1
1973    62.3   16.1     9.3     3.7     5.5     3.1       1973   47.3    30.5     6.5     5.4     6.4     3.9      1973    45.1   29.4     4.3     8.2     7.7     5.3       1973   45.1    14.2    4.0    16.1   11.4     9.4
1974    59.0   15.1    12.0     3.5     7.2     3.2       1974   44.5    28.5     9.5     5.3     8.5     3.8      1974    45.0   24.4     7.1     7.9    10.4     5.2       1974   45.4    9.0     6.1    14.4   13.8    11.2
1975    60.1   15.1    11.0     3.6     7.1     3.1       1975   45.2    27.7     9.9     5.3     8.3     3.7      1975    48.8   20.8     6.6     8.1    10.2     5.5       1975   58.3    8.2     3.3    12.1   11.1     6.9
1976    62.6   15.2     8.0     3.5     7.7     2.9       1976   46.0    29.5     5.9     5.5     9.2     4.0      1976    47.4   22.7     4.4     8.1    11.3     6.1       1976   49.5    8.9     6.4    11.6   14.3     9.3
1977    63.6   15.8     5.5     4.1     8.1     3.0       1977   49.2    28.1     4.4     5.7     9.0     3.6      1977    48.7   21.6     2.6     9.1    11.7     6.4       1977   53.6    6.8     3.1    13.6   13.5     9.5
1978    57.9   17.8     4.0     9.0     8.5     2.9       1978   49.5    23.9     3.2    10.8     9.3     3.3      1978    46.4   17.9     1.0    17.0    11.5     6.3       1978   49.7    6.8     1.4    21.0   12.1     9.0
1979    51.6   20.8     3.8    11.1     9.7     3.1       1979   50.6    20.3     3.0    12.4    10.2     3.6      1979    47.6   14.9    -0.2    18.4    12.7     6.6       1979   49.0    5.8    -1.1    21.8   14.4    10.1
1980    57.9   16.2     2.8     9.8    10.4     3.0       1980   53.1    17.5     1.6    12.7    11.5     3.7      1980    48.2   12.7    -1.1    18.8    14.3     7.2       1980   50.0    6.4    -1.9    20.6   15.4     9.5
1981    54.8   15.1     4.0    10.9    12.4     2.8       1981   44.6    19.9     2.1    15.3    14.4     3.7      1981    43.7   10.8     0.2    20.6    17.5     7.1       1981   44.7    6.0    -0.2    20.9   19.2     9.5
1982    61.6   13.1     3.2     8.4    11.4     2.4       1982   49.1    20.9     2.5    11.7    12.8     3.1      1982    50.7   11.4     0.5    16.3    14.8     6.4       1982   47.1    1.9     0.5    26.1   12.5    12.0
1983    66.0   13.7     2.7     8.0     8.0     1.7       1983   52.2    25.2     1.5    10.4     8.7     2.0      1983    52.0   18.1     0.7    14.3    10.5     4.4       1983   63.7    3.2    -0.7    18.1    9.6     6.0
1984    67.5   14.3     2.5     5.8     7.9     2.0       1984   52.9    26.8     1.9     7.9     8.5     2.1      1984    54.4   19.0     1.6    11.0    10.0     4.0       1984   59.8    2.0    -0.9    25.8    7.7     5.7
1985    67.7   13.7     1.9     6.2     8.3     2.3       1985   55.2    24.4     1.1     8.1     8.6     2.6      1985    59.4   15.2     0.0    11.2     9.8     4.3       1985   64.3    1.2    -2.4    23.4    8.3     5.3
1986    68.1   14.6     1.8     5.7     7.4     2.4       1986   56.5    24.1     0.9     8.0     7.8     2.8      1986    59.2   15.4    -0.1    11.7     9.2     4.6       1986   65.9    2.0    -1.6    19.8    7.9     6.1
1987    66.7   14.6     2.0     5.4     6.4     4.9       1987   57.5    22.8     1.4     6.4     6.8     5.1      1987    63.4   13.6     0.3     9.2     7.7     5.8       1987   68.9    1.9    -1.1    19.7    6.8     3.9
1988    65.5   14.8     2.7     5.2     6.8     5.1       1988   56.6    22.5     2.4     6.5     6.9     5.2      1988    66.1   10.1     2.1     8.3     7.5     5.8       1988   75.7    0.7     3.1    9.2     5.8     5.5
1989    62.3   15.7     3.0     5.4     8.5     5.2       1989   52.6    23.6     2.4     6.9     9.2     5.3      1989    62.6    9.9     2.4     9.6    10.3     5.3       1989   72.5    0.7     3.9    10.6    6.2     6.0
1990    62.0   15.1     2.5     5.2     9.8     5.4       1990   52.0    23.2     2.2     6.7    10.9     5.1      1990    57.3   12.4     2.0     9.2    13.2     5.9       1990   66.7    1.5     3.4    11.3   11.6     5.5
1991    63.4   15.1     2.0     4.6     8.5     6.4       1991   52.3    24.4     2.0     6.3     9.2     5.8      1991    57.8   13.8     2.0     9.4    11.7     5.3       1991   63.6    1.8     2.1    17.6   13.2     1.7
1992    65.7   15.5     1.9     4.3     6.4     6.2       1992   53.0    26.7     1.9     5.8     7.1     5.5      1992    58.4   16.0     2.0     8.3     9.8     5.6       1992   72.0    1.6     3.4    10.0   10.3     2.8
1993    66.1   15.3     2.0     4.1     4.8     7.8       1993   53.9    26.9     2.1     5.3     5.4     6.3      1993    63.2   14.3     1.9     7.8     7.4     5.4       1993   79.6    1.4     0.9    7.6     6.8     3.7
1994    67.0   15.1     2.3     3.9     4.2     7.5       1994   55.9    25.8     2.1     5.3     4.6     6.2      1994    65.6   13.4     2.1     7.3     6.5     5.1       1994   74.0    1.3     2.7    9.2     6.2     6.6
1995    65.5   14.9     2.4     3.9     4.9     8.4       1995   55.9    25.2     2.3     4.9     5.2     6.5      1995    65.7   12.7     1.8     7.6     7.1     5.2       1995   74.1    1.3     2.5    12.1    7.6     2.5
1996    64.8   15.5     2.8     4.1     4.4     8.5       1996   56.6    24.4     2.6     5.1     4.7     6.7      1996    67.9   12.0     1.9     7.4     5.4     5.4       1996   67.5    0.9     4.3    16.5    6.4     4.4
1997    65.5   16.3     3.0     4.3     3.4     7.6       1997   57.6    23.9     2.9     5.1     3.8     6.8      1997    70.1   11.7     1.5     7.3     4.0     5.4       1997   72.6    0.8     2.2    18.5    3.2     2.8
1998    66.2   15.9     3.0     4.3     3.2     7.4       1998   59.0    22.3     2.6     5.4     3.9     6.9      1998    69.4    9.7     1.8     8.0     4.1     7.0       1998   72.0    0.4     0.9    19.4    3.6     3.8
1999    66.8   15.5     3.2     4.4     3.1     7.0       1999   59.8    21.5     3.1     5.3     3.8     6.5      1999    68.7    9.9     2.9     8.0     4.6     5.8       1999   67.0    0.7     1.8    20.9    3.3     6.3
2000    67.6   15.4     2.9     4.3     3.3     6.6       2000   61.2    20.5     2.6     5.3     3.9     6.7      2000    71.3    8.8     2.4     8.5     4.4     4.6       2000   74.3    0.4     0.5    15.2    3.2     6.5

Notes: Wage is defined as wages and salaries, pensions, and other employment earnings (such as bonuses, stock-option exercises, etc.). Prof. is professional income defined as self-employment income from professions
such as doctors, lawyers, etc. Busin. is business income defined as net profits from sole proprietorships, partnerships, and other small businesses (such as farm and fishing). Divid. defined as dividends from Canadian
corporations. Interest includes bond and bank interest income as well as annuities. Invest. includes all other investment income such as estate and trust income, foreign investment income, etc. All details in Appendix Section C.
The sums of all sources add up to 100%. Capital Gains are excluded.
                                                               Table C4: Share of Capital Gains in Total Income for Upper Groups in Canada, 1972-2000
                                                                            (capital gains are expressed in % of total income (including capital gains) of each group)

                            A. Fractiles defined by total income excluding capital gains                                                                               B. Fractiles defined by total income including capital gains
        P90-100   P95-100     P99-100   P99.5-100   P99.9-100 P99.99-100   P90-95   P95-99   P99-99.5   P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99 P99.99-100          P90-100   P95-100     P99-100   P99.5-100   P99.9-100 P99.99-100   P90-95   P95-99   P99-99.5   P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99 P99.99-100



1972     0.6       0.9         1.7        2.0         2.8        4.7       0.2      0.4       1.3         1.5         2.2        4.7        1972    1.2       2.7         3.8        4.6         7.5       17.2       0.2      0.5       2.1         3.0         4.7       17.2
1973     0.9       1.1         2.1        2.3         3.3        6.1       0.4      0.5       1.6         1.7         2.5        6.1        1973    1.5       3.4         4.6        5.6         9.2       21.9       0.4      0.7       2.6         3.5         5.4       21.9
1974     0.8       1.0         1.7        1.9         2.6        4.2       0.4      0.6       1.5         1.5         2.0        4.2        1974    1.4       2.9         3.8        4.5         7.0       15.4       0.5      0.8       2.4         3.1         4.4       15.4
1975     1.0       1.2         2.1        2.3         3.2        4.9       0.6      0.7       1.8         1.7         2.6        4.9        1975    1.6       3.4         4.5        5.4         8.5       17.7       0.5      0.9       2.9         3.5         5.4       17.7
1976     1.4       1.7         3.1        3.5         4.7        6.8       0.8      0.9       2.5         2.7         4.1        6.8        1976    2.3       4.9         6.6        8.0        12.4       23.9       0.8      1.2       4.1         5.5         8.6       23.9
1977     1.6       2.1         4.0        4.3         6.5        9.2       0.8      1.0       3.4         3.0         5.5        9.2        1977    2.5       5.6         7.6        8.7        13.1       17.6       0.8      1.3       5.6         6.1        11.5       17.6
1978     2.2       2.9         5.6        6.1         9.2       11.5       1.0      1.3       4.6         4.1         8.4       11.5        1978    3.4       7.6         10.4      12.1        18.3       21.4       1.0      1.7       7.5         8.3        17.2       21.4
1979     3.4       4.5         8.9        9.5        14.1       17.9       1.4      1.8       7.6         6.3        12.5       17.9        1979    5.1      12.0         16.3      19.6        30.3       47.5       0.9      2.5      10.0        12.6        23.4       47.5
1980     4.1       5.4         9.9       11.1        15.9       17.6       1.7      2.5       7.5         7.6        15.2       17.6        1980    6.1      14.2         18.4      22.8        33.8       46.9       1.0      3.4       9.9        15.2        28.6       46.9
1981     3.0       4.0         7.9        9.4        14.2       17.0       1.1      1.6       4.9         5.9        13.1       17.0        1981    4.6      10.9         14.9      19.4        30.6       45.5       0.7      2.2       6.5        11.9        24.7       45.5
1982     1.4       1.9         3.7        4.4         6.2        7.2       0.5      0.9       2.0         3.2         5.8        7.2        1982    2.6       5.9         7.8       10.0        14.8       20.4       0.4      1.2       3.3         6.4        12.4       20.4
1983     2.0       2.8         4.9        5.9         7.6        6.4       0.8      1.5       2.8         4.7         8.0        6.4        1983    3.5       7.7         10.1      12.5        18.7       28.1       0.8      2.1       5.2         8.1        14.9       28.1
1984     1.7       2.3         4.1        5.0         6.2        4.8       0.6      1.1       2.3         4.1         6.8        4.8        1984    2.9       6.4         8.3       10.2        15.0       21.7       0.7      1.7       4.1         6.7        12.0       21.7
1985     2.6       3.4         5.8        6.8         9.1       12.9       1.1      1.9       3.7         5.1         7.4       12.9        1985    4.3       9.2         11.6      14.2        21.0       28.3       1.0      2.7       6.0         9.0        17.7       28.3
1986     3.9       5.2         8.4        9.5        12.0       11.9       1.8      3.2       6.0         7.7        12.1       11.9        1986    6.7      13.5         16.1      18.2        24.3       31.7       1.6      5.2      11.6        13.7        21.0       31.7
1987     5.6       7.2         11.4      12.6        14.5       15.1       2.6      4.5       8.9        11.3        14.2       15.1        1987    9.6      20.2         24.5      27.2        32.4       41.6       1.7      6.3      18.3        23.0        28.1       41.6
1988     4.7       6.0         9.2       10.1        10.9        7.2       2.1      3.7       7.2         9.4        12.7        7.2        1988    8.2      17.1         20.8      23.5        28.7       26.7       1.4      4.6      14.1        18.8        29.7       26.7
1989     6.2       8.0         12.3      13.6        14.5        8.0       2.6      4.6       9.2        12.7        18.0        8.0        1989   10.0      20.1         24.0      27.2        33.2       32.5       1.6      5.4      15.3        21.1        33.6       32.5
1990     3.1       3.9         5.6        5.8         5.8        4.0       1.6      2.7       5.1         5.9         6.6        4.0        1990    5.5      11.5         14.0      15.9        18.2       10.3       1.1      3.3       9.4        14.1        21.9       10.3
1991     3.1       4.0         6.2        6.8         7.1        7.5       1.5      2.5       5.0         6.5         6.9        7.5        1991    5.5      11.7         14.6      17.2        21.3       16.3       1.0      2.9       8.2        13.8        23.8       16.3
1992     3.7       4.7         7.1        7.7         7.8        5.7       1.7      3.1       5.7         7.7         8.8        5.7        1992    6.4      13.8         17.4      20.6        26.8       16.5       1.1      3.2       9.5        15.6        31.4       16.5
1993     5.5       6.9         10.0      10.5        10.7       10.0       2.7      4.7       8.9        10.3        11.1       10.0        1993    9.5      19.7         24.2      27.9        32.7       25.0       1.7      5.1      15.0        24.0        36.3       25.0
1994     3.8       5.0         8.9       10.4        10.4        7.7       1.6      2.2       5.4        10.4        11.6        7.7        1994    6.6      14.2         21.6      27.7        31.6       19.3       1.0      2.3       9.1        24.3        38.0       19.3
1995     2.8       3.6         5.5        6.0         6.3        4.5       1.2      2.2       4.2         5.7         7.2        4.5        1995    4.6      10.1         13.1      16.0        20.6       17.4       0.7      1.8       5.7        12.2        22.1       17.4
1996     3.3       4.2         6.5        7.1         8.0        7.5       1.4      2.6       4.8         6.4         8.2        7.5        1996    5.4      11.1         13.9      16.5        20.8       22.8       1.1      2.6       7.2        12.6        19.7       22.8
1997     4.2       5.3         7.8        8.2         7.6        5.4       1.9      3.3       6.8         8.8         8.7        5.4        1997    6.7      12.8         15.5      17.9        21.9       25.1       1.6      3.6       8.7        14.1        20.2       25.1
1998     4.1       5.2         7.4        7.9         8.7        4.9       1.8      3.4       6.2         7.1        10.5        4.9        1998    6.4      12.2         14.9      17.2        19.9       22.1       1.4      3.2       8.4        14.4        18.8       22.1
1999     4.2       5.2         7.3        7.3         6.7        5.4       1.9      3.5       7.2         7.8         7.4        5.4        1999    6.7      12.4         14.9      17.2        19.4       19.6       1.5      3.6       8.5        14.9        19.3       19.6
2000     6.4       7.8         10.4      11.0        10.6        6.7       3.1      5.4       8.5        11.4        12.7        6.7        2000    9.9      17.5         20.6      23.2        24.9       26.6       2.4      5.7      12.3        21.3        24.0       26.6

Notes: In Panel A, tax returns are ranked by total income excluding capital gains. Series report the additional income reported in the form of capital gains. The share of Capital gains reported are the share of
total income including capital gains. For example, the top decile (defined by income excluding capital gains) in 2000 earned 6.4% of their total income (including capital gains) in the form of capital gains.
In Panel B, tax returns are ranked by total income including full realized capital gains. The series report the share of total income (including capital gains) accruing in the form of capital gains.
Details on estimation are presented in Appendix Section C.
             Table D1: Aggregate Series on Wage Income, 1972-2000

                                                            Average
                          Number of                        individual      Average   Consumer
             Total number families          Total wage       wage        family wage Price Index
             of employees with wage          Income         income         income       (CPI)


                              in    in millions of           in 2000        in 2000     (base 100
             in thousands thousands 2000 dollars             dollars        dollars      in 2000)
                   (1)           (2)            (3)            (4)            (5)           (6)


   1972           8,541                      232,780         27,255                       22.996
   1973           8,955                      250,139         27,933                       24.758
   1974           9,419                      268,249         28,480                       27.401
   1975           9,648                      281,100         29,135                       30.396
   1976           9,869                      303,667         30,768                       32.687
   1977          10,014                      309,893         30,945                       35.242
   1978          10,328                      310,055         30,021                       38.414
   1979          10,772                      319,123         29,625                       41.938
   1980          11,069                      328,688         29,694                       46.167
   1981          11,420                      333,827         29,232                       51.894
   1982          11,256         8,328        320,869         28,507         38,530        57.533
   1983          11,185         8,290        314,970         28,160         37,996        60.881
   1984          11,402         8,446        323,321         28,357         38,279        63.524
   1985          11,582         8,548        330,655         28,549         38,682        66.079
   1986          12,079         8,933        343,190         28,413         38,419        68.811
   1987          12,312         9,001        351,459         28,547         39,046        71.806
   1988          12,623         9,218        371,880         29,461         40,344        74.714
   1989          12,962         9,389        386,737         29,836         41,189        78.414
   1990          13,073         9,511        384,702         29,427         40,447        82.203
   1991          12,916         9,476        370,462         28,683         39,097        86.784
   1992          12,869         9,412        374,704         29,117         39,813        88.106
   1993          12,903         9,460        374,313         29,011         39,568        89.692
   1994          13,021         9,569        382,823         29,402         40,008        89.868
   1995          13,195         9,718        388,505         29,443         39,979        91.806
   1996          13,297         9,772        391,518         29,445         40,067        93.304
   1997          13,615         9,989        407,506         29,932         40,797        94.802
   1998          13,844        10,157        425,961         30,768         41,937        95.683
   1999          14,233        10,432        443,824         31,183         42,543        97.357
   2000          14,688        10,534        466,028         31,729         44,239       100.000


Notes: Total number of part-time and full time employees from number of tax returns reporting
positive wages and salaries. Families defined as the sum of married couples and single individuals
reporting positive wages and salaries.
Total employment income reported on tax returns (sum of wages and salaries, commissions from
employment and other employment income). Average wage is column (5) over columns (2) or (3).
All amounts are reported in 2000 Canadian dollars. See Appendix Section D for details.
                                    Table D2: Shares of Wage Income for Upper Groups, 1972-2000
                    P90-100    P95-100     P99-100     P99.5-100 P99.9-100 P99.99-100             P90-95      P95-99     P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99
                      (1)        (2)         (3)          (4)       (5)        (6)                  (7)         (8)        (9)       (10)       (11)

Panel A: Individuals
   1972            27.22        16.80       5.59          3.51        1.12         0.19            10.41       11.21       2.08         2.40        0.92
   1973            27.31        16.93       5.79          3.69        1.24         0.23            10.38       11.14       2.11         2.45        1.00
   1974            26.92        16.57       5.65          3.59        1.26         0.26            10.35       10.92       2.06         2.33        1.00
   1975            26.97        16.56       5.76          3.70        1.40         0.32            10.41       10.80       2.06         2.30        1.08
   1976            26.20        16.02       5.19          3.38        1.13         0.23            10.19       10.83       1.81         2.24        0.90
   1977            26.10        15.79       5.04          3.25        1.10         0.23            10.31       10.75       1.78         2.15        0.87
   1978            25.82        15.42       4.74          3.05        1.05         0.22            10.40       10.69       1.68         2.01        0.82
   1979            26.30        15.74       5.09          3.25        1.10         0.23            10.56       10.65       1.84         2.16        0.87
   1980            26.65        16.10       5.28          3.34        1.17         0.26            10.55       10.82       1.94         2.16        0.91
   1981            26.44        15.79       4.94          3.10        1.08         0.24            10.65       10.85       1.84         2.02        0.84
   1982            27.37        16.57       5.55          3.63        1.50         0.41            10.79       11.02       1.92         2.14        1.09
   1983            27.52        16.59       5.54          3.63        1.49         0.42            10.92       11.05       1.92         2.14        1.07
   1984            27.65        16.72       5.68          3.75        1.58         0.46            10.92       11.05       1.93         2.18        1.11
   1985            27.80        16.89       5.84          3.91        1.68         0.51            10.91       11.05       1.94         2.22        1.18
   1986            28.00        17.04       5.89          3.92        1.67         0.50            10.96       11.14       1.97         2.26        1.17
   1987            28.28        17.35       6.21          4.21        1.85         0.55            10.94       11.14       2.00         2.36        1.30
   1988            29.04        18.27       7.11          5.05        2.47         0.86            10.77       11.16       2.05         2.58        1.61
   1989            29.43        18.70       7.55          5.47        2.80         1.10            10.73       11.15       2.08         2.67        1.71
   1990            29.05        18.18       6.93          4.87        2.32         0.82            10.87       11.25       2.07         2.55        1.50
   1991            29.22        18.21       6.80          4.73        2.20         0.75            11.01       11.41       2.07         2.53        1.45
   1992            29.21        18.16       6.78          4.73        2.22         0.78            11.06       11.38       2.05         2.51        1.44
   1993            29.59        18.51       7.11          5.04        2.46         0.86            11.08       11.41       2.07         2.58        1.60
   1994            29.75        18.68       7.20          5.09        2.42         0.79            11.08       11.48       2.11         2.67        1.63
   1995            30.15        19.10       7.59          5.38        2.57         0.84            11.06       11.51       2.21         2.81        1.73
   1996            30.73        19.66       8.06          5.78        2.78         0.84            11.07       11.61       2.28         3.00        1.94
   1997            31.66        20.64       8.90          6.56        3.30         1.08            11.02       11.74       2.34         3.26        2.22
   1998            32.16        21.17       9.31          6.90        3.52         1.17            10.99       11.86       2.42         3.38        2.35
   1999            32.35        21.40       9.48          7.02        3.58         1.21            10.95       11.92       2.45         3.44        2.37
   2000            33.50        22.57       10.51         7.97        4.30         1.50            10.93       12.06       2.54         3.67        2.80

Panel B: Families

   1982              27.53      16.49       5.26          3.39        1.38         0.37            11.05       11.22       1.87         2.01        1.02
   1983              27.84      16.66       5.30          3.41        1.39         0.39            11.19       11.36       1.89         2.02        1.00
   1984              28.06      16.86       5.48          3.58        1.53         0.45            11.19       11.39       1.90         2.05        1.08
   1985              28.29      17.08       5.64          3.74        1.60         0.48            11.20       11.45       1.90         2.13        1.12
   1986              28.66      17.33       5.68          3.73        1.54         0.45            11.33       11.64       1.95         2.19        1.10
   1987              28.99      17.68       6.04          4.06        1.78         0.53            11.31       11.64       1.98         2.29        1.24
   1988              29.71      18.47       6.87          4.77        2.29         0.73            11.24       11.61       2.10         2.47        1.56
   1989              30.11      18.91       7.29          5.17        2.62         0.99            11.20       11.62       2.12         2.55        1.64
   1990              30.01      18.58       6.72          4.65        2.18         0.77            11.43       11.86       2.07         2.46        1.41
   1991              30.39      18.76       6.64          4.56        2.09         0.72            11.63       12.12       2.09         2.47        1.37
   1992              30.38      18.71       6.53          4.46        2.02         0.67            11.67       12.18       2.07         2.44        1.35
   1993              30.80      19.14       6.93          4.85        2.29         0.79            11.67       12.20       2.09         2.56        1.50
   1994              30.98      19.27       7.01          4.87        2.23         0.70            11.71       12.26       2.14         2.64        1.54
   1995              31.40      19.66       7.32          5.13        2.37         0.74            11.74       12.34       2.19         2.76        1.63
   1996              31.87      20.12       7.77          5.44        2.51         0.72            11.75       12.35       2.33         2.93        1.79
   1997              32.70      20.99       8.57          6.16        2.99         0.93            11.71       12.42       2.42         3.17        2.06
   1998              33.21      21.55       9.00          6.51        3.24         1.03            11.66       12.55       2.49         3.27        2.21
   1999              33.46      21.80       9.19          6.65        3.30         1.06            11.67       12.61       2.53         3.35        2.24
   2000              34.57      22.83       10.08         7.50        3.85         1.25            11.74       12.76       2.58         3.65        2.60

Notes: Shares computed from tax return statistics and total number of wage earners and total wage bill from Table D1. All details in Appendix Section D.
For example, in 2000, the top 10% individual wage and salary earners earned 33.50% of total wages and salaries in Canada
                                             Table D3: Average Wage Income and Threshold for each Fractile (in 2000 Canadian dollars), 1972-2000

  Year     P90-100     P95-100    P99-100     P99.5-100 P99.9-100 P99.99-100            P90-95     P95-99     P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99           P90      P95       P99      P99.5     P99.9      P99.99
   (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)          (5)         (6)          (7)             (8)        (9)       (10)           (11)     (12)            (13)     (14)      (15)      (16)      (17)       (18)


Panel A: Individuals


  1972      74,176     91,592      152,435     191,436      303,889      528,735         56,758     76,379    113,428     163,307     278,701         51,874    62,946    101,161   133,067   214,059   437,850
  1973      76,281     94,602      161,842     205,975      345,806      654,217         57,961     77,792    117,699     171,003     311,103         52,940    64,541    104,693   138,521   230,334   516,617
  1974      76,672     94,396      160,915     204,376      358,854      729,138         58,954     77,768    117,514     165,731     317,373         53,921    64,965    105,230   137,210   229,652   550,330
  1975      78,574     96,477      167,729     215,365      407,596      917,144         60,669     78,666    120,177     167,272     351,050         55,050    65,334    108,021   139,696   243,226   647,177
  1976      80,619     98,551      159,565     207,809      348,605      706,510         62,689     83,301    111,353     172,512     309,004         57,974    68,783    109,466   137,948   222,599   535,335
  1977      80,757     97,699      155,807     201,203      341,321      715,802         63,824     83,172    110,516     166,171     299,232         58,572    70,512    107,085   131,525   217,644   534,030
  1978      77,520     92,609      142,210     183,368      314,320      669,860         62,436     80,212    101,088     150,599     274,651         57,372    68,577    98,633    123,275   197,969   483,615
  1979      77,903     93,237      150,822     192,623      324,693      675,700         62,576     78,837    109,056     159,593     285,627         57,366    68,236    97,408    127,710   209,745   497,139
  1980      79,142     95,616      156,757     198,121      348,019      768,976         62,672     80,338    115,401     160,697     301,085         57,487    69,177    104,232   133,374   215,907   546,180
  1981      77,274     92,308      144,288     181,003      315,995      693,354         62,244     79,322    107,592     147,198     274,089         57,167    68,540    100,434   120,704   197,776   486,721
  1982      78,017     94,494      158,269     207,072      426,459     1,165,309        61,540     78,555    109,461     152,210     344,313         56,437    67,681    100,687   121,961   227,231   703,728
  1983      77,481     93,450      156,117     204,382      419,860     1,186,896        61,509     77,786    107,869     150,525     334,548         56,563    67,404    99,036    120,412   225,013   672,182
  1984      78,392     94,841      160,952     212,674      446,616     1,313,681        61,940     78,314    109,217     154,176     350,345         57,111    67,798    100,184   122,610   231,121   745,186
  1985      79,365     96,448      166,752     223,021      480,757     1,446,320        62,282     78,873    110,487     158,583     373,550         57,321    68,265    100,926   124,586   240,070   834,990
  1986      79,553     96,808      167,465     222,984      473,927     1,423,370        62,303     79,140    111,944     160,288     368,343         57,425    68,284    101,769   126,768   242,726   768,191
  1987      80,742     99,047      177,191     240,480      528,405     1,581,208        62,439     79,515    113,904     168,452     411,561         57,488    68,550    103,185   129,889   265,343   881,177
  1988      85,561     107,639     209,351     297,675      727,984     2,526,101        63,483     82,208    121,004     190,117     528,183         58,247    70,091    108,699   141,153   314,450   1,260,222
  1989      87,816     111,586     225,231     326,405      836,300     3,267,809        64,047     83,174    124,075     198,944     566,097         58,793    70,615    111,099   146,353   334,945   1,404,351
  1990      85,489     106,992     203,931     286,327      682,712     2,416,870        63,989     82,753    121,558     187,241     489,947         58,480    70,428    109,342   141,919   300,906   1,167,181
  1991      83,809     104,470     195,160     271,400      631,891     2,147,467        63,151     81,794    118,892     181,280     463,632         58,045    69,965    107,479   138,763   287,629   1,037,253
  1992      85,055     105,731     197,387     275,276      646,407     2,266,611        64,377     82,812    119,539     182,469     466,393         59,092    71,028    108,223   140,358   287,814   1,090,105
  1993      85,852     107,404     206,122     292,430      713,087     2,504,019        64,303     82,719    119,847     187,253     514,107         58,906    70,938    108,147   141,307   310,116   1,225,954
  1994      87,478     109,832     211,662     299,131      711,517     2,326,451        65,126     84,371    124,214     196,030     532,074         59,633    71,901    111,112   146,848   324,963   1,221,657
  1995      88,774     112,444     223,415     316,574      755,220     2,462,685        65,104     84,704    130,255     206,866     565,625         59,473    72,029    114,458   152,136   345,237   1,311,880
  1996      90,496     115,783     237,178     340,323      818,861     2,477,941        65,212     85,433    134,039     220,685     634,507         59,483    72,255    117,457   157,049   383,280   1,393,046
  1997      94,758     123,552     266,302     392,405      987,746     3,236,470        65,962     87,866    140,189     243,567     737,868         60,089    73,387    123,931   168,319   436,280   1,715,679
  1998      98,945     130,279     286,515     424,418     1,082,738    3,590,101        67,607     91,218    148,659     259,790     804,247         61,433    75,430    130,746   179,725   462,914   1,882,364
  1999     100,864     133,432     295,520     438,057     1,116,347    3,764,928        68,294     92,913    152,976     268,471     822,131         62,124    76,422    134,367   186,407   474,949   2,071,545
  2000     106,300     143,214     333,382     505,704     1,364,367    4,773,356        69,385     95,677    161,000     291,071     985,623         63,102    77,836    138,825   197,300   537,560   2,512,359


Panel B: Families


  1982     101,672     121,763     194,309     250,309      511,079     1,349,561        81,581    162,994    138,310     185,116     417,915         74,526    89,830    129,074   151,821   273,478   846,293
  1983     101,255     121,163     192,781     248,161      506,639     1,415,197        81,347    162,277    137,401     183,542     405,688         74,435    89,440    128,252   150,448   270,782   816,125
  1984     103,166     124,019     201,423     263,091      561,297     1,652,549        82,312    164,534    139,755     188,540     440,047         75,186    90,596    130,231   153,572   285,697   915,816
  1985     104,710     126,476     208,625     276,533      592,585     1,781,916        82,943    166,687    140,716     197,520     460,437         76,085    91,851    132,476   158,725   296,556   992,748
  1986     105,736     127,841     209,679     275,335      569,604     1,643,210        83,631    169,182    144,022     201,769     450,314         76,271    92,548    135,127   164,394   300,509   939,486
  1987     108,912     132,844     226,832     305,163      666,990     2,007,646        84,979    172,368    148,502     214,706     518,029         77,375    94,098    138,089   171,512   331,688   1,119,115
  1988     115,606     143,741     267,153     370,777      892,020     2,854,513        87,471    177,893    163,530     240,466     673,965         79,704    96,964    148,122   184,410   399,648   1,563,466
  1989     120,026     150,726     290,581     412,451     1,045,693    3,937,357        89,326    182,663    168,711     254,140     724,397         81,303    99,157    153,470   189,299   431,098   1,783,381
  1990     117,668     145,697     263,420     364,268      855,408     3,010,609        89,640    184,719    162,572     241,483     615,941         81,377    99,669    151,938   184,294   384,250   1,460,320
  1991     115,876     143,067     253,166     347,359      796,625     2,757,097        88,686    183,295    158,974     235,042     578,795         80,498    98,743    149,486   182,022   366,742   1,326,439
  1992     117,979     145,318     253,709     346,453      784,457     2,599,814        90,641    187,309    160,965     236,952     582,751         82,194    101,141   152,066   186,483   367,555   1,314,715
  1993     120,065     149,183     270,201     377,743      892,534     3,081,161        90,948    188,501    162,660     249,045     649,354         82,380    101,535   153,312   191,940   402,448   1,537,901
  1994     122,019     151,817     276,086     383,744      880,033     2,748,987        92,221    191,760    168,428     259,672     672,371         83,446    102,866   156,909   199,646   420,980   1,463,066
  1995     123,535     154,694     287,821     403,626      930,949     2,915,317        92,377    193,061    172,016     271,796     710,463         83,517    103,158   158,597   206,114   444,955   1,584,672
  1996     125,466     158,421     305,788     428,399      989,484     2,847,768        92,512    192,497    183,176     288,127     783,008         83,638    103,420   160,787   214,211   482,484   1,657,332
  1997     131,161     168,399     343,931     493,801     1,199,195    3,746,988        93,922    197,603    194,060     317,452     916,107         84,916    105,403   169,861   227,671   552,238   2,081,551
  1998     137,032     177,878     371,382     537,101     1,334,955    4,236,519        96,185    205,830    205,662     337,637     1,012,559       86,863    108,431   180,598   240,394   595,741   2,279,223
  1999     140,577     183,137     385,853     559,047     1,386,464    4,440,136        98,018    211,103    212,660     352,192     1,047,167       88,274    110,355   187,208   247,866   621,701   2,391,342
  2000     148,136     195,663     431,773     642,584     1,648,036    5,359,561       100,609    218,665    220,962     391,221     1,235,644       90,315    112,950   197,153   266,105   709,700   2,917,182


Notes: Levels computed from tax return statistics and total number of tax units and total employment income from Table D1. All details in Appendix Section D.
For example, in 2000, the threshold P90 of the top decile of the wage and salaries distribution was $63,102 for individuals.
                Table D4: Top Wage Income Shares, Francophones in Quebec versus all Filers from Rest of Canada, 1982-2000
                             Average
                 # Wage       wage
                 Earners    income ($
                 ('000s)      2000)     P90-100     P95-100     P99-100    P99.5-100 P99.9-100 P99.99-100            P90-95   P95-99   P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99
                    (1)        (2)        (3)         (4)         (5)         (6)       (7)        (8)                 (9)     (10)      (11)      (12)       (13)


Panel A: Francophones in Quebec

   1982            2,355     26,613       26.08       15.24       4.33        2.56        0.82        0.19            10.85   10.91      1.77      1.74       0.63
   1983            2,347     25,937       25.95       15.11       4.34        2.58        0.83        0.17            10.85   10.77      1.76      1.75       0.66
   1984            2,412     26,465       25.99       15.08       4.33        2.58        0.83        0.17            10.92   10.75      1.75      1.75       0.66
   1985            2,456     26,566       25.97       15.10       4.36        2.60        0.84        0.17            10.87   10.75      1.76      1.76       0.67
   1986            2,586     26,256       26.24       15.31       4.51        2.74        0.94        0.21            10.93   10.80      1.77      1.80       0.73
   1987            2,675     26,585       26.40       15.44       4.62        2.84        1.01        0.24            10.96   10.82      1.78      1.83       0.77
   1988            2,729     26,895       26.37       15.51       4.66        2.86        1.02        0.25            10.86   10.84      1.80      1.85       0.77
   1989            2,766     26,904       26.42       15.57       4.72        2.91        1.03        0.25            10.85   10.85      1.81      1.88       0.78
   1990            2,827     26,888       26.65       15.68       4.71        2.89        0.99        0.22            10.97   10.97      1.83      1.89       0.77
   1991            2,797     26,285       27.11       15.94       4.80        2.95        1.03        0.24            11.17   11.15      1.85      1.92       0.79
   1992            2,781     26,685       27.19       15.98       4.88        3.04        1.13        0.33            11.21   11.11      1.84      1.91       0.81
   1993            2,788     26,519       27.37       16.12       4.97        3.13        1.19        0.36            11.25   11.15      1.84      1.94       0.83
   1994            2,831     26,755       27.40       16.14       4.98        3.13        1.16        0.31            11.27   11.16      1.85      1.97       0.85
   1995            2,869     26,691       27.66       16.54       5.37        3.50        1.47        0.54            11.12   11.17      1.87      2.04       0.93
   1996            2,889     26,494       27.80       16.62       5.31        3.41        1.32        0.36            11.19   11.31      1.90      2.09       0.97
   1997            2,952     26,419       28.15       16.99       5.62        3.67        1.46        0.39            11.16   11.37      1.95      2.21       1.08
   1998            3,014     26,973       28.89       17.71       6.20        4.18        1.84        0.63            11.19   11.51      2.02      2.34       1.21
   1999            3,082     27,327       28.65       17.59       6.14        4.10        1.74        0.50            11.06   11.46      2.03      2.36       1.24
   2000            3,184     27,878       29.23       18.01       6.51        4.44        1.98        0.67            11.22   11.50      2.08      2.45       1.31

Panel B: Canada excluding Quebec

   1982           8,509      28,915       27.55       16.79       5.76        3.82        1.61        0.44            10.77   11.03      1.94      2.20       1.17
   1983           8,468      28,669       27.74       16.83       5.75        3.82        1.62        0.46            10.91   11.07      1.94      2.20       1.16
   1984           8,617      28,843       27.89       16.98       5.91        3.96        1.72        0.50            10.91   11.07      1.95      2.23       1.22
   1985           8,755      28,983       28.12       17.19       6.10        4.13        1.83        0.54            10.93   11.09      1.97      2.30       1.29
   1986           9,099      28,896       28.28       17.30       6.11        4.10        1.78        0.55            10.98   11.19      2.01      2.33       1.23
   1987           9,233      29,027       28.64       17.71       6.51        4.47        2.02        0.61            10.93   11.21      2.04      2.46       1.41
   1988           9,498      30,123       29.56       18.80       7.60        5.48        2.77        0.97            10.76   11.20      2.12      2.72       1.80
   1989           9,785      30,591       29.99       19.27       8.08        5.93        3.12        1.20            10.71   11.19      2.15      2.82       1.92
   1990           9,824      30,135       29.47       18.64       7.37        5.24        2.58        0.92            10.83   11.27      2.12      2.66       1.66
   1991           9,703      29,361       29.57       18.60       7.18        5.06        2.44        0.84            10.97   11.42      2.12      2.63       1.60
   1992           9,684      29,780       29.54       18.50       7.11        5.00        2.40        0.83            11.04   11.40      2.10      2.60       1.57
   1993           9,711      29,733       29.96       18.91       7.52        5.39        2.69        0.94            11.05   11.39      2.12      2.70       1.75
   1994           9,789      30,163       30.14       19.09       7.60        5.43        2.63        0.85            11.05   11.49      2.18      2.80       1.78
   1995           9,929      30,198       30.54       19.49       7.91        5.66        2.71        0.84            11.05   11.59      2.24      2.95       1.87
   1996           10,016     30,307       31.20       20.17       8.50        6.21        3.02        0.93            11.03   11.67      2.30      3.19       2.09
   1997           10,271     30,901       32.11       21.13       9.31        6.92        3.47        1.07            10.98   11.82      2.40      3.44       2.41
   1998           10,438     31,821       32.61       21.70       9.77        7.29        3.73        1.19            10.91   11.93      2.48      3.56       2.54
   1999           10,749     32,222       32.89       21.98       9.97        7.44        3.81        1.23            10.91   12.00      2.54      3.62       2.59
   2000           11,080     32,970       34.02       23.21       11.10       8.48        4.57        1.54            10.82   12.11      2.62      3.90       3.03


Notes: Francophones in Quebec defined as Quebec residents filing tax return in french
Canada excluding Quebec defined as residents from Canadian Provinces excluding Quebec. All details in appendix Section D.
                                             Table D5: The Role of Stock Options in Top Wage Income Shares, 1995-2000
                          P0-100       P90-100     P95-100      P99-100     P99.5-100 P99.9-100 P99.99-100             P90-95      P95-99     P99-99.5 P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99 P99.99-100
                            (1)          (2)         (3)          (4)          (5)       (6)        (7)                  (8)         (9)        (10)      (11)       (12)        (13)


Panel A: Fraction of stock options in total wage income and top wage income groups (ranked including stock options) (in percent)
      1995                 0.261         0.89         1.39       3.33         4.45        7.23         10.82            0.03        0.13        0.58         1.92        5.47         10.82
      1996                 0.429         1.43         2.19       5.06         6.64        10.25        16.43            0.08        0.21        0.96         3.22        7.33         16.43
      1997                 0.648         2.06         3.10       6.72         8.55        12.33        16.00            0.09        0.30        1.39         4.35        10.03        16.00
      1998                 0.669         2.09         3.14       6.77         8.67        13.03        19.04            0.07        0.30        1.31         4.04        9.92         19.04
      1999                 0.880         2.68         4.01       8.61         11.05       16.82        25.69            0.08        0.36        1.59         5.05        12.21        25.69
      2000                 1.538         4.44         6.55       13.56        17.16       25.58        38.79            0.10        0.49        2.34         7.58        18.30        38.79

Panel B: Top wage income shares excluding stock options (both in ranking and in wage income) (in percent)

      1995                               29.97       18.89        7.37         5.17        2.42         0.78            11.08       11.52       2.20         2.75        1.64         0.78
      1996                               30.46       19.34        7.72         5.46        2.56         0.75            11.11       11.62       2.26         2.90        1.81         0.75
      1997                               31.26       20.18        8.41         6.10        2.99         0.97            11.08       11.77       2.31         3.11        2.02         0.97
      1998                               31.72       20.67        8.78         6.40        3.16         1.03            11.05       11.89       2.39         3.23        2.14         1.03
      1999                               31.78       20.75        8.79         6.38        3.14         1.00            11.03       11.96       2.41         3.23        2.14         1.00
      2000                               32.49       21.44        9.33         6.85        3.50         1.13            11.05       12.11       2.48         3.35        2.37         1.13

Panel C: Top wage income shares excluding stock options in ranking but including stock options in wage income (in percent)

      1995                               30.12       19.06       7.52          5.30        2.48         0.79            11.06       11.53       2.22         2.82        1.69         0.79
      1996                               30.65       19.57       7.94          5.64        2.64         0.76            11.08       11.63       2.30         3.00        1.88         0.76
      1997                               31.61       20.58       8.79          6.43        3.14         1.00            11.03       11.79       2.36         3.29        2.14         1.00
      1998                               32.08       21.08       9.17          6.72        3.30         1.05            11.00       11.91       2.44         3.42        2.25         1.05
      1999                               32.23       21.26       9.25          6.76        3.29         1.03            10.97       12.01       2.49         3.46        2.26         1.03
      2000                               33.17       22.22       10.06         7.48        3.84         1.20            10.95       12.16       2.57         3.65        2.64         1.20

Panel D: Fraction of stock options in top wage income groups ranked excluding stock-options (in percent)
      1995                               0.74         1.13        2.29         2.76       2.79          1.53            0.09        0.38        1.14         2.73        3.38         1.53
      1996                               1.08         1.61        3.22         3.59       3.36          1.94            0.13        0.52        2.31         3.79        3.99         1.94
      1997                               1.77         2.61        5.01         5.80       5.46          3.95            0.18        0.79        2.75         6.16        6.38         3.95
      1998                               1.79         2.61        4.85         5.53       4.81          3.11            0.21        0.89        2.99         6.24        5.63         3.11
      1999                               2.28         3.27        5.83         6.46       5.43          3.40            0.35        1.30        4.10         7.45        6.38         3.40
      2000                               3.31         4.74        8.46         9.66       10.02         7.01            0.42        1.68        5.00         9.28        11.43        7.01

Notes: Stock options are reported as wage income on tax returns when exercised.
In Panel A, wage earners are ranked by wage income including stock option exercises (as in Table D2), and fraction of stock options (in total wage income) are reported in percent.
In Panel B, wage earners are ranked by wage income excluding stock options and wage income shares are computed excluding stock options (in both numerator and denominator).
In Panel C, wage earners are ranked by wage income excluding stock-options but wage income shares are computed including stock option (in both numerator and denominator).
In Panel D, wage earners are ranked by wage income excluding stock options and the share of stock options (in percent) in total wage income (including stock options) are reported.
All details in Appendix Section D.
                             Table E1: Marginal Income Tax Rates in Canada, 1920-2000

                P90         P95          P98          P99        P99.5        P99.9       P99.95       P99.99     P99.999        Top
                 (1)         (2)          (3)          (4)        (5)          (6)          (7)          (8)        (9)          (10)
   1920          0.0         0.0          4.0          4.0        4.2         15.8         20.0         26.3       44.1          72.5
   1921          0.0         0.0          4.0          4.0        4.2         15.8         21.0         25.2       39.9          72.5
   1922          0.0         0.0          0.0          4.0        4.2         13.7         16.8         24.2       39.9          72.5
   1923          0.0         0.0          0.0          4.0        4.2         13.7         16.8         24.2       39.9          72.5
   1924          0.0         0.0          0.0          4.0        3.2         13.7         16.8         24.2       39.9          72.5
   1925          0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0        2.0          8.0         14.0         23.0       38.0          50.0
   1926          0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0        1.8          9.0         14.4         21.6       36.9          45.0
   1927          0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0        1.6          8.8         13.6         20.0       32.0          40.0
   1928          0.0         0.0          0.0          1.6        2.4          9.6         15.2         20.8       33.6          40.0
   1929          0.0         0.0          0.0          1.6        2.4          9.6         15.2         20.8       33.6          40.0
   1930          0.0         0.0          0.0          0.0        1.6          8.8         14.4         20.8       33.6          40.0
   1931          0.0         0.0          0.0          2.0        3.2          9.5         15.8         25.2       39.9          52.5
   1932          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        4.0         10.5         15.8         26.3       41.0          58.8
   1933          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        4.0          9.5         14.7         25.2       36.8          58.8
   1934          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        4.0         13.5         19.8         31.3       47.9          69.3
   1935          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        4.0         13.5         19.8         31.3       47.9          69.3
   1936          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        4.0         14.6         20.8         32.3       50.0          69.3
   1937          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        5.0         14.6         21.9         33.4       47.9          69.3
   1938          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.0        5.0         16.7         22.9         32.3       51.1          69.3
   1939          0.0         0.0          0.0          3.6        6.0         18.7         27.5         38.8       60.0          83.2
   1940          0.0         3.0          8.0         15.0       19.0         40.5         43.5         53.5       68.5          89.5
   1941          3.5         5.0         21.0         26.5       37.0         54.0         57.0         65.0       75.0          93.0
   1942         18.0        18.0         20.0         22.0       29.0         43.1         43.4         50.0       59.4          59.4
   1943         40.0        40.0         44.0         48.0       58.0         69.0         69.5         80.0       95.0          95.0
   1944         40.0        40.0         44.0         48.0       58.0         69.0         69.5         80.0       95.0          95.0
   1945         38.4        38.4         42.2         46.1       55.7         66.2         66.7         76.8       91.2          91.2
   1946         33.6        33.6         37.0         40.3       48.7         58.0         62.6         67.2       79.8          79.8
   1947         22.5        24.0         24.0         25.5       35.0         49.5         55.0         60.0       75.5          85.5
   1948         20.0        20.0         20.0         22.0       31.0         52.0         57.5         62.5       73.0          83.0
   1949         15.0        17.0         19.0         22.0       26.0         45.0         50.0         55.0       65.0          80.0
   1950         15.0        17.0         19.0         22.0       26.0         45.0         50.0         55.0       70.0          80.0
   1951         16.5        18.7         20.9         24.2       33.0         49.5         55.0         60.5       77.0          88.0
   1952         19.7        22.4         22.4         25.7       35.5         52.0         57.5         68.5       79.5          91.0
   1953         18.0        20.5         23.5         26.5       31.0         45.5         50.0         61.0       72.0          80.0
   1954         17.0        19.0         21.5         25.0       28.5         43.0         47.5         57.5       67.0          77.0
   1955         16.0        18.0         21.0         24.0       32.5         42.0         46.5         56.5       66.0          76.0
   1956         15.0        17.0         20.0         23.0       31.5         46.0         45.5         55.5       65.0          75.0
   1957         17.0        17.0         20.0         23.0       31.5         46.0         45.5         55.5       65.0          75.0
   1958         17.0        17.0         20.0         27.0       31.5         46.0         45.5         55.5       65.0          75.0
   1959         18.0        18.0         25.0         26.0       32.5         47.0         46.5         56.5       66.0          76.0
   1960         19.0        19.0         22.0         29.0       33.5         48.0         46.5         57.5       67.0          77.0
   1961         19.0        19.0         26.0         29.0       38.5         48.0         47.0         56.0       65.0          75.0
   1962         17.0        22.0         26.0         29.0       38.5         48.0         47.0         56.0       65.0          75.0
   1963         17.0        22.0         26.0         29.0       38.5         48.0         52.0         56.0       65.0          75.0
   1964         19.0        22.0         26.0         34.0       43.5         48.0         52.0         56.0       65.0          75.0
   1965         19.0        22.0         30.0         34.0       43.5         48.0         52.0         56.0       65.0          75.0
   1966         22.0        22.0         30.0         39.0       43.5         48.0         52.0         56.0       65.0          75.0
   1967         22.0        26.0         35.0         39.0       43.5         48.0         52.0         61.0       65.0          75.0
   1968         22.0        26.0         35.0         44.0       44.0         53.0         53.0         61.0       65.0          75.0
   1969         22.7        30.9         41.2         45.3       45.3         54.6         59.7         62.8       72.1          77.3
   1970         26.8        30.9         41.2         45.3       45.3         54.6         59.7         62.8       72.1          77.3
   1971         26.4        30.5         40.6         44.7       49.7         53.8         58.9         61.9       66.0          76.1
   1972         31.4        33.9         44.0         44.0       49.0         54.0         59.1         59.1       59.1          59.1
   1973         32.6        38.9         43.9         43.9       48.9         61.3         61.3         61.3       61.3          61.3
   1974         35.2        38.9         43.9         48.9       50.9         61.3         61.3         61.3       61.3          61.3
   1975         35.2        38.0         42.9         50.9       50.9         61.3         61.3         61.3       61.3          61.3
   1976         33.1        38.0         45.7         50.9       50.9         61.3         61.3         61.3       61.3          61.3
   1977         33.8        37.8         46.1         51.8       51.8         56.2         61.9         61.9       61.9          61.9
   1978         33.8        37.8         46.1         51.8       51.8         56.2         61.9         61.9       61.9          61.9
   1979         33.8        37.8         46.1         51.8       51.8         56.2         61.9         61.9       61.9          61.9
   1980         33.8        46.1         46.1         51.8       51.8         56.2         61.9         61.9       61.9          61.9
   1981         38.4        46.7         46.7         52.6       52.6         56.9         62.8         62.8       62.8          62.8
   1982         37.0        37.0         44.4         50.3       50.3         50.3         50.3         50.3       50.3          50.3
   1983         37.0        37.0         44.4         50.3       50.3         50.3         50.3         50.3       50.3          50.3
   1984         37.0        37.0         44.4         50.3       50.3         50.3         50.3         50.3       50.3          50.3
   1985         37.0        37.6         45.2         52.0       52.0         52.0         52.0         52.0       52.0          52.0
   1986         37.5        38.8         47.0         54.9       54.9         54.9         54.9         54.9       54.9          54.9
   1987         38.3        45.9         46.4         52.5       52.5         52.5         52.5         52.5       52.5          52.5
   1988         40.0        40.0         44.7         44.7       46.1         46.1         46.1         46.1       46.1          46.1
   1989         40.6        40.6         45.2         47.2       47.2         47.2         47.2         47.2       47.2          47.2
   1990         41.1        41.1         45.8         48.2       48.2         48.2         48.2         48.2       48.2          48.2
   1991         41.1        41.1         47.3         48.8       48.8         48.8         48.8         48.8       48.8          48.8
   1992         41.3        41.3         47.6         49.1       49.1         49.1         49.1         49.1       49.1          49.1
   1993         41.9        41.9         50.1         51.5       51.5         51.5         51.5         51.5       51.5          51.5
   1994         41.9        44.4         51.5         51.5       51.5         51.5         51.5         51.5       51.5          51.5
   1995         41.9        44.9         52.3         52.3       52.3         52.3         52.3         52.3       52.3          52.3
   1996         41.3        44.3         52.0         52.0       52.0         52.0         52.0         52.0       52.0          52.0
   1997         39.3        41.8         49.0         49.0       49.0         49.0         49.0         49.0       49.0          49.0
   1998         37.9        40.1         49.4         49.4       49.4         49.4         49.4         49.4       49.4          49.4
   1999         36.7        48.3         48.3         48.3       48.3         48.3         48.3         48.3       48.3          48.3
   2000         34.6        46.4         47.9         47.9       47.9         47.9         47.9         47.9       47.9          47.9

Notes: Computations by authors based on gross income interpolations (reported in Table B4) and tax law for each year.
Marginal tax rates are calculated assuming exemptions for a married person with two dependents and average deductions by gross
income level. Before 1972, only the federal income tax rates are reported as these included provincial income tax rates in most cases.
Beginning in 1972, the reported income rates include then-applicable provincial income tax, assuming residence in the largest province,
Ontario. All rates include applicable surtaxes and credits. All details in Appendix Section E.
                                         Table E2: Average Tax Rates in Upper Groups, 1920-2000


              P90-100      P95-100      P99-100     P99.5-100 P99.9-100 P99.99-100                  P90-95       P95-99      P99-99.5    P99.5-99.9 P99.9-99.99
                 (1)          (2)          (3)          (4)      (5)        (6)                        (7)          (8)         (9)         (10)       (11)
   1920         2.90         3.69         7.34         9.77     14.92     20.50                       1.00         0.80        0.82         4.39      11.33
   1921         2.35         2.95         5.92         8.03     12.76     22.14                       0.91         0.68        0.68         3.96       8.87
   1922         2.18         2.77         5.32         7.22     11.72     17.11                       0.93         0.75        0.71         3.24       9.14
   1923         2.26         2.91         5.22         7.05     11.78     18.01                       0.92         0.80        0.74         3.03       8.75
   1924         2.21         2.81         5.02         6.72     10.91     15.31                       0.95         0.82        0.76         2.99       8.71
   1925         1.47         2.06         4.36         5.88     10.38     16.22                       0.18         0.24        0.47         2.07       7.84
   1926         1.77         2.44         4.97         6.60     11.21     16.90                       0.17         0.25        0.58         2.50       8.44
   1927         1.77         2.43         4.86         6.42     10.97     16.59                       0.12         0.20        0.56         2.29       8.10
   1928         1.82         2.49         4.93         6.49     11.20     16.93                       0.07         0.15        0.64         2.29       8.37
   1929         1.74         2.38         4.68         6.15     10.66     16.62                       0.05         0.15        0.63         2.23       7.86
   1930         1.67         2.30         4.55         5.98     10.37     16.62                       0.03         0.12        0.55         1.95       7.37
   1931         1.87         2.59         5.39         7.21     12.98     22.57                       0.14         0.20        0.65         2.24       8.68
   1932         2.40         3.25         6.72         8.85     15.41     26.47                       0.43         0.43        1.25         3.03      10.25
   1933         2.21         2.99         6.21         8.25     14.42     26.19                       0.43         0.45        1.09         3.03       9.56
   1934         2.70         3.67         7.65        10.15     18.03     33.45                       0.43         0.45        1.24         3.29      11.00
   1935         2.75         3.75         7.87        10.44     18.60     35.17                       0.42         0.43        1.33         3.44      11.34
   1936         2.98         4.06         8.37        10.97     18.89     33.56                       0.42         0.47        1.48         3.85      12.05
   1937         3.23         4.42         9.16        12.06     21.17     42.51                       0.42         0.48        1.50         4.16      12.82
   1938         3.11         4.21         8.47        11.03     18.83     32.91                       0.38         0.50        1.79         4.53      12.54
   1939         3.17         4.30         8.82        11.51     19.48     33.28                       0.45         0.55        1.76         4.70      13.64
   1940         4.93         6.21        11.76        14.93     23.84     38.07                       2.01         1.91        4.23         8.04      16.55
   1941        10.74        13.90        25.71        31.10     42.30     54.88                       4.07         4.90       12.42        22.02      36.81
   1942        11.89        14.55        21.24        24.12     30.31     37.42                       6.54         9.55       14.23        19.23      27.25
   1943        24.08        29.03        41.74        47.06     58.50     70.81                      14.57        20.02       29.28        38.45      53.60
   1944        22.31        27.17        39.80        45.14     56.92     68.85                      13.08        18.44       27.69        36.58      52.30
   1945        19.73        24.35        36.16        41.32     53.04     64.52                      10.73        16.11       24.65        33.05      48.81
   1946        18.48        22.16        32.65        37.12     47.36     57.39                      11.00        14.44       22.62        30.10      43.78
   1947        14.92        18.68        27.73        31.89     41.97     54.30                       7.18        11.90       18.37        25.02      37.54
   1948        13.29        16.58        24.68        28.77     38.63     47.81                       6.68        10.61       15.45        21.96      35.69
   1949         9.99        13.04        20.89        24.69     33.56     41.68                       3.96         7.33       12.42        18.90      31.05
   1950        10.77        13.92        21.91        25.88     35.02     43.30                       4.50         7.95       12.81        19.68      32.40
   1951        12.81        16.18        25.34        29.71     40.19     48.72                       6.27         9.58       15.52        22.61      37.62
   1952        14.05        17.50        27.04        31.43     41.99     50.46                       7.46        10.82       17.46        24.36      39.18
   1953        12.90        15.77        23.94        27.68     36.41     41.75                       7.51        10.21       15.85        21.85      34.68
   1954        12.25        14.96        22.68        26.24     34.33     40.63                       7.13         9.63       14.86        20.92      32.23
   1955        12.05        14.68        22.22        25.72     33.50     37.57                       7.08         9.46       14.54        20.35      32.04
   1956        11.97        14.52        22.10        25.71     33.67     41.71                       7.24         9.51       14.34        20.39      31.03
   1957        12.13        14.67        22.13        25.68     33.29     40.96                       7.44         9.83       14.66        20.69      30.79
   1958        11.74        14.43        21.96        25.76     33.02     40.49                       6.72         9.50       14.06        21.08      30.61
   1959        12.28        15.07        22.75        26.77     33.88     41.36                       7.13        10.15       14.48        22.26      31.50
   1960        12.82        15.68        23.54        27.64     34.56     42.28                       7.55        10.68       15.16        23.31      32.12
   1961        13.00        15.87        23.38        27.29     33.64     39.95                       7.70        11.09       15.50        23.33      31.58
   1962        13.05        15.76        22.94        26.62     32.65     39.35                       8.10        11.29       15.64        23.02      30.62
   1963        13.55        16.33        23.69        27.51     33.82     41.01                       8.50        11.83       16.18        23.81      31.72
   1964        14.46        17.35        25.14        28.92     35.00     42.12                       9.17        12.50       17.63        25.31      32.83
   1965        14.40        17.16        24.69        28.34     34.22     40.87                       9.37        12.49       17.43        24.85      32.18
   1966        14.94        17.64        24.73        28.11     35.03     40.58                      10.04        13.37       18.16        24.10      33.38
   1967        16.56        19.50        27.27        30.77     36.26     40.72                      11.21        14.81       20.51        27.64      35.00
   1968        18.24        21.38        29.70        33.52     39.95     44.98                      12.56        16.36       22.28        29.85      38.56
   1969        19.64        22.89        31.51        34.91     41.97     45.97                      13.79        17.72       25.01        30.92      40.87
   1970        20.66        23.95        32.61        35.79     42.93     48.04                      14.84        18.86       26.60        31.89      41.58
   1971        21.40        24.64        32.84        35.58     41.92     46.56                      15.73        19.86       27.68        32.24      40.75
   1972        23.82        26.37        32.95        35.69     39.91     41.90                      19.33        22.47       27.65        33.34      39.33
   1973        24.52        27.15        33.80        36.63     41.07     44.33                      19.81        23.13       28.31        34.09      40.05
   1974        24.64        27.42        33.99        36.83     41.14     44.74                      19.70        23.49       28.56        34.33      40.00
   1975        24.32        27.04        34.26        37.47     42.64     47.47                      19.50        22.74       28.09        34.37      41.03
   1976        23.85        26.28        33.51        36.92     42.58     46.70                      19.72        22.26       27.23        33.63      41.24
   1977        23.61        26.05        32.39        34.89     39.86     42.81                      19.55        22.59       27.80        31.98      38.87
   1978        22.62        24.70        29.59        31.35     36.05     38.27                      19.10        21.98       26.33        28.49      35.27
   1979        22.50        24.48        29.05        30.16     33.14     33.74                      19.08        21.81       26.88        28.24      32.90
   1980        23.15        25.10        29.30        31.05     34.37     35.24                      19.70        22.57       25.86        28.84      33.97
   1981        24.01        26.14        30.46        32.12     33.90     33.66                      20.28        23.57       27.20        30.97      33.99
   1982        22.49        24.01        26.73        28.36     30.29     30.52                      19.76        22.28       23.26        26.87      30.18
   1983        22.32        23.83        26.80        28.76     31.05     31.48                      19.65        21.97       22.77        27.13      30.85
   1984        22.82        24.33        26.98        28.62     30.19     29.55                      20.13        22.60       23.44        27.38      30.42
   1985        23.64        25.21        28.45        29.65     31.30     31.30                      20.81        23.07       25.72        28.32      31.30
   1986        24.15        25.63        28.59        30.69     33.69     35.53                      21.48        23.67       24.17        28.49      32.90
   1987        24.63        25.88        28.23        30.12     33.51     35.98                      22.35        24.24       24.10        27.54      32.42
   1988        24.84        26.04        28.09        29.75     32.30     33.73                      22.46        24.37       24.13        27.46      31.51
   1989        26.16        27.53        30.12        31.92     34.37     35.48                      23.36        25.28       25.59        29.51      33.60
   1990        26.85        28.28        30.92        32.69     34.88     35.92                      24.01        26.15       26.68        30.71      34.26
   1991        26.39        27.78        30.55        32.34     34.44     34.16                      23.67        25.63       26.36        30.49      34.52
   1992        26.05        27.49        30.51        32.46     35.06     36.32                      23.29        25.21       26.01        30.28      34.36
   1993        25.92        27.41        30.59        32.75     35.45     36.29                      23.06        24.99       25.58        30.41      34.96
   1994        26.45        28.05        31.13        33.05     35.78     37.20                      23.37        25.69       26.67        30.74      35.04
   1995        26.95        28.65        32.17        34.43     36.91     37.51                      23.56        25.86       26.90        32.25      36.54
   1996        27.20        29.02        32.68        34.75     36.81     36.52                      23.46        25.97       27.62        32.82      36.88
   1997        27.62        29.58        33.13        34.92     36.69     36.31                      23.41        26.34       28.50        33.14      36.82
   1998        27.54        29.57        32.88        34.58     36.15     35.31                      23.02        26.36       28.37        32.93      36.52
   1999        27.29        29.26        32.24        33.78     34.97     33.32                      22.81        26.23       28.08        32.44      35.85
   2000        27.14        29.00        31.77        33.18     34.00     33.31                      22.77        25.92       27.77        32.16      34.32

Notes: Computations by authors based on tax return statistics. See Appendix Section E for details.
Average tax rate defined as ratio of total net taxes paid to total gross income reported (including taxable capital gains) for each group.
Average tax rates reported include both Provincial and Federal taxes and surtaxes as well as all income tax credits and deductions.
                                     $25,000                                                                                                                           100
   Income in 2000 Canadian Dollars




                                                                                                                                                                             Consumer Price Index (base 100 in 2000)
                                     $20,000




                                     $15,000

                                                                                                                                                                       10

                                     $10,000




                                      $5,000

                                                                                                              Average Income              Price Index

                                         $0                                                                                                                            1
                                               1920

                                                      1925

                                                             1930

                                                                    1935

                                                                           1940

                                                                                  1945

                                                                                         1950

                                                                                                1955

                                                                                                       1960

                                                                                                              1965

                                                                                                                     1970

                                                                                                                            1975

                                                                                                                                   1980

                                                                                                                                           1985

                                                                                                                                                  1990

                                                                                                                                                         1995

                                                                                                                                                                2000
                                                          FIGURE 1
                               Average Real Income and Consumer Price Index in Canada, 1920-2000
Source: Table A, columns Average income (in real 2000 Canadian dollars) and CPI (base 100 in 2000)
                             45%


                             40%
       Income Share (in %)




                             35%


                             30%


                             25%


                             20%


                             15%
                                   1920

                                          1925

                                                 1930

                                                        1935

                                                               1940

                                                                      1945

                                                                             1950

                                                                                    1955

                                                                                           1960

                                                                                                  1965

                                                                                                         1970

                                                                                                                1975

                                                                                                                       1980

                                                                                                                              1985

                                                                                                                                     1990

                                                                                                                                            1995

                                                                                                                                                   2000
                                                   FIGURE 2
                              The Top 5% Income Share (P95-100) in Canada, 1920-2000
Source: Table B1, col. P95-100.
                           25.0%

                           22.5%

                           20.0%
     Income Share (in %)




                           17.5%

                           15.0%

                           12.5%

                           10.0%

                           7.5%
                                                                             P90-95          P95-99        P99-100
                           5.0%
                                   1920

                                          1925

                                                 1930

                                                        1935

                                                               1940

                                                                      1945

                                                                              1950

                                                                                      1955

                                                                                             1960

                                                                                                    1965

                                                                                                           1970

                                                                                                                  1975

                                                                                                                         1980

                                                                                                                                1985

                                                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                                                              1995

                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                 FIGURE 3
   The Income Shares of P90-95, P95-99, and P99-100 in Canada, 1920-2000
Source: Table B1, columns P90-95, P95-99, and P99-100.
Estimates for P90-95 are only available from 1941 (because of high exemption levels in the pre-war period).
                             A. Income share of the top 0.1% (P99.9-100)                                                                                 B. Income share of the top 0.01% (P99.99-100)
 7%                                                                                                                          2.5%


 6%
                                                                                                                             2.0%
 5%

                                                                                                                             1.5%
 4%


 3%
                                                                                                                             1.0%

 2%
                                                                                                                             0.5%
 1%


 0%                                                                                                                          0.0%




                                                                                                                                    1920

                                                                                                                                           1925

                                                                                                                                                  1930

                                                                                                                                                         1935

                                                                                                                                                                1940

                                                                                                                                                                       1945

                                                                                                                                                                              1950

                                                                                                                                                                                     1955

                                                                                                                                                                                            1960

                                                                                                                                                                                                   1965

                                                                                                                                                                                                          1970

                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1975

                                                                                                                                                                                                                        1980

                                                                                                                                                                                                                               1985

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      1990

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             1995

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    2000
      1920

             1925

                    1930

                           1935

                                  1940

                                         1945

                                                1950

                                                       1955

                                                              1960

                                                                     1965

                                                                            1970

                                                                                   1975

                                                                                          1980

                                                                                                 1985

                                                                                                        1990

                                                                                                               1995

                                                                                                                      2000
                                                                                  FIGURE 4
                                                       The Income Shares of the Top Income Groups in Canada, 1920-2000


Source: Table B1, columns P99.9-100, and P99.99-100.
                                                      A. Profits, retained earnings, and dividends, 1926-1955                    B. Capital income and dividends in personal income, 1926-2000

                                        20                                                                                22%

                                                                                                                          20%
    Billions of Canadian 2000 dollars




                                        15                                                                                18%
                                                                                                                          16%

                                                                                                                          14%
                                        10
                                                                                                                          12%

                                                                                                                          10%
                                        5
                                                                                                                          8%

                                                                                                                          6%
                                        0                                                                                 4%

                                                                                                                          2%
                                        -5                                                                                0%
                                             1926


                                                     1929


                                                            1932


                                                                   1935


                                                                          1938


                                                                                 1941


                                                                                        1944


                                                                                               1947


                                                                                                       1950


                                                                                                                1953




                                                                                                                                1926

                                                                                                                                       1931

                                                                                                                                              1936

                                                                                                                                                     1941

                                                                                                                                                            1946

                                                                                                                                                                   1951

                                                                                                                                                                          1956

                                                                                                                                                                                 1961

                                                                                                                                                                                        1966

                                                                                                                                                                                               1971

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1976

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1981

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1986

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           1991

                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                Profits     After-tax Profits      Retained Earnings          Dividends                              Capital Income               Domestic Dividends



                                                                                                      FIGURE 5
                                                                          Capital Income in the Corporate and the Personal Sector in Canada


Source: Authors' computations based on National Income and Expenditure Accounts from CANSIM (2003)
                                    Panel A: 1946                                                                         Panel B: 2000
    100%                                                                                      100%
      90%                                                                                     90%
      80%                                                                                     80%
      70%                                                                                     70%
      60%                                                                                     60%
      50%                                                                                     50%
      40%                                                                                     40%
      30%                                                                                     30%
      20%                                                                                     20%
      10%                                                                                     10%
       0%                                                                                      0%
                P90-95



                           P95-99



                                        P99-99.5



                                                    P99.5-99.9



                                                                   P99.9-99.99



                                                                                 P99.99-100




                                                                                                     P90-95



                                                                                                                 P95-99



                                                                                                                              P99-99.5



                                                                                                                                          P99.5-99.9



                                                                                                                                                        P99.9-99.99



                                                                                                                                                                      P99.99-100
                  Wage Income       Entrepreneurial Income       Capital Income                          Wage Income      Entrepreneurial Income       Capital Income



                                                                 FIGURE 6
                                    Income Composition of Top Groups within the Top Decile in 1946 and 2000

Capital income does not include capital gains.
Source: Table C3, rows 1946 and 2000.
                                100%

                                90%

                                80%
     Wage Income Share (in %)




                                70%

                                60%

                                50%

                                40%

                                30%

                                20%

                                10%
                                                     P90-95          P95-99     P99-99.5          P99.5-99.9          P99.9-100
                                 0%
                                       1946


                                              1951


                                                     1956


                                                              1961


                                                                         1966


                                                                                1971


                                                                                           1976


                                                                                                     1981


                                                                                                               1986


                                                                                                                         1991


                                                                                                                                  1996
                                 FIGURE 7
    The Share of Wage Income in upper income groups in Canada, 1946-2000
Source: Table C3, cols. P90-95, P95-99, P99-99.5, P99.5-99.9, and P99.9-100
                                                                 2.50                                                                                        20%
         Ratio average salary to average non-salaried earnings



                                                                 2.25                                                                                        18%




                                                                                                                                                                   Fraction of salaried workers
                                                                 2.00                                                                                        16%


                                                                 1.75                                                                                        14%


                                                                 1.50                                                                                        12%


                                                                 1.25                                                                                        10%


                                                                 1.00                                                                                        8%
                                                                                      Ratio salaried to non-salaried earnings
                                                                 0.75                                                                                        6%
                                                                                      Fraction Salaried
                                                                 0.50                                                                                        4%
                                                                        1915


                                                                               1918


                                                                                       1921


                                                                                              1924


                                                                                                     1927


                                                                                                            1930


                                                                                                                   1933


                                                                                                                          1936


                                                                                                                                 1939


                                                                                                                                        1942


                                                                                                                                               1945


                                                                                                                                                      1948
                                   FIGURE 8
 Salary vs. Non-salaried Earners in Manufacturing Sector in Canada, 1915-1948
Source: Series D280-287 in Urquhart and Buckley (1965) and The Canada Yearbook, various years.
Salaried workers are employees whose compensation is fixed on an annual basis
Non-salaried workers are employees whose compensation is fixed on an hourly, daily, or weekly basis
Number of non-salaried workers for years 1925 to 1930 has been reduced by 5% because of a change
in the count of seasonal workers for these years.
                                  36%

                                  34%
       Wage Income Share (in %)




                                  32%

                                  30%

                                  28%

                                  26%

                                  24%

                                  22%

                                  20%
                                        1972

                                               1974

                                                      1976

                                                             1978

                                                                    1980

                                                                           1982

                                                                                  1984

                                                                                         1986

                                                                                                1988

                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                              1992

                                                                                                                     1994

                                                                                                                            1996

                                                                                                                                   1998

                                                                                                                                          2000
                                  FIGURE 9
          The Top 10% Wage Income Share (P90-100) in Canada, 1972-2000
Source: Table D2, Panel A, col. P90-100.
                                12.5%



                                10.0%
     Wage Income Share (in %)




                                7.5%



                                5.0%



                                2.5%

                                                                           P90-95        P95-99        P99-100
                                0.0%
                                        1972

                                               1974

                                                      1976

                                                             1978

                                                                    1980

                                                                           1982

                                                                                  1984

                                                                                         1986

                                                                                                1988

                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                              1992

                                                                                                                     1994

                                                                                                                            1996

                                                                                                                                   1998

                                                                                                                                          2000
                               FIGURE 10
The Wage Income Shares of P90-95, P95-99, and P99-100 in Canada, 1972-2000
Source: Table D2, Panel A, cols. P90-95, P95-99, and P99-100.
                      A. Wage income share of the top 0.1% (P99.9-100)                                                                 B. Wage income share of the top 0.01% (P99.99-100)
 5.0%                                                                                                             1.6%

 4.5%
                                                                                                                  1.4%
 4.0%
                                                                                                                  1.2%
 3.5%
                                                                                                                  1.0%
 3.0%

 2.5%                                                                                                             0.8%

 2.0%
                                                                                                                  0.6%
 1.5%
                                                                                                                  0.4%
 1.0%
                                                                                                                  0.2%
 0.5%

 0.0%                                                                                                             0.0%




                                                                                                                         1972

                                                                                                                                1974

                                                                                                                                       1976

                                                                                                                                              1978

                                                                                                                                                     1980

                                                                                                                                                            1982

                                                                                                                                                                   1984

                                                                                                                                                                          1986

                                                                                                                                                                                 1988

                                                                                                                                                                                        1990

                                                                                                                                                                                               1992

                                                                                                                                                                                                      1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                             1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                    1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                           2000
        1972

               1974

                      1976

                             1978

                                    1980

                                           1982

                                                  1984

                                                         1986

                                                                 1988

                                                                        1990

                                                                               1992

                                                                                      1994

                                                                                             1996

                                                                                                    1998

                                                                                                           2000
                                                                                  FIGURE 11
                                                                The Top Wage Income Shares in Canada, 1972-2000


Source: Table D2, cols. P99.9-100, and P99.99-100.
                                   10%

                                   9%

                                   8%
        Wage Income Share (in %)




                                   7%

                                   6%

                                   5%

                                   4%

                                   3%

                                   2%
                                                                     Canada     United States
                                   1%

                                   0%
                                         1972


                                                1975


                                                       1978


                                                              1981


                                                                        1984


                                                                               1987


                                                                                      1990


                                                                                                1993


                                                                                                       1996


                                                                                                              1999
                              FIGURE 12
   The Top 0.5% Wage Income Share in Canada and United States, 1972-2000
Source: Canada Table D2, col. P99.5-100
United States, Piketty and Saez (2003), Table IV, col. P99.5-100, updated to 2000
United States series are based on family units while Canadian series are based on individual units
                                12%


                                10%
     Wage Income Share (in %)




                                 8%


                                 6%


                                 4%


                                 2%

                                                           Francophones      Canada excluding Quebec
                                 0%
                                      1982


                                             1984


                                                    1986


                                                             1988


                                                                      1990


                                                                                1992


                                                                                         1994


                                                                                                 1996


                                                                                                        1998


                                                                                                               2000
                                                            FIGURE 13
                                The Top 1% Wage Income Share of Quebec Francophones Versus
                                         All Filers from the Rest of Canada, 1982-2000

Source: Table D4, Panel A and B, col. P99-100.
                                  A. Fraction of stock options in top wage income groups                                    B. Top 0.1% wage shares with and without stock options
                            40%                                                                                      5.0%

                                                                                                                     4.5%
                                              Stock options included in ranking, 2000
Fraction of Stock-options




                                              Stock options excluded in ranking, 2000                                4.0%
                            30%
                                              Stock options included in ranking, 1995                                3.5%
                                              Stock options excluded in ranking, 1995
                                                                                                                     3.0%

                            20%                                                                                      2.5%

                                                                                                                     2.0%
                                                                                                                                                   Stock options fully excluded
                                                                                                                     1.5%
                            10%                                                                                                                    Stock options in shares only (not in ranking)
                                                                                                                     1.0%
                                                                                                                                                   Stock options in ranking and shares
                                                                                                                     0.5%

                            0%                                                                                       0.0%




                                                                                                                                1995



                                                                                                                                          1996



                                                                                                                                                    1997



                                                                                                                                                                 1998



                                                                                                                                                                              1999



                                                                                                                                                                                            2000
                                     P90-95




                                                    P95-99




                                                                  P99-99.5




                                                                             P99.5-99.9




                                                                                          P99.9-99.99




                                                                                                        P99.99-100
                                                                                               FIGURE 14
                                                             The Role of Stock Options in the Surge in Top Wage Income Shares, 1995-2000

Sources:
For Panel A: Table D5, Panels A and D, rows 1995 and 2000.
For Panel B: Table D2, Panel A, col. P99.9-100, and Table D5, Panels B and C, col. P99.9-100.
                       100%

                       90%

                       80%

                       70%
   Marginal Tax Rate




                       60%

                       50%

                       40%

                       30%

                       20%

                       10%
                                                                          P90         P99           P99.9          P99.99         Top
                        0%
                              1920

                                     1925

                                            1930

                                                   1935

                                                          1940

                                                                 1945

                                                                        1950

                                                                               1955

                                                                                      1960

                                                                                             1965

                                                                                                     1970

                                                                                                            1975

                                                                                                                    1980

                                                                                                                           1985

                                                                                                                                  1990

                                                                                                                                         1995

                                                                                                                                                2000
                             FIGURE 15
Marginal Income Tax Rates in Canada for Various Percentiles, 1920-2000
Source: Table E1, cols. P90, P99, P99.9, P99.99, and Top.
Note: Year 1942 excluded because rates were reduced due to transition to a pay-as-you earn system
                              16%

                              14%

                              12%
        Income Share (in %)




                              10%

                              8%

                              6%

                              4%

                              2%
                                                                              Canada            United States
                              0%
                                    1920

                                           1925

                                                  1930

                                                         1935

                                                                1940

                                                                       1945

                                                                               1950

                                                                                      1955

                                                                                             1960

                                                                                                    1965

                                                                                                           1970

                                                                                                                  1975

                                                                                                                         1980

                                                                                                                                1985

                                                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                                                              1995

                                                                                                                                                     2000
                                FIGURE 16
    The Top 0.5% Income Share in Canada and the United States, 1920-2000
Source: Canada, Table B1, col. P99.5-100
United States, Piketty and Saez (2003), Table II, col. P99.5-100, updated to 2000
United States series are based on family units while Canadian series are based on individual units
                            A. Income share of the top 1% (P99-100)                                                                    B. Income share of the top 0.01% (P99.99-100)
 16%                                                                                                             2.5%


 14%                                                                                                             2.0%


 12%                                                                                                             1.5%


 10%                                                                                                             1.0%


  8%                                                                                                             0.5%
              K gains excluded             K gains only in share              K gains fully included                           K gains excluded            K gains only in share              K gains fully included
  6%                                                                                                             0.0%




                                                                                                                        1972

                                                                                                                               1974

                                                                                                                                      1976

                                                                                                                                             1978

                                                                                                                                                    1980

                                                                                                                                                           1982

                                                                                                                                                                  1984

                                                                                                                                                                         1986

                                                                                                                                                                                1988

                                                                                                                                                                                       1990

                                                                                                                                                                                              1992

                                                                                                                                                                                                     1994

                                                                                                                                                                                                            1996

                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1998

                                                                                                                                                                                                                          2000
       1972

              1974

                     1976

                            1978

                                    1980

                                           1982

                                                  1984

                                                         1986

                                                                1988

                                                                       1990

                                                                              1992

                                                                                     1994

                                                                                            1996

                                                                                                   1998

                                                                                                          2000
                                                                          FIGURE A1
                                   Income Shares with and without Capital Gains of Top Income Groups in Canada, 1972-2000


Source: Tables B1 and B3, cols. P99-100 and P99.99-100.
                 A. Wage income share of the top 10% (P90-100)                                                 B. Wage income share of the top 1% (P99-100)
 35.0%                                                                                     11%

                                                                                           10%

 32.5%
                                                                                           9%

                                                                                           8%
 30.0%
                                                                                           7%

                                                                                           6%
 27.5%

                                      Individuals          Families                        5%                                     Individuals          Families

 25.0%                                                                                     4%




                                                                                                 1982


                                                                                                        1984


                                                                                                                   1986


                                                                                                                           1988


                                                                                                                                     1990


                                                                                                                                                1992


                                                                                                                                                         1994


                                                                                                                                                                  1996


                                                                                                                                                                         1998


                                                                                                                                                                                2000
         1982


                1984


                        1986


                               1988


                                         1990


                                                    1992


                                                            1994


                                                                      1996


                                                                             1998


                                                                                    2000
                                                                  FIGURE A2
                                      Wage Income Shares for Individuals and Families in Canada, 1982-2000


Source: Table D2, Panels A and B, cols. P90-100 and P99-100.
                      45%

                      40%

                      35%
   Average Tax Rate




                      30%

                      25%

                      20%

                      15%

                      10%

                      5%

                      0%
                            1920

                                   1925

                                          1930

                                                 1935

                                                        1940

                                                               1945

                                                                      1950

                                                                             1955

                                                                                      1960

                                                                                             1965

                                                                                                     1970

                                                                                                            1975

                                                                                                                   1980

                                                                                                                          1985

                                                                                                                                 1990

                                                                                                                                        1995

                                                                                                                                               2000
                                                                P90-95              P95-99          P99-100


                            FIGURE A3
   Average Income Tax Rates in Canada within Top Decile, 1920-2000
Source: Table E2, cols. P90-95, P95-99, P99-100.
Notes: Average tax rates based on net taxes (including deductions and credits) divided by gross incomes.
In 1942, tax rate lower due to transition to pay-as-you earn system.
                      75%
                      70%
                      65%
                      60%
                      55%
   Average Tax Rate




                      50%
                      45%
                      40%
                      35%
                      30%
                      25%
                      20%
                      15%
                      10%
                      5%
                      0%
                            1920

                                   1925

                                          1930

                                                 1935

                                                        1940

                                                               1945

                                                                       1950

                                                                              1955

                                                                                     1960

                                                                                             1965

                                                                                                    1970

                                                                                                           1975

                                                                                                                  1980

                                                                                                                         1985

                                                                                                                                1990

                                                                                                                                       1995

                                                                                                                                              2000
                                                 P99-99.5             P99.5-99.9            P99.9-99.99           P99.99-100


                           FIGURE A4
Average Income Tax Rates in Canada within Top Percentile, 1920-2000
Source: Table E2, cols. P99-99.5, P99.5-99.9, P99.9-99.99, P99.99-100.
Note: Average tax rates based on net taxes (including deductions and credits) divided by gross incomes.
