                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            THE NEW COMPARATIVE ECONOMICS

                                          Simeon Djankov
                                         Edward L. Glaeser
                                           Rafael La Porta
                                     Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                           Andrei Shleifer

                                         Working Paper 9608
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9608


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




We are grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Olivier Blanchard, Rafael DiTella, Simon Johnson, Peter Murrell,
Katharina Pistor, Richard Posner, Dani Rodrik, Gerard Roland, Lawrence Summers, and Daniel Treisman
for helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Simeon Djankov, Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei
Shleifer. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without
explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
The New Comparative Economics
Simeon Djankov, Edward L. Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer
NBER Working Paper No. 9608
April 2003
JEL No. H1, K1, P1, P14, P16, P37, P5, P51

                                             ABSTRACT


In recent years, comparative economics experienced a revival, with a new focus on comparing
capitalist economies. The theme of the new research is that institutions exert a profound influence
on economic development. We argue that, to understand capitalist institutions, one needs to

understand the basic tradeoff between the costs of disorder and those of dictatorship. We then apply
this logic to study the structure of efficient institutions, the consequences of colonial transplantation,

and the politics of institutional choice.

Simeon Djankov                                           Edward L. Glaeser
The World Bank                                           Harvard University
1818 H Street, NW                                        315a Littauer Center
Washington, DC 20433                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
Sdjankov@worldbank.org                                   and NBER
                                                         Eglaeser@harvard.edu

Rafael La Porta                                          Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
Harvard University                                       Yale School of Management
M7 Littauer Center                                       135 Prospect Street
Cambridge, MA 02138                                      New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                                 and NBER
Rafael_Laporta@harvard.edu                               florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu

Andrei Shleifer
Harvard University
M9 Littauer Center
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
ashleifer@harvard.edu
I. Introduction.

       The traditional field of comparative economics deals mostly with the comparison of

socialism and capitalism2. Under socialism, the principal mechanism of resource allocation is

central planning. Under capitalism, this mechanism is the market. Comparative economics, which

dates back at least to the discussions of market socialism in the 1930s, asks under what

circumstances either the plan or the market delivers greater economic efficiency and equality.

       By the time socialism collapsed in Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union, this question lost

much of its appeal. It was clear that socialism produced misery and inefficiency – not to mention

mass murder by the communist dictators who practiced it. Capitalism, in contrast, produced growth

and wealth. With capitalism triumphant, is comparative economics dead?

       The answer, we argue in this paper, is NO. Traditional comparative economics has evolved

into a new field. This field shares with its predecessor the notion that by comparing alternative

economic systems, we can understand better what makes each of them work. But it sees the key

comparisons as being those of alternative capitalist models that prevail in different countries. Each

capitalist economy has many public and private institutions. These institutions function to choose

political leaders, to secure property rights, to redistribute wealth, to resolve disputes, to govern

firms, to allocate credit, and so on. Political economy over the last two centuries, as well as recent

empirical research, demonstrate that these institutions differ tremendously and systematically among

countries, with significant consequences for economic performance.            The analysis of these

differences is the subject of the new comparative economics.


       2
       This field has its own category in the Journal of Economic Literature, called Economic
Systems. The subcategories are capitalist systems, socialist systems, socialist institutions, other
economic systems and comparative economic systems.

                                                  1
        In thinking about these issues, it is best to start from first principles. Since the days of the

Enlightenment, economists agreed that good economic institutions must secure property rights,

enabling people to keep the returns on their investment, make contracts, and resolve disputes. Such

security encourages people to invest in themselves and in physical capital, and thereby fosters

economic growth. As Smith [1776] wrote, “in all countries where there is tolerable security [of

property], every man of common understanding will endeavor to employ whatever [capital] stock

he can command... In those unfortunate countries... where men are continually afraid of the violence

of their superiors, they frequently bury and conceal a great part of their [capital] stock ... in case of

their being threatened with any of those disasters to which they consider themselves as at all times

exposed.”

        But there are two sides to the security of property rights. On the one hand, investment must

be secured – typically by the government – from the expropriation by one’s neighbors: thieves,

competitors, or tort-feasors. Hobbes (1651) considered controlling private disorder – the war of all

against all – to be the central concern of the state. The problems of disorder – crime, ethnic

violence, squatter takings, bribery, investor expropriation, and so on – continue to plague modern

developing countries. On the other hand, a government capable of protecting property against private

infringement can itself become the violator and thief. Smith refers to the violence from “superiors;”

Montesquieu (1748) is even more explicit: “Great enterprises in commerce are not found in

monarchical, but republican governments... An opinion of greater certainty as to the possession of

property in these [republican] states makes [merchants] undertake everything...                Thinking

themselves sure of what they have already acquired, they boldly expose it in order to acquire more...

A general rule: A nation in slavery labors more to preserve than to acquire; a free nation, more to


                                                   2
acquire than to preserve.” In Enlightenment thinking, a crucial aspect of securing property rights

is the control of dictatorship.

        A fundamental problem of institutional design is the conflict between the twin goals of

controlling disorder and dictatorship. Hobbes, most fearful of disorder, favored absolutism, but

subsequent writers recognized that extreme solutions are generally suboptimal. The framers of the

U.S. constitution realized that dealing with disorder and localism through a more powerful central

government directly conflicts with the objective of restraining the sovereign (Hamilton, Madison,

and Jay 1788).      This concern with institutional design continues in modern writing, most

importantly in institutional economics (Hayek 1960, Olson 1965, 2000, Demsetz 1967, North 1981,

1990, North and Weingast 1989) and public choice (Buchanan and Tullock 1962). In addition,

empirical studies confirm the close relationship between good institutions and economic

development (De Soto 1989, De Long and Shleifer 1993, Besley 1995, Easterly and Levine 1997,

2003, Knack and Keefer 1995, Acemoglu et al. 2001, Rodrik et al. 2002).

        The interest in institutions revived with the collapse of socialism, and the transition of the

economies in Eastern Europe, the former Soviet Union, and China to capitalism. The transition

experience has been diverse. Many countries of Eastern and Central Europe, especially Poland,

Slovenia, Hungary, and the Czech Republic, successfully established both secure democracies and

many of the legal and regulatory institutions of capitalism during the 1990s. They grew rapidly, and

are expected to fully integrate into Europe over the next several years. Countries further East, such

as Romania and Russia, also moved to establish democracies and market institutions, but their

experience has been more complex. Some of the Asian countries, from Kazakhstan to China, did

not embrace democracy, but undertook significant economic reforms and grew, in China’s case


                                                  3
spectacularly. Finally, several transition economies, including Cuba, Belarus and many countries

of Central Asia, did not reform and stagnated.

       Early discussions of the transition experiences focused on the speed of reforms – big bang

versus gradualism – as a crucial determinant of performance. Although it is now clear that the

absence of reform – as in Belarus and Cuba – is associated with both economic and political

stagnation, the emphasis on speed turned out to be excessive. The important differences among

countries had more to do with the effectiveness of the newly created institutions (Murrell 1995).

The countries of Central Europe succeeded in creating successful institutions of both democracy

and a market economy. Russia – having moved as fast or faster on many of its reforms – also

established a successful democratic government, but faced greater problems of corruption and

capture, and began growing only recently.

       These divergent experiences raised many questions. Some of them dealt with controlling

disorder. How much government ownership is desirable? Poland, the Czech Republic, and Russia

privatized extensively; China retained large state industries, yet grew the fastest. How much should

governments regulate? Transition saw both successful regulation and degeneration of regulation

into corruption and selective abuse of new business (Frye and Shleifer 1997, Hellman, Jones, and

Kaufmann 2003, McKinsey 1999). How much should the government fight disorder at all? Many

writers saw public institutions as having limited use, and stressed private orderings as the means of

securing property and contract (McMillan and Woodruff 1999, Johnson, McMillan, and Woodruff

2002, Allen, Qian, and Qian 2003, Murrell 2003).

       Other questions focused on dictatorship. For starters, is democracy the best political system

for economic reform or is dictatorship efficient when radical change is required? China’s economic


                                                 4
success under communism, contrasted with the difficulties of Yeltsin’s democracy in Russia,

animated the advocates of one party rule; the successes of democracies of Central Europe pointed

in the opposite direction. Within democracies, do reforms proceed better under divided or

consolidated governments? Many economists assumed that consolidated government is better for

reforms, yet here again, the deeply divided governments of Central Europe had the most success

(Hellman 1998). Is a federal structure desirable from the viewpoint of economic transformation?

Scholars of China credited its federalism and resulting competition among regions with the success

of reforms (Jin and Qian 1998, Roland 2000); scholars of Russia saw its federalism and the resulting

conflict between the regions and the center as a key obstacle to stability (Shleifer and Treisman

2000, Blanchard and Shleifer 2001, Zhuravskaya 2000).

        What can one make of these questions? First, the standard economic questions of market

failure, and inefficiencies associated with it, have played virtually no role in the central debates of

transition. Rather, the central issues have all dealt with property rights: how these rights can best

be secured against both public and private expropriation? Second, we see in all these questions a

common tradeoff. On the one hand, there is the objective of controlling disorder, that pushes toward

greater state intervention. On the other hand, there is the goal of controlling dictatorship, that pushes

against state power. In the rest of the paper, we explore this tradeoff.

        To this end, we present a framework describing the tradeoff between dictatorship and

disorder, and apply it to the problem of social control of business. We argue that the four common

strategies of such control: private orderings, private litigation, regulation, and state ownership, can

be thought of as points on the institutional possibility frontier, ranked in terms of increasing powers

of the state. These strategies are associated with progressively diminishing social costs of disorder,


                                                   5
and progressively rising social costs of dictatorship. We use this framework to analyze efficient

institutional choice, and to argue that it provides useful empirical predictions as well as guidance

for reform.

       But the efficiency perspective is not the only way to think about institutional choice. A key

reason for institutional inefficiency is the transplantation of institutions through conquest and

colonization. Many countries have inherited their legal systems. An institution which in the origin

country respects the delicate tradeoff between dictatorship and disorder may not, once transplanted,

remain efficient. This view of colonial transplantation may shed light on the amazing consistency

with which a given country regulates different activities, as well as on some institutional

pathologies. In addition, as both the Marxist and the public choice literature have long recognized,

governments choose policies and institutions to benefits themselves – to stay in power and to get

rich. The politics of institutional choice may also explain the inefficiencies.

       We describe our framework in Section II and illustrate it in Section III. Section IV focuses

on transplantation, and Section V on politics. Section VI concludes.



II. Basic Framework.

       The two central dangers that any society faces are disorder and dictatorship. By disorder

we mean the risk to individuals and their property of private expropriation in the form of murder,

theft, violation of agreements, torts, monopoly pricing, and so on. Disorder, in this framework, is

also reflected in private subversion of public institutions, such as courts, through bribes and threats,

which allows private violators to escape penalties. By dictatorship we mean the risk to individuals

and their property of expropriation by the state and its agents in the form of murder, taxation,


                                                   6
violation of property, and so on. Dictatorship, in this framework, is also reflected in expropriation

through – rather than just by – the state, as with the use of regulators to eliminate entry by

competitors. Some phenomena, such as corruption, are reflections of both disorder and dictatorship:

in so far as individuals pay bribes to avoid penalties for harmful conduct, corruption is a reflection

of disorder, but in so far as officials create harmful rules to collect bribes from individuals seeking

to get around them, corruption is a cost of dictatorship.3

        Institutions function to control the twin dangers of dictatorship and disorder. We focus on

a fundamental tradeoff inherent in such control: a state that has enough powers to control disorder

also has enough for dictatorial abuse.

        Figure 1 – the basic building block of our analysis – depicts what we call the Institutional

Possibility Frontier (IPF) for a society or a sector within it. On the x-axis are the social losses from

a higher level of dictatorship (as opposed to gross amounts of such activities as taxation and

government expropriation), measured relative to a world with perfect property rights. On the y-axis

are the social losses from a higher level of disorder, again measured relative to a perfect property

rights benchmark. We measure the costs of dictatorship and disorder in the same units of “social

losses” to think about the tradeoff. The IPF reflects the institutional possibilities of the society: how

much disorder can be reduced with an incremental increase in the power of the state. As in all

standard neoclassical theory, the IPF is convex to the origin. In our framework, an institution – such

as a legal or a regulatory system – is a point on the IPF.

        In thinking about institutions, economists usually distinguish between written rules and their



        3
        Our discussion of dictatorship and disorder is related to the literature on rent-seeking
and corruption (Tullock 1967, Posner 1974, Shleifer and Vishny 1993, Ades and DiTella 1997).

                                                   7
enforcement. In our framework, this separation disappears: a rule comes with its own enforcement

properties, reflected in the equilibrium degree of dictatorship and disorder arising


                                               Figure 1: Institutional possibilities
              Social losses due to
             private expropriation
                  (Disorder)


                                            Private orderings


                                               Independent judges



                                     Total loss                       Institutional possibility frontier (IPF)
                                     minimization



                                                                              Regulatory state
                                                                                        Socialism
                                                                45o

                                                                             Social losses due to state
                                                                             expropriation (Dictatorship)




when this rule is used. If Russia regulates its monopolies through an anti-trust agency, there will

be a certain residual amount of market failure, the equilibrium disorder, given by the waste from

actual monopolists escaping the law and exercising their market power, as well as from their bribing

the regulators to let them do so. There will also be a certain amount of public abuse of the private

sector, the equilibrium dictatorship, associated with monopolists using the regulator to restrict entry

by competitors, as well as from the agency’s officials charging non-monopolists bribes in exchange

for agreeing not to harass them.

       The downward sloping 45 degree line in Figure 1 holds constant the total social costs of

dictatorship and disorder. Its point of tangency with the IPF is the efficient institutional choice for


                                                                8
a given society or a sector within a society. In much of our discussion, we focus on the efficient

institutional choice for a given IPF. Efficient institutions could evolve from democratic pressures

(Wittman 1989), from the influence of growth-seeking interest groups such as merchants (DeLong

and Shleifer 1993), from a Coasian negotiation among the members of the elite, such as the Magna

Carta or the American Constitutional bargain (Becker 1983), or from a long term evolutionary

process described by Hayek (1960). Moreover, looking at efficient institutional choices does not

mean that, in equilibrium, the society eliminates the problems of dictatorship and disorder. It does

not. Consistent with Coase (1960), even the most efficient institutional structure retains residual

levels of both dictatorship and disorder.

       The shape and the location of the IPF -- and hence the efficient choice -- varies across

activities within a society, as well as across societies.4       An activity that involves repeated

interactions among participants of roughly similar resources, and with little technological change,

such as diamond trading, can achieve order with little dictatorship (Bernstein 1992). In contrast, an

activity like security issuance, involving players with few repeated interactions and massive

inequalities of power, is vulnerable to much more disorder for a given level of police.

       Looking across societies, the differences loom even larger. The institutional possibilities of

modern Sweden, or even China, are far superior to those of Albania or Congo. Sweden can pursue


       4
          Empirical growth studies generally confound the location of the IPF and the choice of a
point on it under the rubric of “institutions,” but for us it is important to draw the distinction. In
these empirical studies, “institutions” are measured with a variety of objective and subjective
assessments of institutional quality of a country, such as law and order, risk of government
expropriation, rule of law, corruption, efficiency of the judiciary, or some combination of these
variables (Easterly and Levine 1997, 2003, Hall and Jones 1999, Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-
Lobaton 2002). These variables are highly correlated with each other, and have proven to be
strong predictors of per capita income, economic growth, and many other “good” outcomes, but
it is not entirely clear what they measure conceptually.

                                                   9
either extreme laissez-faire policies or toy with socialism and still achieve decent outcomes, Albania

can choose a perfect balance of dictatorship and disorder for its IPF, but property rights would

remain insecure. For lack of a better term, we refer to location of the IPF as “civic capital,” with

the idea that societies with more such capital, and an IPF closer to the origin, are better capable of

achieving cooperation among their members. We use the term “civic capital” rather than social

capital because we have something similar but broader in mind. We stick with the idea of capital

because investments in civic capital pay off in the medium run.

       Recent historical research has made progress in understanding the determinants of civic

capital. Landes (1998) continues the great tradition of stressing the influence of culture. Easterly

and Levine (1997) and Alesina, Baqir and Easterly (1999) show how ethnic heterogeneity, and the

resulting ethnic strife, reduce institutional quality. Diamond (1997) and Engerman and Sokoloff

(1997, 2002) stress the role of factor endowments and the physical environment in shaping – and

limiting – the institutional opportunities of a society. For instance, the environment of Latin

America, unlike that of North America, was most hospitable to large scale agricultural technologies

that bred significant economic and social inequalities, causing a long-lasting damage to the regions’s

institutions. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) argue that the mortality of European settlers

shaped settlement patterns and institutional outcomes. Putnam (1993) maintains that the long run

history of cooperation in a community -- its social capital -- determines the ability of its members

to cooperate in the production of public goods.

       But there are some other, more prosaic, determinants of civic capital. Technology of

production matters. When the scale of production and the pace of interaction among individuals

rise, the opportunities for private expropriation expand, moving the IPF out. The technology of


                                                  10
government repression – the efficiency of tax extraction and the monopoly on power – influence

both the location and the shape of the IPF, because they determine how much dictatorship is needed

to reduce disorder both on average and at the margin. Last but not least, the level of human capital

in the society is itself likely to determine the location of the IPF, as better educated and informed

people may be more likely to solve problems without violence.

        Admittedly, civic capital is a somewhat vague concept, but many aspects of it have been

measured. We have already referred to the measurement of historical influences, which are

predetermined for many policy choices. Other aspects of civic capital, such as human capital,

technology, or inequality, can be changed in the medium run through public investments or large

interventions, such as land reform. For many reforms that economists focus on, however, including

social control of business, the location of the IPF is fixed in the short run. For the analysis of such

reforms, civic capital is a constraint rather than a choice.

        To think about the IPF and institutional choices in more concrete terms, consider the problem

of social control of business. Suppose that “the society” wishes to reduce disorder from monopoly

pricing, torts, predatory tactics, etc. There are four distinct strategies of such control, involving ever

growing powers of the officials vis-a-vis private individuals: market discipline, private legal action

through courts, public enforcement through regulation, and state ownership. They are shown as

points on the IPF in Figure 1. These four strategies are not mutually exclusive: competition and

regulation often operate in the same market, as do private litigation and public regulation.

Moreover, intermediate strategies of social control of business, such as private litigation to enforce

public rules, are available.     Nonetheless, these four categories provide a useful analytical

classification.


                                                   11
        To illustrate these categories, take the example of social control of securities issues. Suppose

that the society – through its institutions – has an interest in having broad and liquid securities

markets and, to this end, deems it desirable that firms issuing equity disclose accurate information

about their circumstances. The society has four choices.

        First, it can rely on the incentives of issuers themselves, or of their underwriters, to disclose

the truth about the securities because, to raise funds in the future, they need to establish a reputation

for credibility. This is the market discipline solution.

        Second, the society can rely on private suits by buyers of securities who feel that they have

been cheated by the issuers, under the general doctrines of contract or tort. For this, the society

needs a court and a judge. The question for the court is whether the issuer disclosed inaccurate

information or, alternatively, negligently failed to provide material information.

        Third, the society can designate a public regulatory agency, which mandates what should be

disclosed by security issuers, inspects their books and disclosures, and penalizes issuers and

underwriters who break the regulations. Between private litigation and full-scale regulation, the

regulatory agency can establish the rules for security issuance, but leave the enforcement of these

rules to private litigation by the wronged investors.

        Fourth, the society can nationalize security issuance. A company wishing to raise capital

would turn over the inspection, disclosure, and sale of securities to the state. These are the four

basic institutional strategies for the enforcement of good conduct.

        These four basic strategies differ in the degree of public control. With competition and

private orderings, there is basically no public involvement. With courts, there is a role for impartial

judges enforcing the rules of good behavior. These rules do not even need to come from legislation,


                                                   12
but may instead derive from custom or from judge-made common law. Even so, there is a public

agent – the judge – who has at least some decision-making authority. With regulators, control by

the state rises sharply. The state now writes the rules, inspects the product before it is sold, and

possibly penalizes sellers for delivering a bad product. Both the scope of government activity, and

its centralization, are greatly increased relative to the judges. Finally, with state ownership,

government takes complete control over an activity.

       From the perspective of the tradeoff between dictatorship and disorder, the principal strength

of market discipline as a method of enforcing good conduct is that it is free of public enforcers.

There is no possibility of politicization of rules of conduct, of corruption, of costly and delayed

enforcement of rules, of random or compromised choice of one competitor over another. But market

discipline often fails to control disorder. Market participants use their economic, political, or social

resources to damage their customers and rivals, relying on methods ranging from deception to

predatory pricing to monopoly pricing to social exclusion to outright theft or violence. One man’s

peaceful private orderings become another man’s death in the hands of the mafia. When market

discipline can successfully control disorder and avoid Hobbesian anarchy, it works best because it

minimizes the social costs of dictatorship. As a corollary, any case for public intervention relies

crucially on the presumptive failure of market discipline to control disorder.

       This case for the effectiveness of private orderings and market discipline is often compelling.

Neighbors resolve disputes among themselves, without any government intervention, because they

need to get along with each other over long stretches of time (Ellickson 1991). Industries form

associations that assure quality for consumers, and penalize cheaters among themselves to assure

that consumers continue to patronize the industry (Greif 1989, 1993, 1994, Bernstein 1992).


                                                  13
Families, cities, and ethnic groups establish reputations in the marketplace, and penalize reputation-

threatening misconduct by their members. To the extent that market discipline can control disorder,

regulation, or even courts, are unnecessary.

       But this is far from always being the case. Market pressures may not get rid of all

monopolies. Employers may under-invest in safety and then blame accidents on an injured worker’s

own carelessness (Fishback and Kantor 2000). A fraudulent stock issue can separate investors from

their money very quickly, undermine confidence in markets, and run off with the cash. In these

instances, to control disorder, societies may efficiently accept a higher level of government

intervention and dictatorship.

       The traditional libertarian response to these problems is to move one notch toward more

dictatorship by turning to the enforcement of good conduct through private litigation over contracts

and torts. Injured employees can sue their employers for harm. Investors can sue issuers and

underwriters for damages when they believe that representations about securities were false or

incomplete. Ideally, a judge would recognize quickly whether investors have been misled, and

compel the issuer to compensate investors for their losses. Such judicial enforcement of contracts

and torts is seen by libertarians as a sufficient guarantee of security of property.

       Private litigation has many advantages. In principle, such litigation is of no special interest

to the government, and hence disputes can be resolved apolitically, with no favors to influential

parties. Judges may also develop expertise in contract enforcement (as well as in handling tort

cases), and hence address problems efficiently and expeditiously. This is what Coase (1960),

Nozick (1974), and Posner (1985) have in mind in making the case for courts.

       The reality of litigation is, unfortunately, not so perfect, and the tradeoff between dictatorship


                                                  14
and disorder is helpful for thinking about courts as well. As with private orderings, the powerful

and not the just often get their way in court (Galanter 1974). Some mechanisms of influencing

courts, such as hiring good lawyers, delaying proceedings, and (in some instances) seeking political

help, are entirely legal. But judges are also bribed with cash, benefits, or promises of promotion,

as well as threatened with violence if they do not favor the strong (Dal Bó, Dal Bó, and Di Tella

2002). When the rich and the politically connected influence the path of justice, litigation over

contracts and torts cannot be counted on for enforcing socially desirable conduct (Glaeser,

Scheinkman, and Shleifer 2003).

       A common way of protecting judges from influence is to formalize laws and procedures

through codes, so as to minimize judicial discretion and the potential for subversion.          Such

strategies can be thought of as a move along the IPF, as they reduce disorder but also offer the state

more control over the outcomes of litigation. A related mechanism for controlling private subversion

of courts is to make judges employees of the state, whose career concerns protect them from

succumbing to outside influence. But as judges become more dependent on the state, the risk of

politicization of their decisions rises, and so do the social losses from dictatorship.

        This brings us to the third strategy of enforcing good conduct, government regulation.

Regulation has been an anathema to libertarians such as Nozick (1974), who see a sharp contrast

between the enforcement of rules by judges and that by regulators. But in fact, the change to a

higher level of dictatorship is incremental, and there is no profound conceptual distinction between

litigation and regulation. The libertarian distinctions miss Coase’s (1960) realization that the costs

of enforcement shape the optimal institutional choice.

       To make this continuity clear, note that a step short of full-fledged public enforcement, there


                                                  15
is an important intermediate strategy, namely private enforcement of public rules. The government

can create rules governing private conduct and then leave their enforcement to private litigation.

Private enforcement of such specific statutes through litigation is often considerably cheaper than

that of contracts or torts. It may be efficient, for example, for the government to specify appropriate

safety standards but to let workers or consumers sue when they feel the standards are violated.

Likewise, the government can mandate specific disclosures by a company issuing shares, but then

leave litigation to investors. It may be cheaper for investors to establish in a trial that the company

has failed to reveal specific information whose disclosure was mandated by law, than to prove the

issuer’s negligence in the absence of a statute.

        Private enforcement of public statutes addresses a number of problems of disorder inherent

in pure litigation. First, the burdens on the courts and the plaintiffs of proving liability (or the lack

thereof) fall considerably when the statutes describe precisely what facts need to be established to

do so. Second, subversion of judges becomes more difficult when they lose discretion. It may be

relatively easy to convince a judge – by persuasion or bribery – that a security issuer who concealed

important information from investors is not liable when there are no specific rules as to what needs

to be disclosed. It is much harder to convince the same judge when the law states specifically what

must be disclosed. Perhaps for these reasons, private enforcement of public rules is a highly

efficient strategy of enforcing good conduct in some situations (Black and Kraakman 1996, Hay and

Shleifer 1996, Hay, Shleifer and Vishny 1998).5



        5
        La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002b) show that this is a key strategy for
enforcing good conduct in security issuance in many countries. Barth, Caprio, and Levine
(2003) show that private enforcement of public disclosure rules is a key strategy of bank
supervision.

                                                   16
       At the same time, the creation of public rules – even rules that are enforced privately – raises

the risks of dictatorship. Such rules can be used to expropriate politically weak and to favor the

politically strong. Mandatory safety precautions in factories, mines, and meat-packing plants during

the progressive era in the U.S. at the beginning of the 20th century are sometimes interpreted as an

attempt by large established firms to restrict entry by smaller rivals by raising these rivals’ costs of

regulatory compliance (Libecap 1992, Coppin and High 1999).

       Compared to the enforcement strategies described above, public regulation has a number of

advantages in controlling disorder. First, unlike judges, public regulators can be expert and

motivated to pursue social objectives in specific areas. This, indeed, has been the principal

argument for public regulation of securities markets (Landis 1938, Johnson, Glaeser, and Shleifer

2001). A regulator can become expert, for example, in what constitutes material omission from a

prospectus, present market participants with specific rules, and then enforce them by imposing its

own sanctions or by convincing courts to adopt its rules. Second, to the extent that regulators are

empowered to complete the law, they may have an enforcement advantage relative to judges by

acting preemptively (Pistor and Xu 2002). Third, because regulators can be incentivized by the

sovereign to enforce social policy, they can in principle be much more difficult to subvert than the

disinterested judges with either persuasion or bribes (Glaeser and Shleifer 2003). These differences

render public enforcement more efficient than private enforcement in some cases.

       Alas, public regulation obviously has problems, the key one being public abuse of market

participants by the officials who are either pursuing their own political interests or are captured by

a particular group, including the regulated industry itself (Stigler 1971). Although motivated

regulators might be more difficult to subvert than judges, regulated industries have developed a


                                                  17
range of techniques to turn regulation into a mechanism of protecting industry rents rather than

public welfare. The risks from dictatorship clearly rise as those from disorder decline.

       The basic implication of our theory is that regulation is only necessary when the level of

disorder is too high for private orderings and even courts to deal with successfully. The case for

regulation is most compelling when the problem of inequality of weapons between private parties

involved in a transaction is severe. Securities issuance is one instance; workplace safety is perhaps

another. In contrast, entry of new firms into competitive markets is unlikely to require regulatory

control (De Soto 1989, Djankov et al. 2002). Most regulations of competitive labor markets are

likewise difficult to justify on efficiency grounds (Botero et al. 2003).

       Finally, in some situations, nothing short of government ownership can eliminate disorder.

If monopolies cannot be tamed by competition or regulation, if quality is essential but cannot be

assured except with full state control, if public safety is jeopardized – then there can be a plausible

case for state ownership. Hart, Shleifer and Vishny (1997) argue that prisons might be properly

publicly- rather than privately-owned because the risk that private jailers mistreat inmates is too

high. This is so because inmates have few legal rights and cannot count on the market, the courts,

or even the regulators to protect them. Likewise, the military and the police tend to be state-

controlled because the likelihood of disorder from private control is too high. The case for the

“state monopoly on arms” is just a reflection of a particular area where the tension between

dictatorship and disorder is resolved by going to an extreme.

       Although in some instances the case for government ownership as a means of dealing with

disorder is compelling, state ownership has the obvious problems of dictatorship, illustrated by the

miserable performance record of public enterprises and the benefits of privatization (Lopez-de-


                                                  18
Silanes 1997, La Porta and Lopez-de-Silanes 1999, Megginson and Netter 2001, Djankov and

Murrell 2002). The failure of state socialism as an economic system reveals most dramatically the

consequences of dictatorship taken to an extreme, in which all economic problems are solved to

maintain political control by the communist party (Kornai 1992).

        In summary, the framework presented in Figure 1 enables us to discuss systematically the

alternative forms of social control of business. As a consequence, it may provide some useful input

into thinking about efficient institutional choices. In the next section, we put the model to work and

examine three episodes of institutional design. In the following two sections, we move away the

assumption of efficiency, and examine alternative views of institutional choice.



III. Applications.

        We examine three applications of the basic framework: the divergence between France and

England in the 12th and 13th centuries in their choices of legal systems, the rise of the regulatory state

in the progressive era U.S., and post-communist transition. In all three instances, we focus on

efficient institutional choice given the institutional possibilities of a country.



Legal Origins

        In the 12th and 13th centuries, England and France established the foundations of their modern

legal systems. These systems took rather different forms. England developed a system of common

law, characterized by fact finding by juries, relatively independent judges, infrequent appeals, and

the reliance on precedents and judge-made law rather than strict codes in reaching judicial decisions.

France, following the Roman tradition, adopted a system of civil law, characterized by fact finding


                                                   19
by state-employed judges, automatic superior review of decisions, and later the reliance on

procedural and substantive codes rather than judicial discretion. Over the centuries, some of these

differences have been emasculated, others reinforced, but the basic differences among the two legal

systems survive to this day.

       Why did the two systems diverge? Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) argue that a crucial feature

of any legal system is its vulnerability to subversion by the powerful (disorder). The greater are the

pressures on courts to rule for the strong rather than the just, the more centralization (dictatorship)

is needed to counter these pressures. On the other hand, greater centralization raises the cost of

dictatorship: sovereigns rule according to their personal preferences and biases rather than the

community standards or laws that the jurors follow.

       In the 12th and 13th centuries, France was relatively decentralized and disorderly, with local

notables successfully able to subvert all local institutions to their own advantage. England, in

contrast, was relatively peaceful and the king maintained control over the entire country. To counter

disorder, it was efficient for France to adopt a legal system with higher dictatorship than England,

even at the cost of greater scope for sovereign abuse of the law.

       Figure 2 illustrates the relevant choices, where we think of the French IPF as a shift out of

the English IPF, but also as a tilt that made marginal increases in dictatorship highly productive in

reducing disorder. The efficient choice for France was a legal system with a higher level of

dictatorship. In equilibrium, France had a higher level of disorder as well, consistent with the notion

that its institutional possibilities were less attractive. Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) further show that

state employed judges, reluctance to rely on independent jurors, codification of rules and procedures,

and nearly-automatic appeals are all complementary aspects of this choice of greater centralization


                                                  20
and dictatorship to counter the problems of disorder.


                                       Figure 2: Legal origins

                   Disorder
                                        France




                                                     Civil law

                              Common
                                law




                                   England

                                                                 Dictatorship




The Rise of the Regulatory State

       Before 1900, significant commercial disputes in the United States were generally resolved

through private litigation over contracts and torts. Courts ruled on corporate liability in industrial

accidents, on anti-competitive practices such as railroad rebates, on safety of foods and medicines,

and even on the constitutionality of the income tax. Between 1887, when Congress passed the

Interstate Commerce Act, and 1917, when participation in the war put an end to the progressive

movement, this situation changed radically. Over thirty years, reformers eroded 19th century belief

that private litigation was the sole appropriate response to social wrongs. During the progressive

era, regulatory agencies at both the state and the federal level took over the social control of



                                                   21
competition, anti-trust policy, railroad pricing, food and drug safety, workplace safety, and many

other areas. The regulatory state was born in the United States.

       Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) interpret this experience using a model intimately related to the

framework of this paper. They argue that the pre-Civil-War United States was a relatively stable

country, without great inequality among the potential litigants, so private litigation was an efficient

strategy of social control of business (see Figure 3).           But massive industrialization and

commercialization of the American economy after the Civil War severely undermined courts as the

sole institution securing property rights. The rise of railroads and large firms greatly increased

disorder: these firms maimed passengers and workers, destroyed their competitors through

aggressive and possibly wasteful tactics, occasionally poisoned and deceived customers, and so on.

The growth in disorder resulting from the greater scale of enterprise and rising inequality of wealth

shifted the IPF of the economy out, rendering the existing system of private dispute resolution

inefficient. The robber barons commanded economic and political resources that overwhelmed

consumers, workers, or competitors who complained in court. They did so both legally – by hiring

superior lawyers, and illegally – by bribing judges and legislators. Figure 3 illustrates the changes

in the U.S. economy during the post-civil-war era, as well as the regulatory reform. Technological

change shifted the IPF out, but also twisted it so that the reduction in disorder from a marginal rise

in dictatorship increased. When courts were subverted but regulations were new and relatively

benign, marginal regulation was highly productive. As Figure 3 shows, the efficient institutional

choice in the American economy in response to this shift in the IPF called for more regulation to

provide the countervailing power to big business.




                                                  22
                                        Figure 3: Progressive reforms

                   Disorder



                                         Post-gilded age




                                Pre-gilded age


                                                                    Dictatorship




       Glaeser and Shleifer (2003) interpret the rise of regulation, of litigation over statutes rather

than contracts and torts, as well as many other reforms in the U.S. economy during the progressive

era, as precisely such a shift toward the newly-efficient system of social control of business.     In

equilibrium, disorder may well have increased relative to the mid-19th century – this by itself does

not imply that the progressive reforms were ineffective. Dictatorship, as noted by Stigler (1971) and

his followers, increased as well. The greater power of the state has led to greater benefits of state

capture, and more such capture in equilibrium. Still, the reforms have moved the U.S. economy to

a better point than it was at in 1880, as much of the evidence on economic and social progress during

the reform period indicates.




                                                     23
Institutions in Transition

        At least some aspects of the transition of Eastern Europe and the Former Soviet Union from

socialism to capitalism can be interpreted using our framework. The crucial – though often

insufficiently emphasized – aspect of the transition is the collapse of communism, and therefore a

sharp decline in dictatorship through most of the region. Figure 4 presents our view of Russia, East

European countries, and the FSU non-reformers (with Belarus taken as an example), in the first few

years of transition. Two crucial factors separate Russia from FSU non-reformers on the one hand,

and from East European reformers on the other.          First, Russia has experienced a much more

dramatic decline in dictatorship and, consistent with our model, a rise in disorder, than countries like

Belarus and Uzbekistan. Second, Russia’s IPF is probably less attractive than that of the East

European countries and, at the same time, its shift along the IPF was probably greater.

        According to Kornai (1992), the communist party is the critical mechanism of keeping

economic, political, and social order in socialist countries. Such police order comes at the expense

of personal, economic, and political freedom, and as such has enormous human costs, but it is order

nonetheless. As the communist control of the Russian economy and society was eliminated by

Gorbachev and Yeltsin, so were the mechanisms of keeping order. The immediate benefits of

disorder – the free press, the growth of entrepreneurship, the tremendous rise of ties to the rest of

the world – were apparent, but so were the costs. The initial impact of the fall of economic

dictatorship was extreme economic disorganization (Murrell 1992, Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny

1992, Blanchard and Kremer 1997), but even as markets began to work, the lack of law and order

was manifest. The unofficial economy reached perhaps as much as 40% of the total (Johnson,

Kaufmann, and Shleifer 1997). The nascent public institutions were subverted by the powerful


                                                  24
through crime, corruption and political influence (Shleifer 1997, Hellman, Jones, and Kaufmann

2003, Sonin 2003). Most importantly, the U.S.S.R. disintegrated and Russia itself – like the U.S.

prior to the adoption of its constitution and Argentina today – experienced severe problems of

localism, with regional governments undermining both national finances and law and order (Shleifer

and Treisman 2000, Zhuravskaya 2000). Russia’s transition can be plausibly described as a sharp

move up along its IPF.


                                        Figure 4: Transition
                      Disorder



                                           Russia, 1995




                                                                    Russia, 1990
                                                                    Belarus, 1990-95
                                             Eastern Europe, 1995

                                                          Eastern Europe, 1990

                                                                        Dictatorship




       This experience can be usefully contrasted with that of non-reforming states, such as Belarus

and Uzbekistan, where communist dictatorship was replaced by personal dictatorship, but many of

the controlling institutions of the communist state remained intact. These countries still utterly lack

freedom, but they also did not suffer as sharp a rise in disorder. Tellingly, Belarus and Uzbekistan

retained extremely small unofficial economies, a clear indicator of pervasive state control (Johnson,


                                                   25
Kaufmann, and Shleifer 1997). They also did not experience as large a decline in officially

measured output, again consistent with preserving order. On the other hand, these countries failed

to reap the benefits of economic transition from communism, and over the decade performed very

poorly.

          Compared to Russia, Eastern Europe had a more attractive IPF. East European countries

lived through a shorter spell of communism, and have, in the cases of the Czech Republic, Hungary,

and Poland, rebelled against their Soviet occupiers and local dictators.         They had many more

independent organizations and, in the case of Poland, an independent Church. They were also more

integrated into Western Europe, and from the beginning anxious to join the European community,

which imposed rules of cooperation restricting dictatorship and disorder. Compared to Russia (or

Yugoslavia), East European countries also did not move as far up along their IPFs, perhaps because

they did not face as severe problems of decentralization and localism.

          A plausible case can be made that Russia in the 1990s stayed on its institutional possibility

frontier. It has moved away from the communist dictatorship, but arguably overshot initially in its

institutional change toward too much disorder. Under the Putin presidency, Russia has moved down

along its IPF toward reducing disorder, even at the cost of some growth in dictatorship. The more

general point suggested by this reasoning is that economic and social change in each country should

be considered in light of its own institutional possibilities, rather than some idealized view of perfect

law and order.



IV. Transplantation.

          Although one can explain at least some institutional diversity by focusing on efficient


                                                   26
choices, these are clearly not the whole story. One dramatic deviation from the assumption of

indigenous formation of institutions is transplantation. As European powers conquered much of the

world in the 19th century, they brought with them their institutions, including their laws. A

significant portion of institutional variation among countries, especially in legal systems, is

accounted for by transplantation (Watson 1974, La Porta et al 1997, 1998, Berkowitz et al 2002).

       When the English, the French, the Spaniards, the Dutch, the Germans, and the Portuguese

colonized the world, they brought with them many institutions, including language and sports. As

we discussed above, there is systematic variation among these institutions in origin countries, shaped

by their political economy over the last millennium. England developed a common law tradition,

characterized by the independent judges and juries, relatively weaker reliance on statutes, and the

preference for contracts and private litigation as a means of dealing with social harms. France, in

contrast, developed a civil law tradition, characterized by state-employed judges, great reliance on

legal and procedural codes, and a preference for state regulation over private litigation. Germany

developed its own civil law tradition, also based in Roman law. There is also a distinctive legal

tradition of Scandinavian countries. Finally, and crucially for the 20th century, the U.S.S.R.

developed a system of socialist law.

       Napoleon exported the French legal system during his conquests to Spain, Portugal, and

Holland, and through his and their colonial conquests, it was transplanted to all of Latin America,

large parts of Europe, North and West Africa, parts of the Carribean, and parts of Asia. The

common law tradition was transplanted by England to the U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand,

East Africa, large parts of Asia (including India), and parts of the Carribean. The German legal

system was voluntarily adopted by Switzerland, Austria-Hungary, and later Japan, and through


                                                 27
Japan it influenced legal systems of Korea, Taiwan, and China. The U.S.S.R. transplanted its legal

system to socialist countries. These channels of both voluntary and colonial transplantation suggest

that there might be systematic variation in legal systems among countries.

       Some of the initial evidence on transplantation of legal systems, assembled by La Porta et

al. (1997, 1998), strongly supports this hypothesis. The authors look at the laws governing the

protection of investors – shareholders and creditors – from expropriation by corporate insiders using

a sample of 49 countries around the world. They find that, generally speaking, common law

countries protect shareholders better than do civil law countries, and especially French civil law

countries. They also find that common and German civil law countries protect creditors better than

do the French civil law countries. La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) and subsequent studies also show that

both legal origin and investor protection are strongly correlated with various aspects of financial

development (Demirguc-Kunt and Levine 2001, Johnson et al. 2000, Wurgler 2000, Beck et al.

2003a,b, Friedman, Johnson, and Mitton 2003, La Porta et al. 2000, 2002).

       Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002, 2003) and Botero et al. (2003) take

these cross-country comparisons further by examining various domains of government regulation,

including entry by new firms, judicial procedures in courts, and labor markets. Although the data

for each of these studies were collected using different procedures and they cover somewhat

different samples of countries, some systematic patterns emerge. Countries appear to have

pronounced styles of social control of business intimately related to the legal origin of their laws.

In all three areas – entry, courts, and labor – socialist and French legal origin countries regulate

much more heavily than do the common law countries. On average, the very same countries that

regulate entry, also regulate courts and labor markets, and that these correlations are at least in part


                                                  28
driven by legal origin (see Table 1).

                                                          Table I
                                         Correlations between regulation measures
The table shows the pairwise correlations of regulation indices across 63 countries. No former or current communist
countries are included to avoid spurious correlation. The measures of regulation are: (1) "Employment laws index"
which measures the level of protection of labor and employment laws and is formed by the normalized sum of: (i)
subindex: alternative employment contracts. (ii) subindex: conditions of employment. (iii) subindex: job security; (2)
"Number of procedures to start a business;" which is defined as the number of different procedures that a start-up has
to comply with in order to obtain a legal status, i.e., to start operating as a legal entity; and (3) "Court formalism index
for the collection of a bounced check" which measures substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases
at lower-level civil trial courts, and is formed by various characteristics in the process such as the need for lawyers and
legal justifications in the process, written vs. oral elements, statutory regulation of evidence, control of superior review,
engagement formalities for the parties, and the number of independent procedural actions.



                                                            Employment laws                   Number of procedures to
                                                                 index                           start a business
          Number of procedures to start
                                                                    0.6168a                                1
          a business
          Court formalism index for the
                                                                    0.6083a                              0.5944a
          collection of bounced check

a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.

Sources:
“The Regulation of Labor,” Harvard University manuscript, November 2002 (Botero, Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer);
 “The Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics CXVII, February 2002, 1-37 (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer);
 “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, forthcoming 2003, (Djankov, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes and Shleifer).




           The same rankings appear when we look at state ownership. Socialist and French legal

origin countries have more government ownership of banks (La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and

Shleifer 2002a) and a greater role of state-owned enterprises in the economy (La Porta et al. 1999)

than do common law countries. This evidence suggests that transplantation, rather than local

conditions, exerts a profound effect on national modes of social control of business, including both

state ownership and regulation. This evidence poses a sharp challenge to standard theories of

regulation, which emphasize local industry conditions and the power of interest groups, as opposed



                                                                          29
to broad national tendencies, to explain regulatory practice.

        The fact that colonial transplantation is such a significant determinant of institutional design

suggests that the observed institutional choices may well be inefficient. A legal and regulatory

system perfectly suitable for France might yield inefficiently high levels of regulation and state

ownership when transplanted to countries with lower civic capital. Likewise, a system of

independent courts that works in Australia or the U.S. might fail in Malaysia or Zimbabwe. Can we

understand how colonial transplantation can go awry?

        Figure 5 applies our theoretical framework to transplantation. We think of a legal system

as (roughly) limiting dictatorship and disorder in fixed proportions. For a given country, its legal

system is the intersection of the ray emanating from the origin defining these proportions with its

own IPF. The common law ray has a higher proportion of disorder to dictatorship than the civil law

ray. Finally, as the IPFs shift out from developed to developing countries, the marginal amount of

dictatorship required to reduce disorder rises: less developed countries (unlike the U.S. in 1900)

cannot buy much order with regulation. As a consequence, less developed countries need relatively

less dictatorship in equilibrium, i.e., less regulation.

        Figure 5 describes the transplantation of common and civil law into a country with an IPF

further from the origin. Whichever system is transplanted, the equilibrium amounts of dictatorship

and disorder rise simply because the institutional possibilities are less attractive. Also, relative to

efficiency, the transplantation of both civil and common law will lead to excessive intervention and

regulation in lower civic capital countries. Finally, transplantation leads to higher levels of over-

regulation in civil than in common law countries. Because of the enormous risks of public abuse

of business, countries at lower levels of civic capital efficiently need less regulation. But when legal


                                                   30
                                      Figure 5: Transplantation of laws
                    Disorder
                                            Common law




                                                                   Civil law



                                                                     Less developed
                                                                        country




                                                                          Developed
                                                                           country


                                                                   Dictatorship




systems are transplanted, they end with as much relatively speaking, and more in absolute terms,

than do the origin countries. This problem is most severe in civil law countries, which end up being

especially over-regulated relative to efficiency.

       Figure 5 is consistent with the findings of Djankov et al. (2002, 2003) and Botero et al.

(2003) that levels of regulation are higher in poorer than in richer countries, and in civil law than

in common law countries. Moreover, consistent with Figure 5, the evidence shows that, in poor

countries, the levels of regulation are often excessive. Higher levels of regulation of entry are

associated with larger unofficial economies and no measurable benefits for product quality (Djankov

et al. 2002). Higher level of regulation of judicial procedure are associated with higher costs and

longer delays, without offsetting benefits in terms of perceived justice (Djankov et al. 2003).

Heavier regulation of labor is associated with larger unofficial economies, higher unemployment,


                                                    31
and lower labor force participation (Botero et al. 2003). In all these cases, the transplanted

regulatory systems appear excessive for the countries that use them.

       The evidence on the role of legal origin points to some tangible ways in which the existing

institutions fall short of their potential, as well as to some possible directions for reform. The

evidence suggests that deregulation – particularly in areas such as entry and labor markets, where

the forces of competition are potentially so effective – is a high level priority for poor countries. In

these countries, regulation is nearly universally associated with poor outcomes because public

officials abuse their powers over private agents. Deregulation is likely to diminish the problems of

dictatorship without a significant increase in disorder.

       But the evidence also identifies some pitfalls of reform. One cannot assume, for example,

that highly formalized general jurisdiction courts could efficiently resolve disputes in developing

civil law countries. The most attractive areas for deregulation in developing economies are those

where one can count on competition and market discipline, rather than on courts, to control disorder.

In contrast, in the developed countries, courts – especially specialized courts – are becoming an

increasingly attractive alternative to regulation.

       So far, we have focused on the content of transplantation, and more specifically on the

transplantation of the legal/regulatory regimes. But obviously, other institutions are transplanted

as well. Moreover, how they are transplanted may also matter. Berkowitz, Pistor, and Richard

(2003) and Pistor et al. (2002, 2003) stress the importance of “receptivity” for the success of

transplantation of legal systems. Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001) argue that the quality

of institutional transplantation depends on whether the colonizers themselves settled in the occupied

land, as they did in the U.S. or New Zealand, or just set up trading posts and exploited the colonies,


                                                     32
as they did in most African states.

        All the evidence points to extraordinary importance of institutional transplantation. Legal

origin as we discussed it proxies for the transplantation of institutions of social control of business:

it captures the location of the transplanted institutions on the IPF, rather than the location of the IPF

itself. As such, we expect legal origin to only affect growth indirectly, in so far as the specific

mechanisms of social control affect markets for capital, labor, and entrepreneurs, thereby influence

factor accumulation and productivity growth. Other aspects of colonization and transplantation may

influence growth directly, by influencing the civic capital of the society, i.e., the location of the IPF.

 Of these, human capital of the people operating the institutions is probably most important.

Understanding the diverse consequence of transplantation is a crucial challenge for the new

comparative economics.



V. Politics.

        Politics has a bad name in economics. From Marx (1872), to the Austrians (von Mises 1949,

Hayek 1960), to institutional economists (Olson 1965, 1982, North 1990), to public choice scholars

(Buchanan and Tullock 1962), to regulation economists (Stigler 1971), to political historians (Finer

1997), writers on institutions have maintained that political choice is often responsible for

institutional inefficiency. Generals, dictators, ascendant social classes, democratic majorities, and

favored interest groups all choose institutions that entrench them in power, so that they can collect

political and economic rents. Constitutions, voting rules, federalist arrangements, organization of

army and police are selected by incumbents to keep themselves in power. Olson (1993), Rajan and

Zingales (2000), Acemoglu and Robinson (2000, 2002), Aghion, Alesina, and Trebbi (2002),


                                                   33
Glaeser and Shleifer (2002b), are some of the recent models examining these phenomena. In these

models, there is no reason that the equilibrium institutional choice would end up on the IPF, let

alone minimize total social losses, because Coasian negotiations between various players fail (Olson

2000, Acemoglu 2003).6

       The political perspective predicts that equilibrium institutions can be either excessively

disorderly or excessively dictatorial. Recent research on Yelstin’s Russia argues, for example, that

the oligarchs who came to strongly influence the government (like the robber barons in the pre-

progressive-era U.S.) preferred institutional disorder as a strategy of maximizing their rents (Black

and Tarassova 2003, Sonin 2003). More typically, as those in power attempt to stay in power, they

help themselves and their supporters through excessive dictatorship. State ownership becomes a

mechanism of dispensing patronage and maintaining political support for the incumbent politicians

(Shleifer and Vishny 1994). Regulations with ostensibly benign goals end up protecting incumbent

firms from competition, and offering extensive corruption and political support opportunities to their

enforcers (Stigler 1971, De Soto 1989, Djankov et al. 2002, Bertrand and Kramarz 2002, Besley and

Burgess 2002, Rajan and Zingales 2003). At the most basic level, the political perspective explains

socialism itself – the system that concentrates all political power and economic decision making in

the hands of a small elite, thereby providing this elite with the most powerful lever for perpetuating

itself – making the whole population of a country dependent on it economically.

       Despite the value of the political angle, it is premature to blame all institutional failure on

politics. Politics is often a stronger force toward institutional efficiency than away from it. After



       6
       We do not discuss here a large literature on comparative political institutions. See, for
example, Laffont (2000) and Persson and Tabellini (2000).

                                                 34
all, even communist dictatorships collapsed and turned into capitalist democracies. There are at

least four significant ways in which the political process moves institutions toward efficiency. First,

some institutions evolve over time toward more efficient forms as they confront new circumstances.

This, fundamentally, is Hayek’s (1960) view of the evolution of common law. Second, the reigns

of government are often captured by interest groups favoring efficiency. De Long and Shleifer

(1993), for example, show that, over the last millennium, the regions of Europe that were governed

by merchants established good institutions and experienced rapid urban growth, whereas regions

governed by absolutist princes did not do as well. Third, even when some interest groups oppose

change, Coasian bargaining often does lead to efficient institutional choice (Becker 1983). The

adoption of Magna Carta in England, and of the U.S. Constitution, are only the most famous

examples of such bargaining. Last but not least, despite well-recognized problems with democratic

voting (Buchanan and Tullock 1962), it is often a powerful force toward more efficient institutions

(Wittman 1989).      We have already discussed progressive reforms. On a broader scale, the

enormous rise in the world’s wealth during the 20th – democratic – century is the best evidence of

the virtues of democratic politics.

       The tendency of democratic states to seek efficiency is well illustrated by the adoption of that

great American invention for balancing dictatorship and disorder – a rigid constitution with checks

and balances (Brennan and Buchanan 1980). The clearest embodiment of such rigidity is the idea

that courts themselves have the power to check laws passed by the legislature against the

constitution. The American idea of constitutional review has spread to countries influenced by the

U.S. Constitution, especially those in Latin America, but after World War II to many other parts of

the world, including Continental Europe, as constitutional courts became common. La Porta, Lopez-


                                                  35
de-Silanes, Pop-Eleches, and Shleifer (2002) examine recent constitutions of 71 countries, identify

the countries that have adopted judicial review in their constitutions, and find that constitutional

review is indeed associated with greater political freedom.7

       Not all efficiency-enhancing bargains have the sweet smell of the Magna Carta or the U.S.

Constitution, but they may still improve welfare. During the 1990s, Russia’s President Yeltsin

fought the possible return of the communist dictatorship and extreme disorder arising from

decentralized federalism and economic disorganization. Yelstin’s political, economic, and legal

reforms generally required Coasian bargains with significant stakeholders, bargains that to

uninformed observers appeared as failures of democratic rule. Privatization, for example, required

deep concessions to enterprise insiders, the defeat of communists at the polls in 1996 called for a

purchase of political support from the oligarchs, and the preservation of the federation demanded

massive giveaways to independent regions (Boycko, Shleifer, and Vishny 1995, Shleifer and

Treisman 2000). By the end of the decade, Russia emerged as a democratic, capitalist economy,

with much stronger institutions than it had at the beginning of the decade, enabling Yelstin’s

successor to continue his program and reap considerable benefits of stability and economic growth.

In retrospect, many of Yelstin’s policies and institutional reforms look like welfare-improving

strategies of combating dictatorship and disorder.

       To take this point still further, consider the even more extreme example of Peru’s President

Fujimori and his director of Central Intelligence Agency, Vladimiro Montesinos. Montesinos was

Fujimori’s right hand man, managing the President’s relations with other politicians, judges,



       7
        In transition economies and in West European constitutional deliberations, the creation
of checks and balances has become a central issue of institutional design (Berglof et al. 2003).

                                                36
business people, the media, foreign governments, and civil society. A principal tool of Montesinos’

management was corruption: he routinely exchanged favors and bribes with key members of the

elite. Unfortunately for Montesinos, he taped his conversations and exchanges. When Fujimori

eventually escaped the country, the tapes became public. Ocampo (2003) reviews some of the tapes

and documents the corrupt deals between Montesinos and over 100 members of the Peruvian elite.

What do we make of this horrifying evidence?

        On the one hand, this is a story of obscene dictatorship and corruption. But on the other,

these deals were part of restoring order in Peru. Before Fujimori was elected, Peru was a country

in the state of anarchy, with negative growth rate, continuous – and murderous – threat from the left-

wing guerillas, the Shining Path, and incessant political battles among the elite. Fujimori restored

order, destroyed the Shining Path, and attained significant economic growth during his rule. He did

so, in part, by reducing conflict among the elites and entrenching himself in power through

Montensinos’ corrupt deals. From the perspective of Peruvian institutions, these deals reflect a

move to eliminate disorder and increase dictatorship, which was probably efficient. The move is

not attractive, but neither is the institutional possibility frontier that Peru faced. Eventually, as

Fujimori attempted to consolidate his dictatorship, the political process worked and he was driven

out of the country. Not surprisingly, disorder increased as well.

        The often benign influence of politics is subject to an important caveat. Politics is

fundamentally a negotiation between different interests, and the success of political negotiation itself

relies crucially on the civic capital in the society – the ability to cooperate. Countries with higher

civic capital, and the more attractive IPFs, are more likely to have successful political negotiations

and to choose an efficient point on the IPF. In this very important way, the location of the IPF, and


                                                  37
the political choice of a point on it, are not independent. Even so, it is incorrect to blame all poor

institutional outcomes on politics, since the failures of political negotiation are rooted in many of

the same factors that undermine institutional opportunities in the first place.



VI. Conclusion: Appropriate Institutions.

       At least since the 18th century, economists have recognized that good institutions – those that

secure property rights – are conducive to good economic performance. The appreciation of the

benefits of good institutions has grown recently, in light of both the challenges of transition and

development and the significant growth of empirical knowledge. But now economics can move

further, and recognize that different institutions are appropriate in different circumstances. This,

we believe, is the goal of the new comparative economics.

       In this paper, we tried to put some flesh on this bare bones agenda. We argued that

institutional diversity can in part be understood in terms of the fundamental tradeoff between

controlling dictatorship and disorder. Many features of successful and unsuccessful institutions can

be understood from this perspective. Moreover, this perspective sheds light on a range of historical

experiences, including colonial transplantation, the rise of the regulatory state, and the transition

from socialism. This perspective also maintains most forcefully that reforms in any country should

be evaluated relative to its own institutional opportunities, rather than some idealized benchmark

free of dictatorship and disorder.

       The field of comparative economics has entered a fascinating new stage. The extraordinary

turbulence in the world during the last decade – from post-communist transition, to Asian and Latin

American financial crises, to economic and social devastation of Africa – has flagged the centrality


                                                 38
of institutional reforms, but also the many pitfalls along the way. We are all humbler and wiser now.

 But we are also keenly aware that the comparative perspective, which identifies both the

possibilities and the limitations of individual societies, can serve as a useful framework for future

progress.




                                                 39
References

Acemoglu, Daron, “Why Not a Political Coase Theorem: Social Conflict, Commitment, and
Politics,” J. Comp. Econ. 31, forthcoming, 2003.

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James Robinson, “The Colonial Origins of Comparative
Development: An Empirical Investigation,” Am. Econ. Rev. 91, 5:1369-1401, Dec. 2001.

Acemoglu, Daron and James Robinson, “ Political Losers as a Barrier to Economic Development,”
Am. Econ. Rev. 90, 2:126-30, May 2000.

Acemoglu, Daron, and James Robinson, “Economic Backwardness in Political Perspective,” NBER
Working Paper #8831, 2002.

Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella, “National Champions and Corruption: Some Unpleasant
Interventionist Arithmetic,” Econ. J. 107, 443:1023-1042, July 1997.

Aghion, Philippe, Alberto Alesina, and Francisco Trebbi, “Endogenous Political Institutions,”
Harvard University mimeo, 2002.

Alesina, Alberto, Reza Baqir, and William Easterly, “Public Goods and Ethnic Divisions,” Q. J.
Econ. 114, 4:1243-1284, Nov. 1999.

Allen, Franklin, Jun Qian, and Meijun Qian, “Law, Finance, and Economic Growth in China,”
University of Pennsylvania mimeo, 2002.

Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, and Ross Levine, “Bank Supervision and Regulation: What Works
Best?,” J. Fin. Intermediation, forthcoming, 2003.

Becker, Gary, “A Theory of Competition Among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,” Q. J.
Econ. 98, 3:371-400, Aug. 1983.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, “Law and Finance: Does Legal Origin
Matter?,” J. Comp. Econ. 31, forthcoming, 2003a.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, “Law, Endowments, and Finance,” J. Fin.
Econ., forthcoming, 2003b.

Berkowitz, Daniel, Katharina Pistor, and Jean-Francois Richard, “Economic Development, Legality,
and the Transplant Effect,” Eur. Econ. Rev. 47, 1:165-195, Feb. 2003.

Bernstein, Lisa, “Opting out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relations in the Diamond
Industry,” J. Legal Studies 21, 1:115-157, Jan. 1992.


                                               40
Berglof, Erik, Barry Eichengreen, Gerard Rolland, Guido Tabellini, and Charles Wyplocz, Built to
Last: A Political Architecture for Europe, London, UK: CEPR, 2003.

Bertrand, Marianne, and Francis Kramarz, “Does Entry Regulation Hinder Job Creation? Evidence
from the French Retail Industry,” Q. J. Econ. 117, 4:1369-1414, Nov. 2002.

Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta, and Sendhil Mullainathan, “Ferreting out Tunneling: An
Application to Indian Business Groups,” Q. J. Econ. 117, 1:121-148, Feb. 2002.

Besley, Timothy, “Property Rights and Investment Incentives: Theory and Evidence from Ghana,”
J. Pol. Econ. 103, 5:903-937, Oct. 1995.

Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic Performance?
Evidence from India,” London School of Economics mimeo, 2002.

Black, Bernard, and Reinier Kraakman, “A Self-Enforcing Model of Corporate Law,” Harvard Law
Review 109, 8:1911-1981, June 1996.

Black, Bernard, and Anna Tarassova, “Institutional Reform in Transition: A Case Study of Russia,”
Stanford Law School mimeo, 2003.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Michael Kremer, “Disorganization,” Q. J. Econ. 112,4:1091-1126, Nov.
1997.

Blanchard, Olivier, and Andrei Shleifer, “Federalism with and without Political Centralization:
China versus Russia,” IMF Staff Papers 48, 0:171-179, Special Issue, 2001.

Botero, Juan, Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,
“The Regulation of Labor,” Harvard University mimeo, 2002.

Boycko, Maxim, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, Privatizing Russia. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 1995.

Brennan, Geoffrey and James Buchanan, The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations of the Fiscal
Constitution. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1980.

Buchanan, James and Tullock, Gordon, The Calculus of Consent, Logical Foundations of
Constitutional Democracy, Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 1962.

Coase, Ronald, “The Problem of Social Cost,” J. Law Econ. 3, 1:1-44, April 1960.

Coffee, John C., “The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence in Corporate
Governance and its Implications,” Northwestern U. Law Rev. 93, 3:631-707, Spring 1999.


                                               41
Coppin, Clayton and Jack High, The Politics of Purity, Ann Arbor, MI: The University of Michigan
Press, 1999.

Dal Bó, Ernesto, Pedro Dal Bó, and Rafael Di Tella, “Plata o Plomo?: Bribe and Punishment in a
Theory of Political Influence,” Harvard Business School Working Paper Series, No. 03-060, 2002.

De Long, J. Bradford and Andrei Shleifer,“Princes and Merchants: European City Growth Before
the Industrial Revolution,” J. Law Econ. 36, 2:671-702, Oct. 1993.

Demirgüç-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine, eds., Financial Structure and Economic Growth,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001.

Demsetz, Harold, “Towards a Theory of Property Rights,” Am. Econ. Rev. 57, 2:347-359, May 1967.

De Soto, Hernando, The Other Path. New York, NY: Harper and Row, 1989.

Diamond, Jared, Guns, Germs, and Steel: The Fates of Human Societies, New York, NY: W. W.
Norton, 1997.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “The
Regulation of Entry,” Q. J. Econ. 117, 1:1-37, Feb. 2002.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Courts,” Q.
J. Econ. 118, forthcoming, May 2003.

Djankov, Simeon, and Peter Murrell, “Enterprise Restructuring in Transition: A Quantitative
Survey,” J. Econ. Lit. 40, 3:739-792, Sept. 2002.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, “Africa’s Growth Tragedy: Policies and Ethnic Divisions,” Q.
J. Econ. 112, 4:1203-1250, Nov. 1997.

Easterly, William, and Ross Levine, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments Influence
Economic Development,” J. Mon. Econ. 50, 1:3-39, Jan. 2003.

Ellickson, Robert, Order without Law: How Neighbors Settle Disputes, Cambridge, MA: Harvard
University Press, 1991.

Engerman, Stanley, and Ken Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Institutions, and Differential Paths of
Growth among New World Economies,” in S. Haber, ed., How Latin America Fell Behind, Stanford,
CA: Stanford University Press, 1997.

Engerman, Stanley, and Ken Sokoloff, “Factor Endowments, Inequality, and Paths of Development
Among New World Economies,” NBER Working Paper #9259, 2002.


                                              42
Finer, Samuel, The History of Government, Vol. I-III, Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University
Press, 1997.

Fishback, Price and Shawn Kantor, A Prelude to the Welfare State: The Origins of Workers’
Compensation, Chicago, IL: The University of Chicago Press, 2000.

Friedman, Eric, Simon Johnson, and Todd Mitton, “Propping and Tunneling,” J. Comp. Econ. 31,
forthcoming, 2003.

Frye, Timothy, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Invisible Hand and the Grabbing Hand,” Am. Econ. Rev.
Papers and Proceedings 87, 2:354-358, May, 1997.

Galanter, Marc, 1974, “Why the Haves Come Out Ahead: Speculations on the Limits of Legal
Change,” Law Soc. Rev. 9, 95-169, 1974.

Glaeser, Edward, “Public Ownership in the American City,” in Urban Issues and Public Finance:
Essays in Honor of Dick Netzer (Amy Ellen Schwartz, ed.), Northampton, MA: Edward Elgar
Publishing Inc., forthcoming, 2003.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer, “Legal Origins,” Q. J. Econ. 117, 4:1193-1229, Nov. 2002a.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Curley Effect,” NBER Working Paper #8942, 2002b.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” J. Econ. Lit. 41, 2:401-
425, June 2003.

Glaeser, Edward, Simon Johnson, and Andrei Shleifer, “Coase versus the Coasians,” Q. J. Econ.
116, 3:853-899, Nov. 2001.

Glaeser, Edward, Jose Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer, “The Injustice of Inequality,” J. Mon.
Econ. 50, 1:199-222, Jan. 2003.

Greif, Avner, 1989, “Reputation and Coalitions in Medieval Trade Evidence on the Maghribi
Traders,” J. Econ. Hist. 49, 4:857-882, Dec. 1989.

Greif, Avner, “Contract Enforceability and Economic Institutions in Early Trade: The Maghribi
Traders’ Coalition,” Am. Econ. Rev. 83, 3:525-548, June 1993.

Greif, Avner, “Cultural Beliefs and the Organization of Society: A Theoretical Reflection on
Collectivist and Individual Societies,” J. Pol. Econ. 102, 5:912-950, Dec. 1994.

Hall, Robert, and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce so Much More Output per
Worker than Others?,” Q. J. Econ. 114, 1:83-116, Feb. 1999.


                                               43
Hamilton, James, James Madison, and John Jay, Federalist Papers, Reprinted in C. Rossiter, ed.,
Federalist Papers. New York, NY: New American Library, 1788 [1961].

Hart, Oliver, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “The Proper Scope of Government.” Q. J. Econ.
112, 4:127-1161, Nov. 1997.

Hay, Jonathan and Andrei Shleifer, “Private Enforcement of Public Laws: A Theory of Legal
Reform,” Am. Econ. Rev. Papers and Proceedings 88, 2:398-403, May 1998.

Hay, Jonathan, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Toward a Theory of Legal Reform,” Eur. Econ.
Rev. 40, 3-5:559-567, April 1996.

Hayek, Friederich, A., The Constitution of Liberty. South Bend, IN: Gateway Editions Ltd., 1960.

Hellman, Joel, , “Winners Take All: The Politics of Partial Reform,” World Politics 50, 2:203-234,
1998.

Hellman, Joel, Geraint Jones, and Daniel Kaufmann, “Seize the State, Seize the Day: State Capture,
Corruption and Influence in Transition,” J. Comp. Econ. 31, forthcoming, 2003.

Hobbes, Thomas, Leviathan, reprinted in R. Tuck, ed., Leviathan. New York, NY: Cambridge
University Press, 1651,[1991].

Jin, Hehui and Yingyi Qian, “Public versus Private Ownership of Firms: Evidence from Rural
China,” Q. J. Econ. 113, 3:773-808, Nov. 1998.

Johnson, Simon, Peter Boone, Alasdair Breach, and Eric Friedman, “Corporate Governance in the
Asian Financial Crisis,” J. Fin. Econ. 58, 1-2:141-186, Oct. 2000.

Johnson, Simon, Daniel Kaufmann, and Andrei Shleifer, “The Unofficial Economy in Transition,”
Brook. Pap. Econ. Act. 2, 1:159-221, Spring 1997.

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Tunneling,”
Am. Econ. Rev. Papers and Proceedings 90, 2:22-27, May 2000.

Johnson, Simon, John McMillan, and Christopher Woodruff, “Courts and Relational Contracts,” J.
Law, Econ. Org. 18, 1:221-277. April 2002.

Kaufmann, Daniel, Aart Kraay, and Pablo Zoido-Lobaton, “Governance Matters II: Updated
Indicators for 2000-2001,” World Bank Policy Research Working paper 2772, 2002.

Knack, Stephen and Philip Keefer, “Institutions and Economic Performance: Cross Country Tests
Using Alternative Institutional Measures,” Econ. and Pol. 7, 3:207-227, Sept. 1995.


                                               44
Kornai, Janos, The Socialist System: The Political Economy of Communism, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1992.

Laffont, Jean-Jacques, Incentives and Political Economy, New York, NY: Oxford University Press,
2000.

Landes, David, The Wealth and Poverty of Nations, New York, NY: W. W. Norton, 1998.

Landis, James, The Administrative Process, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1938.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Cristian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer, “The
Guarantees of Freedom,” NBER Working Paper #8759, 2002.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, “Government Ownership of
Banks,” J. Fin. 57, 1:265-301, Feb. 2002a.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer,”What Works in Securities
Laws,” Harvard University Mimeo, 2002b.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Legal
Determinants of External Finance,” J. Fin. 52,3:1131-1150, June 1997.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Law and
Finance,” J. Pol. Econ. 106, 6:1113-1155, Dec. 1998.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “The Quality of
Government,” J. Law, Econ. Org. 15, 1:222-279, Oct. 1999.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “Investor
Protection and Corporate Governance,” J. Fin. Econ. 58,1-2:3-27, Oct. 2000.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny, “Investor
Protection and Corporate Valuation,” J. Fin. 57, 3:1147-1170, June 2002.

Lopez-de-Silanes, Florencio, “Determinants of Privatization Prices,” Q. J. Econ. 112, 4:965-1026,
Nov. 1997.

Marx, Karl, Das Kapital, London: Lawrence and Wishart, 1872 [1974].

McKinsey Global Institute, Russia’s Economic Performance, Moscow: McKinsey, 1999.

McMillan, John and Christopher Woodruff, “Interfirm Relationships and Informal Credit in
Vietnam,” Q. J. Econ. 114, 4:1285-1320, Nov. 1999.


                                               45
Megginson, William, and Jeffry Netter, “From State to Market: A Survey of Empirical Studies on
Privatization,” J. Econ. Lit. 39, 2:321-389, June, 2001.

Mises, Ludwig von, Human Action, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1949.

Montesquieu, M. de Secondat, The Spirit of Laws. Special Edition, The Legal Classics Library.
Birmingham, AL: Lucas Printing Company, 1748 [1984].

Murphy, Kevin, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, “The Transition to a Market Economy: Pitfalls
of Partial Reform,” Q. J. Econ. 107, 3:899-906, Aug. 1991.

Murrell, Peter, “Evolution in Economics and in the Economic Reform of the Centrally Planned
Economies,” in Emergence of Market Economies in Eastern Europe, Christopher Clague and
Gordon Rausser, eds., London and New York: Blackwell, 1992.

Murrell, Peter, “Transition According to Cambridge, Mass.,” J. Econ. Lit. 33,1:164-178, March
1995.

Murrell, Peter, “Firms Facing New Institutions: Transactional Governance in Romania,” J. Comp.
Econ. 31, forthcoming, 2003.

North, Douglass, Structure and Change in Economic History. Cambridge, MA: W. W. Norton and
Company, 1981.

North, Douglass, Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. Cambridge and
London: Cambridge University Press, 1990.

North, Douglass and Barry Weingast, “Constitutions and Commitment: The Evolution of Institutions
Governing Public Choice in Seventeenth-Century England,” J. Econ. Hist. 49, 4:803-832, Winter,
1989.

Nozick, Robert, Anarchy, State and Utopia, New York, NY: Basic Books , 1974.

Ocampo, Luis Moreno, “The Montesino’s Case,” Harvard Law School mimeo, 2003.

Olson, Mancur, The Logic of Collective Action, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1965.

Olson, Mancur, The Rise and Decline of Nations, New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1982.

Olson, Mancur, “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development,” Am. Pol. Sc. Rev. 87, 3:567-575,
Sept. 1993.

Olson, Mancur, Power and Prosperity: Outgrowing Communist and Capitalist Dictatorships, New
York, NY: Basic Books, 2000.

                                              46
Persson, Torsten, and Guido Tabellini, Political Economics: Explaining Economic Policy,
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.

Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark West, “ The Evolution of
Corporate Law,” U. Penn. J. Int. Econ. Law 23, 4:791-871, Winter 2002.

Pistor, Katharina, Yoram Keinan, Jan Kleinheisterkamp, and Mark West, “Innovation in Corporate
Law,” J. Comp. Econ. 31, forthcoming, 2003.

Pistor, Katharina and Chenggang Xu, “Law Enforcement under Incomplete Law: Theory and
Evidence from Financial Market Regulation,” Columbia Law School mimeo, 2002.

Posner, Richard, “Theories of Economic Regulation,” Bell J. Econ. 5, 2:335-358, Autumn 1974.

Posner, Richard, “What do Judges Maximize?,” chapter 3 in Overcoming Law, Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press, 1995.

Putnam, Robert, Making Democracy Work: Civic Traditions in Modern Italy, Princeton, NJ:
Princeton University Press, 1993.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, “The Tyranny of Inequality,” J. Pub. Econ. 76, 3:521-558,
June 2000.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial Development
in the 20th Century,” J. Fin. Econ. 69, 1:xx-xx, July, 2003.

Rodrik, Dani, Arvind Subramanian, and Francisco Trebbi, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development,” Harvard University mimeo,
2002.

Roland, Gerard, Transition and Economics: Politics, Markets, and Firms. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press, 2000.

Shleifer, Andrei, “Government in Transition,” Eur. Econ. Rev. 41, 3-5:385-410, April, 1997.

Shleifer, Andrei, “State versus Private Ownership,” J. Econ. Persp. 12, 4:133-150, Fall, 1998.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Daniel Treisman, Without a Map: Political Tactics and Economic Reform in
Russia, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2000.

Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, “Corruption,” Q. J. Econ. 108, 3:599-618, Nov. 1993.

Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny, “Politicians and Firms,” Q. J. Econ. 109, 3:995-1025, Nov.
1994.

                                               47
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert Vishny, The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and their Cures.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1998.

Smith, Adam, An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations. Chicago, IL:
University of Chicago Press, 1776 [1976].

Sonin, Konstantin, “Why the Rich Favor Poor Protection of Property Rights?” J. Comp. Econ.
forthcoming., 2003

Stigler, George, “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell J. Econ. and Man. Sci. 2, 1:3-21,
Spring, 1971.

Tullock, Gordon, “The Welfare Cost of Tariffs, Monopoly, and Theft,” Western Econ. J. 5, 0:224-
232, 1967.

Watson, Alan, Legal Transplants: An Approach to Comparative Law. Charlottesville, VA:
University of Virginia Press, 1974.

Wittman, Donald, “Why Democracies Produce Efficient Results,” J. Pol. Econ. 97, 6:1395-1424,
Dec. 1989.

Wurgler, Jeffrey, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” J. Fin. Econ. 58, 1-2:1187-214,
Oct. 2000.

Zhuravaskaya, Ekatherina, “Incentives to Provide Local Public Goods: Fiscal Federalism – Russian
style,” J. Pub. Econ. 76, 3:337-368, June 2000.




                                                48
