NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOG ROUND MARKETING, SEED QUALITY,
AND GOVERNMENT POLICY:
INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE IN U.S.
COTTON PRODUCTION, 1920-1960
Alan L. Olmstead
Paul W. Rhode
Working Paper 9612
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9612
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

Hog Round Marketing, Seed Quality, and Government Policy:
Institutional Change in U.S. Cotton Production, 1920-1960
Alan L. Olmstead and Paul W. Rhode
NBER Working Paper No. 9612
April 2003
JEL No. N6, N4
ABSTRACT
Between 1928 and 1960 U.S. cotton production witnessed a revolution with average yields roughly
tripling while the quality of the crop increased significantly. This paper analyzes the key
institutional and scientific developments that facilitated the revolution in biological technologies,
pointing to the importance of two government programs -- the one-variety community movement
and the Smith-Doxey Act -- as catalysts for change. The story displays two phenomena of interest
in light of the recent literature: 1. an important real-world example of the workings of Akerlof's
lemons model and 2. a case where inventors, during an early phase of the product cycle, actually
encouraged consumers to copy and disseminate their intellectual property.

Alan L. Olmstead
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
Davis, CA 95616

Paul W. Rhode
Department of Economics
University of North Carolina, Chapel Hill
Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3305
and NBER
prhode@email.unc.edu

HOG ROUND MARKETING, SEED QUALITY, AND GOVERNMENT POLICY:
INSTITUTIONAL CHANGE IN U.S. COTTON PRODUCTION, 1920-601

During the twentieth century American cotton farming evolved from a backward sector to a
highly productive industry. For the most part, the history of the modernization of the cotton
industry has concentrated on mechanization and the end of sharecropping to the virtual exclusion of
any serious analysis of the enormous advances in biological technologies.2 This omission is
surprising given the emphasis devoted to the role of improved varieties in generating productivity
growth of other crops and other regions. Most notable are the studies on the development and
diffusion of hybrid corn.3 The lack of attention to new cotton varieties should not suggest that no
changes occurred. To the contrary, average U.S. cotton yields started their upward march at about
the same time as the upturn in corn yields, and from 1928-32 to 1958-62 the rate of growth in
cotton yields actually outpaced that of corn yields (see Figure 1).
This paper analyzes the role of government policy and, in particular, the one-variety
improvement movement and the Smith-Doxey Act in promoting the diffusion of new, highperforming cottons. The story of the development and diffusion of new cotton varieties is far more
intriguing than the often-cited accounts of the introduction of hybrid corn, in part because cotton
farming was one of the most backward sectors of American agriculture. The most distinguishing
characteristic of the diffusion of new cottons was the role of government policy. Once new
varieties of corn became available, the story of diffusion was largely the result of the market
interactions between individual farmers and private seed companies (apart from extension service
educational campaigns). By comparison, the cotton industry was long plagued by chronic problems
of market failure that dulled the incentives for both seed breeders and individual farmers. To
overcome negative externalities in production and a “lemons problem” in marketing, the United
1

We would like to thank Shelby Baker, Dick Bassett, Fred Bourland, J. Jerome Boyd, David L. Carlton, Peter
Coclanis, Harry B. Collins, John Constantine, Tom Culp, Early C. Ewing, Jr., Deborah K. Fitzgerald, Janet Hudson,
Susana Iranzo, Hal Lewis, Gary Libecap, Shelagh Mackay, C. W. Manning, Leslie Maulhardt, William Meredith,
Robert Margo, Massimo Morelli, Larry Nelson, Carl Pray, Gene Seigler, Macon Steele, Nancy Virts, Henry Webb,
Gavin Wright, and two anonymous referees for their comments and assistance. Julian Alston played an especially
important role in shaping our analysis. We also benefited from the comments of the seminar participants at the Triangle
Economic History Workshop, the University of Mississippi, Harvard University, the Spring 2002 All-UC Group in
Economic History Conference at Scripps College, and the 2003 Meetings of the American Historical Association.
Work on this article was facilitated by a fellowship granted by the International Centre for Economic Research (ICER)
in Turin, Italy.
2
Wright, Old South, pp. 226-38; Street, New Revolution; Day, “Economics” pp.427-49; Musoke and Olmstead,
“Rise of the Cotton Industry,” pp. 385-412; Whatley, “Labor,” pp. 905-929; Holley, Emancipation, pp. 124-129 The
exceptions typically deal with the boll weevil. Helms, “Revision and Revolution,” pp. 108-25; Osband, “Boll Weevil,”
pp. 627-43.

1

States Department of Agriculture (USDA) and state officials orchestrated a campaign to create onevariety communities and provided impartial grading services. These efforts played a key role in
facilitating the adoption of the new biological technologies.

YET ANOTHER BURDEN OF SOUTHERN HISTORY

The 1921 USDA Yearbook is representative of an extensive literature bemoaning yet
another burden of southern history: “According to the testimony of the cotton trade in Europe as
well as in the United States, the quality of the American cotton crop has deteriorated in recent
decades.”4 The available quantitative evidence on the decline in quality in fact supports this claim.
Table 1 collects data on the staple length of U.S. cotton by state circa 1880, 1913, and 1928-30.5 In
every state for which data are available, the staple length in either 1913 or 1928-30 was less than in
1880. Based on the national weighted average, staple length fell by over 12 percent between 1880
and 1930.6
The consequences of the deterioration in quality were very serious given rising competition
from foreign cotton, rayon, and other synthetic fibers. The causes of quality decline were twofold.
First, the invasion of the boll weevil, beginning in 1892, led farmers throughout the cotton belt to
discard late-maturing varieties that were most susceptible to the pest. “In this way many excellent
varieties of long-staple upland cotton and practically all of the better types of medium-staple were
lost within a comparatively short time, to be replaced by the early, rapid-fruiting types brought in
from the northern parts of the belt.”7 But the boll weevil was only part of the problem. As
indicated in Table 1, staple length also declined between 1880 and 1913 in areas not yet hit by the
3

Griliches, “Hybrid Corn,” pp. 275-80. Modern convention uses the term “cultivar” instead of the term “variety.”
Because most of the literature of the period under consideration predates this terminology, we use the term “variety”
throughout.
4
Doyle, Meloy, and Stine, “Cotton,” p. 400. Also see Johnson, Cotton, pp. 53-54. The 1866 Report of the
Commissioner of Agriculture dates the problem to the war itself. “The most serious difficulty encountered by cottongrowers, and particularly those who are engaging in such enterprises for the first time since the war, had been found to
be poor seed.” The report further noted that “for seven years little or no pains have been taken by any cotton-growers
to perfect their seed.” U.S. Commissioner of Agriculture, Report, p. 209.
5
Cotton length was one of the most important factors in pricing cotton. Cotton classers divided samples into 6
different color classes. Within each color there were a range of grades. For white cotton there were 9 specific grades
that captured factors such as the existence of foreign matter, the cotton’s color quality, and “ginning preparation,”
which included the roughness, nappiness, and stringiness of the fibers. With modern high velocity testing equipment it
is now possible to cheaply determine important characteristics (such as fiber strength) that previously were difficult to
assess. Cox, “Cotton,” pp. 320-23.
6
Determining exactly how the market valued this decline is slightly more complicated. Over the 1928-30 period,
the average price over cotton in ten central markets varied as follows with staple length in 32s of an inch (taking 26-32s
as 100): 28: 108; 30: 111; 32: 115; 34: 120; 36: 125; 38: 133; 40: 158. USDA, Agricultural Statistics 1936, p. 84. Note
the marginal value of increasing staple length was greater at the ends, especially at the high end, than at the middle of
the distribution. Due to these non-linearities, the market value of the decline in staple length over the 1880-1930 period
was larger than a comparison of the prices of mean qualities would indicate.

2

weevil such as North Carolina. Contemporaries noted that cotton culture was burdened by an
interlocking set of production and marketing problems that both hampered the ability of and
reduced the incentives for individual farmers to maintain and improve cotton quality. Cotton
production was plagued by a number of negative externalities that made it difficult to maintain the
genetic purity of the seed supply.8 These technical difficulties were exacerbated by post-Civil War
institutional changes, in particular the break-up of the plantation units into small operations and the
increased importance of public gins. In addition, the prevalence of price pooling through what was
known as the hog round system muted incentives to produce high-quality cotton. A “vicious
circle” thwarted efforts to improve the crop and reduced demand for quality seed. This, in turn,
reduced incentives for seed breeders to invest in R&D, further reinforcing the low-level equilibrium
trap.9
On the production side, problems of maintaining purity arose because cotton is subject to
cross-pollination. The incidence of cross-pollination varied greatly depending on the variety,
weather conditions, the distance between fields, and the population of insects (especially bumble
bees). When cotton was cultivated in small fields located near the woodland habitat of feral bees—
conditions common across much of the South in 1900—cross-pollination rates could easily exceed
40 percent. But when it was grown in large mono-variety fields that were frequently sprayed with
insecticides, as was common in the Mississippi Delta by the 1950s, the cross-pollination rates were
likely less than a few percent.10 The median rate of natural crossing between alternate rows
reported in ten studies across the South over the 1903-50 period was between 8 and 9 percent.11
Maintaining pure seed lines became an increasingly serious problem after the Civil War with
the emergence of public gins and changes in ginning technology. According to the USDA roughly
90 to 95 percent of the seed used to plant the U.S. cotton crop in the 1920s and early 1930s was
mixed “gin-run” quality.12 Even when farmers purchased seed rather than used their home-grown
product, the “outside” seed was often simply gin-run seed from other areas. Prior to 1850 the
typical plantation gin was animal powered and processed only three to four bales per day of cotton
grown in the gin’s immediate neighborhood. With the spread of steam power and other important
7

Ware, “Plant,” p. 661.
Purity” is obviously a loaded term. In this context, it meant that the seed was relatively homogeneous and could
be expected to yield descendents with similar characteristics.
9
Burges, “Break This Vicious Circle,” pp. 5, 6, and 29.
10
Brown, Cotton, 1st ed., pp. 165-66. Cook describes several cases in which early efforts to grow Durango and
Egyptian cottons in California failed because of cross-pollination with shorter-staple cottons. Cook, “One-Variety
Cotton,” pp. 10-11.
Cross-pollination rates in today’s cotton are lower because the plants have evolved to self-pollinate after the
increased use of pesticides led to the destruction of the pollinating insects. McGregor, “Insect,” pp. 171-90D; Simpson,
“Natural Cross-Pollination.”
11
Brown and Ware, Cotton, p. 158.
8

3

innovations, gin capacity increased and the supply area expanded. The major breakthrough
occurred in the mid-1880s with the invention by Robert Munger of “system ginning” that employed
pneumatic and mechanical conveyance technologies and multiple stands of gin equipment. This
represented one of the major technological advances in the New South. By 1900 the prototypical
modern ginnery, containing four gins of seventy saws each, could process 40 to 60 bales of cotton
per day and some were capable of handling 150 bales per day. The new “system” gins were much
more efficient than the older methods, but their complicated machinery and larger clientele had the
unintended consequence of substantially increasing the problem of seed mixing.13
Seed mixing in successive gin runs was a serious problem (the smaller the runs the greater
the problem).14 For example, the USDA estimated that “seed from a farmer’s first bale at the gin
contains 26 percent of the seed from the preceding bale….”15 Investigators reported cases of
farmers receiving seed not only from the previous farmer to use the gin but those three or four turns
earlier. Given the practices of the day, gin operators were apt to indiscriminately return seed to
farmers even if the growers requested their own seed. Thus, “the farmer as an individual finds
himself practically powerless when he attempts to establish and maintain a pure stock of cotton.”16
In this environment new cotton varieties proliferated but soon lost their distinctive
advantages under mass cultivation. As Ware put it, a “very high percentage” of the varieties “come
and go within a rather brief period.”17 Almost every contemporary authority highlighted the rapid
turnover in varieties under cultivation. Of the 58 varieties reported in the Tenth Census (1880),
“only 6 were commonly in cultivation in 1895,” and none were grown by the mid-1930s. Of the
118 varieties Samuel Tracy listed in 1895, only 2 were still present in 1925; and of the 600 varieties
Frederick Tyler enumerated in 1907, fewer than 25 were in existence in 1925 and “only 9 were
cultivated extensively.” The problem was that “much of the benefit gained by bringing in new
varieties and by the excellent breeding work that was done by the Department of Agriculture,
private breeders, and the State experiment stations, has been lost by the failure to perpetuate the
best strains and varieties and to keep them free from admixture with inferior kinds.”18
12

Doyle, “Multiplicity,” p. 108; Doyle, “Cotton,” p. 264; USDA, "Marketing Cotton Seed,” p. 65.
Bennett, Saw and Toothed Cotton Ginning, pp. 7, 32; Aiken, “Evolution of Cotton Ginning,” pp. 199-206;
Roper, “Cotton Ginning,” pp. 338-39; Ballard and Doyle, “Cotton-Seed Mixing Increased by Modern Gin Equipment.”
14
U.S. Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering, Better Cottons, pp. 955-58; Doyle, Meloy
and Stine, “Cotton,” p. 400. According to Cook most farmers only brought one or two bales to the gin at a time, which
magnified the problem of the intermingling of seed. Cook, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 13. Cook, “Local Adjustment,” p.
41, thought that the two sources of contamination (cross pollination and mixing at the gin) were roughly of equal
importance.
15
U.S. Congress, Hearings, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October 10, 1947, p. 957.
16
Doyle, “Cotton,” p. 264.
17
Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 712.
18
Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 696.
13

4

There are numerous accounts of promising varieties being destroyed by cross-pollination
and mixing at the gin. As a prominent example, in 1912 Roland M. Meade first selected a prized
variety in fields around Clarkville, Texas. This variety (Meade) had lint of over 1 1/2 inches and
had black seeds that were practically devoid of fuzz. The seed was taken to the Sea Island areas of
South Carolina, increased, and sold in that region. There it produced a staple length averaging 1 5/8
inches and showed exceptional uniformity. “Meade was on the way to becoming a striking success.
More than 10,000 acres were grown between 1920 and 1922, but mixing of seed and planting in
close proximity to fuzzy-seeded upland varieties resulted in a rapid contamination in the stocks, the
mixed fiber was rejected by the trade, and the variety was largely abandoned after 1925.”19 Crosspollination and the mixture of seed at the gin reduced the ability of farmers who used saved seed to
cultivate high-yielding, high-quality varieties.20 Purchasing commercial seed was an expensive
proposition: data from the early 1920s indicate that the commercial product cost 2.5 to 4 times as
much as “gin-run” seed, and that improved seed sold by breeders cost 6 to 8 times as much.21
Coupled with these production externalities were pervasive marketing imperfections.
According to the preponderance of testimony and in line with the observed pattern of falling staple
lengths and stagnating yields, local markets in the South failed to provide sufficient rewards for
producing higher quality cotton.22 Complaints about middlemen seem to be common to all
agricultural commodities, but in this case, the criticisms went beyond the habitual grousing. The
cotton grading and marketing system in place at the turn of the century was one of the most
complicated and controversial aspects of the whole cotton production process.23 Accurately grading
individual bales of cotton in local markets was prohibitively expensive, given the technology of the
day. The use of mixed or gin-run seed added complications because there would be “considerable
variation in quality and length of lint” within a single bale, making a small sample drawn from the
exterior less representative.24 As a result the use of pooling contracts was widespread; cotton was
generally sold in small local markets on the “hog-round” or “on point” system, meaning buyers
19

Ware, “Plant Breeding,” pp. 690-91. The literature repeatedly emphasized that mills would prefer shorter but
uniform fibers to fibers of different lengths.
20
There are several forces affecting seed quality. For example, if farmers chose their seed stock from a random
sample from the gin, it would have the negative effect of selecting strains with high seed-to-lint ratio.
21
The ordinary ratios are based on data for 1920-22 from USDA, “Cotton Seed,” pp. 49, 59 and “Prices Paid,” p.
143. The improved seed ratios are based on prices found in Coker’s Pedigreed Seed Company catalogs. For examples
see the price list dated February 1, 1918, inserted in Coker’s, Spring 1918, and the Coker’s, Spring 1927, pp. 14-29. In
1927 new releases cost farmers about $3.00 a bushel of 30 pounds plus shipping charges. In addition to the reasons
offered above, southern poverty, tenancy, low investments in education and extension activities, and high interest rates
may have discouraged investments in better seed.
22
Cook, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 12, 36; Cook and Martin, “Community,” p. 4; Crawford, “Point Buying,” pp.
376-86.
23
Virts, “Efficiency,” pp. 390-91.
24
Darst, “Cotton-Seed,” pp. 190-91.

5

graded a sample of bales and then paid one average price for all the cotton in that market.25 The
cotton would then be shipped to regional markets where highly trained specialists would grade a
sample from each bale in special rooms with proper lighting, temperature, and humidity. After
grading the cotton would be assembled in larger running lots of roughly similar quality bales for
sale to the cotton mills. There was a regional division of labor among mills, with some demanding
better grades of cotton and producing higher-quality output than others.26 Once a given mill had
adjusted its machinery it required a uniform staple length to run efficiently. A difference of 1/32 of
an inch could be significant.
The workings of the hog-round system encouraged farmers to “free ride” by marketing
lower-quality cotton than their neighbors, and helps explain the rising importance of relatively high
yielding but short-staple varieties such as “Half-and-Half.” Ordinarily one would expect pooling
contracts to break down, as individuals who produced higher-quality goods demanded a higher
price. As predicted, some plantation owners did sell directly in central markets where their crop
could be graded separately.27 But most tenants and small farm operators lacked the economies of
scale, information, and perhaps savvy to mitigate the problem. Such farmers suffered from
problems of unequal bargaining power and asymmetric information as they likely faced only one or
two buyers in local markets. For these reasons, most contemporary accounts argued that high25

“This [the hog-round] system did not provide for the paying of fair premiums for better cotton, prices being
based on the average quality produced in each district, usually with no advantage to the farmers who planted better
varieties.” Cook and Doyle, “One-Variety Community,” p. 132. The practice of pooling cotton in local markets was not
a short-lived phenomenon. Elsewhere Cook noted that, “‘the practice is old and longstanding, so that nobody now alive
can be blamed for starting it.”’ As quoted in Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 13.
As is often true, the nomenclature used to describe the cotton market varies between authors. For example, Garside
used the term “hog-round” system to describe the practice of quoting a single, average price for a large number of bales
and “on point” pricing for the practice of quoting a single price for all of the cotton in a given market on a given day.
Garside, Cotton, p. 179. Others use “round lot” pricing to describe the first practice and “hog-round” pricing for the
second. Note that making an all-or-nothing offer to an individual seller to buy a number of bales at a price based on
average quality can preserve quality incentives.
26
Wright, Old South, pp. 133-35.
27
Virts, “Efficiency,” pp. 390-93. Nancy Virts argued that these general marketing problems help explain the
persistence of the plantation system. She noted that plantations on average produced higher quality cotton and that this
could be due to their having economies of scale in marketing that allowed them to bypass local markets. She does not
test among other hypotheses such as that plantations occupied better land that was more suitable for producing longer
staple varieties. Although Virts accepted the argument that buyers in local markets generally offered one price for all,
she did not emphasize the dynamic implications of this system on cotton quality. Ibid., pp. 387-88. In addition to
Virts’s observations about cotton marketing, plantations also provided a form of vertical integration and scale
economies that protected seed quality by reducing cross pollination and seed mixing problems. For example, America’s
largest plantation, Delta and Pine Land Company, generally grew only one commercial variety at a time. When other
varieties were grown commercially or as part of the seed-breeding program, the company was meticulous in separating
different varieties in the field and at the gin. For this reason, plantations represented a market solution to the externality
problems, which begs the question why the land in plantations was declining. Edmonds, “Around the Clock,” pp. 4043, 80. Burges observed that only shipments of 100 bales or more could command special treatment with respect to
quality. Burges, “Break This Vicious Circle,” pp. 5, 6, 29

6

quality cotton varieties were being driven from the market, exactly as Akerlof’s “lemons model”
would suggest.28
TESTING FOR MARKET FAILURE

Although the “lemons problem” is much discussed, important real-world examples are rare
in the literature. Thus the nearly unanimous testimony of cotton specialists asserting that grading
and marketing problems seriously distorted production incentives should be of considerable
interest. The USDA and various state agencies conducted numerous detailed studies investigating
the relationship between price and quality in local and regional markets across the South. Studies
of local markets in Arkansas (1913-16), North Carolina (1914-16), Texas (1926), Alabama (1926
and 1927), and South Carolina (1925-27) all found prices varied little with quality.29 The two most
definitive studies on cotton pricing were published by the USDA in 1936 and 1939. Howell and
Burgess (1936) monitored individual transactions in over 100 local markets between 1928 and
1933, and independently classed 300,000 bales of cotton. They compared the prices received in
local markets for cotton of a given quality with those prevailing in central markets for the same
quality on the same day. (Neither buyers nor sellers in the local markets knew the results of Howell
and Burgess’s classifications at the time of sale.) The survey found that the local market price
differentials for various staple lengths were far smaller than the differentials in the central markets
(which better reflected the value cotton spinners placed on quality). As an example, the Howell and
Burgess research team classified and recorded the prices of over 100,000 bales of middling white
cotton. Panel 1 of Table 2 offers a summary measure of the price differentials by staple length
prevailing in the local and central markets over the 1928-33 period. “For the 5-year period, on an
average, premiums for staples longer than 7/8 inch in local markets amounted to only 17 percent of
those in central markets and varied from only 12 percent for 15/16-inch cotton to 34 percent for 1 1/8inch cotton. At the other end of the spectrum, discounts for cotton shorter than 7/8 inch in local
markets amounted to only 6 percent of those quoted in central markets for cotton with a staple length
of 13/16 inch.”30 The summary conclusion is that the price signals given to farmers in local markets
systematically failed to reflect the incentive structure being generated in central markets. Farmers who
sold short-staple cotton were vastly overpaid, and those who marketed longer staples were
shortchanged.31
28

Akerlof, “Market,” pp. 488-500.
As reported in Howell and Burgess, “Farm Prices,” pp. 2-3.
30
Ibid., p. 21.
31
Numerous critics asserted that local cotton graders systematically cheated small farmers. This may have
happened, but Howell and Burgess’s findings suggest that the misgrading at the local level hurt some farmers and
29

7

Howell and Watson’s (1939) study covering the 1933-36 period took the research a step
further.32 In addition to comparing local and central markets, they compared local markets offering
impartial public classification services (PCS) with those lacking such services.33 Panel 2 of Table 2
shows the differentials by staple length for bales sold in the two types of local markets compared
with equal quality cotton sold on the same day in the central markets. (Note that the timing of sales
in the local markets with PCS and those without PCS differed, making it necessary to report two
series for central market differentials.) Howell and Watson found that the quality differentials in
the central markets were more closely reflected in local markets with public classification services
than in those without such services.34 As an example, the local markets with public classers
captured 56 percent of the central market premiums for cotton of 1 1/16 inch (relative to 7/8 inch)
whereas markets without public classers captured only 30 percent. Compared with the 1928-32
period, farmers selling in both types of markets were increasingly receiving greater quality
differentials, especially at the higher end.35
Several natural experiments offer further evidence on the workings of local markets. In
1923 the cotton farmers in the McKinney area of Collin County, Texas began the process of
forming one-variety communities (see below) to improve cotton quality and yields. Buyers soon
recognized that the McKinney market had better cotton and began to offer substantial premiums
compared to prices offered in nearby markets. “Difficulty then arose because the higher prices at
McKinney soon attracted farmers from other communities, who soon were hauling considerable
quantities of inferior cotton to McKinney, in order to take advantage of the higher prices paid there.
One farmer was known to have hauled 48 bales of cotton 150 miles by truck and to have sold it for
$5 per bale net above what he was offered on his local market.”36 As outsiders began shipping to
McKinney, its share of the region’s market jumped from 25 percent in 1925 to 37 percent by 1928.

helped others. For a statement of the cheating hypothesis see the testimony of Representative Hampton P. Fulmer in
U.S. Congress, Hearings, 67th Cong., 4th Sess., Part 1, February 5, 9, & 12, 1928, pp. 1-5.
32
Howell and Watson, “Cotton Prices,” pp. 1-54.
33
One might be concerned that the availability of these services are not random and thus the comparisons did not
represent true natural experiments. For example, more advanced areas might have more access to classification
services, better markets before their spread, and higher overall quality. Internal evidence suggests that if anything the
biases ran in the opposite direction. Although the differentials were greater in markets with public classification
services, average prices and quality were not higher than in markets without such services. The availability of such
services may have been too recent to have much effect on cotton improvement.
34
They also found that price variability, conditional on quality, was lower in markets with public classification
services.
35
The finding that cotton markets were improving over the interwar period is consistent with the informed
observations of Alston Hill Garside, an economist at the New York Cotton Exchange. Garside credited the advent of
uniform federal grading standards with improving grading practices. Garside, Cotton, pp. 176-84.
36
Saunders, “Pioneer,” p. 7.

8

This behavior only made sense where the hog-round system was being employed. Predictably, the
McKinney price fell and the one-variety effort collapsed.37
Other areas had long held a reputation for producing quality cotton and traditionally
received price premiums. Some mills and even the Liverpool Market essentially “bought cotton on
the basis of place of origin, as well as on grade and staple length.”38 The appearance of trucks and
good roads eroded these advantages. As an example,
Country buyers of cotton knew the value placed on the Hope, Arkansas warehouse tag. They went
into the sand hill sections of South Arkansas, bought short cotton hog round, trucked it over the
concrete highway to Hope, put a Hope compress tag on it, and shipped it as Hope cotton.… When the
spinner got hold of the cotton he had a real surprise coming. It was not Hope cotton. It was some
inferior short stuff from the sand hill of South Arkansas. So the premium went off Hope cotton.
Similar situations prevailed throughout the South.39

Collectively, these experiences with free riders dumping inferior cotton into quality markets,
coupled with the exceptionally detailed and careful studies on local and central market pricing and
grading practices, strongly support the assertions of contemporary cotton specialists. The hoground system was, indeed, widespread, and it resulted in a “lemons problem” that led to a decline in
cotton quality.

THE ONE-VARIETY COMMUNITY MOVEMENT

Early in the twentieth century USDA scientists intensified their breeding and extension
projects aimed at improving the yields and quality of U.S. cotton. Initially, these efforts paralleled
similar campaigns for other crops.40 Because of the problems discussed above, researchers soon
realized that it would not be sufficient to develop and distribute small quantities of better seeds.
Rather their campaign would have to change the complex institutional structure to reduce negative
externalities and better align local prices with those in regional markets. According to the father of
the one-variety community movement, Oral Fuller Cook, “the method of distribution that was first
projected did not result in establishing commercial supplies of pure seed. Several of the varieties
that were developed and distributed in the early years of the cotton-breeding work were lost
completely before the system of distribution was changed.”41 To counter these problems, Cook
developed an ambitious program to develop better cotton varieties, improve cultural methods,
37

Ibid., pp. 1-10. The same general story was repeated across the South, as early one-variety community programs
suffered because outsiders shipped in inferior cotton. Coruthers refers to similar cases in North Carolina, Oklahoma,
and Mississippi. Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 39-55.
38
Pike, “Cottonseed,” p. 2; Crawford, “Point Buying,” pp. 376-86.
39
Andrews, “Cotton,” pp. 8-9; also see Garside, Cotton, p. 181.
40
For an example of these efforts in the wheat industry see Olmstead and Rhode, “Red Queen,” pp. 8-20.
41
Cook, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 8.

9

standardize cotton classification systems, advance new seed treatment processes, and train qualified
cotton graders.42
At the heart of the program was a utopian scheme to fundamentally change the way cotton
was grown, ginned, graded, and marketed in the United States. To succeed would require a “new
association of ideas” to alter how farmers thought about their community.43 Instead of each
individual farmer choosing his own variety, the new system would be built on a cooperative
structure in which cotton farmers would organize “one-variety communities.” The USDA in
conjunction with state authorities would provide education, guidance, and standardized contracts.
Cook and his fellow reformers envisioned communities ranging in size from a group of farmers
using one gin to encompassing an entire state. In addition to producing, ginning, and marketing
only one variety of cotton, the communities would be responsible for increasing (and in some cases
breeding) pure seed for their members. It is important to note that from the outset the literature on
one-variety communities emphasized the benefits to the nearly total exclusion of any discussion of
the costs associated with individual farmers losing the freedom to tailor their cultural practices to fit
their particular growing situations.44
Cook first suggested the idea of one-variety communities in 1909 and subsequently
developed the concept in a 1911 article.45 At first the USDA concentrated its one-variety campaign
in the newly irrigated cotton regions in the Far West, promoting the idea in conjunction with the
distribution of a number of recently introduced or developed long and medium staple varieties. At
times local USDA scientists withheld the distribution of the new seed until a one-variety structure
was in place. The first one-variety community began in 1912 with the distribution of Yuma cotton
in the Salt River Valley of Arizona.46 At about the same time Durango was grown in a singlevariety community in the Imperial Valley of California. After 1920 Acala, which the USDA had
introduced from Mexico in 1907, became an important one-variety cotton in many western areas.47
The initial efforts were often loosely structured. As an example, to gain access to Acala seed,
growers in Riverside County organized the Acala Cotton Growers’ Association of the Coachella
42
By the mid-1930s, the USDA had initiated genetic and breeding research programs in every important cotton
producing state. Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 665.
43
Cook, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 33.
44
Even the few one-variety proponents who addressed this concern typically argued that under the prevailing
adverse conditions each farmer stood to gain from adopting the community’s improved seed. Willis, “One-Variety
Cotton,” pp. 3-4.
45
Cook, “Cotton Improvement,” pp. 397-410; Cook, “Local Adjustment,” p. 41.
46
The North Carolina Agricultural Experiment Station began work on community production around 1915, but it is
not clear if any communities were actually formed at that time. Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 75.79.
47
Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 697; after Acala was introduced it took researchers several years to select and
develop outstanding strains suitable for commercial use. Ibid., p. 689. Durango was another recent Mexican
introduction and Yuma and Pima were the product of USDA breeding programs in the Southwest and depended largely
on crosses of Egyptian cultivars with Sea Island cotton.

10

Valley in 1920. By 1923 the region’s farmers had voluntarily planted Acala on over 96 percent of
their cotton acreage. It was only after the fact, in order to prevent the mixing of seeds at gins and
cross-pollination, that Riverside County gave legal protection to the district in 1924 by passing an
ordinance declaring the county a pure seed district.48 These western initiatives, as well as scattered
efforts in southern states, generally met with mixed results as farmers and USDA officials
experimented with varieties and structures. Most one-variety districts reported higher yields and
increased premiums, but for a number of reasons (including problems of free riding from nearby
farmers and inadequate supplies of the one-variety seed to serve a given area) many of the early
districts were short-lived.49
A giant step in the one-variety campaign occurred in May 1925 when California enacted
legislation declaring eight San Joaquin Valley counties and Riverside County as a one-variety
community. The new law represented the culmination of an extended lobbying effort by W. B.
Camp, the USDA’s California cotton specialist who had been sent west in 1917 to promote onevariety production of high-quality varieties. The law, along with the institutional structure that
evolved in 1926, would define the development of the state’s cotton industry for the next six
decades. The law stipulated that only Acala could be planted, harvested, or ginned in a district of
well over four million acres. Even the possession of non-Acala seeds was illegal (except at a few
research stations).50 The USDA’s Cotton Research Center at Shafter became the de facto sole
Acala breeder in the state, as the USDA successfully strove to keep private seed breeders out of the
Central Valley. Under this system, Shafter’s “head breeder” held enormous power, overseeing a
research program that for the next 60 years would be the only source for cottonseed for most of
California. To increase and market the seed bred at Shafter, growers organized the California
Planting Cotton Seed Distributors in 1926. Most specialized accounts credit the one-variety system
with contributing significantly to California’s high cotton yields, which over much of the twentieth
century were roughly double the national average. (In fact, many factors such as climate and
irrigation contributed to the state’s yield advantage.) These accounts also credit the one-variety
community with helping California growers earn quality premiums for their relatively uniform,
medium staple product.51
To date, neither the economics nor history literature has devoted much attention to the onevariety movement. The one exception is John Constantine, Julian Alston, and Vincent Smith’s
48

McKeever, “Community,” p. 29.
For inadequate supplies of planting seed, see Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 112.
50
In 1941 Riverside County dropped out of the program in order to grow longer staple Pima cotton, which fetched
relatively high prices during World War II. This move posed little threat to Acala growers, because of the physical
separation between Riverside County and the San Joaquin Valley.
51
For example see Turner, White Gold, pp. 55-94.
49

11

critical Journal of Political Economy article analyzing the California one-variety law.52 They
argued that in the 1970s and 1980s the legislation artificially limited California’s production,
resulting in higher prices for the state’s cotton.53 Landowners in regions most suitable for Acala
production (the community variety) benefited, while other Central Valley farmers experienced yield
losses or abandoned cotton. Constantine et al. concluded that the legislation became increasingly
inefficient and by the late 1970s was costing growers as a group about $180 million annually (over
10 percent of the annual value of the state’s cotton output). The law remained in force because a
faction of California farmers who benefited from the legislation had captured the system’s
administrative apparatus.54
Constantine et al. provide a valuable perspective on the recent history of the California onevariety law, but they say little about the early history of the state’s experience, and they ignore a far
larger, but more short-lived, southern one-variety movement. Understanding the movement outside
of California not only provides a fresh perspective on the sources of southern development, but also
helps in reevaluating the one-variety legislation in California.55
There were fits and starts in the one-variety movement in the traditional Cotton South before
1930, but few lasting accomplishments. However the USDA intensified its efforts, initiating onevariety campaigns throughout the South in 1931/32. These were often tied with education and other
cotton improvement programs. Almost all contemporary studies of early one-variety programs
52

Constantine, Alston, and Smith, “Economic Impacts,” pp. 951-74.
It is important to emphasize that Constantine, Alston, and Smith argue that the technological regulation became
increasingly costly as time passed and was clearly inefficient by the 1970’s. They are agnostic as to whether or not the
law was efficient in its early decades.
54
Constantine, Alston, and Smith, “Economic Impacts,” pp. 951-74. Constantine, Alston, and Smith were not
alone in noting that the need for different varieties on different soils could be a major problem for the one-variety
concept. Oklahoma farmers were concerned about yield losses due to the inability to fine tune varieties to local
conditions. Campbell noted that although one-variety communities increased the standardization of the product, there
was still considerable variance within a one-variety community so that the bales had to be resorted as with non-onevariety community production. Campbell, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 5-19; Campbell, “Comparisons,” pp. 7-33. Other
critics of one-variety communities feared there could be catastrophic losses should a new disease appear for which the
limited number of varieties lacked resistance. K. S. Quisenberry, “The Role of Public and Private Agencies in Cotton
Improvement,” pp. 1-8, Dallas TX, Feb. 2, 1954, Delta and Pine Land Company Records, Box XV, Miscellaneous,
Joint Cotton Breeders Policy Committee file (2/8), 1953-54 in Special Collections, Mitchell Memorial Library,
Mississippi State University. Hereafter other sources from this collection cited as D&PL archives.
55
Even the institutional structures in other Acala growing states differed. For example, the one-variety movement
started in the Rio Grande and Pecos River areas of New Mexico in 1922. There was no statewide one-variety
legislation, but by the early 1930s Acala constituted more than 95 percent of the cotton grown in the state. As in
California, the foundation seed was supplied by the USDA, a system of inspection and certification was developed for
the farms that increased the seed, and local gins developed special precautions when ginning planting seed. Between
1922 and 1932 the state’s yields increased from 201 to 412 pounds of lint per acre (roughly on par with what occurred
in California), with local observers giving most of the credit to the community production system with its pure seed
program. Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 106-108; Leding, “Community,” pp. 1-23; USDA, “Statistics on
Cotton,” p. 82.
53

12

reported immediate increases in yields and quality, along with greater financial returns to farmers.56
The movement started in Georgia in 1931. By the end of 1934, there were 45 communities in
various stages of development and preliminary work was underway in starting 25 others. The onevariety producers were immediately rewarded with higher yields, along with quality and length
premiums valued at about $7.13 an acre.57 In Oklahoma the one-variety movement began in earnest
in 1932. By early 1933 there were 6 communities with over 25,000 acres and 11,000 farmers
participating.58 In Mississippi, 14 communities were organized in 1931, with the number growing
to 33 in 1932; six of these were countywide organizations. By 1937 there were 197 communities in
the state, with members receiving an estimated average increase in revenue (stemming from
increased yields and premiums) of $8.71 per acre.59 A similar transformation of cotton production
was taking place across the South during the 1930s.
From the humble beginnings in the 1930s, the movement took off. Table 3 pieces together
key indices of the extent of the one-variety movement for the years 1934-1949. By 1946 there were
about 2,275 one-variety communities, producing roughly one half of the entire cotton output of the
United States. Table 4 provides data on the distribution of one-variety production across the
various states. Although the California one-variety program has monopolized scholarly attention,
these data clearly indicate that California was not alone in one-variety production. In fact, in 1946
California accounted for less than 2 percent of the community members, less than 5 percent of the
acreage in one-variety communities, and about 10 percent of community output in the United
States. California was different because of the size of the participating farms and the legal rigidity
of the system, not because its farmers were banding together ostensibly to overcome negative
externalities and to capture economies of scale in grading, information, and marketing.60
A clearer image of the micro-structure and daily operations of the southern one-variety
communities may be distilled from numerous descriptions in experiment station and cotton trade
publications. The organizing effort was typically initiated by a small group of local farmers
working with the county extension agent, who would call a meeting and provide a set of suggested
standardized bylaws. The proposed “Cotton Improvement Association” was to be established as a
56
U.S. Congress, Hearings, 67th Cong., 4th Sess., Part 1, February 5, 9, & 12, 1928, p. 135. The two exceptions
appear to have occurred in Florida and Oklahoma. In Florida farmers evidently made a poor choice of varieties. In
Oklahoma studies reported significant quality increases and in 1932-33 estimated added revenue of about $2.31 per
bale. But in 1933-34 the estimated added benefit to one-variety production fell to a mere $0.33 per bale. Ballinger and
McWhorter, “Results,” pp. 68-71. See Porter, “Toward Standardized Cotton,” pp. 21-22.
57
Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 67-72; Westbrook, “One-Variety Community,” pp. 3-8; and Bledsoe and
Westbrook, “History,” pp. 16-19. The $7.13 estimate comes from Bledsoe and Westbrook.
58
Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 80-88. Coruthers gives the membership and acreage for only 5 of the 6
communities.
59
Willis, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 1-2; Coruthers, “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 60-63.

13

non-profit, unincorporated cooperative association. Membership was voluntary and involved no
fees or dues. Under some bylaws, membership was “open to any cotton grower” who agreed to the
one-variety regulations; in others, new members were admitted with the approval of existing
members. Conditions for exit also varied. In some agreements members could withdraw at any
time, and those who failed to comply with community rules were automatically dropped without
penalty. Other bylaws specified a 5-year membership term. In almost all bylaws the association’s
membership periodically selected by majority rule (on a one-member one-vote basis) the variety to
be grown and elected a small board responsible for the daily operations. The association also
formed a relationship with a local gin. If only a fraction of the local growers choose to enter the
association, the one-variety community contracted with the ginner to set aside specific days or
specific machines to handle members’ crops with special care. Thus, the southern one-variety
communities were neither as compulsory nor as formal as in the California model.61
The communities acquired foundation seed from private breeders (such as Delta and Pine
Land Company, Stoneville, or Coker) or a state experiment station. A common arrangement was to
purchase annually one bushel of foundation seed (enough to plant one acre) for each 100 acres of
cotton in the community. A small number of selected growers planted this seed in isolated fields,
harvested and ginned the resulting seed cotton in a manner to ensure purity, and then exchanged the
so-called first-year seed to other members at set prices that were well below the market price of the
foundation seed. The other members agreed to plant at least one-tenth of their acreage with this
first-year seed, producing sufficient second-year seed for their remaining acreage in the next
season.62 To help maintain purity, all of the cotton grown from the foundation seed was to be
ginned under close supervision before any of that grown from the first-year seed, which in turn was
ginned before that grown from the second-year seed. The resulting third-year seed was to be sold to
the oil mill. This plan “provides for a continuous flow of new, pure breeder or foundation seed into
the community each year and a continuous outflow of old seed to the oil mill.”63
60

According to E. C. Westbrook, in 1956 all one-variety communities were voluntary except in California.
Westbrook, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 17.
61
Willis, “One-Variety Cotton;” Westbrook, “One-Variety Community;” Leding, “Community Production;”
Wasson, “One Variety Cotton;” Lowery, “Cotton;” and Rains, “Cotton.”
62
This method of expanding the seed supply represented a large-scale collective implementation of the 1-10-100
technique recommended by extension agents and seed companies (such as Coker’s) to individual farmers for
maintaining pure seed. Coker’s, Spring 1917, p. 16. For a detailed guide on how to organize a one-variety community
see Bode Hughes, “Organizing Communities,” D&PL Company Records, Box XV, Miscellaneous file (2/2), D&PL
archives.
63
U.S. Congress, Hearings, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October 10, 1947, p. 960.

14

SMITH-DOXEY CLASSING

During the mid-1930s, the one-variety movement pushed beyond its campaign to restructure
cotton production into a more long-lasting effort to reform marketing. Given the prevailing weak
market incentives to produce higher quality cotton, farmers in many one-variety communities
complained that they were not being properly rewarded for their labors. In 1937 President
Roosevelt signed the Smith-Doxey Cotton Classing Act that was meant to complement the
traditional one-variety communities.64 The act that went into effect in 1938 made free market news
service and cotton classing available to members of all organized cotton improvement groups. The
act was to be largely self-supporting (through the sale of the sample material) and benefit almost
everyone up and down the marketing chain except perhaps local buyers-graders. Smith-Doxey
classification cards became accepted within the trade, cutting marketing costs by reducing the need
to repeatedly re-sample and re-grade cotton bales every time they changed hands. The primary aim
of the program was to better align the incentives given to small farmers by narrowing the
discrepancies between grading in local and central markets. Under the Smith-Doxey program
farmers could mail cotton samples to one of 31 central locations established throughout the Cotton
Belt and within a few days receive by return mail a government certified “green card” specifying
the cotton’s grade, length, etc. There was a catch. To qualify for the free services a farmer had to
be a member of an organized cotton improvement group with at least 10 members. These SmithDoxey districts were typically much less formal than one-variety communities, and in some cases
simply represented an agreement between a group of farmers and a ginner to provide special care in
handling the group’s one variety. The Smith-Doxey districts played no role in breeding, increasing,
or marketing seed. A bureaucratic difference was that Smith-Doxey groups were organized out of
the USDA Agricultural Marketing Service, whereas the One-Variety Community project was under
the aegis of the Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering. On the ground, the
cooperative extension service administered both programs.65
A pair of USDA belt-wide surveys on classification practices and the use of information in
the 1935-36 and 1947-48 crop years provides some sense of the changes wrought by the SmithDoxey Act. The first survey, conducted by John W. Wright, revealed just how poorly informed
many growers were when they sold their cotton before the act.66 This survey of 101 local markets
64

U.S. Congress, Authorizing the Secretary, 75th Cong, 1st Sess., Report No. 143, February 24, 1937, pp. 1-3, and
U.S. Congress, Letter, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., Vol 81, Part 3, p. 3164.
65
Betts, “Green Card,” pp. 13-16; USDA, “Report of the Chief,” pp. 36-39.
66
Wright, Marketing Practices.

15

found that 36 percent of growers sold their cotton with no information about general market prices
except their price offer, and that 60 percent of growers (accounting for 60 percent of the crop) sold
their cotton without knowing its grade or staple length. Even when growers reported knowledge of
their cotton’s quality at the time of sale, the most common source of this information was the buyer
(29 percent of cotton). Less than 10 percent of cotton was classified by impartial parties—the
USDA, licensed classers, warehousemen, factors, or ginners.67 There was widespread
dissatisfaction with poor state of market information. Nearly six-tenths of cotton growers reported
a willingness to maintain a self-supporting sampling service to provide official classification. Most
ginners surveyed (84 percent) also favored such a service. By way of contrast, most first-buyers
disliked the idea and reported a disinclination to base their purchases on official classes. The
market situation illustrated in this report, especially the weak bargaining position of growers in
local cotton markets, created pressures for reform.68
The 1947 follow-up study revealed substantial improvements in price and quality
information available to growers since 1935.69 In the 1947-48 crop year only about 25 percent of
growers, who accounted for about 15 percent of U.S. cotton output, sold without having
independent information about general cotton prices. Only 45 percent of growers (with 30 percent
of the cotton) sold their crop without knowing its quality (again down from the 60 percent of
producers and output in the 1935-36 season). In 1947-48 growers with impartially provided quality
information sold 52 percent of the cotton crop, up from just 9 percent of the crop in 1935-36. The
spread of the Smith-Doxey system accounted for much of the change. In 1947-48, 40 percent of the
crop in the markets studied received green cards (Form 1 classifications) by the time of sale.70 The
study concluded that in 1947 growers “generally occupied a stronger bargaining position than in
67

Ibid., pp. 20-23. Besides surveying growers, the study also queried first-buyers regarding their practices. These
buyers reported relatively little cotton—only 11 percent—was purchased without any effort to classify the cotton in
individual bales. The author expressed skepticism, however, about the thoroughness of the first-buyers’ own
classification efforts. Only one-third of first buyers owned or had access to a copy of the official cotton standards.
Ibid., pp. 29-30. The problems associated with imperfect information about quality obviously were not limited to
cotton, and during the first half of the 20th century the USDA established standards for grading most agricultural
products. Given the technology of the time, classing cotton was probably more difficult than grading most major crops.
68
Ibid., pp. 60-62.
69
Soxman, Marketing. This study covered 98 of 101 local markets analyzed in the 1935-36 study.
70
Ibid., pp. 12, 69. The use of the Smith-Doxey system was unevenly distributed across the cotton belt and over
farms of different sizes. Virtually all cotton growers in Arizona, California, and New Mexico received Form 1 classing,
as did about one-half of the growers in Arkansas, Oklahoma, and Texas, and one-quarter of the growers in Alabama,
Georgia, and Mississippi., Ibid., p. 16. Larger growers were far more likely than smaller farmers to sell on the basis of
Form 1 classification, Ibid., pp. 12, 16, 62, 69. Many buyers expressed an unwillingness to use the government
classification system.
A study conducted in the same crop year by Southern Regional Cotton Marketing Project comparing the behaviors
of participants and non-participants in one-variety communities found that, except in the High Plains, participants were
far more likely to use USDA classification services. Faught, “Cotton,” p. 28.

16

1935” when “most growers reported knowing neither the market price nor the quality of their cotton
at the time of sale.”71
The Smith-Doxey program apparently went a long way to correcting the problems
highlighted in the cotton pricing studies of the 1920s and 1930s. For example, based on a survey
that recorded the pricing of about 300,000 bales of cotton in 24 local markets across the cotton-belt
over the 1951-52 to 1953-54 seasons, William Faught concluded that:
prices to growers in markets where cotton is sold on the basis of Smith-Doxey cards … reflected
central market differentials for grade and staple rather fully and accurately. In markets where
growers did not have or did not use reliable quality information in the sale of their cotton, local prices
reflected little, if any, of the central market differentials.72

In local markets where most “cotton was sold on the basis of Smith-Doxey cards” the price
reflected, on average, 78 percent of central market differentials whereas in local markets where
“cotton quality information was not readily available to growers” the price reflected only 3 percent
of differentials.73 As officials at the Texas agricultural extension service put it: “Smith-Doxey has
probably done more than anything else to breach the traditional system of hog ‘round buying.’”74
As a result of the advantages of the Smith-Doxey program, participation rapidly increased.
Table 5 provides summary data of the growth of the program between 1938 and 1952. By 1951
about 65 percent of American cotton was being graded under this system. The diffusion of this new
organizational form proceeded at a pace rivaling the era’s better known mechanical and biological
technologies. In the 1954 season just under three-quarters of the U.S. crop was classified under the
program. And from the mid-1960s to the present, Smith-Doxey cotton represented roughly 95
percent of the crop.75 In summary, detailed quantitative studies on the diffusion and impact of
Smith-Doxey services suggest that the program had a significant impact on narrowing the gap
between local and central markets in cotton classing.76
71

Soxman, Marketing, pp. 2, 69.
Faught, “Cotton Price” p. 3. Faught noted that farmers who were enrolled in the Smith-Doxey service but did
not use the green card at the time of sale frequently did not receive full central market differentials. Often these farmers
sold their cotton so quickly after ginning that the government classification information was not yet available. Ibid., p.
22.
73
Ibid., pp. 14-15 and 26-27. As is often the case in the American federal system, experiments initiated by
individual states subsequently provide a model for national programs. This appears to have been the case with the
Smith-Doxey classification system. In the early 1920s, at the urging of local Farm Bureaus, the California State
Department of Agriculture began a public classing service. In addition, farmers in some areas organized selling
agencies to handle bulk sales. The combination of these programs resulted in a price premium of “1½ to 3 cents a
pound over that [cotton] of similar grade sold independently in the local yard on the same day.” The fact that California
Farm Bureau members, who in the main would have been relatively educated and informed producers, requested and
benefited from such a program suggests that the benefits for most southern producers could have been substantial. R. E.
Blair, “Grade,” pp. 628-31.
74
Texas A&M College Extension Service, New Agriculture, p. 37.
75
USDA, Consumer and Marketing Service, “Story,” n.p.
76
We do not know the extent of double counting in the data on one-variety communities presented in Table 3 and
the Smith-Doxey data shown in Table 5. But from Brown and Ware’s account it is likely that many one-variety
communities were Smith-Doxey groups, but that Smith-Doxey groups generally were not enumerated as one-variety
72

17

The one-variety community movement and the Smith-Doxey program at the same time ran
counter to and reinforced the larger AAA acreage reduction and price support programs that
became fixtures of the cotton economy in 1933. The main push of the early AAA programs was to
plow up cotton land in 1933 and later to restrict acreage to deal with the problem of “over
production.” The one-variety community movement helped increase yields and added to total
output. On the other hand the movement also encouraged higher quality production, increasing the
competitiveness of American cotton and raising farm incomes. Paradoxically, the AAA’s early
price support programs gave many cotton farmers an incentive to reduce quality at the same time
that AAA officials were touting the benefits of higher quality production. This is because “up to
1938 cotton loans were made at a flat rate regardless of grade and staple length,” thereby generating
a form of Gresham’s law with bad cotton driving out good.77 Starting in 1938 loan differentials
became based on the price differences of each staple length and grade in 10 spot markets, thus
giving farmers a stronger incentive to produce higher quality cotton. By making grading services
widely available, the Smith-Doxey Classing Act helped facilitate this change in loan policy.

THE REVOLUTION IN U.S. COTTON PRODUCTION

There were many quantitative indices of the revolution in U.S. cotton production, including
changes in cotton quality and in varietal concentration. Just as the one-variety advocates had
planned, there was an almost immediate increase in the staple length in one-variety districts
compared to nearby areas. The aggregate data on the length of U.S. cotton reflected these
developments. Figure 2 shows that between 1928-33 and 1945-49 the average length of U.S.
upland cotton increased by about one-eight of an inch, or four staple lengths. This was
accomplished by the systematic substitution of medium-staple varieties for short-staple varieties.
The percentage of upland cotton 29/32 of an inch and less fell from over 50 percent in 1928-32 to
less than 14 percent in 1944-49. Between 1928-30 and 1946-47 the percent equal to or greater than
1 inch increased from about 22 percent to about 73 percent. Mississippi has traditionally been
known for producing high quality cotton. Writing in 1950, J. F. O’Kelly noted that “twenty years
ago only 31 per cent of the cotton produced in Mississippi was 1 to 1-1/32 inches. Currently 92 per

communities. In addition, Brown and Ware noted that after 1948 Smith-Doxey groups “have taken the place of onevariety communities in many areas, especially in large portions of the main Cotton South.” This implies that it is at
least possible, even likely, that by 1946 well over 50 percent of U.S. cotton production came from one or the other of
these forms of community organizations. Brown and Ware, Cotton, p. 83.
77
Shepherd, Agricultural Price Control, pp. 64-72. Although Shepherd is correct for many pre-1938 years, it
appears that the AAA loan programs in 1933 and 1934 offered two rates—one rate for cotton classed as low middling

18

cent of the State’s cotton is in this staple range.”78 At the other end of the scale, cotton less than
one inch fell from 45 percent in 1928-30 to about 2 percent of Mississippi’s production in 1946-47.
Similar progress occurred across the Cotton Belt. As an example, “the South Carolina crop went
from an estimated 20 percent cotton stapling 15/16 inch and longer in length in 1926 to over 97
percent of such lengths in 1943. With this increase in length there has also been an increase in per
acre yield.”79 A number of factors such as changing cultural practices surely contributed to the
change in cotton quality and yields. But the rapidity of the change (with local yield increases and
longer staples reported within a couple of years following the introduction of a community), and
widespread contemporary testimony point to the one-variety movement as an important catalyst for
the changes.80
In addition to promoting the production of longer-staple cottons, the one-variety program
contributed to a dramatic decline in the number of varieties of cotton grown in the United States.
One-variety advocates saw this decline in bio-diversity as a positive step. One of the USDA’s
initial goals was to significantly reduce the number of varieties, in order to eliminate inferior
cottons, to reduce the problems of cross-pollination and gin mixing, and to promote standardization
of the resulting product. Nobody really knows how many varieties and strains of cotton were being
grown in the American South in 1930. In 1907 Tyler listed over 600 varieties, and given the
tendency for the number to increase due to mutations and cross-pollination, it is likely that
substantially more existed at the dawn of the one-variety movement. Westbrook claimed that there
were about 300 varieties being grown in Georgia alone in 1930.81 Many of these so-called varieties
or better of 7/8th inch staple and another for cotton less than 7/8th inch staple. Still even the two-rate system was a far
cry from the myriad oan rates in effect in 1938 and after. Richards, Cotton and the AAA, pp. 213-230.
78
O’Kelly, “Cotton,” pp. 36-37.
79
U.S. Congress, Testimony of George J. Wilds, in Hearings, 78th Cong., 2nd Sess., December 4-9, 1944, p. 399.
Wilds was the president Coker’s Pedigreed Seed Company.
80
For one example attributing the improvements to the one-variety-community movement and of the rapidity of the
change see Ware, “Plant Breeding,” p. 662. According to most commentators one-variety communities facilitated
education campaigns and provided incentives that stimulated the adoption of better cultural methods. See Brown and
Ware, Cotton, p. 84. Our assessment of the premiums and discounts suggests that the economic significance to farmers
of increased fiber length was probably much less than the impact of higher yields. Over the period 1930-60 increasing
the staple length by 1/8 of an inch from a base from 7/8 to 1 inch (the rough range that applied to most farmers)
generally resulted in a premium of only 5-10 percent. The premiums were non-linear because for increases in length for
longer cottons the premiums were much larger. The relatively small premium in the length range applicable to most
farmers may represent yet another example of what agricultural economists refer to as the “Cochran Effect,” meaning
that the benefits of a technological change are largely passed on to consumers. According to O’Kelly, “Cotton,” p. 51,
“Varieties producing a medium staple length (1 to 1 3/32 inch) have been the favorites for at least two decades. In
many of the Cotton Belt states 75 to 95 per cent of the cotton produced is in this length range. This fact has
considerably reduced the discounts in the markets for lengths just shorter than one inch and has greatly increased the
premiums paid for lengths 1 1/8 inches and longer.”
81
Westbrook, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 16. Westbrook’s assertion that 1200 varieties had been grown in the
United States in 1930 is probably a misreading of Ware. A 1947 Congressional report on cotton asserted, that before
the one-variety cotton movement, over 500 were grown. U.S. Congress, Hearings, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October
10, 1947, p. 955.

19

were undoubtedly just different local names for the same variety, but the exact number is not so
important as the general magnitude in relation to what existed after the one-variety movement
picked up steam. With rare exceptions, such as the Acala communities in the West, no single
variety dominated a given region or state in 1930. This situation changed rapidly.
In 1954 only 10 varietal types (a variety such as Acala had several strains) accounted for
over 77 percent of the cotton grown in the United States, and 5 pure varieties accounted for almost
52 percent of the nation’s crop. A single variety (Deltapine 15) made up 25.5 percent of all U.S.
cotton acreage.82 Contemporaries credited the one-variety campaign with playing a major role in
causing the concentration of varieties. As an example, according to the 1947 Congressional
hearings on cotton quality “the one-variety program has reduced the number of varieties grown and
standardized the entire crop of the organized areas on a few improved high-yielding varieties.”83
Brown and Ware were equally emphatic: “The cotton-varietal-standardization movement...has
practically made over the situation in cotton varieties in America and has thereby contributed
greatly to quality improvement of cotton.”84
State-level data offer a clearer sense of the movement toward varietal concentration, because
by the early 1950s several states had effectively become de facto one-or-two variety enclaves (see
Table 6). These enclaves transcended state boundaries; as an example, Coker 100 Wilt comprised
over 95 percent of the cotton grown in South Carolina, North Carolina, and Virginia. In many
states the extent of de facto one-variety production far exceeded the production of official onevariety communities. Even in states with a greater number of varieties, such as Texas, a given
region likely had a high concentration of a specific commercial variety whether or not there was a
formal association of farmers.85 In 1952, 35 percent of U.S. cotton was ginned in counties where
one variety comprised 90 percent or more of acreage, and 46 percent came from counties where one
variety accounted for 75 percent of the acreage.86
82

Brown and Ware, Cotton, p. 97.
U.S. Congress, Hearings, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October 10, 1947, p. 960. With the introduction of onevariety communities the decline in the number of varieties happened fairly rapidly in local areas. As an example, the
county agent for Carroll County, Georgia, reported that between 1933 and 1937 the land in one variety went from a few
acres to 25,000 acres and the number of varieties grown in the county had dropped in half. Wiley, “Cotton,” pp. 46-47.
84
Brown and Ware, Cotton, p. 98.
85
The High Plains region of Texas and Oklahoma has been an outlier, following a different path of technological
development from the rest of the Cotton South and the Far West. Farmers on the High Plains adopted a low input and
low output strategy of production resulting in lower quality and lower yields than other regions. High Plains farmers
were more likely to use strippers instead of spindle pickers, and they have traditionally used fewer chemicals to control
insects, diseases, and weeds. Farmers in this region were far more likely to reuse their own seed or buy seed from local
producers. As a result, national seed breeding companies largely avoided the region and did not invest in developing
better varieties tailored to its needs.
86
Compiled from USDA, Production and Marketing Administration, Cotton Branch, Cotton. The shares are based
on 1952 acreage and 1951 ginnings. With the concentration in varieties came a parallel concentration in the number of
83

20

Across the South local studies reported net benefits to one-variety community members
similar to those we reported above. In addition, USDA scientists generated a number of more
global estimates. In 1943 the Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils and Agricultural Engineering
estimated that one-variety producers were receiving an additional return of $7.50 an acre. In 1945,
C. B. Doyle reported a benefit of about $7.00 an acre to participating growers. He further reported
that the USDA had invested $800,000 from 1911 through 1944 in creating the one-variety
community system, and that this investment had generated an annual return in excess of
$56,000,000 in 1944 alone. In 1950 the USDA estimated that one-variety communities had
generated an increased value to growers in the “old belt” over the 1938-1945 period of $260
million. The USDA reported cumulative expenditures on one-variety community development up
to and including 1945 of less than one million dollars.87 In its presentations to Congress during the
late 1930s and early 1940s, the USDA showcased the one-variety movement as one of its high
profile programs, consistently reporting annual net benefits to participants in the range of $5 to $7
per acre.88 This compares with an average value of cotton lint of $33.90 per acre over the 1935-44
period.89 Another important indicator that the one-variety movement contributed to the revolution
in cotton production is the widespread support it received beyond the USDA, Extension Service,
and grower communities. Representatives of the cotton textile industry, prominent breeders,
leading shippers, and southern bankers all lauded the movement’s contributions.90
In light of the subsequent developments in government policy regarding intellectual property
rights in genetic materials, it is important to understand the incentive structure and position of
private seed companies regarding one-variety communities. The innovative seed companies faced a
number of interrelated problems. Such a firm’s primary contribution was its investment in research
and development to produce new plant varieties; its value added in cleaning or providing seed
treatments was generally secondary. As principally a seller of intellectual property, a seed company
had to be able to exert market power and price above marginal cost to recoup its sunk R&D
expenses. But even if a company could exercise market power, it faced the problems of a durable
good monopolist–namely, it created its own competition–to an especially severe degree. In the
textbook view, a durable goods monopolist suffers from the following time inconsistency problem:

seed breeders and seed distributors. By 1961, “four large companies produce the cotton seed that is used on 90 percent
of the planted acreage in the Southern and Southeastern States.” Waddle and Colwick, “Producing Seeds,” p. 188.
87
Porter, “Toward Standardized Cotton,” pp. 21-22; Doyle, “One-Variety-Cotton,” U.S. Congress, House
Committee on Agriculture, Research, pp. 754-55.
88
See for example, U.S. Congress, Hearings, 75th Cong., 3rd Sess., pp. 317-19 and 938-40, and U.S. Congress,
Hearings, 78th Cong., 1st Sess., pp. 328-29.
89
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics, Series K553-555.
90
Merrill, Macormac, and Mauersberger, American Cotton, p. 116; U.S. Congress, Hearings, 78th Cong., 2nd. Sess.,
December 4-9, 1944, p. 399; “One-Variety Cotton,” pp. 103-104.

21

it has an incentive to sell initially to high-demand buyers at a high price and in subsequent periods
lower prices (or equivalently offer improved quality for the same price) to attract the lower-demand
buyers. But this threat causes the high-demand buyers to lower the initial price they are willing to
offer. The preferred solution for the durable good monopolist is to lease the good, that is, sell the
services rather than the good outright. If this proves infeasible, the firm may reduce the intertemporal competition by reducing the durability of the good (planned obsolescence).91 Obviously
this reduces the value of the good to the buyer and the firm must weigh this negative price effect
against the positive effect in sustaining its market power to determine the optimal level of
durability.92
For seed producers, the problem of inter-temporal competition is especially severe because
the seed possesses the natural ability to produce multiple offspring. (For cotton, the multiple was
on the order of 10 to 30 to one.) Hence, a farmer could purchase commercial seed to meet a
fraction of his requirements and within a few seasons raise enough for his whole operation and have
a surplus to sell to his neighbors. The seed companies could partially offset this latter form of
competition through quality-control guarantees and branding. But in an environment with weak
intellectual property protection, a company could not easily or effectively prevent its gene stock
from serving as the basis of a competitor’s “improved” variety. These forces help explain why the
desideratum for commercial seed breeders was a product without the ability to reproduce naturally;
a seed such as a F2 hybrid or one with a Terminator gene.
In recent decades cottonseed companies were among the most vocal opponents of the onevariety law in California.93 Breeders also opposed more ambitious New Deal plans for the South.
Shortly after the Agricultural Adjustment Administration (AAA) began, leaders of the Cotton
Section developed a program patterned on the California model for the South. This was a relatively
centralized scheme that would have empowered the directors of the state experiment stations to
choose one variety of cotton for communities in their states. The directors were supposed to
consider the diversity in growing conditions in defining community boundaries, but the hope was
that large areas, possibly entire states, might convert to a single variety. The plan also called for an
expansion of government breeding and seed-distribution activities. According to Cully Cobb, who
91

These are only a few of the alternatives available. Another preferred solution for the durable good monopolist is
to creditably commit to a price schedule or to provide buyback offers.
92
Bulow, “Durable-Goods,” pp. 314-332 and “Economic Theory,” pp. 729–49.
93
As an example, in 1964 D&PL purportedly encouraged dissident growers in the San Joaquin Valley to campaign
for repeal of California’s one-variety law. Camp, “Cotton, Irrigation,” p. 172. D&PL began to push its breeder’s rights
outside of the California context. In the case of Delta and Pine Land Co. v. Peoples Gin Company (1982), the U.S.
district court in Mississippi ruled that the Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970 prevented the cooperative gin from
arranging the sale of collectively ginned cottonseed between its member farmers. Kloppenburg, First the Seed, p. 146

22

headed the AAA’s Cotton Section, USDA Secretary Henry A. Wallace had tentatively signed off on
the program, but at the last minute D. R. Coker convinced Wallace to scuttle it.94
But it would be wrong to conclude that such opposition was a constant. During the heyday
of the one-variety community movement in the South the major seed companies embraced the
effort and lent their support in spite of the communities’ seed multiplication and distribution
policies. In his 1938 article “Break This Vicious Circle Which Shuts You Out From Cotton Seed
Sales” that appeared in the inaugural issue of Southern Seedsman, Austin Burges argued the
“opening wedge must be one-variety communities” and that assisting their development “means
heavy extra profits for the seed dealer.”95 George J. Wilds, the president of Coker’s Pedigreed Seed
Company, spread the same message in his 1944 Congressional testimony: “the one-variety
community is the best solution for all of us interested in cotton.”96 Seed company marketing
policies conveyed the same theme. The USDA noted that “the 1947 catalog of the largest
commercial cottonseed breeding firm in the Southeast states” (presumably Coker) contained a
strong endorsement of one-variety communities, asserting that they had been of great value to
breeders, growers, and manufacturers. Coker also adjusted its breeding and marketing program to
support cotton standardization. Other breeders jumped on the bandwagon. “To further promote
standardized production two other large commercial breeders in the Mississippi Valley [most likely
D&PL and Stoneville], who furnish the foundation planting seed for the great bulk of the onevariety communities in the Central and Eastern States, have adopted the policy of retaining the
same varietal name for their new stocks from year to year, thus simplifying the continued operation
of the one-variety developments.”97 Other evidence suggests that up to the early 1950s the major
seed companies saw the growth of one-variety communities as a bonanza to increase sales.98 Dr. C.
W. Manning, an early breeder with the Stoneville Pedigreed Seed Company, recalled that his firm
gladly sold to one-variety communities knowing full well that they planned to increase the seed and
supply it to local farmers. This meant “the company had to put more salesmen on the road.”99
94

Cobb, “Cotton Section,” pp. 96-99. Camp, “Cotton, Irrigation” pp. 135-38.
Burges, “Break This Vicious Circle,” pp. 5, 6, 29.
96
U.S. Congress, Hearings, 78th Cong., 2nd. Sess., December 4-9, 1944, p. 400.
97
USDA, Report of the Administrator of Agricultural Research, p. 302.
98
Well before the onset of the one-variety community movement Coker promoted a plan whereby farmers would
buy enough seed for a seed patch and then use the resulting seed to plant their entire crop the following year. Coker
catalogs also contained farmer testimonials describing how they made money increasing and selling the improved seed
to neighbors. While initially beneficial to seed companies, such policies created competition for the firms’ future sales.
Seed certification programs and later the Plant Variety Protection Act helped reduce this form of competition. Webb,
“Private Cotton,” pp. 522-534.
99
Phone interview by authors with Dr. C. W. Manning of Leland Mississippi, February 1, 2002. Manning’s
statement referred to the period around 1950. Early C. Ewing, Sr., the head breeder at D&PL also linked the increased
popularity of improved seeds with “the phenomenal growth of one-variety communities, one-variety gins, and onevariety farms….” Early C. Ewing, “History of Cotton Varieties,” D&PL Company Records, Box IX, “History:
Published Material,” D&PL archives.
95

23

Evidently in this evolutionary stage in the development of the cottonseed business some market was
better than no market.
Before World War II, the leading private breeders were typically small and near the margins
of commercial viability as stand-alone operations. Coker’s Pedigreed Seed Company of Hartsville,
SC, the “South’s Foremost Seed Breeders,” appears chiefly to be the farm-improvement
hobbyhorse of its wealthy, public-spirited owner, D. R Coker. The firm’s weak financial record
over the 1920s and 1930s led Coker to consider handing over the operation to a philanthropic
organization, such as the Rockefeller Foundation, to support as a southern improvement project.100
The leading commercial breeding operation in the mid-South was a subdivision of the Delta and
Pine Land Company (D&PL), a 38,000-acre plantation in the Mississippi Delta. Building on its
success in creating early maturing, high yielding, high quality seed for its own lands, D&PL
became a major seed supplier. According to Fortune, the company sold “more cottonseed to
planters than any other single world agency” in the mid-1930s.101 Yet for all of D&PL’s
prominence, its sales over the 1925-1934 decade averaged only about 1,060 tons per year, which
represented less than one percent of the seed planted for the U.S. cotton crop. Figure 3, graphing
D&PL sales from 1925 to 1964, shows that this situation changed significantly after the one-variety
movement took hold. The series reveals many ups and down reflecting weather conditions and
inter-firm competition.102 Despite a 62 percent reduction in U.S. cotton acreage and a more than 50
percent decline in seeding rates, D&PL sales over the 1955-64 period were over seven times those
prevailing 30 years earlier.
It is possible to obtain a summary view of the change in the source of seed supply.
According to various accounts the vast majority of seed used before 1930 was “gin run.” As noted
above, Doyle asserted that in the 1920s and in the early 1930s only 5 to 10 percent of cotton
planting seed came from breeders and dealers. By 1955, purchased seed made up 74 percent of the
cottonseed used for planting.103 Notably, 70 percent of the purchased seed and 52 percent of all
The support that the seed breeders in the 1940s and 1950s gave the one-variety communities is somewhat
analogous to the support book writers and publishers might provide public libraries in areas dominated by illiteracy.
From the book trade’s commercial standpoint, it would be better if each reader bought the book and could not resell it
or share it with others (although advertising it by word-of-mouth would be welcome).
100
Rogers and Nelson, Mr. D. R., pp.152-73, 197; Coclanis, “David R. Coker,” pp. 105-114.
101
“Delta & Pine Land Co.,” p. 158. It is likely that quasi-public agencies in California and Texas distributed more
seed the D&PL.
102
For example, bad weather wiped out the seed crop in 1937. Later the company subcontracted seed production to
reduce climatic risks. Compiled from Annual Statements and President’s Reports, D&PL Company Records, Box 2,
D&PL archives.
103
U.S. Bureau of the Census, Census of Agriculture 1954, p. 19. The survey shows that 583,000 farmers
purchased 194,100 tons of cottonseed for planting. This information, together with the 1954 Census production data,
implies that purchased seed was used on over two-thirds of cotton farms. The total amount of cottonseed used for
planting comes from Table 192 of USDA, “Statistics,” p. 232.

24

planting seed in 1955 was comprised of certified seed.104 In 1971, only about 19 percent of cotton
farms nationally (with 19 percent of acreage) planted seeds they grew themselves. The fractions
were even lower if Oklahoma and Texas are excluded. Outside of these states, 15 percent of farms
(with 13 percent of acreage) reported using homegrown seed. At this time, certified seed was
planted on 64 percent of cotton farms nationally (and 74 percent of those outside Oklahoma and
Texas).105
The timing of the takeoff in the adoption of improved seed varieties clearly predates
adoption of the mechanical harvester because (see Table 7). In 1940, when the mechanical
harvester was in its infancy, there were 98,000 acres approved to produce certified cottonseed. At
prevailing seed yields (0.236 tons per acre over the 1946-48 period) and seeding rates (32 pounds
per acre), the output of this acreage would have been sufficient to plant less than 6 percent of U.S.
cotton land (outside California). By the 1952-54 period, there was an average of 577,000 acres
approved, producing sufficient certified seed for over half of U.S. cotton land (outside California).
Moreover, the average quality of non-certified seed also increased, because it was apt to be only a
generation or two removed from certified seed. After the mid-1950s the number of approved acres
fluctuated, but the percentage of the crop planted with certified seed continued to grow because
with improved seed varieties, delinting (see below), and improved mechanical seeders, the amount
of planting seed required per acre of cotton declined substantially.106

Paralleling the one-variety community movement was a more general campaign to improve seed varieties centered
on the activities of the International Crop Improvement Association. The Association was chartered in 1920 with
members from across the United States and Canada. The aims were to limit fraudulent practices in the seed business,
prevent the loss of valuable varieties as a result of contamination with other varieties, and develop international
standards for seed identification and distribution. The Association developed field and laboratory standards, regulations
to ensure proper isolation and handling of seed breeding and increase programs, a system of uniform seals and tags to
identify pure seed, and uniform definitions for classification and certification. The Association also successfully
lobbied to obtain legal backing for its standards. The Association established uniform cottonseed certification standards
in 1926. As the terminology evolved, “foundation seed” was developed by the breeder; “registered seed” represented
the first year’s multiplication of foundation seed (under tightly controlled conditions); and “certified seed” represented
the multiplication of registered seed (again, under controlled conditions). Hackleman and Scott, History, pp. 1-67. See
USDA, “Marketing Cotton Seed,” pp. 73-74 for a discussion of the severe problems concerning quality standards in the
market for planting cottonseed circa 1920.
104
The data on certified seed come from Saunders, Report 1954, pp. 47-50 and 102. The certified seed data omit
seed produced by government agencies in California (and likely in other states) and thus understate the total production
of high quality seed. The shares reported in the text include our estimates for the pure seed used in California.
105
U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1969 Census.
106
Hackleman and Scott, History, p. 53. Acres planted come from USDA, “Statistics,” p. 63. By 1980, nearly all
planting seed outside the High Plains was certified. Although early accounts claimed that delinting saved about 20
percent of the planting seed, increases in seed quality and improved cultural methods led to further declines. Between
the 1930s and the 1990s, seed planting rates outside the High Plains declined from about 34 pounds per acre to as low
as 8 pounds an acre.
The general seed literature often presents figures indicating that in the recent period U.S. planting cottonseed is
split 50-50 between homegrown and commercial sources. See, for example, Butler and Marion, Impacts. This view is

25

THE DEMISE OF THE ONE-VARIETY MOVEMENT

By the mid-1950s the USDA had de-emphasized its one-variety community campaign in the
South. After 1952, the USDA Bureau of Plant Industry “relinquished much of its part” in the onevariety program and began closing many of its regional offices. By the end of 1954, the program
was “turned over to the agricultural extension services.”107 In roughly the same period, the
Agricultural Marketing Service also de-emphasized the requirement that farmers be members of a
cotton improvement group, opening up Smith-Doxey classification to farmers who contacted their
county agents.108 From the USDA’s perspective, the program had served its purpose of educating
farmers about the importance of growing high-quality cotton and a number of technological and
institutional changes made the one-variety concept less appealing. The maturation of a commercial
seed industry able to supply abundant quantities of high-quality foundation seed was an important
reason for the demise of one-variety communities in the traditional Cotton South. With the
increased presence of quality private breeders and strict new seed certification systems, the seed
increase activities of one-variety communities became unnecessary. At this juncture the South took
a different path than California where a legally entrenched bureaucracy, with its own internal seedbreeding program, prevented competition from private breeders. Southern one-variety
communities, which were more loosely organized and did not have in-house research and breeding
operations, were always dependent on private breeders or experiment stations for their foundation
seed.
The development of high-quality varieties that gained favor over wide areas was just one of
a series of economic and technological changes that made one-variety communities obsolete in the
South and may help account for the finding that California’s system was inefficient by the late
1970s. Among the most important of these changes was the development and diffusion of acid
delinting (and later other chemical treatments) of planting seed. This technology would eventually
strengthen the position of commercial seed companies, increase on-farm productivity, and facilitate
the mechanization of the last major bastion of hand labor in the production of cotton.
When upland cotton is ginned, the seeds remain “fuzzy” because the gin fails to remove all
of the lint. Throughout the ages farmers planted fuzzy seed and then chopped (thinned) the cotton

incorrect. In tracking back the citation chain, we have found no solid basis for this conventional estimate. Indeed, it
conflicts with 1971 survey results in the special report on cotton in the 1969 Census of Agriculture.
107
Westbrook, “One-Variety Cotton,” p. 17. In most areas of the South, the state extension services had folded the
one-variety program into the new “Seven-Step Cotton program” beginning in 1945. This program also addressed
emerging issues such as cotton mechanization and chemical application. USDA, Report of Cooperative Extension
Work, 1946, p. 29.

26

plants to obtain an even stand. Chopping cotton was a labor-intensive activity, requiring nearly as
many worker-hours as picking. Fuzzy seeds worked poorly with mechanical seeders because they
would clump together and clog the machines. Clumping also made it difficult to obtain a wellspaced, uniform stand difficult whether the seed was planted by hand or by machine. More precise
planting to a row greatly reduced the need for chopping, increased yields, and allowed for more
efficient machine cultivation.109 The solution was to delint the cotton, using one of several
technologies. In California, the use of machines to delint planting seed dates to the beginning of the
industry and was widespread by the 1940s.110 By the 1950s the technology had gained popularity in
the Cotton South, and it remained the most common form of delinting to the early 1970s.111
Essentially the cotton was reginned using special machinery designed to remove most of the lint.
This helped in planting with machines, but the remaining lint still made it difficult to obtain an even
stand, and thus the need for chopping continued. The next stage was to expose the mechanically
delinted seed to an intense flame to burn off the remaining lint. This improved the seeds’ handling
characteristics but not sufficiently for precision metering during planting.112 The ultimate solution
was to use one of several acid processes to chemically delint the seed. Besides allowing farmers to
mechanize seeding operations and dispense with chopping, acid delinted seed offered several other
advantages. Delinting (and indirectly the more even spacing of plants) allowed cotton to come to a
stand earlier, which was a real plus, especially given the threat of the boll weevil. In addition, acid
delinting reduced plant diseases and greatly increased germination rates. For these reasons, farmers
need much less planting seed.113
Delinting cottonseed with acid on the farm was an unpleasant and hazardous task.
Experiment station reports provided detailed instructions on how to prepare the acid and soak the
seeds, noting the obvious: “Never add water to the acid, as this causes a violent reaction.”114 For
all the benefits, the cost of the acid and the unpleasantness of the task sharply limited the number of
cotton farmers adopting the delinting technology.115 But H. P. Smith saw the handwriting on the
108

USDA Agricultural Marketing Service, “Get Your Green Card,” pp. 4-5. The Smith-Doxey services continue to
this day, although the program is now called Form 1 classification.
109
Alexander, Arkansas, p. 81; Hopper and McDaniel, “Cotton,” p. 299.
110
Camp, “Cotton Culture,” p. 8.
111
Machine delinting in the South was common earlier because the linters had value, especially during World War
I when they were used to make munitions. Agelasto et al., “Cotton,” pp. 381-83. Evidence on the use of delinted seed
for planting is sparse, but as early as 1922 D&PL’s standard practice was to sell mechanically delinted seed. Delta and
Pine Land Co. of Mississippi, Salisbury Cotton, D&PL Records, Box 1, Oral History, D&PL archives.
112
Cherry and Leffler, “Seed,” pp. 531-33.
113
Hancock, “New Method,” pp. 1-2. Accounts differ on the decline in planting seed per acre. Hancock notes
savings of 20 percent, but Alexander notes that planting delinted cotton “utilizes less than one third the amount of seed
needed for ordinary cotton production….” Alexander, Arkansas, p. 81.
114
Sherbakoff, “Improved Method,” p. 2. Bold type is in the original.
115
Brown’s comment that “some authorities recommended delinting cotton seed that are to be used for planting
purposes,” suggests the lack of adoption in 1938. Brown, Cotton, 2nd ed., p. 212. In 1943, Alexander still asserted that

27

wall in 1950 when he noted that “most cotton growers plant regularly ginned seed which are
covered with fuzzy lint. Mechanization may be influencing the trend toward delinted seed.”116 In
the 1960s with the development of improved acid technologies and with the advent of the
mechanical cotton harvester, the acid processes began to compete more effectively with machine
delinting.117 In 1970 P. R. Smith estimated that roughly 95 percent of U.S. planting seed was
delinted, with acid delinting accounting for 23 percent of the planting seed in California, about 90
percent in Texas and Arizona, 15 percent in the Mid South, and 40 to 50 percent in the Southeast.118
The adoption of delinting (and especially acid processes) reflects the interaction effects of
mechanical and biological technologies as the diffusion of one reinforced the demand for the other.
It was in the interest of farmers to have ample labor during the peak season. Thus, as an example,
adopting tractors that would save labor in plowing would only exacerbate the imbalance between
the peak and non-peak needs, potentially leading to labor shortages during the peak period.
Farmers who adopted a mechanical picker had an added incentive to reduce chopping labor
requirements, and planting acid delinted seed made that possible. Moreover, the new planting
technologies made the mechanical picker much more efficient. If plants are too widely spaced, they
develop woody branches that hinder machine performance. With delinted cotton and a mechanical
seeder, farmers could achieve a thick, uniform stand suitable for efficient machine operation, and
eliminate most of the labor required for chopping.119 The result was that, whereas acid delinted
seed was rare in 1950, it was gaining acceptance in the 1960s, and nearly universal by the late
1970s.120
delinting was relatively expensive. Alexander, Arkansas, p. 81. In the mid-1950s Christidis and Harrison still
recommended machine rather than acid delinting. They noted that the later processes were only “occasionally” used.
Christidis and Harrison, Cotton, pp. 310-11.
116
Smith, “Cultural Practices,” p. 144.
117
Elliot, Hoover, and Porter, Advances, pp. 125-26.
118
Smith, “Introductory Remarks,” p. 90. Smith claimed that 70 percent of the planting seed in Georgia was acid
delinted. Leaders in the development of the California cotton industry maintain that acid delinting came much earlier
than Smith claimed. In Arizona acid delinting appears to have been gaining wide favor as early as 1938, and at least
one commercial delinting plant was in operation by that date. “Much Delinted Seed,” p. 4. Beginning in the 1938 the
firm of Feffer-Wharton regularly advertised its acid-delinting services. Feffer-Wharton, March 1, 1938, p. 4 and March
15, 1938, p. 17. By 1962, 90 percent of D&PL seed sales in Arizona were acid delinted. Sales Department Review,
April 1962, Box 19, D&PL archives.
119
In addition the higher yields that came with improved seed and delinting directly stimulated the mechanization
of the harvest by allowing the fixed cost of the machine to be spread over a larger volume of output. Musoke and
Olmstead, p. 402.
120
In 1961 Waddle and Colwick noted that “delinting…is common throughout the Cotton Belt. Chemical
delinting, mechanical delinting, and flame delinting are used.” Waddle and Colwick, “Producing Seeds,” p. 190.
Advances in chemical delinting technology included a dry system in which hydrochloric acid was mixed with sulfuric
acid to form a gas that reacted with and crystallized the fuzz on the seed. The seeds were then treated to remove the
crystallized lint. The various steps of the wet acid process were also integrated and mechanized in large delinting
facilities.

28

The new cottonseed delinting technologies offered significant economies of scale with the
production of delinted seed typically concentrated in a few plants in any one state.121 The adoption
of delinted seed had enormous implications for the growth of the commercial cottonseed industry
that were analogous to the implications of hybridization to seed-corn producers. Corn farmers had
to purchase new seed every year because pure-line F2 hybrids lost their vigor in a single generation.
But the improved cotton varieties were not F2 hybrids and thus farmers could recycle seeds,
significantly reducing the demand for new commercial seeds. But delinting dramatically increased
the economic benefits of purchased seed relative to gin-run seed, stimulating farmers in most
regions to buy seed annually. This single technological change greatly reinforced the benefits that
cottonseed companies received in 1970 with the passage of the Plant Variety Protection Act.
Along with delinting came a number of other chemical seed treatments to control diseases
and insects. The upshot was that cottonseed in the 1960s not only was higher quality in terms of its
yield potential than seeds of the 1930s, the modern seed embodied numerous other valuable
technological features. These included greater responsiveness to the nitrogen-rich fertilizers, which
were falling in price. Thus by the late 1970s (at the time of Constantine et al.’s estimates for
California) a new division of labor had been firmly established. In most regions nearly all farmers
bought delinted certified seed nearly every year. The old practice of planting one’s own seed
obtained at the gin had become a rarity. The new seeds were produced in tightly controlled isolated
areas to help guarantee purity. These changes in seed technology, certification, and marketing,
along with the development of superior varieties that effectively captured the market in whole
regions or states, simply ended the need for formal one-variety communities. It mattered little if
seed was mixed at the gin if it was not intended for planting. In addition, the problem of cross
pollination in the field was minimized by the annual purchase of new seed, the de facto one-variety
production, and the decades of insecticide use that reduced the density of insects.122 The old
production externalities that had haunted the industry were no longer an issue. In addition the
nearly universal use of Smith-Doxey classification services, and later the adoption of extremely
accurate high volume electronic testing devices, largely solved the problems of classing cotton.
Thus, with the major exception of California, one-variety communities simply faded away, having
121

Around 1970 there were only four or five acid delinting plants in California, and only three in Mississippi. In
recent decades the production and delinting of planting seed for the entire South has largely moved to the arid west
where weather conditions pretty much ensure that the seed will not get wet. Many of the delinting operations have
moved to Indian reservations, outside the reach of the Environmental Protection Agency. In addition, new
technological advances in developing a foam delinting process have greatly reduced the negative environmental side
effects.
122
Yet a final factor in the demise of one-variety communities was the development of High Velocity Instruments
that could rapidly and accurately quantify the important characteristics of cotton samples, and the increased ability of
mills to handle less uniform cotton. These innovations reduced the premium to uniform production.

29

served their purpose in helping promote the transition to better cottons and improved cultural and
marketing practices.

CONCLUSION

In 1957 James Street published his classic, The New Revolution in the Cotton Economy. For
Street the cotton revolution involved a wholesale transformation in cotton production—a
transformation that was critical for the modernization of the southern economy. But Street’s story
of technological change focused largely on mechanization, with only occasional mention of cotton
breeding and improvement activities, and then usually in the context of how breeders were assisting
in the drive to develop plant qualities conducive to mechanizing the harvest.123 The message of
this paper is to emphasize the importance of the other revolution in the cotton economy. Biological
and structural rather than mechanical, this revolution led to a fundamental change in the source of
seed supply, in the varieties of cotton grown, and how cotton was classed and marketed. One of
America’s leading cotton breeders, J. Winston Neely offered an assessment of recent
accomplishments as of the late 1950s:
…the progress made by cotton breeders is truly phenomenal. Yields have been markedly increased.
Varietal resistance to diseases, resulting from breeding programs, has made profitable the growing of
crops where non-resistant varieties would fail completely. The quality of fiber produced by improved
varieties has been greatly increased. Characteristics of plant type, growth habit and fiber quality of
many varieties have been altered by breeding, to the extent that they are much better adapted to
cheaper and better methods of planting, culture, harvesting and processing. We would be growing far
less cotton today if we had to depend upon varieties grown only a few years ago.124

These changes, rather than the arrival of the mechanical picker, accounted for the roughly
tripling of American cotton yields and the significant increases in average staple length between
1930 and 1960.125 As Neely noted, the new biological technologies interacted with mechanical
technologies reinforcing the drive to increase southern agricultural productivity. Because of these
interaction effects with mechanical technologies, the new biological systems had a far greater effect
in reducing labor demand than analogous biological innovations in the grain sectors. Thus
123

For example, see Street, New Revolution, pp. 112-13 and 147-48. Street’s emphasis is consistent with the
broader treatment of technological change in agriculture. As an example Peter McClelland’s recent book Sowing
Modernity has a chapter on sowing that offers marvelous detail on the machines that sowed the seeds, but almost no
mention of the changing qualities of the seeds fed into the machines. McClelland, Sowing Modernity, pp. 64-93.
124
Neely, “Cotton,” p. 74.
125
As with corn, other factors such as the application of improved fertilizers, herbicides, and insecticides clearly
contributed to cotton yield increases.

30

biological innovations represent a hitherto unrecognized factor contributing to the changes in farm
tenure and scale that transformed the southern landscape in the mid twentieth century.126
What fundamentally separated the biological revolution in cotton from what transpired in
corn and most other crops was the greater role that the USDA played in orchestrating institutional
innovations. In the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, USDA research programs played a key
role in improving the quality of seed supplies of most major crops. USDA scientists searched the
globe for useful varieties, and government breeding, testing, and outreach programs made an
enormous contribution to help transform the seed supplies available to American farmers.127 In
addition, the USDA focused on improving the efficiency of seed markets. Seed embodies a
complex array of technical characteristics that are difficult for an individual farmer to assess.
Evaluations about the relative performance of different varieties and the quality of a given batch of
seed (for example, was it cleaned and stored properly, etc.) usually must wait until the harvest; and
given annual variations in growing conditions, several years may be required to make a reliable
assessment. As a result, the development of a market in seed requires particularly good information
and mechanisms for providing guarantees to farmers and building trust between seed buyers and
sellers.128 For most crops, the USDA (often following the lead of individual states) helped create
markets by developing national procedures, laws, and agencies for testing and certifying the
genetic and physical characteristics of seed. But in the case of cotton, the task of market
development was complicated by the exceptional problems in maintaining pure seed supplies, and
the failure of the system of local cotton classing to reflect the relative premiums and discounts
prevailing in central markets. These problems combined with the relative lack of education and the
more depressed conditions in the Cotton South created formidable barriers to technological
diffusion which in turn dampened the incentive for private breeders to invest in creating improved
cotton varieties.
The one-variety community movement and Smith-Doxey classification system represented
the vehicles for a comprehensive reform program that included educational campaigns and seed
certification systems. The goal was to fundamentally redesign both the production and marketing
of cotton in order to shock the cotton economy out of the prevailing low-productivity
equilibrium.129 Within a few years of the beginning of these efforts local reports were touting
126

The causality ran both ways because the decline in tenancy and consolidation of plantations undoubtedly also
hastened the adoption of the new biological technologies.
127
Olmstead and Rhode, “Red Queen.”
128
Tripp, “Institutional Conditions,” p. 24.
129
It is important to note that the problems of maintaining pure seed supplies and of grading cotton were not unique
to American growers, and that other countries, including Egypt, Brazil, Argentina, and India, experimented with onevariety communities as a solution in the 1930s and 1940s.

31

improved yields, longer staple lengths, and greater price premiums. By the 1940s, private seed
breeders embraced the one-variety movement. Incredibly, to gain a toehold in the fledgling seed
market, breeders actually encouraged individual farmers and organized community groups to
purchase small qualities of commercial seed and then increase it and sell the resulting seed
(embodying the breeder’s intellectual property) themselves. In 1949, over 400,000 cotton farmers,
producing roughly 60 percent of American cotton output, were in one-variety communities. This
represented one of the largest and most successful cooperative movements in American agricultural
history. Institutional and technological changes, along with the development of private sector seed
companies, gradually eroded the advantages of one-variety systems. In the South they simply faded
away. In California, the one-variety law and institutions were harder to dispose of, and the system
persisted into the 1990s, long after it evidently had become obsolete.

32

References
———. Arizona Producer 17, no. 1 (March 15, 1938): 17.
Agelasto, A. M., C. B. Doyle, G. S. Meloy, et al. “The Cotton Situation.” In Agriculture Yearbook
1921, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 323-406. Washington, DC: GPO, 1922.
Aiken, Charles S. “The Evolution of Cotton Ginning in the Southern United States.” Geographical
Review 63, no. 2 (April 1973): 196-224.
Akerlof, George A. “The Market for ‘Lemons’: Quality Uncertainty and the Market Mechanism.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 84, no. 3 (August 1970): 488-500.
Alexander, Donald Crichton. The Arkansas Plantation, 1920-1942. New Haven: Yale University
Press, 1943.
Andrews, Stanley. “Cotton the One Variety Way.” American Cotton Grower 1, no. 10 (March
1936): 8-9.
Andrews, W. B. Cotton Production, Marketing, and Utilization. State College, Mississippi: W.B.
Andrews, 1950.
Ballard, W. W., and C. B. Doyle. “Cotton-Seed Mixing Increased by Modern Gin Equipment.”
USDA Department Circular No. 205 (1922).
Ballinger, Roy A., and Clyde C. McWhorter. “Results Achieved by One-Variety Cotton
Communities in Oklahoma.” Current Farm Economics 7, Series 49, no. 4 (August 1934): 6871.
Barr, J. E. “Marketing Cotton Seed for Planting Purposes.” USDA Bulletin No. 1056 (1922).
Beeson, K. E. Report of Seed Certified in 1948 by State Certifying Agencies. Washington, DC: U.S.
Extension Service, 1949.
———. Report of Seed Certified in 1949 by State Certifying Agencies. Washington, DC: U.S.
Extension Service, 1950.
———. Report of Seed Certified in 1950 by State Certifying Agencies. Washington, DC: U.S.
Extension Service, 1951.
Bennett, Charles A. Saw and Toothed Cotton Ginning Developments, Dallas, TX: Texas Cotton
Ginners’ Journal and Cotton Gin and Oil Mill Press, 1960.
Betts, Ronald E. “The Green Card Pays Off.” USDA Marketing Activities 15, no. 8 (August 1952):
13-16.
Blair, R. E. "The Grade and Staple of California Cotton." California Department of Agriculture
Monthly Bulletin XVI: 12 (Dec. 1927): 628-631.
Bledsoe, R. P. and E. C. Westbrook. “History and Progress of the One-Variety Community Cotton
Work in Georgia.” Commercial Fertilizer 50, no. 5 (1935): 16-19.
Brown, Harry Bates. Cotton: History, Species, Varieties, Morphology, Breeding, Culture, Diseases,
33

Marketing, and Uses. 1st ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1927.
———. Cotton: History, Species, Varieties, Morphology, Breeding, Culture, Diseases, Marketing,
and Uses. 2nd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1938.
Brown, Harry Bates, and Jacob Osborn Ware. Cotton. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill Book
Company, Inc., 1958.
Bulow, Jeremy I. “Durable-Goods Monopolists.” Journal of Political Economy 90, no. 2 (April
1982): 314-32.
———. “An Economic Theory of Planned Obsolescence.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 101,
no. 4 (November 1986): 729-49.
Burges, Austin Earle. “Break This Vicious Circle Which Shuts You Out From Cotton Seed Sales.”
Southern Seedsman 1:1 (January 1938).
Butler, L.J., and Bruce Marion. The Impacts of Patent Protection on the U.S. Seed Industry and
Public Breeding. Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin, 1985.
Camp, Wofford B. “Cotton Culture in the San Joaquin Valley in California.” USDA Circular No.
164 (1921).
———. “Cotton, Irrigation, and the AAA.” Interview conducted by Willa Klug Baum. Regional
Oral History Office, General Library, University of California: Berkeley, 1971.
Campbell, John D. “One-Variety Cotton In Oklahoma.” Oklahoma Agricultural Experiment Station
Bulletin No. B-386 (1952).
———.“Comparisons of One-Variety With Multiple-Variety Cotton And Related Economic
Considerations.” Southern Cooperative Series Bulletin No. 41 (1954).
Cherry, John P., and Harry R. Leffler. “Seed.” In Cotton, 512-70, edited by R.J. Kohel and C.F.
Lewis. Madison, WI: American Society of Agronomy, 1984.
Christidis, Basil G., and George J. Harrison. Cotton Growing Problems. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1955.
Cobb, Cully A. “The Cotton Section of the Agricultural Adjustment Administration, 1933-1937.”
Interview conducted by Willa Klug Baum. Regional Oral History Office, General Library,
University of California: Berkeley, 1968.
Coclanis, Peter A. “David R. Coker, Pedigreed Seeds and the Limits of Agribusiness in EarlyTwentieth-Century South Carolina.” Business and Economic History 28, no. 2 (Fall 1999): 105114.
Coker’s Pedigreed Seed Company Catalog, Spring 1917. Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special
Collections Library, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
Coker’s Pedigreed Seed Company Catalog, Spring 1918. Rare Book, Manuscript, and Special
Collections Library, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
Coker’s Pedigreed Seed Company Silver Anniversary Catalog, Spring 1927. Rare Book,
34

Manuscript, and Special Collections Library, Duke University, Durham, North Carolina.
Constantine, John H., Julian M. Alston, and Vincent H. Smith. “Economic Impacts of the California
One-Variety Cotton Law.” Journal of Political Economy 5, no. 102 (October 1994): 951-974.
Cook, O. F. “Local Adjustment of Cotton Varieties.” USDA Bureau of Plant Industry Bulletin No.
159 (1909).
———. “Cotton Improvement on a Community Basis.” In Yearbook, 1911, U.S. Dept. of
Agriculture, 397-410. Washington, DC: GPO, 1912.
———. “One-Variety Cotton Communities.” USDA Bulletin No. 1111 (1922).
Cook, O. F., and C. B. Doyle. “One-Variety Community Plan Shows Numerous Practical
Advantages.” In Yearbook of Agriculture, 1933, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 132-38.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1934.
Cook, O. F. and R. D. Martin. “Community Cotton Production.” USDA Farmers' Bulletin No.
1384. (1924).
Coruthers, John Milton. “One-Variety Cotton Communities.” Ph.D. thesis, Cornell Univ., 1934.
Crawford, G.L. “Point Buying of Cotton Versus Buying on Quality Basis.” Proceedings of the 31st
Annual Convention of the Association of Southern Agricultural Workers. Jackson, MS, February
5-7, 1930.
Cox, A. B. “Cotton Classing and Standardization.” In Cotton Production, Marketing, and
Utilization , 1st ed., 318-36, edited by W. B. Andrews. State College, MS: W.B. Andrews,
1950.
Darst, W. H. “Cotton-Seed Production.” In Seed Production and Marketing, 190-212, edited by
Joseph F. Cox and George E. Starr. New York: John Wiley, 1927.
Day, Richard. “The Economics of Technological Change and the Demise of the Sharecropper.”
American Economic Review 57, no. 3 (1967): 427-49.
“Delta & Pine Land Co.” Fortune 15, no. 3 (March 1937): 125-32, 156-60.
Delta and Pine Land Co. of Mississippi, Salisbury Cotton: A New Variety, Its History and Results
Obtained from a 14,000 Acre Test at Scott Mississippi, Memphis, TN, October 1922. D&PL
Records, Box I, Oral History, in Special Collections, Mitchell Memorial Library, Mississippi
State University.
Delta and Pine Land Company Records, various documents, in Special Collections, Mitchell
Memorial Library, Mississippi State University.
Doyle, C.B. “Cotton Growing in One-Variety Communities.” In Yearbook of Agriculture, 1926,
U.S. Department of Agriculture, 263-67. Washington, DC: GPO, 1927.
———. “Multiplicity of Varieties Handicaps Improvement in the American Cotton Crop.” In
Yearbook of Agriculture, 1933, U.S. Department of Agriculture, 107-14. Washington, DC:
GPO, 1934.
35

———. “One-Variety Cotton Communities Provide for Superior Cotton Fabrics.” Research
Achievement Sheet, no. 45(P) (September 14, 1945).
Doyle, C.B., G.S. Meloy, and O.C. Stine. “The Cotton Situation.” In Agriculture Yearbook, 1921,
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Washington, DC: GPO, 1922.
Edmonds, James E. “Around the Clock on the South’s Largest Cotton Plantation.” The Cotton
Trade Journal, 24th International Yearbook, 1956-57 37, no. 17 (April 26, 1957): pp. 40-43 and
80.
Elliot, Fred C., Marvin Hoover, and Walter K. Porter, Jr. Advances in Production and Utilization of
Quality Cotton. Ames, IA: Iowa University Press, 1968.
Ewing, Early, C., “History of Cotton Varieties,” an address presented at the Fifth Annual SpinnerBreeder Conference, Greenville and Stoneville, Mississippi, September, 20-22, 1948. Delta and
Pine Land Company Records, Box IX, “History: Published Material” in Special Collections,
Mitchell Memorial Library, Mississippi State University.
Feffer-Wharton, advertisements, Arizona Producer and Arizona Farmer, various dates, 1938-1942.
Faught, William A. “Cotton Price Relationships in Farmers' Local Markets.” Southern Cooperative
Series Bulletin No. 51 (1957).
Faught, William A. “Cotton Marketing Practices in Selected Communities, 1947-48.” Southern
Cooperative Series Bulletin No. 8 (1950).
Fisher, O.S. Reports of Seed Certified in 1946 and 1947 by State Seed Improvement Associations.
Washington, DC: U.S. Extension Service, April 1947 and March 1948.
Garside, Alston Hill. Cotton Goes to Market. New York: Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1935.
Griliches, Zvi. “Hybrid Corn and the Economics of Innovation.” Science 132, no. 3422 (July 29,
1960): 275-80.
Hackleman, J. C., and W. O. Scott. A History of Seed Certification in the United States and
Canada, Appendix 1. Raleigh, NC: Association of Official Seed Certification Agencies, 1990.
Hancock, N. I. “A New Method of Delinting Cottonseed With Sulfuric Acid.” University of
Tennessee Agricultural Experiment Station Circular No. 61 (1938).
Helms, Douglas. “Revision and Revolution: Changing Cultural Control Practices for the Cotton
Boll Weevil.” Agricultural History 54, no. 1 (1980): 108-25.
Hilgard, Eugene W. Report on Cotton Production in the United States, Also Embracing
Agricultural and Physico-Geographical Descriptions of the Several Cotton States and of
California, Part 1, Mississippi Valley and Southwestern States. Washington, DC: GPO, 1884.
Hill, Susanna E. Reports of Seed Certified in 1957and 1958 by State Certifying Agencies.
Washington, DC: U.S. Agricultural Research Service, Crop Research Division, 1958 and 1959.
Holley, Donald. The Second Great Emancipation: The Mechanical Cotton Picker, Black Migration,
and How They Shaped the Modern South. Fayetteville: University of Arkansas Press, 2000.
36

Hopper, Norman W., and Robert G. McDaniel. “The Cotton Seed.” In Cotton: Origin, History,
Technology, and Production, 289-318, edited by C. Wayne Smith and J. Tom Cothren.
NewYork: John Wiley, 1999.
Howell, L. D. and John S. Burgess, Jr. “Farm Prices of Cotton As Related to Its Grade and Staple
Length in the United States, Seasons 1928-29 to 1932-33.” USDA Technical Bulletin No. 493
(1936).
Howell, L. D. and Leonard J. Watson. “Cotton Prices in Relation to Cotton Classification Service
and to Quality Improvement.” USDA Technical Bulletin No. 699 (1939).
Hughes, Bode. “Organizing Communities for Quality Cotton Production,” USDA Bureau of Plant
Industry, mimeo, Washington D.C.: December 1941,” in D&PL Company Records, Box XV,
Miscellaneous file (2/2), in Special Collections, Mitchell Memorial Library, Mississippi State
University.
Johnson, W. H. Cotton and Its Production. London: MacMillan, 1926.
Kloppenburg, Jack Ralph, Jr. First the Seed: The Political Economy of Plant Biotechnology, 14922000. New York: Cambridge University Press, 1988.
Leding, A. R. “Community Production of Acala Cotton in New Mexico.” USDA Circular No. 314.
(1934).
Lowery, J.C. “Cotton Improvement.” Alabama Extension Service Circular No. 144 (1938).
Manning, C. W. of Leland Mississippi, phone interview, February 1, 2002.
McClelland, Peter D. Sowing Modernity: America's First Agricultural Revolution. Ithaca, NY:
Cornell University Press, 1997.
McGregor, S. E. “Insect Pollination of Cultivated Crops.” USDA Agriculture Research Service
Agricultural Handbook No. 496 (1976).
McKeever, H.G. “Community Production of Acala Cotton in the Coachella Valley of California.”
USDA Department Bulletin No. 1467 (1927).
Merrill, Gilbert R., Alfred R. Macormac, and Herbert R. Mauersberger. American Cotton
Handbook. 2nd rev. ed., New York: Textile Book Publishers, Inc., 1949.
“Much Delinted Seed to be Planted by Pinal Cotton Farmers.” Arizona Producer 16, no. 24 (March
1, 1938): 4.
Musoke, Moses S., and Alan L. Olmstead. “The Rise of the Cotton Industry in California: A
Comparative Perspective.” Journal of Economic History 42, no. 2 (June 1982): 385-412.
Neely, J. Winston. “Cotton Breeders Pave the Way – for Higher Quality and Yield.” Cotton Trade
Journal, 25th International Yearbook, 1957-58, 38, no. 10 (March 7, 1958): 74-75.
O'Kelly, J. F. “Cotton Varieties and Breeding.” In Cotton Production, Marketing, and Utilization,
1st ed., 19-53, edited by W. B. Andrews. State College, Mississippi: W.B. Andrews, 1950.
Olmstead, Alan L. and Paul W. Rhode. “The Red Queen and the Hard Reds: Productivity Growth in
37

American Wheat, 1800-1940.” Journal of Economic History, 62, no. 4 (Dec. 2002): 929-966.
“One-Variety Cotton Program,” Textile World 92, no. 1, Jan. 1942: 103-104.
Osband, Kent. “The Boll Weevil Versus King Cotton.” Journal of Economic History 45, no. 3
(September 1985): 627-43.
Pike, Clarence E. “Cottonseed Improvement Associations.” Farm Credit Administration Circular
C-130. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, April 1947.
Porter, Horace G. “Toward Standardized Cotton Production.” Agricultural Situation Spring
Planting Issue 29, no. 2 (February 1945): 21-22.
Rains, J. F. “Cotton Improvement by One-Variety Community Production.” Arkansas Extension
Circular No. 414 (1938).
Richards, Henry I. Cotton and the AAA. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution, 1936.
Rogers, James A., and Larry E. Nelson. Mr. D.R., A Biography of David R. Coker. Hartsville, SC:
Coker College Press, 1994.
Roper, Daniel C. “Cotton Ginning” in US Census Office, Twelfth Census of the United States,
1900 Vol. IX Manufactures Pt III, Special Reports on Selected Industries. Washington, D.C.:
GPO, 1902, pp. 331-40.
Saunders, J. M. Report of Seed Certified in …(1951-1956) by State Certifying Agencies.
Washington, DC: U.S. Extension Service, 1952-1957.
Saunders, R. F. “A Pioneer One-Variety Cotton Community in Collin County, Texas.” USDA
Circular No. 293 (1933).
Sherbakoff, C. D. “An Improved Method of Delinting Cotton Seed With Sulphuric Acid.”
University of Tennessee Agricultural Experiment Station Circular No. 3 (1926).
Shepherd, Geoffrey S. Agricultural Price Control. Ames, IA: Iowa State College Press, 1945.
Simpson, D. M. “Natural Cross-Pollination in Cotton.” USDA Technical Bulletin No. 1094 (1954).
Smith, H. P. “Cultural Practices.” In Cotton Production, Marketing, and Utilization, 135-71 edited
by W. B. Andrews. State College: MS: W.B. Andrews, 1950.
Smith, P. R. “Introductory Remarks.” Proceedings of the 1970 Beltwide Cotton Production
Research Conferences: Cotton Planting Seed Quality Seminar. Memphis, TN: National Cotton
Council, 1970.
Soxman, R. C. Marketing of Cotton in Producers' Local Markets. Washington, DC: USDA
Production & Marketing Administration, Cotton Branch, September 1949.
Street, James H. The New Revolution in the Cotton Economy: Mechanization and Its Consequences.
Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1957.
Taylor, Fred. “Relation Between Primary Market Prices and Qualities of Cotton.” USDA Bulletin
No. 457 (1916).
38

Texas A&M College Extension Service. The New Agriculture: 1949 Annual Report of the Texas
Agricultural Extension Service. College Station, TX, 1950.
Tracy, Samuel M. “Cultivated Varieties of Cotton.” in The Cotton Plant: Its History, Botany,
Chemistry, Culture, Enemies, and Uses, USDA Office of the Experiment Stations Bulletin No.
33. 197-224, edited by Alfred C. True. Washington, DC: GPO, 1896.
Tripp, Robert. “The Institutional Conditions for Seed Enterprise Development.” Overseas
Development Institute Working Paper No. 105 (1997).
Turner, John. White Gold Comes to California. Bakersfield, CA: California Planting Cotton Seed
Distributors, 1981.
Tyler, Frederick J. “Varieties of American Upland Cotton.” US Bureau of Plant Industry Bulletin
No. 163 (1910).
U.S. Bureau of Agricultural Economics, Division of Cotton Marketing. “Grade, Staple Length, and
Tenderability of Cotton in the United States, 1928-29 to 1933-34.” USDA Statistical Bulletin
No. 52 (1936).
U.S. Bureau of the Census. Census of Agriculture: 1954, vol. III, Special Reports, pt. 11, Farmers’
Expenditures in 1955. Washington, DC: GPO, 1956.
———. 1969 Census of Agriculture, vol. V, Special Reports, pt. 3, Cotton. Washington, DC: GPO,
October 1973.
————. Historical Statistics of the United States, Colonial Times to 1970. Series K553-555.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1975.
U.S. Bureau of Plant Industry, Soils, and Agricultural Engineering. Better Cottons. Beltsville, MD:
GPO, September 1947.
U.S. Commissioner of Agriculture. Report of the Commissioner of Agriculture, 1866. Washington,
DC: GPO, 1867.
U.S. Congress. House Committee on Agriculture. Hearings Before Committee on Agriculture
Dealing With Cotton Standards, 67th Cong., 4th Sess., Part 1, February 5, 9, and 12, 1928.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1928.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1939. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 75th Cong., 3rd Sess.
Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1944. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 78th Cong., 1st Sess. 1943.
Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1954. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 83rd Cong., 1st sess., Part
4, Mar. 23, 24, Apr. 13-17, 1953. Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1955. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 83rd Cong., 2nd sess., Part
39

3, 1954. Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1963. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 87th Cong., 2nd sess., Part
3, 1962. Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1964. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 88th Cong., 1st sess., Part
3, 1963. Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1965. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 88th Cong., 2nd sess., Part
3, 1964. Washington, DC: GPO.
———. Agricultural Department Appropriation Bill for 1967. Hearings Before the Subcommittee
of the Committee on Appropriations of the House of Representatives, 89th Cong., 2nd sess., Part
3, 1966. Washington, DC: GPO.
———. House Committee on Agriculture. Hearings Before the Subcommittee on the Committee on
Agriculture, 78th Cong., 2nd Sess., December 4-9, 1944. Washington, DC: GPO, 1948
———. House Committee on Agriculture. Hearings Before Special Subcommittee on Cotton Study
of Agricultural and Economic Problems of the Cotton Belt, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October
10, 1947. Washington, DC: GPO, 1948.
———. House Committee on Agriculture. Research and Related Services in the U. S. Department
of Agriculture, vol. 1, 81st Cong., 2nd Sess., Dec. 21, 1950. Washington, DC: GPO, 1952.
———. Letter from H.A. Wallace dated March 16, 1937, Congressional Record, 75th Cong., 1st
Sess., Vol. 81, Part 3, Washington, DC: GPO, April 5, 1937.
———. House. Testimony of George C. Wilds in Hearings Before the Subcommittee on the
Committee on Agriculture, 78th Cong., 2nd Sess., December 4-9, 1944.
———. Senate. Authorizing the Secretary of Agriculture to Provide for Classification of Cotton, to
Furnish Information on Market Supply, Demand, Location, Condition, and Market Prices for
Cotton, and Other Purposes, 75th Cong., 1st Sess., Report No. 143, February 24, 1937.
U.S. Department of Agriculture. Agricultural Marketing Service. “Get Your Green Card Mr.
Farmer!” Agricultural Situation 40, no. 11 (November 1956).
———. Agricultural Statistics, 1936. Washington, DC: GPO, 1936.
———. Bureau of Agricultural Economics. Statistics on Cotton and Related Data. Statistical
Bulletin, no. 99. Washington, DC: GPO, 1951.
———. Consumer and Marketing Service. “The Story of Cotton.” USDA Marketing Bulletin No.
37 (Sept. 1967).
———. “Cotton Seed for Planting Purposes in Fair Demand.” Weather, Crops, and Markets 1, no.
3 (January 21, 1922).
———. Crop Reporting Service. “Prices Paid by Farmers for Commodities and Services, United
40

States 1910-1960.” USDA Statistical Bulletin No. 319 (1962).
———. “Marketing Cotton Seed for Planting.“ Market Reporter 1, no. 5 (January 31, 1920).
———. Production and Marketing Administration. Cotton Branch. Cotton Varieties Planted, 19501952. Memphis, TN: USDA, July 1952.
———. Report of Cooperative Extension Work (1946 and 1950). Washington, DC: GPO, 1947 and
1951.
———. Report of the Administrator of the Production and Marketing Administration, … (19461953). Washington, DC: GPO, 1947-1954.
———. Report of the Chief of the Agricultural Marketing Service. Washington, DC: GPO, 1941.
———. Report of the Administrator of Agricultural Research, 1947. Washington, DC: GPO, 1948.
———. Report of the Secretary of Agriculture,… (1956-57,1959-62, and 1966). Washington, DC:
GPO, 1957-58, 1960-63, and 1967.
———. “Statistics on Cotton and Related Data, 1920-73.” USDA Statistical Bulletin No. 535.
(1974).
U.S. Office of Marketing Services. Report of the Director, … (1942/43-1944/45). Washington, DC:
GPO, 1943-1945.
Virts, Nancy. “The Efficiency of Southern Tenant Plantations, 1900-1945.” Journal of Economic
History 51, no. 2 (June 1991): 385-95.
Waddle, Billy M., and Rex F. Colwick. “Producing Seeds of Cotton and Other Fiber Crops.” In
Yearbook of Agriculture 1961, 188-92. Washington, DC: GPO, 1962.
Ware, J. O. “Plant Breeding and the Cotton Industry.” In Yearbook of Agriculture, 1936, 657-744.
Washington, DC: GPO, 1936.
Wasson, R. A. “One Variety Cotton Improvement Association.” Louisiana State University
Division of Agricultural Extension Circular No. 182 (March 1939).
Webb, Henry W. “Private Cotton Breeding in the Southeast.” 1998 Proceedings of the Beltwide
Cotton Conferences, vol. 1, 522-34. Memphis, TN: National Cotton Council, 1998.
Westbrook, E. C. “One-Variety Community Cotton Production.” University of Georgia
Agricultural Extension Service Bulletin No. 449 (1935).
———. “One-Variety Cotton Communities.” Crops & Soils 8, no. 6 (March 1956): 16-17.
Whatley, Warren C. “Labor for the Picking: The New Deal in the South.” Journal of Economic
History 43, no. 4 (December 1983): 905-29.
Wiley, G.F. “Cotton Improvement in Carroll County, Georgia, Through Use of the One Variety
Community Plan of Production.” In Proceedings of the 39th Annual Convention of the
Association of Southern Agricultural Workers, Atlanta, GA, February 2-4, 1938.
Willis, J. W. “One Variety Cotton Community Organization.” Mississippi Agricultural College
41

Extension Circular No. 96 (1938).
Wright, Gavin. Old South, New South: Revolutions in the Southern Economy Since the Civil War.
New York: Basic Books, 1986.
Wright, J. W. Marketing Practices in Producers' Local Cotton Markets. Washington, DC: USDA
Bureau of Agricultural Economics, May 1938.

42

Table 1: Average Staple Lengths (in 32ds of an inch)
1880 1913 1928-30
Alabama

32.9 29.8

Arizona

28.4
32.8

Arkansas

33.2 30.4

31.2

California

33.8

Florida

28.8

Georgia

34.1 30.6

29.0

Louisiana

34.2 31.4

31.0

Mississippi

33.5 31.4

32.8

Missouri

31.0

New Mexico

33.5

North Carolina
Oklahoma
South Carolina

33.9 29.3

29.7

32.6

29.7

39.5 29.8

30.4

Tennessee

29.9

Texas

34.4 31.4

30.0

Virginia

29.2

Other

33.7

United States

34.3 30.8

Sources: Compiled from Hilgard, Report; Taylor, “Relation;”
and U.S. Bureau of Agricultural Economics, “Grade,” pp. 2021.
United States is average of available states weighted by output

43

30.3

Table 2: Average Price Differential between 34 and 28
Staple Cottons, 1928-36 (in cents per pounds)

(1)

(2)

(3)

Local

Central

Ratio

Markets

Markets

(1)/(2)

1928

0.45

1.65

0.27

1929

0.37

1.98

0.19

1930

0.18

1.55

0.12

1931

0.23

1.03

0.22

1932

0.12

0.80

0.15

1933

0.16

1.00

0.16

1934

0.21

1.17

0.18

1935

0.21

0.97

0.22

1936

0.58

1.53

0.38

1933

--

--

--

1934

0.38

1.33

0.29

1935

0.54

0.95

0.57

1936

0.84

1.52

0.55

Season
Panel 1

Panel 2
Market
w/o PCS

w/ PCS

PCS = Public Classification System34 Staple Cotton
refers to cotton classed as 34 thirty-seconds of an inch in
length; similarly 28 Staple Cotton refers to cotton
classed as 28 thirty-seconds of an inch.

Sources: Howell and Burgess, “Farm” and Howell and
Watson, “Cotton.”

44

Table 3: Cotton in One-Variety Communities, 1934-49

Year
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949

Counties
Participating
Number Percent

161
234
312
425
495
548
550
577
549
581
500
485
nd
531
546

19
28
38
33
62
70
71
75
77
80
72
70
nd
77
79

Communities
Participating

331
511
730
1,056
1,516
1,922
2,116
2,564
2,544
2,194
1,800
1,601
1,963
2,275
2,422

Grower
Members
(thousand)
nd
nd
nd
nd
132
185
229
292
306
299
319
310
331
353
426

Production of adopted varieties
Acres
Bales
Number
Percent
Number
Percent
(thousand)
%
(thousand)
%
589
2
nd
nd
788
3
571
5
1,470
5
1,112
9
2,453
7
1,883
10
2,284
9
1,445
12
2,987
12
1,656
14
4,518
18
2,742
22
6,239
27
3,367
32
7,614
33
4,570
37
8,869
40
4,771
43
7,226
36
4,762
39
7,071
40
4,172
45
6,808
39
4,350
50
8,537
40
5,659
48
11,549
50
9,511
64
13,500
49
9,500
59

Sources: Compiled from U.S. Congress, Hearings, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October 10, 1947; USDA Report of
the Administrator, 1948, p. 319; Brown and Ware, Cotton, p. 58; U.S. Congress, Research, 81st Cong., 2nd Sess.,
December 21, 1950, p. 753; USDA, Report of Cooperative Extension Work, 1950, p. 21; and USDA, Report of the
Chief, 1941.

45

Table 4: Cotton growing in standardized one-variety communities
State Totals for 1946

Counties

Production of adopted varieties

Participating
State

Number

Percent

Communities

Grower

Acres

Bales

Participating

Members

Number

Percent

Number

Percent

(thousand)

%

(thousand)

%

Alabama

53

83

263

39,225

610

40

386

48

Arizona

6

100

9

954

151

100

143

100

Arkansas

30

57

229

10,788

580

36

546

44

California

7

100

7

5,509

339

100

435

100

84

81

241

38,417

574

47

315

57

Kentucky

2

67

2

496

10

97

8

97

Louisiana

26

70

29

22,238

404

51

133

53

Mississippi

61

81

185

49,605

867

38

410

37

Missouri

8

100

126

7,654

272

89

272

89

New Mexico

5

100

5

4,117

130

98

145

98

North Carolina

33

69

38

27,800

332

58

259

62

Oklahoma

29

59

51

13,871

271

27

78

30

South Carolina

26

62

30

26,554

421

46

329

47

Tennessee

22

79

29

26,898

345

57

291

57

Texas

91

57

354

35,955

1,499

25

508

36

2

33

3

265

3

13

1

9

Georgia

Virginia

Source: U.S. Congress, Hearings, 80th Cong., 1st Sess., Part 2, October 10, 1947, p. 962.

46

Table 5: Farmer Participation in the Smith-Doxey Cotton Grading Program
Cotton Improvement Groups
Crop
Year
1938
1939
1940
1941
1942
1943
1944
1945
1946
1947
1948
1949
1950
1951
1952
1953
1954
1955
1956
1957
1958
1959
1960
1961
1962
1963
1964
1965

Number
312
918
1,573
2,511
2,465
2,459
2,410
2,444
2,515
2,453
-------------------

Members
18,589
64,399
128,216
278,782
281,100
281,493
321,284
343,000
343,700
346,500
371,061
497,064
507,873
495,391
515,711
---551,077
----699,632
691,670
678,749
---

Samples
Classed
(1000 bales)
84
265
1,531
2,520
3,567
3,337
4,037
2,888
2,574
4,300
8,067
10,456
5,215
9,844
9,382
12,700
--11,200
----13,703
13,510
14,016
-14,311

Share of
US Cotton
Production
0.7
2.3
12.4
24.0
28.7
30.1
34.4
33.0
30.3
37.3
55.3
65.1
53.2
65.3
62.0
77.0
-81.0
85.0
-93.0
95.0
96.0
96.0
91.0
92.0
-96.0

Sources: Betts, “Green Card,” pp. 13-16; U.S. Office of Marketing Services, Report, 1942/43, p.
111; 1943/44, pp. 44-47; 1944/45, pp. 20-24; USDA, Report of the Administrator of the
Production and Marketing Admin., 1946, p. 36; 1947 pp. 33-34; 1948, p. 39; 1950, pp. 11-14;
1951 p, 13; 1952, pp. 19-20; 1953, p. 11; USDA, Report of the Secretary, 1956, p. 35; 1957, p.
39; 1959, p. 41; 1960, p. 41; 1961, p. 41; 1962, p. 41; 1966, p. 90; U.S. Congress, Agricultural
Department Appropriation Bill for 1954, p.1734; 1955, pp.1031; 1963, p.1249; 1964, p.1344;
1965, p. 84; 1967, p. 548

47

Table 6: Cotton Variety Concentration by State in 1954
Percent of Acreage Planted To:
One Variety
(percent)

State
Alabama
Arizona
Arkansas
Georgia
Illinois
Kentucky
Louisiana
Mississippi
Missouri
Nevada
New Mexico
North Carolina
Oklahoma
South Carolina
Tennessee
Texas
Virginia

Two Varieties
(percent)

37
81
62
60
72
83
84
76
40
100
57
98
26
95
57
11
95

68
86
77
80
90
98
89
82
70
100
66
99
46
97
78
21
96

Source: Compiled from Brown and Ware, Cotton, pp. 53-56.

Table 7: Acreage and Production of Certified Cotton Seed, 1940-57
Acres Approved for Certification

Certified Cotton Seed Production

(Thousands of Acres)

Year

Foundation

Registered

Certified

(Thousands of Tons)

Total

1940

98.0

1945

296.0

Foundation

Registered

Certified

Total

1946

297.7

70.4

1947

436.5

94.5

1948

506.3

129.4

1949
1950

558.9
10.4

169.1

271.0

49.1

450.5

2.9

34.1

70.1

107.1

1951

6.5

225.9

406.9

639.3

1.4

44.5

95.7

141.6

1952

9.5

277.4

414.6

701.5

2.8

76.2

104.2

183.2

1953

7.7

216.0

343.4

567.1

2.5

80.7

89.2

172.5

1954

4.9

183.7

272.9

461.4

1.4

58.5

85.5

145.4

1955

8.4

62.5

294.3

365.2

3.1

21.7

98.9

123.6

1956

6.9

120.9

246.3

374.1

2.4

34.0

61.6

98.0

1957

7.5

94.4

201.8

303.7

3.3

23.7

83.1

110.1

Sources: Hackleman and Scott, History, Appendix 1, p. 53; Fisher, Report, 1946 and 1947; Beeson, Report, 1948, 1949, 1950; Saunders, Report, 1951,
1952, 1953, 1954, 1955, 1956; Hill, Report, 1957, 1958.
Notes: Acreage and output exclude California activity.

48

Sources for Figures

Figure 1: U.S. Bureau of the Census, Historical Statistics of the United State: Colonial Times to
1970 Part 1 (Washington, DC: GPO, 1975) Series K502-03, K553-54, pp. 510-12, 517-18.

Figure 2: U.S. Economic Research Service, “Statistics on Cotton and Related Data, 1920-73,”
USDA Statistical Bulletin No. 535 (October 1974) Table 103 p. 126.

Figure 3: Compiled from Annual Statements and President’s Reports, D&PL Company Records,
Box 2, D&PL archives.

49

Figure 1: Yield per Acre of US Cotton and Corn, 1866-1995
600
corn
cotton

Relative to 1919-28 Average

500

400

300

200

100

0
1866

1886

1906

1926

1946

1966

1986

19
2
19 8
2
19 9
3
19 0
3
19 1
3
19 2
3
19 3
3
19 4
3
19 5
3
19 6
3
19 7
3
19 8
3
19 9
4
19 0
4
19 1
4
19 2
4
19 3
4
19 4
4
19 5
4
19 6
4
19 7
4
19 8
4
19 9
5
19 0
5
19 1
5
19 2
5
19 3
5
19 4
5
19 5
5
19 6
57

Distribution of Staple Lengths
100%

90%

60%
31.5

50%
31

40%
30.5

30%
30

20%

10%
29.5

0%

29 and under
30 to 31
32 to 33
34 and over
29

51

Average Staple Length

Figure 2: US Cotton Staple Length Distribution, 1928-57
33

32.5

80%
32

70%

Figure 3: Sales of Planting Cottonseed of the Delta and Pine Land Company, 1925-64
12000

10000

Tons

8000

6000

4000

2000

0
1925

1930

1935

1940

1945

1950

52

1955

1960

