                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     MIGRATION, SPILLOVERS, AND TRADE DIVERSION:
                           THE IMPACT OF INTERNALIZATION
                             ON STOCK MARKET LIQUIDITY

                                                Ross Levine
                                            Sergio L. Schmukler

                                            Working Paper 9614
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9614


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2003




We received very helpful comments from Gordon Alexander, Luca Benzoni, Stijn Claessens, Valery
Polknichenko, Helene Rey, and Frank Warnock. For help with the data, we are grateful to Pamela Dottin,
Monica Erpen, Dori Flanagan, Angela Marshall, Richard Webster-Smith, and Cheryl Workman. Levine is
grateful for generous financial support from the BSI Gamma Foundation. Schmukler thanks the World Bank
Latin American Regional Studies Program and Research Support Budget for financial support. The findings,
interpretations, and conclusions expressed in this paper are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Ross Levine and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.
Migration, Spillovers, and Trade Diversion:
The Impact of Internalization on Stock Market Liquidity
Ross Levine and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 9614
April 2003
JEL No. G15, F36, F20

                                             ABSTRACT


What is the impact of firms that cross-list, issue depositary receipts, or raise capital in international
stock markets on the liquidity of remaining firms in domestic markets? Using a panel of over 3,200

firms from 55 countries during 1989-2000, we find that internationalization reduces the liquidity of
domestic firms through two channels. First, the trading of international firms migrates from domestic
to international markets and the reduction in domestic liquidity of international firms has negative

spillover effects on domestic firm liquidity. Second, there is trade diversion within domestic markets
as liquidity shifts out of domestic firms and into international firms.



Ross Levine                                                     Sergio L. Schmukler
Finance Department                                              World Bank
Carlson School of Management                                    1818 H Street, NW
University of Minnesota                                         Washington, DC 20433
321 19th Avenue South                                           sschmukler@worldbank.org
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@econ.umn.edu
I.         Introduction

           This paper assesses the question: what is the impact of firms that participate in

international stock markets on the liquidity of the remaining firms in the domestic stock market?

An extensive literature examines “international firms,” the firms that participate in international

markets by issuing depositary receipts, cross-listing, or raising new capital (e.g., Alexander, Eun,

and Janakirananan, 1987, 1988; Foerster and Karolyi, 1998, 1999, 2000; Miller, 1999; Doidge,

Karolyi, and Stulz, 2002; and the review by Karolyi, 1998). This paper, instead, focuses on the

impact of internationalization on “domestic firms,” the firms that do not internationalize.

           Theory provides conflicting predictions about the impact of internationalization on the

liquidity of domestic firms. Consider first the “migration and spillover” argument. According to

the migration view, internationalization will induce a shift in the trading of international firms

out of the domestic market and into international markets. This may occur because foreign

markets have lower transaction costs and are more liquid (Chowdhry and Nanda, 1991).

“Spillovers” means that a drop in the domestic trading of international firms hurts the liquidity of

domestic firms.1 This could occur because of fixed costs associated with operating a market,

running brokerage firms, clearing and settling transactions, etc. Thus, a drop in the domestic

trading of international stocks increases the per trade cost of domestic stock transactions.

Liquidity spillovers could also occur if investors shift their trading to international markets. For

example, investors may seek to diversify country-specific risk. Thus, when some firms cross-list

or issue depositary receipts in international markets, investors may attain country-specific

diversification through these liquid international markets and therefore reduce their trading in



1
     Chordia, Roll, and Subrahmanyam (2000) argue that liquidity is more than an attribute of a single security.
       Individual liquidity tends to co-move with market liquidity.



                                                        1
domestic markets.2 This involves a shift out of trading domestic stocks on domestic exchanges

and into trading internationalized stocks on international exchanges. Combined, migration and

spillovers imply that internationalization reduces the domestic liquidity of international firms due

to migration, and the resultant drop in aggregate domestic liquidity reduces the liquidity of

domestic firms due to spillovers.

          Some disagree with the migration and liquidity spillover view and instead argue that

internationalization improves domestic market liquidity. In contrast to the migration view,

Hargis (2000) argues that cross-listing can transform a segmented equity market with low

liquidity into an integrated market with high liquidity.                Similarly, Alexander, Eun, and

Janakiramanan (1987) and Domowitz, Glen, and Madhavan (1998) hold that internationalization

may actually stimulate domestic trading of international firms due to the increased integration of

markets. Also, if internationalization increases transparency, this could increase the domestic

trading of international firms with positive spillover effects for the rest of the domestic market.

Other skeptics of the migration spillover view could question the existence of liquidity

spillovers, or doubt the economic importance of the impact of aggregate trading on the liquidity

of domestic firms. Thus, it is an empirical question as to whether internationalization induces

migration and spillovers, or whether internationalization boosts the liquidity of domestic firms.

          Second,     consider    the   “domestic     trade    diversion”    view,    which    argues    that

internationalization induces a compositional shift in domestic market trading.                   Firms that

internationalize may become more attractive to those trading in domestic markets because of

improvements in reputation, higher disclosure standards, the availability of more analysts that

generate more information, and the expansion of the shareholder base in the context of

2
    Ahearne, Griever, and Warnock (2003) and Edison and Warnock (2003) show that U.S. investors focus on firms
       that have internationalized.



                                                       2
segmented markets.3          Thus, traders in the domestic market may shift their trading out of

domestic firms and into the domestic trading of international firms. All else equal, this domestic

trade diversion implies less trading of domestic firms and greater trading of international firms in

the domestic market. However, some theories conflict with the trade diversion view and instead

argue that internationalization may enhance integration and thereby boost liquidity of domestic

firms (e.g., Alexander, et al., 1987; Domowitz, et al., 1998; Hargis, 2000). This could occur

because integration increases the liquidity of all firms in the local markets.                       Moreover,

integration may induce a compositional shift in domestic market liquidity toward domestic firms

as the trading of international firms migrates abroad.                 Again, theory provides conflicting

predictions about the impact of firms that choose to internationalize on domestic firms.

          To study the effects of internationalization on domestic liquidity, this paper uses

information on 3,253 domestic firms and 640 international firms across 55 emerging market

countries during the years 1989 to 2000. To measure liquidity, we use the turnover ratio, which

equals the value of a firm’s transactions in a market divided by the market capitalization of the

firm in the domestic market. We use transactions data because bid-ask spreads are unavailable

for our large panel of countries.

          The paper first examines the direct impact of internationalization on the liquidity of

domestic firms. Using annual, firm-level data, we regress the liquidity of domestic firms on the

share of international firms in the domestic market as well as country and year dummy variables.

While we cannot eliminate the possibility that an omitted factor is driving the results, we can

control for an array of firm-specific and country specific traits. We do a variety of robustness

checks controlling for firm-specific characteristics (such as firm size, sales, firm profits, the
3
    See, Baker, Nofsinger, and Weaver (2002), Coffee (1999), Lang, Lins, and Miller (2002), Merton (1987), Portes
       and Rey (1999), and Reese and Weisbach (2001). Also, Bailey, Karolyi, and Salva (2002) find that earnings
       releases impact the price and volume of international firms significantly more than domestics firms.



                                                        3
firm’s industry etc.) and various country-specific factors (e.g., trading of that country’s shares on

international exchanges, economic development, legal system efficiency, international capital

flow openness, inflation, etc.). The results are consistent across numerous specifications.

       The data indicate that as more firms become international, this lowers the liquidity of

domestic firms. This result is robust to controlling for numerous firm-specific and country-

specific traits. These initial results, however, do not shed light on the mechanisms through

which internationalization hurts the liquidity of domestic firms.

       Next, the paper studies the channels through which international firms affect the liquidity

of domestic firms. We study both the (1) migration and liquidity spillover channel and (2) the

domestic trade diversion channel. Thus, we seek to explain the mechanisms through which

internationalization influences the liquidity of domestic firms.

       To study the migration and liquidity spillover channel, we (a) assess whether the trading

of international firms migrates from domestic to international markets and (b) test whether the

domestic trading of international firms influences the liquidity of domestic firms. We find

evidence of migration: as the fraction of international firms rises, the trading of international

firms shifts from domestic markets to international markets.             That is, as more firms

internationalize, domestic liquidity of international firms falls. Furthermore, we find evidence of

liquidity spillovers. The domestic trading of international shares is strongly, positively related to

the liquidity of domestic firms. Thus, the data are consistent with migration and spillover view:

as the liquidity of international firms in the domestic market dries up because of migration, the

liquidity of domestic firms diminishes because of spillovers.

       The migration and liquidity spillover channel, however, is not the only mechanism

through which internationalization hurts the liquidity of domestic firms. In particular, we find




                                                 4
that internationalization is negatively associated with the liquidity of domestic firms even after

controlling for the migration and spillover channel. Thus, we need to look beyond migration and

spillovers to understand fully the impact of internationalization on the domestic market.

          Finally, we examine the domestic trade diversion channel. The data suggest that as firms

internationalize, the domestic market intensifies its trading of those international shares, while

trading of firms that do not internationalize wanes. This does not overturn the result mentioned

above: internationalization reduces the domestic liquidity of international shares. This result is

consistent with theories that emphasize that when a firm internationalizes this enhances its

reputation, transparency, and shareholder base in ways that make it more attractive relative to

domestic firms.         In sum, domestic trade diversion is another mechanism through which

internationalization reduces the liquidity firms that do not internationalize.

          This paper’s assessment of the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of domestic

firms is related to, though distinct from, a large literature on internationalization. First, some

research analyzes the impact of market integration on economic growth, investment, and asset

pricing.4 In this paper, we do not focus on financial integration broadly defined. Rather, we

examine the impact of the decision of one set of firms to cross-list, issue depositary receipts, or

raise capital abroad on the liquidity of the domestic firms that do not internationalize.5 Second,

an extensive literature studies the effects of internationalization on international firms. Some

papers examine the volume and liquidity of international firms in local markets after firms cross-

list or issue depositary receipts.6 Other researchers study the impact of internationalization on

4
    See Bekaert and Harvey (1995, 2000), Bekaert, Harvey, and Lundblad (2001, 2002), Henry (2000), Levine and
       Zervos (1998a,b), and Martin and Rey (2000).
5
    Various publications voice concerns of markets becoming illiquid (e.g., Bovespa, 1996; Financial Times, 1998;
       and Latin Finance, 1999; The Economist, 2000; and the Federation des Bourses de Valeurs, 2000).
6
    See Foerster and Karolyi (1998, 2000), Hargis (1998), Noronha, Sarin, and Saudagaran (1996), and Pulatkonak
       and Sofianos (1999).


                                                        5
stock prices, the cost of capital, and growth opportunities.7 A related line of research analyzes

the effect of internationalization on asset size, growth, financing constraints, and the financial

structure of firms that issue depositary receipts or cross-list.8 Although in the course of our

research we assess the impact of the liquidity of international firms on the domestic liquidity of

those international firms, the focus of our research is different. We concentrate on examining the

impact of internationalization on the liquidity of domestic firms.

          Only two previous studies examine specifically the effects of internationalization on

domestic firms. Moel (2001) finds a negative association between the fraction of a country’s

stocks that issue American depositary receipts (ADRs) and domestic market liquidity. Karolyi

(2003) also finds a negative link between ADRs and domestic market size and liquidity.

          This paper contributes to the literature on internationalization and the liquidity of

domestic stocks in a number of ways. First, this is the first paper to dissect the channels through

which internationalization influences the liquidity of domestic stocks. Thus, we evaluate the

importance of the migration/spillover channel and the trade diversion channel. Second, in

examining the potential channels through which internationalization influences domestic stock

liquidity, we examine the impact of firms that internationalize on both (a) the trading of

international firms in the domestic market and (b) the liquidity of domestic firms. Thus, besides

contributing to the recent literature on the effects of internationalization on domestic firms, we

also use our new database to augment the more established literature on international firms.

Third, we substantially expand the sample size. Our data cover 55 countries, which almost

doubles the number of countries used in previous studies (e.g., Moel, 2001, examines 28

7
    See Alexander, Eun, and Janakiramanan (1988), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Errunza and Miller
       (2000), Foerster and Karolyi (1993, 1999), Miller (1999) and Stulz (1999).
8
    See Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler (2002a), Pagano, Roell, and Zechner (2002), and Schmukler and
       Vesperoni (2001).



                                                     6
countries and Karolyi, 2003, studies 12).               Fourth, we extend the coverage of the

internationalization process by moving beyond the ADR market in New York. Specifically, we

compile data on capital raisings that include global depositary receipts, cross-listings, and private

placements in other international markets. Thus, we can more precisely classify companies as

international or domestic. Fifth, we collect information on the international trading activities of

international firms. That is, we do not simply examine whether a firm is listed abroad or not; we

incorporate time-vary trading data. This has two advantages: (a) we control for country-specific

news that influences global trading of that country’s shares and (b) we assess how the time-

varying extent of internationalization impacts domestic markets. Sixth, we control for firm

specific characteristics, including firm size and other traits, to isolate the marginal impact of

internationalization on firm liquidity while holding firm-specific factors constant.

          Finally, we stress a limitation of this paper’s analyses. We find that internationalization

reduces the liquidity of domestic firms.         We do not, however, examine the net effect of

internationalization (Hargis and Ramanlal, 1998). Specifically, many researchers show that

internationalization benefits those firms that choose to internationalize. Furthermore, research

finds that domestic market liquidity is important for the cost of capital, firm performance, and

economic growth.9 Thus, if internationalization helps international firms and hurts domestic

firms, a critical question emerges: what is the net effect for the domestic economy of firms that

cross-list, issue depositary receipts, or raise capital abroad? We leave this for future research.

          The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II discusses the data. Section III

presents the results. Section V concludes.




9
    See Amihud and Mendelson (1986), Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998), Levine and Zervos (1998a), and
       Beck and Levine (2003).



                                                    7
II. Data

        To assess the impact of internationalization on domestic stocks, we need the following

data:

           1. firm-level data on the international equity activities of firms, including
                  a. dates of capital raisings, cross-listing, and depositary receipts,
                  b. international trading data,
           2. firm-level data on domestic stock transactions,
           3. firm-level data on a range of firm attributes, and
           4. country-specific data on macroeconomic, institutional, and financial conditions.

        An important contribution of this paper is that we collect considerably more data on the

international equity market activities of companies than past studies. The data for identifying

each firm’s international activities come from two main sources: the Bank of New York and

Euromoney.

        Besides the Bank of New York’s standard database (the Complete Depositary Receipt

Directory) that contains information on current depositary receipt activities, the Bank of New

York gave us access to their historical databases and reports on (i) depositary receipt program

initiation dates, (ii) termination dates (if any), (iii) capital raisings, and (iv) trading activities.

These data form a comprehensive database on American and Global depositary receipt programs.

The historical data start in January 1956, but the vast majority of programs begin after 1980.

        We augment the information on dating the initiation of international equity market

activities with data from Euromoney. They provide the dates when firms raise equity capital in

international capital markets, including cross-listings and issuance of global depositary receipts.

Thus, the Euromoney data substantively enhances our ability to identify firms that

internationalize. The Euromoney database covers 8,795 cross-border equity issuance and cross-

listing operations from 5,665 firms in 86 countries over the period January 1983 - April 2001. In

terms of trading, we had access to data from the London and Frankfurt Stock Exchanges (LSE



                                                  8
and FSE respectively) on the trading of depositary receipts and cross-listed firm. However, LSE

trading data for these firms do not begin until 1997 and the data for the FSE do not start until

1999. Thus, they cannot be usefully incorporated into our panel studies that trace the impact of

internationalization on the liquidity of domestic stocks and also assess the dynamic effects of

trading in international markets on the domestic market. Thus, consistent with existing studies,

we do not include LSE and FSE trading data. This will underestimate the amount of trading

abroad, but this is unlikely to bias systematically the results in a particular direction. See

Claessens, Klingebiel, and Schmukler (2002b) for a description of some trends on the

internationalization of stock markets as well as their relation to country characteristics.

       Consistent with our objective of assembling a broad database on internationalization, we

classify firms as international if they (1) issue depositary receipts, (2) cross-list, or (3) raise

capital through private placements abroad. The first two clearly involve ongoing trading of

domestic stocks in foreign countries. However, raising capital through private placements is

different because the new shares are not necessarily traded abroad.            Thus, the issuing of

depositary receipts and cross-listing may involve the two potential channels discussed in the

Introduction: migration/spillovers and trade diversion. Raising capital abroad in the absence of

cross-listing, however, will only potentially involve trade diversion in the domestic market since

simply raising capital abroad cannot induce migration. As noted below, we confirm this paper’s

findings with various sub-samples.

       The firm-level domestic stock market trading data are from the Standard & Poor’s

Emerging Markets Data Base (EMDB), which was formerly collected by the International

Finance Corporation. In cross-checking with country sources, the EMDB is very accurate, but

for Argentina, we discovered that the EMDB information is inconsistent over time. Thus, unlike




                                                  9
previous studies, we circumvent this problem by collecting the data directly from the Buenos

Aires Stock Exchange.            The EMDB provides data on domestic market capitalization and

domestic value traded in current U.S. dollars by firm.                  Although the EMBD is the most

comprehensive database on firm-level trading of equities around the world, the EMDB focuses

mostly on emerging markets and does not include 100 percent of local firms (e.g., while varying

by country, the EMDB typically covers about 70 percent of market capitalization).

           We also use balance sheet data on each firm to control for firm-specific characteristics

that may influence liquidity. Thus, we control for industry effects, firm size effects, and firm

sales in assessing the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of firms in the domestic

market. For simplicity, in the results discussed below, we present the results controlling for firm

size, but the results are robust to controlling for the other firm-specific effects. We obtain these

data from the Worldscope database (Thomson Financial Company).

           The firm-level data on domestic stock market trading, the firm-level balance sheet

information, and international equity activities are all matched at the firm level over the period

1989-2000. Appendix Table 1 lists the 55 countries in the study and the number of domestic and

international firms per country, as well as summary statistics of the main variables under study.

In total, we have over 18,000 firm-year observations. Appendix Table 2 provides additional

information on data sources.10

           As a robustness check, we also control for country-specific information. Data are from

the World Bank’s World Development Indicators. Data on the efficiency of each country’s legal

system are obtained from the International Country Risk Guide (Political Risk Services).

Information on official restrictions on international capital flows is from the International
10
     Note, that some countries in our sample do not have any international firms. We keep these in the sample as a
       control sample. Importantly, we confirm this paper’s results when we eliminate countries with zero or only
       one international firm.



                                                        10
Monetary Fund’s Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions. In

additional tests, we control for economic growth, inflation, real interest rates, terms of trade

changes, time trend, and alternative measures of capital account openness that we describe

below.

         Although our data have the limitations noted above, the database has several advantages

over previous work. First, the data cover 55 countries, which – as we noted earlier – almost

double the number of countries used in previous studies and increase the power of our tests.

Second, our dataset includes information on the international equity market activities of firms

beyond depositary receipts in New York.        We collect information on issuance of equity,

including cross-listing, in major financial markets. Thus, we can much more accurately identify

which firms have internationalized. Third, we collect information on the international trading

activities of each firm with a depositary receipt program. Thus, in assessing the impact of

internationalization on domestic market liquidity, we move beyond considering whether a

company has internationalized or not. By incorporating time-vary trading data, we can assess the

dynamic effects of internationalization.




                                               11
III. Methodology and Results

           This section empirically examines the impact of international firms, those that issue

depositary receipts, cross-list, or raise new capital abroad, on domestic firms, those that do not

internationalize. To do this, we first examine whether internationalization has a direct effect on

the liquidity of domestic firms?                      Second, we examine whether internationalization affects

domestic liquidity through the migration and spillover channel.                                            Third, we test whether

internationalization influences the liquidity of domestic firms through trade diversion.

           A. Direct Effect

           1. Method

           To examine whether internationalization is directly related to the liquidity of domestic

equities, we estimate the following regression using feasible generalized least squares with

standard errors that are robust to heteroskedasticity.

              T jD, c ,t = γ 1 × ISc ,t + γ 2 × ITcI,t + θ ' M c ,t + λ1 × Fj , c ,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t .   (1)

           T jD, c ,t is the turnover ratio of domestic firm j in country c in year t, which equals the total

value of trades of firm j’s stock during year t divided by firm j’s market capitalization.11 The

superscript D designates that it is a domestic firm during the entire sample period, i.e., it never

internationalizes. We define the dependent variable in this way because we want to examine the

effects of internationalization on the firms that rely on the domestic market throughout the

sample period. By focusing on those firms that never access international capital markets, we

test how their liquidity changes as other firms internationalize. In all regressions, we control for



11
     Since in some cases the value traded is zero, we use the natural logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio in the
        regressions. An alternative measure of liquidity is the number of shares traded in one year divided by the
        number of shares outstanding. This alternative abstracts from price changes. But, it is impossible to usefully
        aggregate across different stocks to obtain country-level liquidity measures using this alternative measure.



                                                                      12
country and time effects ( nc and τ t respectively), but do not report these in the tables to save

space.

             ISc ,t is the share of international firms in country c at time t. Thus, ISc ,t is the number

of international firms from country c at time t divided by the total number of firms listed in the

domestic market for country c at time t.                      In computing ISc ,t , a firm is considered an

international firm from the year it issues a depositary receipt, cross-lists, or raises capital abroad.

If, however, the firm terminates its depositary receipt listing or de-lists from an international

exchange, then the numerator of ISc ,t falls by one.12

             ITcI,t is the aggregate turnover ratio of country c’s international firms in international

equity markets at time t. Thus, ITcI,t equals the aggregate value traded of all of country c’s

international firms in international markets divided by the market capitalization of those

international firms.

            We include the variable ITcI,t because we want to control for trading of country c’s

equities on international exchanges.                Information about a country’s political and economic

conditions may induce trading of that country’s stocks in both international and domestic

markets. This effect would be captured by a positive coefficient on ITcI,t . To assess the

independent impact of the share of firms in a country that are international on domestic liquidity,

we seek to abstract from time-varying country specific factors influencing trading. Hence, we

include the trading of country c’s stocks in international markets in regression (1).

            Mc,t is a matrix of macroeconomic and country-specific control variables. We include

gross domestic product (GDP) per capita since the level of economic development may influence
12
     Since firms can list abroad without listing in the domestic markets, this ratio could, in theory, be larger than one.



                                                             13
financial markets development (Levine, 2003). We also include an index of the law and order

tradition of the economy since the operation of legal systems may influence equity market

development (Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine, 2003; La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer,

and Vishny, 1998).      Furthermore, we control for the openness of the capital account to

international capital flows (using data from the International Monetary Fund) since international

financial integration may influence the liquidity of domestic equity markets (Bekaert, Harvey,

and Lundblad, 2001, 2002). We incorporate the macroeconomic and country-specific control

variables because we want to assess the independent impact of internationalization on domestic

liquidity. Toward this end, we examined a variety of additional country-specific factors in

robustness checks as discussed below.

        F j ,c ,t includes firm-specific characteristics in country c during year t. We control for

company level traits to assess the independent impact of internationalization on the trading of

firms in the domestic market. In the tables, we include the logarithm of the total assets in U.S.

dollars. In robustness checks, we control for many other firm characteristics.

       2. Results on the direct effect

       Contrary to a variety of theoretical models discussed in the Introduction, the Table 1

results indicate that internationalization is negatively associated with the liquidity of domestic

firms. In particular, the coefficient on the share of international firms in country c at time t, γ 1 ,

is negative and significant at the one-percent level across all of the specifications that control for

different combinations of regressors. In terms of the other regressors, we do not find a strong

link between the trading of international firms in international markets and the liquidity of

domestic stocks. Put differently, trading of country c’s international stocks on international

exchanges ( ITcI,t ) is not robustly related with the liquidity of domestic stocks. Also, rich



                                                  14
countries and countries with a strong law and order tradition tend to have domestic firms with

greater liquidity. Finally, we see that the variable, total assets, enters with a negative coefficient.

The reason for the negative coefficient is that total assets is closely linked with market

capitalization, which is the denominator of the dependent variable. As we will see below

however, when we compare the trading of stocks within a country, the equities of bigger

companies trade more than those of smaller companies. In sum, as the share of international

firms in an economy rises – i.e., as the fraction of firms in an economy that issue depositary

receipts, cross-list, or raise capital abroad rises, the liquidity of remaining firms falls.

           The adverse impact of internationalization on the liquidity of domestic firms is not only

statistically significant; it is economically relevant. For instance, consider the last regression

coefficient based on the regression with all of the regressors included (-2.2). This estimate

implies that a two-standard deviation increase in the share of international firms (0.086) will

cause the liquidity of domestic firms to fall by -0.19. This is substantial given that the mean

value of the liquidity of domestic firms ( T jD, c ,t ) is 0.50.13

           Some caution, however, is needed in interpreting these initial results. Some may argue

that the results simply reflect the possibility that firms that internationalize are good firms and

firms that do not internationalize are comparatively poor. While potentially true, this would not

negate the value of the Table 1 results. First, some theories discussed in the Introduction suggest

that internationalization boosts domestic liquidity by making markets more integrated. We find

no evidence for this. Second, we confirm the Table 1 results when controlling for many firm-

specific traits (as discussed below). Thus, even when controlling for firm quality, we get the

same result. Third, the argument that bad firms remain domestic does not necessarily predict

13
     Of course, this type of experiment is only for illustrative purposes. Two standard deviations is not a marginal
       change and we do not specify what drives the change in internationalization.



                                                         15
that trading in those firms will diminish as good firms become international, which is what we

find in Table 1. Fourth, we obtain the same results even when we restrict the sample to firms

that trade for the entire sample period. Thus, uncompetitive firms that lose liquidity and drop out

of the sample do not drive the results. Fifth, as we show below, the results indicate that the

liquidity of international firms in the domestic market falls with internationalization, which is

inconsistent with a simple story that international firm liquidity thrives while domestic firm

liquidity falls. An additional weakness with the results thus far is that we do not provide

information on the mechanisms linking internationalization to domestic firm liquidity. Although

regression (1) provides information on the direct impact of internationalization on the liquidity of

domestic firms, it does not provide information on the channels through which

internationalization affects the liquidity of domestic firms. We turn to this now.



       B. Migration and Liquidity Spillover Channel

       The migration and liquidity spillover view predicts a two-stage channel through which

internationalization may influence the liquidity of domestic stocks. First, internationalization

may reduce the domestic trading of international firms as the trading of international firms

migrates to more liquid, lower cost international markets. Second, the reduction in trading of

international firms in domestic markets because of migration may hurt the liquidity of domestic

firms because of liquidity spillovers. Taken together, migration and liquidity spillovers provide

a theory of how internationalization might reduce the liquidity of domestic firms. As discussed

in the Introduction, theoretical debate exists on each of these two mechanisms that define the

migration and spillover channel. We assess empirically each of these channels.




                                                16
        1. The migration part of the migration and liquidity spillover channel

        To examine the migration component of the migration and liquidity spillover channel we

use three different regression specifications. Consider first the simple specification that assesses

the impact of internationalization on the domestic liquidity of international firms.

           T jI, c ,t = γ 1 × ISc ,t + γ 2 × IT jI, c ,t + θ ' M c ,t + λ1 × Fj , c ,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t .   (2)

        T jI, c , t is the turnover ratio of international firm j in country c in year t. The superscript I

designates that it is an international firm, which is a firm that has either issued a depositary

receipt, cross-listed, or raised capital abroad at some point in the sample. Thus, the definition of

an international firm in equation (2) is consistent with the definition of domestic firms in

equation (1). In these first analyses, we simply split the sample between firms that never

internationalize and firms that become international at some point in the sample. Below, we will

assess the impact of an individual firm’s decision to internationalize on its liquidity within the

domestic market.

        IT jI, c ,t is the aggregate turnover ratio of country c’s international firms in international

equity markets at time t, excluding the trading of company j. The other variables are the same as

those in equation (1).

        Table 2 provides strong evidence that internationalization exerts a negative impact on the

domestic liquidity of international firms. The coefficient on ISc , t always enters significantly

and negatively. As in Table 1, we control for the international trading of international firms

( IT jI, c ,t ). We do this to control for other factors influencing the trading of that country’s equities.

IT jI, c ,t enters positively, though in some specifications only at the ten-percent level, which

indicates a positive link between the trading of a country’s stocks abroad and the trading of those



                                                                    17
international firms in the local market. In sum, after controlling for many factors, we find that as

a country’s firms internationalize this negatively influences the domestic liquidity of

international firms.

         The second regression we use to examine the migration component of the migration and

liquidity spillover channel controls for the domestic liquidity of international firms in addition to

the international liquidity of international firms. Thus, to assess the independent impact of the

share of international firms in a country on the domestic liquidity of individual international

firms we now control for the aggregate liquidity of international firms in both international and

domestic markets.

         Specifically, we estimate equation (3).

  T jI, c ,t = γ 1 × ISc ,t + γ 2 × IT jI, c ,t + β ×T jI, c ,t + θ ' M c ,t + λ1 × Fj , c ,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t .   (3)

T jI, c ,t is the aggregate domestic turnover ratio of international firms, respectively, excluding the

trading of company j.

         Table 3 shows that internationalization lowers the domestic liquidity of international

firms, i.e., there is a negative and significant coefficient on ISc ,t . Thus, even when controlling

for many factors, the domestic liquidity of international firms falls as the share of firms in the

economy with international equity market operations rises.

         The Table 3 results also provide some preliminary evidence on spillovers.                                                   The

coefficient on T jI, c ,t enters positively and significantly. Thus, aggregate trading of international

firms in the local market positively influences the trading of individual international firms in the

local market. We examine liquidity spillovers in greater depth below.




                                                                       18
            The third regression we employ to test for migration examines the relative trading of an

international firm in international and domestic markets. Thus, we examine whether the fraction

of trading of an international firm shifts from domestic to international markets as more firms

internationalize. So far, we have examined the impact of internationalization on the level of the

domestic trading of international firms. But the domestic liquidity of international firms can be

influenced by several factors, including how attractive an international company is relative to

other companies. Therefore, a more direct method for studying migration is to analyze the share

of the company’s liquidity in the domestic market relative to its total liquidity.

            Thus, we estimate the following regression for international firms.

         T jI, c ,t
                             = γ 1 × ISc ,t + γ 2 × IT jI, c ,t + β ×T jI, c ,t + θ ' M c ,t + λ1 × Fj , c ,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t . (4)
  T jI, c ,t + IT jI, c ,t

The dependent variable in this equation measures the level of domestic liquidity of firm j relative

to firm j’s total liquidity, which includes the domestic liquidity of firm j and the international

liquidity of firm j. Since the market capitalization is the same in the numerator and denominator,

this measure is equivalent to using the ratio of value traded in the domestic market to total value

traded. Importantly, we control for the aggregate liquidity of country c’s international firms,

excluding firm j ( T jI, c ,t ). Thus, we control for the aggregate liquidity of firm j’s markets when

assessing the impact of internationalization on whether the trading of firm j shifts abroad.

            Table 4 presents regressions that are consistent with migration. There is a negative and

significant coefficient on ISc ,t . This indicates that internationalization (an increase in the

proportion of international firms in the domestic market) reduces the proportion of trading of

international firms in domestic markets. As above, we control for many factors, including the




                                                                             19
liquidity of country c’s stocks ( IT jI, c ,t ) in international markets and also the domestic liquidity of

country c’s international firms ( T jI, c ,t ).

         Table 4 also provides evidence consistent with the existence of liquidity spillovers. Note

that T jI, c ,t has a positive and significant coefficient. Also, note that this holds while controlling

for the liquidity of country c’s international stocks in international markets ( IT jI, c ,t ). Thus,

proportion of trading of firm j that occurs in the domestic market is positively affected by the

aggregate liquidity of the domestic market (excluding firm j), i.e., aggregate liquidity influences

the liquidity of individual stocks.

         2. The liquidity spillover part of the migration and liquidity spillover channel

         Next, we further examine liquidity spillovers.                           Does aggregate trading in a market

influence the liquidity of individual domestic stocks?                                      If there is migration – if

internationalization induces a shift in the trading of international firms from domestic to

international markets – and if there are liquidity spillovers, then this represents a two-part

channel through which internationalization affects the liquidity of domestic firms.

         Besides the evidence on liquidity discussed above that focuses on whether aggregate

liquidity influences the trading of international firms in the local market, we estimate an

extension of equation (1) that focuses on the liquidity of domestic firms.

       T jD, c ,t = γ 1 × ISc ,t + γ 2 × ITcI,t + β × TcI,t + θ ' M c ,t + λ1 × Fj , c ,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t . (5)

The difference between equation (1) and equation (5) is that equation (5) controls for the

aggregate liquidity of international firms in the domestic market. Specifically, TcI,t equals the

domestic turnover of international firms in country c at time t.




                                                                  20
        Table 5 provides positive evidence of liquidity spillovers. As shown, there is a positive

and significant coefficient on TcI,t in all of the specifications.          The aggregate liquidity of

international firms in the domestic market positively influences the liquidity of individual

domestic firms above and beyond (i) the aggregate liquidity of international firms in

international markets ( ITcI,t ), (ii) the degree of internationalization ( ISc ,t ), (iii) macroeconomic

and country-specific controls ( M c ,t ), (iv) firm-specific traits ( F j ,c ,t ), and (v) country and time

effects ( nc and τ t respectively). Thus, the positive coefficient on TcI,t presents evidence of

positive liquidity spillovers.

        The regression results presented in Tables 2-5 are consistent with the migration and

liquidity spillover channel. We find that (a) internationalization reduces the domestic liquidity of

international firms and (b) the domestic liquidity of international firms exerts a positive impact

on the liquidity of domestic firms. Taken together, these results imply that internationalization

hurts the liquidity of domestic firms through the migration and liquidity spillover channel.

        Note, however, that the migration and liquidity spillover channel is not the whole story.

In Table 5 when we control for the liquidity of international firms in the domestic market,

ISc ,t still enters negatively and significantly. Thus, the liquidity of domestic firms is negatively

influenced by the share of international firms in a market beyond the aggregate trading of

international firms in the domestic economy ( TcI,t ) and in international markets ( ITcI,t ) and after

controlling for country-specific and firm-specific factors. If migration and liquidity spillovers

were the only channel through which internationalization affected the liquidity of domestic

stocks, then ISc ,t should enter insignificantly after controlling for the liquidity spillover channel.




                                                    21
The fact that ISc ,t remains significant suggests that internationalization is influencing domestic

liquidity through an additional mechanism.



              C. The Trade Diversion Channel

              1. Method

              Trade diversion is an additional channel through which internationalization can influence

domestic stock liquidity. We assess whether internationalization induces a compositional shift in

the domestic market from the trading of domestic stocks to the trading of international stocks.

More specifically, does the proportion of the overall liquidity of the domestic stock market

accounted for by a particular firm rise simply because it becomes an international firm?

              To study the trade diversion channel, we estimate the following equation:

   S j , c ,t = φ1 × I j , c ,t + φ2 × IT jI, c ,t + θ ' M c ,t + κ × MCap j , c ,t + λ1 × Fj , c ,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t . (6)

              T j ,c ,t
S j , c,t =               is firm j’s share of turnover in country c in year t relative to the total turnover of
              TcD,t + I

country c’s domestic stock market in year t, where total turnover includes the domestic trading of

both domestic and international firms. We also used value traded instead of the turnover ratio

and obtained similar results.

              I j , c ,t is a dummy variable that equals one if the company is international and zero

otherwise. Note, that this dummy turns from zero to one when a firm internationalizes.

              IT jI, c ,t is the international trading of company j and equals zero for domestic firms.




                                                                     22
           MCap j ,c ,t is the market capitalization of firm j. We include this variable to control for

the fact that the share of turnover in firm j might tend to rise when the price of the stock rises or

when the number of shares outstanding increase.14

           Finally, we continue to control for the trading of international firms in international

markets. We do this to control for as many firm- and country-specific factors as possible and

focus on the marginal impact of internationalization of the proportion of domestic liquidity

accounted for by international firms. We control for firm-specific factors, macroeconomic traits,

year dummies, and country dummies.

           2. Results on the trade diversion channel

           The Table 6 results indicate that internationalization reduces the proportion of liquidity of

domestic firms in the local market through the trade diversion channel. The coefficient, φ1, on

Ij,c,t enters with a positive coefficient in all of the Table 6 specifications. Thus, the proportion of

the overall liquidity of the domestic stock market accounted for by a particular firm rises simply

because it becomes international. Furthermore, note that the size of a company (total assets) is

positively associated with the share of liquidity of that company in the local market. In sum, the

results are consistent with the view that internationalization induces a compositional shift in the

local market toward comparatively less trading of domestic stock and greater liquidity of

international stocks.

           As noted in the Introduction, alternative theories predict trade intensification, not trade

diversion. These alternative views hold that internationalization will induce more active trading

of domestic stocks, not less. In contrast, our results support the view that internationalization



14
     In the previous specifications, we do not include market capitalization among the independent variables because
        the dependent variables are already scaled by market capitalization.



                                                         23
induces trade diversion. As firms internationalize, the domestic market becomes more focused

on trading those international companies.



       D. Robustness Issues

       First, there may be concerns that the entry and exit of domestic and international firms

will affect the results. Thus, estimated all regressions holding constant the number of firms in

the sample. We obtained the same results with the control sample.

       Second, we incorporated additional macroeconomic and country-specific control

variables to evaluate the independent impact of internationalization on domestic liquidity. For

instance, we included the inflation rate since inflation may interfere with trading and reduce

market liquidity (Boyd, Levine, and Smith, 2001). We also controlled for economic growth

since business-cycle phenomenon may influence market activity. We examined terms of trade

changes since shocks may importantly influence equity market transactions.              In other

specifications, we included the real interest rate, a broad index of financial liberalization

developed by Kaminsky and Schmukler (2002), and a time trend. Including these additional

macroeconomic controls did not change the results on the impact of internationalization on the

liquidity of domestic firms.

       Third, we included an assortment of microeconomic regressors to control for firm-

specific and industry-specific factors influencing stock liquidity. This is important since firm-

specific traits may lead high-performing firms to internationalize and poorly performing firms to

remain domestic. Thus, we included industry dummy variables and information on firm sales and

profits. Controlling for these additional microeconomic factors did not change the findings.

Moreover, even when including array of firm-specific variables, macroeconomic controls,




                                               24
industry dummy variables, year dummies, and country dummy variables, we continued to

confirm the papers findings. While we are unable to rule out the possibility that some third

factor is driving the results, the findings remained robust to many controls.

        Fourth, to measure spillover effects in a different way, we estimated equations (3), (4),

and (5) including the aggregate domestic liquidity of both domestic and international firms,

instead of the liquidity of only international firms. We confirmed this paper’s conclusions.

        Fifth, our measure of internationalization is based on the number of firms becoming

international. It may be appropriate to weight internationalization by the size and activity of the

firm that is cross-listing, issuing depositary receipts, or raising capital abroad.       Thus, we

computed an internationalization measure based on the value traded of the internationalizing

firm. We again confirmed this paper’s findings.

        Sixth, we re-defined internationalization by excluding the cases in which firms raise

private capital in international markets and, at the same time, do not issue a depositary receipts or

cross-list.      These cases are only a small proportion (less than 10 percent) of the

internationalization episodes. Excluding them did not alter the results of the paper.

        Seventh, we also experimented with interaction terms.              We examined whether

internationalization has a different impact on domestic firms depending on their size or other

characteristics.     Thus, we assessed whether the liquidity of big firms that do not

internationalization falls more or less than smaller firms that do not internationalize. We also

examined firm profitability, sales, etc. We found no evidence of these interaction terms entering

significantly.




                                                 25
       Eighth, in our sample, 19 out of 55 countries have zero or only one international firm.

Thus, we re-did the analyses eliminating all 19 of these countries. We got the same results with

this alternative sample.



VI. Conclusions

       This paper finds that the internationalization of stock markets has a negative effect on the

stock market liquidity of domestic firms. We studied in detail how this effect takes place.

Liquidity migrates to international financial markets, having negative spillover effects on the

liquidity of domestic firms in domestic markets.       Furthermore, there is trade diversion in

domestic markets as trading shifts from domestic to international stocks within the local market.

As a result, we were able to identify two channels through which internationalization hurts

domestic firms.

       The findings in this paper have opened several avenues for future research. First, a

theoretical model that more comprehensively specifies the mechanisms influencing the impact of

internationalization on domestic markets would substantively sharpen the interpretation of this

paper’s results and shape future empirical work. Second, although this paper finds strong

evidence of liquidity spillovers, we do not identify the source of these spillovers. To better

understand the operation of financial markets, future research might usefully dissect the sources

of liquidity spillovers.   Third, it would be interesting to understand the net effect of

internationalization. Some papers have argued that internationalization has positive effects on

the firms that internationalize. This paper has shown that internationalization hurts the liquidity

of domestic firms. What is the net effect for the economy? What is the future for domestic




                                                26
markets and companies that are unable to internationalize? We believe these questions represent

fruitful areas for future research.




                                              27
References

Ahearne, A., Griever, W., and Warnock, F., 2003. Information Costs and Home Bias: AN
      Analysis of U.S. Holdings of Foreign Equities. Journal of International Economics,
      forthcoming.

Alexander, G., Eun, C., and Janakiramanan, S., 1987. Asset Pricing and Dual Listing on Foreign
      Capital Markets: A Note. Journal of Finance Vol. 42(1), pp.151-158.

Alexander, G., Eun, C., and Janakiramanan, S., 1988. International Listings and Stock Returns:
      Some Empirical Evidence. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis Vol. 23(2),
      pp.135-151.

Amihud, Y., and Mendelson, H., 1986. Asset Pricing and the Bid-Ask Spread. Journal of
     Financial Economics Vol. 17, pp. 223-249.

Bailey, W., Karolyi, A., and Salva, C., 2002. The Economic Consequences of Increased
       Disclosure: Evidence from International Cross-Listings. Ohio State and Cornell
       University working papers.

Baker, H. K., Nofsinger, J. R., and Weaver, D. G., 2002. International Cross-Listing and
       Visibility. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis Vol. 37(3), pp.495-521.

Beck, T. and Levine, R. 2003. Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth: Panel Evidence.
       Journal of Banking and Finance, forthcoming.

Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., and Levine, R., 2003. Law, Endowments, and Finance. Journal of
       Financial Economics, forthcoming.

Bekaert, G., and Harvey, C. R., 1995. Time-Varying World Market Integration. Journal of
       Finance Vol. 50(2), pp. 403-444.

Bekaert, G., and Harvey, C. R., 2000. Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets,
       Journal of Finance Vol. 55(2), pp. 565-613.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., and Lundblad, C., 2001. Emerging Equity Markets and Economic
       Development. Journal of Development Economics Vol. 66(2), pp.465-504.

Bekaert, G., Harvey, C. R., and Lundblad, C., 2002. Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?
       NBER working paper 8245.

Bovespa, 1996. Nova York Ataca e os Mercados Reagem. Revista Bovespa, May 1996.

Boyd, J. H., Levine, R., and Smith, B. D., 2001. The Impact of Inflation on Financial Sector
       Performance. Journal of Monetary Economics Vol. 47(2), pp.221-48.




                                             28
Chordia, T., Roll, R., and Subrahmanyam, A., 2000. Commonality in Liquidity. Journal of
       Financial Economics Vol. 56, pp. 3-28.

Chowdhry, B. and Nanda, V., 1991. Multimarket Trading and Market Liquidity. Review of
     Financial Studies Vol. 4(3), pp.483-511.

Claessens, S., Klingebiel, D., and Schmukler, S., 2002a. Accessing International Equity Markets:
       What Firms from Which Countries Go Abroad? Mimeo, World Bank.

Claessens, S., Klingebiel, D., and Schmukler, S., 2002b. The Future of Stock Exchanges in
       Emerging Markets. Brookings-Wharton Papers on Financial Services, pp.167-202, also
       available as CEPR Discussion Paper 3301.

Coffee, J., 1999. The Future as History: The Prospects for Global Convergence in Corporate
       Governance and Its Implications. Northwestern University Law Review, pp.641-708.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., Maksimovic, V., 1998. Law, Finance, and Firm Growth. Journal of Finance
      Vol. 53, 2107-2137.

Doidge, C A., Karolyi, A., and Stulz, R., 2002. Why Are Firms That List in the U.S. Worth
      More? Ohio State University working paper.

Domowitz, I., Glen, J., and Madhavan, A., 1998. International Cross-Listing and Order Flow
     Migration: Evidence from an Emerging Market. Journal of Finance Vol. 53(6), pp.2001-
     2027.

Edison, H. and Warnock, F., 2003. U.S. Investors’ Emerging Market Portfolios: A Security-
       Level Analysis. International Monetary Fund, mimeo.

Errunza, V., and Miller, D., 2000. Market Segmentation and the Cost of Capital in International
       Equity Markets. Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis Vol. 35(4), pp.577-600.

Fereration des Bourses de Valeurs, 2000. Price Discovery and the Competitiveness of Trading
        Systems.

Financial Times, 1998. ADRs Prove a Double-Edged Sword, April 6.

Foerster, S. and Karolyi, A., 2000. The Long Run Performance of Global Equity Offerings.
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis Vol. 35(4), pp.499-528.

Foerster, S. and Karolyi, A., 1999. The effects of Market Segmentation and Investor Recognition
       on Asset Prices: Evidence form Foreign Stocks Listing in the United States. Journal of
       Finance Vol. 54(3), pp.981-1013.




                                              29
Foerster, S. and Karolyi, A., 1998. Multimarket Trading and Liquidity: A Transactions Data
       Analysis of Canada-U.S. Interlistings. Journal of International Financial Markets,
       Institutions, and Money Vol. 8(3-4), pp.393-412.

Foerster, S. and Karolyi, A., 1993. International Listings of Stocks: The Case of Canada and the
       U.S. Journal of International Business Studies Vol. 24, pp.763-784.

Hargis, K., 2000. International Cross-Listing and Stock Market Development in Emerging
       Economies. International Review of Economics and Finance Vol. 9(2), pp.101-122.

Hargis, K., 1998. When Does Multimarket Trading Improve the Quality of the Primary Market?
       Evidence from International Cross-Listings. Goldman, Sachs and Co. Working Paper.

Hargis, K. and Ramanlal, P., 1998. When Does Internationalization Enhance the Development of
       Domestic Stock Markets? Journal of Financial Intermediation Vol. 7(3), pp.263-292.

Henry, P., 2000. Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity
       Prices. Journal of Finance Vol. 55(2), pp. 529-564.

Kaminsky, G. and Schmukler, S., 2002. Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects of
      Financial Liberalization. World Bank Working Paper No. 2912.

Karolyi, A., 1998. Why do Companies List Shares Abroad? A Survey of the Evidence and its
       Managerial Implications. Financial Markets, Institutions, and Instruments, Vol. 7(1), pp.
       1-60.

Karolyi, A., 2003. The Role of ADRs in the Development and Integration of Emerging Equity
       Markets. Mimeo, Ohio State University.

Lang, M., Lins, V., and Miller, D., 2002. ADRs, Analysts, and Accuracy. University of Utah
Working Paper.

Latin Finance, 1999. The Incredible Shrinking Markets. September.

La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and Vishny, R. W., 1998. Law and Finance.
       Journal of Political Economy Vol. 106(6), pp.1113-1155.

Levine, R. 2003. Finance and Growth. In Aghion, P. and Durlauf, S. (eds.), Handbook of
       Economic Growth, Elsevier Press, forthcoming.

Levine, R. and Zervos, S., 1998a. Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth. American
       Economic Review Vol. 88(3), pp.537-558.

Levine, R. and Zervos, S., 1998b. Capital Control Liberalization and Stock Market
       Development. World Development Vol. 26, pp. 1169-1184.




                                              30
Martin, P. and Rey, H., 2000. Financial Integration and Asset Returns. European Economic
       Review Vol. 44(7), pp.1327-1350.

Merton, R. 1987. A Simple Model of Capital Market Equilibrium with Incomplete Information.
      Journal of Finance Vol. 42(3), pp.483-510.

Miller, D., 1999. The Market Reaction to International Cross-Listings: Evidence from
       Depositary Receipts. Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 51(1), pp.103-123

Moel, A., 2001. The Role of American Depositary Receipts in the Development of Emerging
      Markets. Economia Vol. 2(1), pp.209-273.

Noronha, G., Sarin, A., and Saudagaran, S., 1996. Testing for Microstructure Effects of
      International Dual Listings Using Intraday Data. Journal of Banking and Finance Vol.
      20(6), pp.965-983.

Pagano, M., Roell, A., and Zechner, J., 2002. The Geography of Equity Listing: Why Do
      European Companies List Abroad? Journal of Finance Vol. 57(6), pp.2651-2694.

Portes, R. and Rey, H. 1999. The Determinants of Cross-Border Equity Flows. NBER Working
        Paper 7336.

Pulatkonak, M. and Sofianos, G., 1999. The Distribution of Global Trading in NYSE-Listed
       Non-U.S. Stocks. NYSE Working Paper 99-03.

Reese, W. A. Jr. and Weisbach, M. S., 2001. Protection of Minority Shareholder Interests, Cross-
       Listing in the United States, and Subsequent Equity Offerings. Journal of Financial
       Economics, forthcoming.

Schmukler, S. and Vesperoni, E., 2001. Firms’ Financing Choices in Bank-Based and Market-
     Based Economies. In Demirguc-Kunt, A. and Levine, R. (eds.), Financial Structure and
     Economic Development, MIT Press.

Stulz, R., 1999. Globalization of Equity Markets and the Cost of Capital. Journal of Applied
       Corporate Finance, Fall, pp.8-25.

The Economist, 2000. Latin America’s Stock Markets: High and Dry, February 19.




                                              31
                                                         Table 1: Effects of Internationalization on Domestic Firms
This table reports regressions of the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of domestic firms. Using firm-level data from 55 countries, during the years 1989-2000,
and employing a feasible generalized least squares estimator with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, the table reports results of the following regression equation:
T jD,c ,t = γ 1 × IS c ,t + γ 2 × ITcI,t + θ ' M c ,t + λ1 × F j ,c ,t + δ 1 × n c + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t . T jD,c ,t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio of domestic firm j in country c during
year t, where the turnover ratio equals the value traded of firm j in country c during year t divided by that firm’s market capitalization. ISc,t is the share of international
firms in country c at time t and is the measure of internationalization. ITcI,t is the logarithm of one plus the aggregate turnover ratio of country c’s international firms in
international equity markets during year t. Mc,t is a matrix of macroeconomic and country-specific control variables, which in the table includes the logarithm of real per
capita gross domestic product (Log of GDP per capita), an index of the law and order tradition of the country (Law and Order), and an index of capital account openness
(Capital Account Liberalization). F j , c,t is a vector of firm j characteristics in country c during year t, which in the table includes the logarithm of total assets of the firm
as a proxy for firm size (Log of Total Assets). In the regression nc and τ t represent country-specific and year-specific dummy variables (Country Dummies and Year
Dummies respectively), but the results on these coefficients are not reported in the tables. T-statistics are in brackets. ***, **, * mean significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                            Dependent Variable:
                                                            Log of One Plus the Turnover Ratio of Domestic Firms
           IS c,t                                  -0.942 ***               -2.483 ***               -2.422 ***               -2.340 ***               -2.362 ***               -2.203 ***
                                                  [4.349]                  [6.714]                  [6.413]                  [6.130]                  [6.323]                  [5.622]
                I
           IT       c,t                             0.023                   -0.048                   -0.077                   -0.005                   -0.050                   -0.043
                                                  [0.513]                  [0.866]                  [1.346]                  [0.087]                  [0.908]                  [0.792]
           Log of GDP per capita                                                                      0.123 ***                                                                  0.112 **
                                                                                                    [2.642]                                                                    [2.397]
           Law and Order                                                                                                       0.034 ***                                         0.025 **
                                                                                                                             [2.964]                                           [2.189]
           Capital Account                                                                                                                             -0.032                   -0.034
           Liberalization                                                                                                                             [1.521]                  [1.558]
           Log of Total Assets                                              -0.062 ***               -0.063 ***               -0.062 ***               -0.058 ***               -0.059 ***
                                                                           [8.891]                  [8.921]                  [8.940]                  [8.243]                  [8.310]
           Country Dummies                            Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
           Year Dummies                               Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes                      Yes
           Number of Firms                         2,531                     1,290                    1,290                    1,290                    1,276                   1,276
           Number of Observations                 14,382                     6,735                    6,735                    6,735                    6,556                   6,556
           R-squared                               0.629                      0.67                     0.67                     0.67                    0.654                   0.655
                                                       Table 2: Effects of Internationalization on International Firms
This table reports regressions of the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of international firms within the domestic market. Using firm-level data from 55
countries, during the years 1989-2000, and employing a feasible generalized least squares estimator with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, the table reports
results of the following regression equation: T jI, c,t = γ 1 × ISc,t + γ 2 × IT jI, c,t + θ ' M c,t + λ1 × F j , c,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t . T jI, c ,t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover
ratio of international firm j in country c during year t, where the turnover ratio equals the value traded of firm j in country c during year t divided by that firm’s market
capitalization. ISc,t is the share of international firms in country c at time t and is the measure of internationalization. IT jI, c,t is the logarithm of one plus the aggregate
turnover ratio of country c’s international firms in international equity markets during year t, excluding the trading of company j. Mc,t is a matrix of macroeconomic and
country-specific control variables, which in the table includes the logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product (Log of GDP per capita), an index of the law and order
tradition of the country (Law and Order), and an index of capital account openness (Capital Account Liberalization). F j , c, t is a vector of firm j characteristics in country c
during year t, which in the table includes the logarithm of total assets of the firm as a proxy for firm size (Log of Total Assets). In the regression nc and τ t represent
country-specific and year-specific dummy variables (Country Dummies and Year Dummies respectively), but the results on these coefficients are not reported in the tables.
T-statistics are in brackets. ***, **, * mean significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                           Dependent Variable:
                                                         Log of One Plus the Turnover Ratio of International Firms
           IS c,t                                 -1.187 ***               -1.319 ***                -1.388 ***               -1.152 ***                -1.377 ***               -1.345 ***
                                                 [4.776]                  [3.774]                   [3.905]                  [3.344]                   [3.971]                  [3.899]
           IT jI, c , t                            0.137 **                 0.113 *                   0.119 *                  0.155 **                  0.111 *                  0.171 ***
                                                 [1.997]                  [1.778]                   [1.839]                  [2.393]                   [1.736]                  [2.586]
           Log of GDP per capita                                                                     -0.038                                                                      -0.084
                                                                                                    [0.716]                                                                     [1.557]
           Law and Order                                                                                                       0.047 ***                                          0.053 ***
                                                                                                                             [3.395]                                            [3.610]
           Capital Account                                                                                                                               0.007                    0.013
           Liberalization                                                                                                                              [0.249]                  [0.440]
           Log of Total Assets                                             -0.012 *                  -0.012                   -0.013 *                  -0.012 *                 -0.012 *
                                                                          [1.653]                   [1.570]                  [1.822]                   [1.663]                  [1.685]
           Country Dummies                           Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes
           Year Dummies                              Yes                       Yes                      Yes                      Yes                       Yes                      Yes
           Number of Firms                           634                      548                       548                      548                       548                      548
           Number of Observations                  3,863                    2,945                     2,945                    2,945                     2,910                    2,910
           R-squared                               0.643                    0.658                     0.658                    0.659                     0.654                    0.656
                                         Table 3: Effects of Internationalization on International Firms - Beyond Spillovers
This table reports regressions of the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of international firms within the domestic market. Using firm-level data from 55
countries, during the years 1989-2000, and employing a feasible generalized least squares estimator with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, the table reports
results of the following regression equation: T jI, c, t = γ 1 × ISc, t + γ 2 × IT jI, c, t + β × T jI, c, t + θ ' M c, t + λ1 × F j , c, t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t . T jI,c ,t is the logarithm of one plus
the turnover ratio of international firm j in country c during year t, where the turnover ratio equals the value traded of firm j in country c during year t divided by that firm’s
market capitalization. ISc,t is the share of international firms in country c at time t and is the measure of internationalization. IT jI, c, t is the logarithm of one plus the
aggregate turnover ratio of country c’s international firms in international equity markets during year t, excluding the trading of company j. T jI, c,t is the logarithm of one
plus the turnover ratio of international firms within the domestic market, excluding the trading of company j. Mc,t is a matrix of macroeconomic and country-specific
control variables, which in the table includes the logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product (Log of GDP per capita), an index of the law and order tradition of the
country (Law and Order), and an index of capital account openness (Capital Account Liberalization). F j , c, t is a vector of firm j characteristics in country c during year t,
which in the table includes the logarithm of total assets of the firm as a proxy for firm size (Log of Total Assets). In the regression nc and τ t represent country-specific and
year-specific dummy variables (Country Dummies and Year Dummies respectively), but the results on these coefficients are not reported in the tables. T-statistics are in
brackets. ***, **, * mean significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%.

                                                                              Dependent Variable:
                                                            Log of One Plus the Turnover Ratio of International Firms
            IS c,t                                  -0.796 ***                 -0.849 **                 -0.845 **                 -0.744 **                  -0.885 **                 -0.834 **
                                                   [3.256]                    [2.449]                   [2.459]                   [2.162]                    [2.560]                   [2.448]
            IT jI, c , t                             0.025                      0.006                     0.006                     0.037                      0.001                     0.037
                                                   [0.402]                    [0.119]                   [0.112]                   [0.664]                    [0.013]                   [0.643]
                I
           T    j, c, t
                                                     0.498 ***                  0.445 ***                 0.445 ***                 0.437 ***                  0.443 ***                 0.432 ***
                                                  [10.973]                    [8.914]                   [8.990]                   [8.768]                    [8.745]                   [8.641]
            Log of GDP per capita                                                                         0.002                                                                         -0.027
                                                                                                        [0.044]                                                                        [0.546]
            Law and Order                                                                                                           0.032 **                                             0.032 **
                                                                                                                                  [2.363]                                              [2.301]
            Capital Account                                                                                                                                    0.009                     0.010
            Liberalization                                                                                                                                   [0.341]                   [0.376]
            Log of Total Assets                                                -0.011                    -0.011                    -0.012 *                   -0.011                    -0.012
                                                                              [1.548]                   [1.526]                   [1.664]                    [1.559]                   [1.601]
            Country Dummies                             Yes                       Yes                       Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes
            Year Dummies                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes
            Number of Firms                            634                        548                       548                       548                        548                       548
            Number of Observations                   3,863                      2,945                     2,945                     2,945                      2,910                     2,910
            R-squared                                0.663                      0.675                     0.675                     0.675                       0.67                     0.671
                                                                   Table 4: Effects of Internationalization on Migration
This table reports regressions of the impact of internationalization on the relative liquidity of international firms in domestic versus international markets. Using firm-level
data from 55 countries, during the years 1989-2000, and employing a feasible generalized least squares estimator with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, the
table reports results of the following regression equation: T jI, c, t (T jI, c,t + IT jI, c, t ) = γ 1 × ISc, t + γ 2 × IT jI, c, t + β × T jI, c, t + θ ' M c, t + λ1 × F j , c, t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j , c,t . The
dependent variable measures the level of domestic turnover of firm j relative to firm j’s total turnover, which includes domestic turnover and turnover in international
markets. Specifically, T jI,c ,t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio in the domestic market of international firm j in country c during year t, where the turnover ratio
equals the value traded of firm j in country c during year t divided by that firm’s market capitalization and where IT jI,c,t equals the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio
in international markets of firm j from country c during year t. ISc,t is the share of international firms in country c at time t and is the measure of internationalization.
 IT jI, c,t is the logarithm of one plus the aggregate turnover ratio of country c’s international firms in international equity markets during year t, excluding the trading of
company j. T jI, c,t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio of international firms within the domestic market, excluding the trading of company j. Mc,t is a matrix of
macroeconomic and country-specific control variables, which in the table includes the logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product (Log of GDP per capita), an index
of the law and order tradition of the country (Law and Order), and an index of capital account openness (Capital Account Liberalization). F j , c,t is a vector of firm j
characteristics in country c during year t, which in the table includes the logarithm of total assets of the firm as a proxy for firm size (Log of Total Assets). In the regression
 nc and τ t represent country-specific and year-specific dummy variables (Country Dummies and Year Dummies respectively), but the results on these coefficients are not
reported in the tables. T-statistics are in brackets. ***, **, * mean significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%.

                                                                          Dependent Variable:
                                             Log of One Plus the Share of Value Traded Domestically of International Firms
            IS c,t                                    -0.807 ***                 -0.816 ***                 -0.901 ***                 -0.799 ***                 -0.815 ***                 -0.876 ***
                                                     [7.186]                    [5.914]                    [6.168]                    [5.957]                    [5.888]                    [6.136]
            IT jI, c , t                              -0.108 ***                 -0.120 ***                 -0.114 ***                 -0.116 ***                 -0.115 ***                 -0.099 **
                                                     [3.407]                    [3.253]                    [3.097]                    [2.988]                    [3.101]                    [2.540]
                I
            T                                          0.068 ***                  0.071 ***                  0.068 ***                  0.069 ***                  0.072 ***                  0.066 ***
                j, c, t
                                                     [7.511]                    [5.974]                    [5.867]                    [5.618]                    [6.064]                    [5.453]
            Log of GDP per capita                                                                           -0.044 **                                                                        -0.048 **
                                                                                                           [2.198]                                                                          [2.242]
            Law and Order                                                                                                               0.005                                                 0.010 **
                                                                                                                                      [1.101]                                               [2.066]
            Capital Account                                                                                                                                       -0.023 *                   -0.019
            Liberalization                                                                                                                                       [1.723]                    [1.388]
            Log of Total Assets                                                  -0.002                     -0.001                     -0.002                     -0.002                     -0.001
                                                                                [0.544]                    [0.382]                    [0.586]                    [0.554]                    [0.460]
            Country Dummies                              Yes                        Yes                        Yes                        Yes                        Yes                        Yes
            Year Dummies                                 Yes                        Yes                        Yes                        Yes                        Yes                        Yes
            Number of Firms                              621                        535                        535                        535                        535                        535
            Number of Observations                     3,628                      2,768                      2,768                      2,768                      2,733                      2,733
            R-squared                                  0.974                      0.971                      0.971                      0.971                      0.971                      0.971
                                          Table 5: Effects of Internationalization on Domestic Firms - Beyond Spillovers
This table reports regressions of the impact of internationalization on the liquidity of domestic firms. Using firm-level data from 55 countries, during the years 1989-2000,
and employing a feasible generalized least squares estimator with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, the table reports results of the following regression equation:
T jD,c,t = γ 1 × ISc,t + γ 2 × ITcI,t + β × TcI,t + θ ' M c,t + λ1 × F j ,c,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t . T jD, c,t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover ratio of domestic firm j in country c
during year t, where the turnover ratio equals the value traded of firm j in country c during year t divided by that firm’s market capitalization. ISc,t is the share of
international firms in country c in year t and is the measure of internationalization. ITcI,t is the logarithm of one plus the aggregate turnover ratio of country c’s international
firms in international equity markets during year t. TcI,t equals the logarithm of one plus the domestic turnover of international firms in country c at during year t. Mc,t is a
matrix of macroeconomic and country-specific control variables, which in the table includes the logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product (Log of GDP per
capita), an index of the law and order tradition of the country (Law and Order), and an index of capital account openness (Capital Account Liberalization). F j , c,t is a
vector of firm j characteristics in country c during year t, which in the table includes the logarithm of total assets of the firm as a proxy for firm size (Log of Total Assets).
In the regression nc and τ t represent country-specific and year-specific dummy variables (Country Dummies and Year Dummies respectively), but the results on these
coefficients are not reported in the tables. T-statistics are in brackets. ***, **, * mean significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                             Dependent Variable:
                                                             Log of One Plus the Turnover Ratio of Domestic Firms
           IS c,t                                   -0.525 **               -1.269 ***              -1.222 ***               -1.234 ***              -0.990 ***               -0.927 **
                                                   [2.454]                 [3.711]                 [3.521]                  [3.509]                 [2.832]                  [2.565]
           IT I c,t                                 -0.006                  -0.095 *                -0.120 **                -0.078                  -0.095 *                 -0.123 **
                                                   [0.150]                 [1.808]                 [2.233]                  [1.554]                 [1.804]                  [2.443]
           T I c,t                                  0.455 ***                0.418 ***               0.416 ***               0.412 ***                0.430 ***               0.429 ***
                                                 [18.391]                 [11.767]                [11.703]                [11.653]                 [11.833]                [11.966]
           Log of GDP per capita                                                                     0.108 **                                                                  0.118 ***
                                                                                                   [2.408]                                                                   [2.652]
           Law and Order                                                                                                      0.013                                           -0.001
                                                                                                                            [1.090]                                          [0.055]
           Capital Account                                                                                                                           -0.064 ***               -0.068 ***
           Liberalization                                                                                                                           [2.980]                  [3.102]
           Log of Total Assets                                              -0.063 ***              -0.064 ***               -0.063 ***              -0.059 ***               -0.060 ***
                                                                           [9.145]                 [9.151]                  [9.155]                 [8.516]                  [8.539]
           Country Dummies                             Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes
           Year Dummies                                Yes                     Yes                     Yes                      Yes                     Yes                      Yes
           Number of Firms                          2,531                    1,290                   1,290                    1,290                   1,276                    1,276
           Number of Observations                  14,382                    6,735                   6,735                    6,735                   6,556                    6,556
           R-squared                                0.642                    0.678                   0.678                    0.678                   0.663                    0.663
                                        Table 6: Effects of Internationalization on Domestic Firms - Trade Diversion Effects
This table reports regressions of the impact of internationalization on the share of firm’s liquidity in the domestic market. Using firm-level data from 55 countries, during
the years 1989-2000, and employing a feasible generalized least squares estimator with heteroskedasticity-consistent standard errors, the table reports results of the
following regression equation: S j ,c,t = φ1 × I j ,c,t + φ2 × IT jI,c,t + θ ' M c,t + κ × MCap j ,c,t + λ1 × F j ,c,t + δ1 × nc + δ 2 × τ t + ε j ,c,t . S j ,c,t = T j ,c,t TcD,t + I is firm j’s share of turnover
in country c in year t relative to the total turnover of country c’s domestic stock market in year t, where total turnover includes the domestic trading of both domestic and
international firms. I j , c,t is a dummy variable that equals one if the company is international and zero otherwise. This dummy turns from zero to one when a firm
internationalizes. IT jI,c,t is the logarithm of one plus the turnover of firm j from country c in international markets during year t. MCap j ,c,t is the market capitalization of
firm j in country c during year t, where the turnover ratio equals the value traded of firm j in country c during year t divided by that firm’s market capitalization. Mc,t is a
matrix of macroeconomic and country-specific control variables, which in the table includes the logarithm of real per capita gross domestic product (Log of GDP per
capita), an index of the law and order tradition of the country (Law and Order), and an index of capital account openness (Capital Account Liberalization). F j , c,t is a vector
of firm j characteristics in country c during year t, which in the table includes the logarithm of total assets of the firm as a proxy for firm size (Log of Total Assets). In the
regression nc and τ t represent country-specific and year-specific dummy variables (Country Dummies and Year Dummies respectively), but the results on these coefficients
are not reported in the tables. T-statistics are in brackets. ***, **, * mean significant at 1%, 5%, and 10%.


                                                                                Dependent Variable:
                                                                  Log of One Plus the Share of Firm j Value Traded
            I j,c,t                                  0.080 ***                 0.079 ***                 0.080 ***                 0.079 ***                  0.079 ***                 0.080 ***
                                                   [3.948]                   [3.587]                   [3.624]                   [3.587]                    [3.646]                   [3.688]
                 I
            IT       j,c,t                           0.223 ***                 0.091                     0.094                     0.091                      0.087                     0.089
                                                   [2.921]                   [1.110]                   [1.155]                   [1.106]                    [1.061]                   [1.091]
            MCap             j,c,t                 -0.122 ***                -0.133 ***                 -0.134 ***                -0.133 ***                -0.133 ***                -0.134 ***
                                                 [19.864]                  [14.705]                   [14.766]                  [14.670]                  [14.593]                  [14.625]
            Log of GDP per capita                                                                        0.134 ***                                                                      0.138 ***
                                                                                                       [3.062]                                                                        [3.102]
            Law and Order                                                                                                         -0.001                                               -0.009
                                                                                                                                 [0.098]                                              [0.699]
            Capital Account                                                                                                                                   0.018                     0.010
            Liberalization                                                                                                                                  [0.680]                   [0.371]
            Log of Total Assets                                                0.023 ***                 0.023 ***                 0.023 ***                  0.025 ***                 0.025 ***
                                                                             [2.765]                   [2.689]                   [2.752]                    [2.916]                   [2.842]
            Country Dummies                            Yes                       Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
            Year Dummies                               Yes                       Yes                        Yes                       Yes                       Yes                       Yes
            Number of Firms                         3,252                      1,839                     1,839                      1,839                     1,825                     1,825
            Number of Observations                 18,488                      9,744                     9,744                      9,744                     9,526                     9,526
            R-squared                               0.681                      0.718                     0.718                      0.718                     0.715                     0.716
                                                                                                       Appendix Table 1
                                                                                                   Basic Statistics and Means
This table reports summary statistics by country. It displays the total number of firms, the number of international firms, the number of domestic firms, the sample coverage, and the sample average of some of the variables used in
the regressions. The variables turnover and value traded are the log of one plus turnover and one plus value traded. International companies are the ones that issue a depositary receipt, cross-list, or raise capital in a foreign stock
exchange at any time in the sample.


                                                                                                                                Log Turnover in    Log Ratio of Value                             Log Turnover in
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Market
                                                              Number of         Number of                   Log Turnover          the Domestic  Traded in the Domestic           Log Share of       International
                                             Number of                                                                                                                                                                  Capitalization
                       Country                               International      Domestic      Sample Period  (Domestic               Market     Market to Total Value            International        Markets
                                               Firms                                                                                                                                                                    (U.S. dollars,
                                                                 Firms            Firms                        Firms)            (International         Traded                       Firms         (International
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Million)
                                                                                                                                     Firms)      (International Firms)                                 Firms)

    1       Argentina                             47              18                29          1989 - 2000         0.399             0.283                   0.500                  0.071               0.315               668.2
    2       Bahrain                               15               1                14          1999 - 2000         0.094             0.369                   0.693                  0.000               0.000               337.4
    3       Bangladesh                            66               1                65          1996 - 2000         0.298             0.434                   0.693                  0.002               0.000                20.8
    4       Botswana                              9                0                9           1996 - 2000         0.067             0.000                   0.000                  0.000               0.000                90.4
    5       Brazil                               105              36                69          1989 - 2000         0.305             0.360                   0.589                  0.024               0.237              1,419.6
    6       Bulgaria                              23               0                23          1996 - 2000         0.054             0.000                   0.000                  0.000               0.000                14.6
    7       Chile                                 58              22                36          1989 - 2000         0.078             0.131                   0.419                  0.047               0.182               827.9
    8       China                                251              94               157          1992 - 2000         0.973             0.802                   0.680                  0.133               0.041               669.6
    9       Colombia                              37               7                30          1989 - 2000         0.072             0.142                   0.620                  0.029               0.042               285.0
   10       Cote d'Ivoire                         15               0                15          1996 - 2000         0.026             0.000                   0.000                  0.000               0.000                78.4
   11       Croatia                               10               2                 8          1997 - 2000         0.061             0.039                   0.693                  0.020               0.000               265.6
   12       Czech Republic                        76               4                72          1994 - 2000         0.139             0.304                   0.693                  0.011               0.000               199.8
   13       Ecuador                               13               0                13          1996 - 2000         0.434             0.000                   0.000                  0.000               0.000                85.1
   14       Egypt                                 84              11                73          1996 - 2000         0.274             0.338                   0.693                  0.003               0.000               162.0
   15       Estonia                               13               1                12          1997 - 2000         0.372             0.278                   0.693                  0.042               0.000               120.2
   16       Ghana                                11                1               10           1996 - 2000         0.084             0.001                   0.118                  0.035               0.163               101.5
   17       Greece                                86              14                72          1989 - 2000         0.417             0.411                   0.691                  0.017               0.005               655.0
   18       Hungary                              25               17                8           1992 - 2000         0.325             0.442                   0.687                  0.287               0.015               424.0
   19       India                                182              48               134          1989 - 2000         0.247             0.481                   0.689                  0.004               0.035               502.8
   20       Indonesia                            137              34               103          1989 - 2000         0.443             0.512                   0.678                  0.093               0.046               348.0
   21       Israel                                55              19               36           1997 - 2000         0.227             0.370                   0.600                  0.020               0.145               755.3
   22       Jamaica                               24               0                24          1996 - 2000         0.047             0.000                   0.000                  0.000               0.000                82.2
   23       Jordan                               67                1               66           1989 - 2000         0.283             0.028                   0.693                  0.002               0.000                82.2
   24       Kenya                                20                1               19           1996 - 2000         0.047             0.073                   0.693                  0.007               0.000                73.1
   25       Latvia                                16               2                14          1997 - 2000         0.269             0.332                   0.693                  0.018               0.000                19.8
   26       Lebanon                                5               2                 3          1999 - 2000         0.104             0.060                   0.693                  0.000               0.000               297.7
   27       Lithuania                             38               5                33          1996 - 2000         0.119             0.292                   0.693                  0.035               0.000                29.9
   28       Malaysia                             199              12               187          1989 - 2000         0.595             0.261                   0.693                  0.008               0.000               794.6
                                                                           Appendix Table 1 (Continued)
                                                                            Basic Statistics and Means

                                                                                                      Log Turnover in    Log Ratio of Value                    Log Turnover in
                                                                                                                                                                                   Market
                                              Number of      Number of                 Log Turnover     the Domestic  Traded in the Domestic   Log Share of      International
                                 Number of                                                                                                                                       Capitalization
               Country                       International   Domestic    Sample Period  (Domestic          Market     Market to Total Value    International       Markets
                                   Firms                                                                                                                                         (U.S. dollars,
                                                 Firms         Firms                      Firms)       (International         Traded               Firms        (International
                                                                                                                                                                                   Million)
                                                                                                           Firms)      (International Firms)                        Firms)

29   Mauritius                      17             0            17        1996 - 2000     0.039            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000             84.5
30   Mexico                        101            42            59        1989 - 2000     0.253            0.373              0.522               0.153             0.480           1,443.8
31   Morocco                        21             2            19        1996 - 2000     0.089            0.149              0.693               0.010             0.000            488.4
32   Namibia                         8             0             8        1999 - 2000     0.082            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000             29.3
33   Nigeria                        41             0            41        1989 - 2000     0.024            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000             66.0
34   Oman                           34             0            34        1999 - 2000     0.152            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000             76.2
35   Pakistan                      124             5           119        1989 - 2000     0.210            1.030              0.693               0.004             0.000             80.2
36   Peru                          43             8            35         1992 - 2000     0.511            0.228              0.590               0.015             0.151            230.1
37   Philippines                    78            38            40        1989 - 2000     0.424            0.324              0.685               0.096             0.032            566.8
38   Poland                         45            17            28        1992 - 2000     0.572            0.317              0.693               0.038             0.000            395.7
39   Portugal                       47            12            35        1989 - 1999     0.230            0.269              0.671               0.039             0.034            669.9
40   Romania                        53             2            51        1997 - 2000     0.243            0.037              0.693               0.000             0.000             17.7
41   Russia                        42             5            37         1996 - 2000     0.156            0.275              0.627               0.015             0.015           1,395.4
42   Saudi Arabia                   22             0            22        1997 - 2000     0.305            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000           2,133.5
43   Slovak Republic                20             2            18        1996 - 2000     0.354            0.143              0.693               0.009             0.000             60.7
44   Slovenia                       20             2            18        1996 - 2000     0.332            0.324              0.693               0.030             0.000            104.7
45   South Africa                  102            33            69        1992 - 2000     0.179            0.233              0.601               0.029             0.033           1,749.1
46   South Korea                   230            30           200        1989 - 2000     1.196            0.891              0.683               0.014             0.042            809.7
47   Sri Lanka                      66             2            64        1992 - 2000     0.125            0.216              0.693               0.004             0.000             26.2
48   Taiwan, Province of China     143            30           113        1989 - 2000     1.506            1.203              0.691               0.027             0.022           1,615.9
49   Thailand                      125            31            94        1989 - 2000     0.789            0.602              0.693               0.048             0.000            633.8
50   Trinidad and Tobago            12             0           12         1996 - 2000     0.047            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000            215.0
51   Tunisia                        18             1            17        1996 - 2000     0.093            0.134              0.693               0.007             0.000            136.4
52   Turkey                         78            16            62        1989 - 2000     1.019            0.659              0.691               0.026             0.002            632.8
53   Ukraine                        19             0            19        1997 - 2000     0.080            0.000              0.000               0.000             0.000             80.2
54   Venezuela                      23             6            17        1989 - 2000     0.190            0.222              0.570               0.037             0.302            328.1
55   Zimbabwe                       34             3            31        1989 - 2000     0.099            0.159              0.693               0.020             0.000             64.4

     Total                         3,253         640           2,613                      0.344            0.288              0.491               0.023             0.041           523.501
                                                                                                Appendix Table 2
                                                                                      Series Description and Data Sources
This table shows the description of the data used and their coverage and sources.

Series                             Description                                                                                            Source
Variables related to the           The data come from Bank of New York (1989-2000) and Euromoney (1980-2000). This information is Bank of New York and Euromoney
internationalization of stock      used to classify firms as domestic or international companies. International companies are the ones
markets                            that issue a depositary receipt, cross-list, or raise capital in a foreign stock exchange at any time in the
                                   sample. Different variables are constructed using this variable. See text for details.


Domestic market capitalization     Market capitalization in domestic stock markets.                                                       Standard & Poor's (former International Finance Corporation) Emerging Markets
(current U.S. dollars)                                                                                                                    Database


Domestic value traded              Value traded in domestic stock markets.                                                                Standard & Poor's (former International Finance Corporation) Emerging Markets
(current U.S. dollars)                                                                                                                    Database
Value traded in foreign markets    Value traded in depository receipts covering the period 1989-2000. Series are computed on a firm- Bank of New York
(current U.S. dollars)             level basis by adding the different depositary receipts that belong to each company on a yearly basis.


GDP per capita at market prices    Gross domestic product (GDP) divided by mid-year population. The GDP at purchaser prices data is World Bank: World Development Indicators
(current U.S. dollars)             converted from domestic currencies using yearly official exchange rates. For the cases in which the
                                   official exchange rate is different from the market rate, the latter is used.

Law and order                      Qualitative variable that ranges from 1 to 6, where higher numbers indicate higher "levels" of law and Political Risk Services: International Country Risk Guide
                                   order. Law and order are assessed separately, with each sub-component comprising zero to three
                                   points. The law sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of the legal system,
                                   while the order sub-component is an assessment of popular observance of the law. Thus, a country can
                                   have a high rating in terms of its judicial system, for example 3, but a low rating, for example 1, if the
                                   law is ignored for a political aim, e.g. widespread strikes involving illegal practices. The data cover the
                                   period 1984-2000 for all countries.


Capital account liberalization     Dummy that equals one on and after the year of capital account liberalization, and zero elsewhere. The International Monetary Fund: Annual Report on Exchange Arrangements and
(IMF)                              data cover the period 1975-2000 for all countries.                                                     Exchange Restrictions
Total assets                       Total assets as reported in Worldscope for each firm-year, in million of U.S. dollars. The sample Worldscope
                                   covers the period 1989-2000 for all countries.
