                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       WHY PLANT-LEVEL PRODUCTIVITY STUDIES
                     ARE OFTEN MISLEADING, AND AN ALTERNATIVE
                              APPROACH TO INFERENCE

                                           Hajime Katayama
                                              Shihua Lu
                                           James R. Tybout

                                          Working Paper 9617
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9617


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




We gratefully acknowledge the National Science Foundation for support (grant 421-18 687W0). We have
benefited from useful discussions with Tom Holmes, Marc Melitz, Nina Pavcnik, Mark Roberts, Marc
Rysman, Sofronis Clerides, Johannes Van Biesebroeck, participants in the 2002 Dartmouth Summer Camp
on Firms and Trade, and participants in the December 2002 meetings of the NBER Productivity Group. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


©2003 by Haijime Katayama, Shihua Lu, and James R. Tybout. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Why Plant-Level Productivity Studies are Often Misleading, and
an Alternative Approach to Inference
Haijime Katayama, Shihua Lu, and James R. Tybout
NBER Working Paper No. 9617
April 2003
JEL No. L1, O3, L6

                                            ABSTRACT


       Applied economists often wish to measure the effects of managerial decisions or policy
changes on plant-level productivity patterns. But plant-level data on physical quantities of output,
capital, and intermediate inputs are usually unavailable. Therefore, when constructing productivity
measures, most analysts proxy these variables with real sales revenues, depreciated capital spending,
and real input expenditures. The first part of this paper argues that the resultant productivity indices
have little to do with technical efficiency, product quality, or contributions to social welfare.
Nonetheless, they are likely to be correlated with policy shocks and managerial decisions in
misleading ways.

       The second part of the paper develops an alternative approach to inference. Using Steven
Berry's (1994, RAND Journal) representation of equilibrium in a differentiated product market, we
show how to impute each plant's unobserved marginal costs and product quality from its observed
revenues and costs, and how to use this mapping to calculate plant-specific welfare-based
performance measures. (Bayesian estimation techniques are required because the vector of unknown
parameters is under-identified.) The final part of the paper demonstrates our methodology using
panel data on Colombian pulp and paper plants.

Haijime Katayama                       Shihua Lu                       James Tybout
Department of Economics                Charles River Associates        Department of Economics
Pennsylvania State University          Boston, MA 02116                Pennsylvania State University
University Park, PA 16802                                              University Park, PA 16802
                                                                       and NBER
                                                                       jtybout@psu.edu
I.         Overview
           Economists often seek to quantify the effects of a policy or event on the

performance of the manufacturing sector. Recurrent questions include: How much, if at

all, does trade liberalization improve efficiency? Do multinational investments cause

firms to perform significantly better? How big are the efficiency gains from R&D

spending? Are there learning spillovers between firms within an industry? How do entry

regulations affect an industry’s performance?

           To address these issues, many analysts rely on plant- or firm-level productivity

analysis. They posit that each establishment’s output is a function of the inputs it employs

and its productivity level, hereafter indexed by φ . Then, using the available output and

input measures, they estimate this function and solve for producer- and time-specific
                                 ~
approximations to φ , hereafter, φ . Finally, looking across producers and/or though time,

               ~
they correlate φ with things like the extent of foreign ownership, intensity of R&D

activity, whether the firms are exporting, rates of effective protection for the firm’s

product, and whether entry and exit are institutionally constrained.

           When output and input characteristics are common across plants, and when data
                                                                        ~
on the physical quantities of these variables are available, the use of φ -type measures

makes good sense. Indeed, most of the methodological literature on this approach to

analyzing firm or plant-level performance presumes that these conditions hold.1 But in
          ~
practice, φ -type measures are more commonly applied to differentiated product and/or

differentiated input industries, where the characteristics of products and factor inputs vary

1
    Particular attention has been devoted to the issues of how to estimate the functional relationship and how
to separate noise from “true” productivity shocks in φ jt .



                                                                                                                 1
considerably across producers.2 Under these circumstances data on physical volumes are

usually unavailable, so analysts are forced to make do with information on the values of

production, material inputs, and capital stocks.3 The resulting performance measures are

therefore, roughly speaking, indices of revenue per unit input expenditure.

         Such measures are viewed as a practical solution to the problem of imperfect data,

and because they are expressed in relative value terms, they are commonly presumed to

avoid the problem of comparing heterogeneous goods and factors. Our first objective in

this paper is to argue that this benign view is misguided, and that standard performance

measures can be very misleading when applied to differentiated product industries

(Section II). Even if the functional relationship between inputs and outputs is precisely

estimated, they are contaminated by variation in factor prices and demand elasticities. At

worst, they have nothing to do with firms’ productive efficiency, product quality or

contribution to consumer surplus.

         Our second objective is to develop an alternative approach to inference (Section

III). Specifically, we view firms’ costs and revenues as resulting from a Bertrand-Nash

equilibrium in a differentiated product industry, as in Berry (1994), and we incorporate

the demand system explicitly in the analysis. This allows us to impute the quantities,

qualities, marginal costs, and prices of each good from the observed revenues and

2
 A complete list of the relevant studies would take pages. Recent examples include Olley and Pakes
(1996), Bahk and Gort (1993), Caves and Barton (1990), Griliches (1986); Aitken and Harrison (1999),
Tybout et al (1991); Tybout and Westbrook (1995); Pavcnik (2002); Levinsohn and Petrin (forthcoming),
and Aw, Chen and Roberts (2000). Tybout (2000) surveys this type of study for developing countries;
Mairesse and Sassenou (1991) survey firm level studies that relate R&D to productivity measures.
3
  On the input side, the typical data set reports the value of intermediate goods purchased, the historical cost
of capital stocks, energy usage (sometimes in kilowatt hours, sometimes in value terms), and the number of
workers or total hours worked, perhaps broken down by broad skill categories or gender. On the output side
it describes sales revenuesometimes distinguishing exportsand product classification according to
standard industrial codes.



                                                                                                              2
expenditures. It also allows us to construct product-specific measures of consumer and

producer surplus, and to relate these measures to policies, events, or managerial

decisions.

       Our last objective is to demonstrate our methodology on plant-level panel data

from the Colombian manufacturing sector, and to compare our performance measures

with standard measures (Section IV). We find, first, that standard performance measures

are positively correlated with producer surplus because they depend positively upon

mark-ups. (This is probably the reason that they are correlated with producers’ survival

rates and growth rates.) Second, these standard measures are not closely related to

product quality measures and they are nearly orthogonal to consumer surplus measures,

so from a social welfare standpoint, they are poor characterizations of producer

performance. Third, firms with high marginal costs also tend to produce high quality

products, so studies that presume homogenous products and view marginal production

costs as an inverse index of performance tend to under-appreciate the producers of these

goods. Finally, relating firms’ performances to whether they engage in international

trade, we find that standard measures imply trading firms tend to do worse, while our

welfare-based measures suggest they do not.



II.    The Problem with standard performance measures
                                            ~
       To be specific about the features of φ jt -type indices, let us assume that the

production function may be written as:

                                   Q jt = e
                                              φ jt
                                                       ( )
                                                     ⋅ h F jt ,                          (1)




                                                                                           3
where Q jt is the output of the jth plant in period t, φ jt is its “true” productivity level, h(⋅)

is a differentiable function, and F jt is a scalar index of factor usage. Also, let F jt be a

                                                                                   v
constant returns function of the vector of inputs employed by the plant, F jt = f (V jt ) ,

                                         ′                                         r
where V jt = {V jt1 , V jt2 , K , V jtI } and factors that differ in quality enter V jt as distinct inputs.
      v

  r
( V jt collapses to a scalar in the case of labor productivity studies.)

          When Q jt and F jt are observable and the function h(⋅) is known, the productivity

                                                            ( )
index is retrievable as φ jt = ln Q jt − ln h F jt . But these conditions rarely prevail, so

analysts usually proceed with imperfect information. Specifically, when data on physical
                                                                 ~
output volumes are unavailable, they typically replace Q jt with Q jt = R jt / Pt ,

where R jt is the jth plant’s nominal sales revenue and Pt is an industry-wide output price

index. Similarly, if input quantities are unobservable, the convention is to replace them

                                                         B                         
                                                  ~       jt                       
with a deflated measure of expenditure on inputs, F jt =                            F jt , where Bt is a sector-
                                                          Bt                       
                                                                                   

wide input price deflator and B jt is the price of a unit bundle of inputs for the jth plant.4

Thus performance is commonly measured by indices of the general form:
                             ~
                                    (                   )   ~
                             φ jt = ln R jt − ln Pt − ln hˆ F jt ,( )                                                    (2)


                                                            v
 That is, B = min  ∑W i V i | 1 = f (Vv ) where W jt = {W jti ,W jt2 ,K,W jtI } is the plant-specific vector of unit
4                        I
           jt    V    jt                 
                       i =1                
                                                    v
factor prices associated with the input vector Vjt . If some elements of the input vector are measured in
                                                                                           ~
physical terms and others are measured in expenditure terms, the expression for F jt is more complicated.
We will treat this case in detail below.




                                                                                                                          4
where hˆ(⋅) is an approximation to the function h(⋅) .

            Sales revenues depend upon demand conditions and the nature of competition, so
                                     ~
we cannot describe the properties of φ jt without introducing additional assumptions

about consumer and producer behavior. Suppose N t firms compete in the industry of

interest during period t and let demand for the jth firm’s product be given by the

differentiable function:

                                                   (
                                                 v v
                                      Q jt = m j Pt , ωt , Yt , )            j ∈ {1, L , N t }                     (3)

      v
                    {               ′
                                         }
where ω t = ω1t , ω 2t , K , ω N t t is a vector of product quality/appeal measures for all Nt

       v
                 {              ′
                                     }
firms, Pt = P1t , P2t ,K, PN t t is the corresponding vector of product prices, and Yt is an

index of total market size.5 Further, assume that current prices and product quality indices
                      v     v
are common knowledge, ω and φ do not respond to the current or past output decisions

of any producer, firms are price takers in factor markets, and they are pure Bertrand-Nash

price setters in the product market.




5
                (             )
    Define m j −1 Pj | Pv − j , ω
                                v                                                th
                                  , Y to be the inverse demand function for the j firm, given the vector of prices for
                    v
all other products, P − j , the complete vector of product qualities, and market size. Caplin and Nalebuff
(1991) show that a pure Bertrand-Nash equilibrium exists if this function is convex and diminishing in Pj ,
so long as cost functions are convex. They also describe sufficient conditions on individual utility functions
and the distribution of these utility functions across individuals for this property to obtain, and they
demonstrate conditions for uniqueness. In particular, they show that the individual utility functions that
underlie logit demand systems satisfy existence and uniqueness conditions. This type of demand system
underlies our empirical work in the following sections.




                                                                                                                     5
        Under these assumptions, producer j considers its marginal revenue product at input

                                                                j v v
                 
level F jt to be 1 −
                      1    
                            γ jt
                                  R jt
                                       , where η jt =
                                                      − ∂ ln m   (Pt , ωt , Yt ) is this firm’s elasticity
                  η jt          F jt                       ∂ ln P jt
                          

                               ( )
                        d ln h F jt
of demand and γ jt =                is its returns to scale. Thus, equating the marginal
                         d ln F jt

revenue product of input bundles to their unit prices, producer by producer, we obtain a set

of first-order conditions for equilibrium:

                                η jt  B jt       
                        R jt =                    F jt ,        j ∈ {1, L , N t } .               (4)
                                η jt − 1  γ jt   
                                                 
                                    ~
Finally, substituting (4) into (2), φ jt may be written as:

                                               η jt          B     
              ~
                                    ( )
                                     ~
              φ jt = ln F jt − ln hˆ F jt + ln           + ln jt
                                               η jt − 1       P
                                                                       − ln γ jt .
                                                                                                     (5)
                                                              t    


                      ~
        How well does φ jt capture performance? Changes in product quality or productive

efficiency generally cause firms to adjust their size, so all of the terms on the right-hand

                       B jt                                                           ~
side of (5) except ln       depend upon ω jt and φ jt . But as we shall argue below, φ jt
                             
                       Pt 

need not respond to variation in ω jt and φ jt in the way that is commonly presumed; that

is, by taking on relatively high values when ω jt and/or φ jt are relatively large.

        A simple case
                                      ~
        To simplify our discussion of φ jt , we shall assume that analysts are somehow

able to correctly estimate the production function h(·) and the input aggregating function




                                                                                                      6
    f (⋅) . 6 Further, in order to begin with a simple case, we shall momentarily suppose that

                                                           ~
factor usage can be precisely measured in physical terms ( F jt = F jt ) , all firms face the

same demand elasticity ( η jt = η ∀j, t ), and all firms enjoy constant returns to scale

( γ jt = 1 ∀j, t and d ln h( F jt ) = d ln F jt ).

           Under these assumptions, ln F jt − ln hˆ( F jt ) drops out of equation 5 and

   η jt 
ln       becomes a constant. So φ~jt becomes proportional to real factor costs, and
   η −1 
   jt   

completely unrelated to productive efficiency or product quality. The former property

obtains because firms burdened with high factor costs pass a fraction of them on to

consumers as higher output prices, and therefore generate more revenue per unit input.

The latter property obtains because, with η and γ parametrically fixed, shocks to φ jt and

ω jt move R jt and F jt in equal proportion, leaving revenue per unit input unaffected

(equation 4).7 (Klette and Raknerud, 2001, and Bernard et al, 2000, make similar

observations in slightly different contexts.)
                              ~
           This dependence of φ jt on factor prices may subvert productivity analysis in a

number of ways. For example, the common finding that small and new firms are

relatively unproductive may partly reflect the fact that they pay relatively low wages and


                                                              ~
6
    Estimation errors introduce another type of problem with φ -type measures, but they do not undo the ones
we will focus upon here. Klette and Griliches (1996) provide discuss the estimation issues that arise when
revenue-based output measures are used in place of volume indices.

                                                                                         ~
7
    Shocks to efficiency and/or product quality can, however, affect the general level of φ values if they
affect the output price index, Pt .




                                                                                                             7
provide few fringe benefits (Baily, et al 1992; Griliches and Ragev, 1996; Aw, Chen and

Roberts, 2001). Similarly, productivity among exporters may tend to be understated if

they enjoy duty drawback schemes that reduce the costs of their intermediate inputs. On

the other hand, the finding that geographically clustered firms are relatively productive

(Henderson, 2001), which is typically attributed to agglomeration economies, may simply

reflect high wages and rental costs in urban areas. Likewise, the common tendency to
          ~
find high φ indices among R&D-intensive firms (Mairesse and Sassenou, 1991) and

among multinational firms (Blomstrom and Kokko, 1997; Aitken and Harrison, 1999)

may trace partly to their high unit labor costs.8

        Similar problems arise in time series. For example, in open economies, real

exchange rate appreciation tends to drive up real wages in the tradeable goods industries.
                                                           ~
But it also tends to increase import penetration rates, so φ -type indices may falsely create

the impression that import competition improves productivity among tradeable goods

producers. Further, given that multinationals and exporters rely more intensively on
                                                  ~
imported intermediate goods (Kraay, et al, 2001), φ -type indices may falsely imply that

they are relatively efficient during periods of real appreciation and heightened import

competition. (We will return to this effect in section IV.D below.)

        Unobserved heterogeneity in factor stocks

        Thus far we have been assuming that each factor is homogeneous across plants,

and we have been treating inputs with different characteristicsfor example, different



8
  Here we are assuming that their productivity measure is constructed using an index of physical labor
rather than a measure of expenditures on labor. We will consider the case of expenditure-based labor
measures shortly.




                                                                                                         8
types of workersas distinct elements of the V vector. Data are never actually available
                                                                               ~
in sufficient detail to do this, so it is natural to ask how the properties of φ are affected

by unobserved factor heterogeneity. The answer is that cross-plant and inter-temporal

variation in factor prices will no longer be orthogonal to φ jt and ω jt . Rather, assuming

that factors are paid the value of their marginal product, one would expect to find positive
                    ~                                                        ~
correlation between φ jt and φ jt or ω jt .9 But this source of variation in φ jt would

simply reflect the fact that firms using high quality inputs get more and/or better output.

It would reveal nothing about which firms are doing well in an economic sense, or

whether firms are getting better over time.

         Endogenous demand elasticities

         Although the assumption of common demand elasticities is often invoked, it is

unrealistic in many contexts. When some firms enjoy non-trivial market shares, formal

characterizations of market equilibrium often imply that the larger firms face relatively

low demand elasticities. 10 Further, it is reasonable to expect that firms with high

efficiency ( φ jt ) and/or high quality products ( ω jt ) will use relatively large bundles of




9
 This dependence of measured productivity on unobservable aspects of factor quality is well known (e.g.,
Griliches and Jorgenson, 1967).

10
   An inverse relationship between ω jt or φ jt and the perceived elasticity of demand arises in a variety of
contexts. For example, in a Dixit-Stiglitz (CES) system, one can induce such a relationship by assuming N
is small. The nested logit demand system we adopt in sections III and IV also exhibits this property.



                                                                                                           9
factor inputs.11 Thus “good” (high φ and high ω ) firms may well enjoy relatively low

                                                            ~
demand elasticities and, accordingly, have relatively large φ ’s. To the extent that this

                 ~
linkage matters, φ variation will not be entirely unrelated to performance.

                                                                                       ~
           However, elasticity effects are also likely to induce spurious variation in φ . For

example, producers of close substitutes may look relatively inefficient because their

demand is relatively elastic. Also, reductions in institutional barriers to entry may reduce

the market power of incumbent firms (e.g., Pakes and McGuire, 1994), making them

appear less productive. Similarly, when trade liberalization and exchange rate

appreciation reduce the equilibrium prices of the largest domestic firmswhich compete
                                                                                                                   ~
most directly with importsthese shocks will tend to reduce both the average φ jt value

                          ~
and dispersion in φ jt , even if true productivity remains unaffected.12 This pro-

competitive effect of appreciation works against the real factor price effect mentioned

earlier, which may help explain why the literature relating trade liberalization and import

penetration rates to ~φ jt -type measures reports mixed results (Tybout, 2001).


11
     For the case of a nested logit demand system, see Berry (1994). For a CES utility function,
                             η     
                     η−1 
                             η −1 
         ω                        , Melitz (2000) shows that with fixed     γ and a large number of products,
U  ∑  e jt Q jt  η        ,Z 
   j              
                                   
                                 
                                   
market clearing implies: ln R − ln P ≈  η − 1 γ ⋅ ln F +  1  ln Rt  +  η − 1  φ + ω . (Here R t is
                                                                                               (          )
                             jt     t                   jt                            jt   jt
                                         η                   η   Nt Pt   η 
industry-wide revenues.) Substituting this expression into the first-order condition (4), one obtains a
reduced-form expression for factor demand:
                 η            1  Rt   η − 1                            η −1      B jt  , which implies
ln F jt = 
            γ + η ⋅    − γ
                               ln
                                  η
                                           + 
                                                  η (φ jt + ω jt ) + γ + ln η  − ln P 
                   (1     )       P N
                                     t t                                             t 
cov[ln F , φ + ω] > 0 .

12
     This dispersion effect is one interpretation for the findings of Caves and Barton (1990).


                                                                                                                       10
         Non-constant returns to scale

         Relaxing the assumption of constant returns introduces another possible source of
                     ~
co-variation between φ and ( φ , ω ). However, its sign is uncertain. Suppose returns to

scale are above unity for the smallest firms but fall with size, as one would expect in most

industries. Then positive shocks to φ jt or ω jt increase factor usage and reduce

ln F jt − ln h( F jt ) until constant returns are reached. This negative effect of φ or ω on

~
φ will be somewhat moderated by the negative relationship between ln γ jt and F jt . So

the scale effect is ambiguous unless returns to scale are the same at all firms sizes.13

         Measuring some factor in expenditure terms

         Thus far we have assumed that all factors are accurately measured in physical

terms. But this is hardly realistic. With the possible exception of primary metals and

some food processing sectors (e.g., dairy and grain mills), data on intermediate inputs for

manufacturing plants are almost always expressed in expenditure terms. It is even more

rare to find physical capital measured in terms of numbers of machines of each type and
                                                    ~
vintage. Therefore we now explore the properties of φ when input expenditures are used

as proxies for input usage.

         Let some subset E ⊆ {1,K, I }of the inputs be measured in deflated expenditure


                                                             ~ i  W jt                 
                                                                       i
                                         ~v                                              V i for i ∈ E
terms, so that the measured input vector V jt has components V jt =
                                                                    W i                  jt
                                                                     t                  


13
  If there are decreasing returns to scale, expression (5) can be used to describe the limiting case of
perfectly competitive product markets by letting η approach infinity. (A unique pure Bertrand-Nash
equilibrium does not exist in the limit if returns to scale are constant or increasing.) For the CES case
                                                                       ~
described in footnote 11, it is easy to demonstrate that as η → ∞ , φ jt → φ jt + ω jt .




                                                                                                            11
    ~
and V jti = V jti for i ∉ E . Further, let the input aggregator function be


                           ( ) , ∑µ
          v        I
                              µi
F jt = f (V jt ) = ∏ V jti              i   = 1 , and assume that returns to scale are γ for all firms.
                    i =1            i



           ~                ~v                            W jti       
Then ln h( F jt ) = γ ln f (V jt ) = γ ln F jt + ∑ µ i ln i            , and ~
                                                                                 φ jt can be written as:
                                                          W            
                                                i∈E      t           

                                      η                  W jti                 i    
                ~
                φ jt = ln(µ 0 ) + ln        + ∑ µ i ln          + γ ∑ µ i ln Wt   
                                       η − 1              P                     P     
                                              i∉E        t            i∈E      t    
                                                                                                           (6)
                                              W jti              
                                     
                           + (1 − γ ) ∑ µ i ln          + ln F jt  − ln(γ ) .
                                      i∈E    P                   
                                              t                  

           All of the properties of (5) are still present in (6). But now the role of factor prices

is more nuanced. In particular, when some factors are measured in expenditure terms,
                                                        ~
cross-plant variation in their prices no longer affects φ jt because these factor prices are

                             W jti          
excluded from the sum ∑ µ i                  . On the other hand, by measuring some factors in
                             Pt             
                      i∉E                   

expenditure terms, we introduce a new role for their deflators through the expression

       Wt i   
∑ µ i         . Thus exchange rate fluctuations and other industry-wide factor price shocks
i∈E    Pt      

still work their mischief temporally on performance measures, even if the price deflators

are precisely constructed. Notice also that the cross-sectional effect of factor price

variation is ambiguous under non-constant returns. It depends upon whether the factor in

question is measured in expenditure terms, whether there are increasing or decreasing

returns, and the strength of the negative effect of factor prices on input usage (see

footnote 11).


                                                                                                           12
                                               ~
        But don’t we get sensible stories from φ ?

                                                   ~
        To all of the above, one might object that φ -type performance measures

nonetheless seem to “work.” That is, many studies have found that firms with high
~
φ jt values are more likely to be large or grow, and they are less likely to fail (Baily,

Hulten and Campell, 1992; Olley and Pakes, 1996; Aw, Chen and Roberts, 2001;

Baldwin and Gorecki, 1991; Lu and Tybout, 1996; Pavcnik, 2002). Does not this finding
                                                           ~
imply, as the authors of these studies suggest, that high- φ jt firms are more efficient

and/or produce a relatively desirable product? It need not. Success ultimately depends

upon profits rather than efficiency or product quality, and firms with low demand

                                       η
elasticities (i.e., large values of        ) tend both to be profitable and to have high
                                      η −1

~
φ jt values, even if their productive efficiency and product quality are unexceptional.

        To summarize, when analyzing differentiated product industries, it is a mistake to

pretend that sales revenues and input expenditures measure physical outputs and inputs,

respectively. This convention leads to spurious measures of productivity that may have

little to do with efficiency or product quality yet tend to be correlated with policy shocks

and managerial choices. Furthermore, even when efficiency and product quality are

captured in some way, these performance measures do not tell us anything about firms’

contributions to welfare.




                                                                                            13
III.        An Alternative Approach to Measuring Performance

            How, then, is one to infer something about plants’ performances when neither

their physical output volumes ( Q jt ) nor their prices ( Pjt , ) are available? If the input

         v
vector ( V jt ) is observable and demand elasticities are the same for all firms, Melitz

(2000) suggests using the residuals from a revenue function to make inferences about

φ jt + ω jt (see footnote 11). But in most applications, important elements of the input

vector are measured in expenditure terms, and/or it unrealistic to assume that the

elasticity of demand is the same for large and small firms. Under these circumstances we

propose using an alternative approach to inference.
                                                                             v v
            Specifically, suppose total variable costs and total revenues, (TCt , Rt ) =

                        ′
TC1t TC 2t TC N t t 
          L              , are observable for all plants and they reflect equilibrium in a
 R1t R2t    R N t t 

differentiated product industry. Then, using the demand functions (3) and the first-order

conditions for profit maximization (4), it may be possible to induce a unique mapping
       v v           v v v v
from (TCt , Rt ) to (Pt , Qt ,ωt , C t ) , where C jt denotes the jth plant’s marginal cost

schedule in period t. Once such a mapping is established, one can use it to impute plant-

specific consumer and producer welfare measures, to study the evolution of these welfare

measures over time, and to relate them to policy shocks and managerial choices.14




14
     Without data on factor prices it is impossible to impute productivity measures, φ t = {φ1t , φ 2t , K , φ Nt } ,
from observable variables. But these are relevant for welfare only inasmuch as they influence marginal
costs, which are identified.



                                                                                                                        14
A.         The demand system, producer behavior, and market equilibrium

           Several conditions must be satisfied in order to implement this strategy. First,

one’s assumptions concerning consumer and producer behavior must imply a unique set
                                      v v                v v
of equilibrium prices and quantities (Pt , Qt ) at each (ωt .Ct ) , given observable control

variables. (Sufficient conditions are described in Caplin and Nalebuff, 1991.) Second,

given equilibrium output and marginal cost values, it must be possible to infer the

associated total variable costs, TC for each firm. Thus it is generally necessary to impose

some structure on the marginal cost function.

           These requirements rule out non-parametric approaches and some flexible

functional forms, but it is not difficult to find a reasonable set of assumptions that suits

our purposes. In the remainder of this paper we describe one approach to inference that

seems to work well. First, we assume that marginal costs at the jth plant in year t are

given by the scalar C jt , regardless of that plant’s output level. (We do, however,

allow C jt to evolve through time with plant-specific productivity and factor price shocks.)

Second, we adopt Berry’s (1994) representation of market equilibrium with nested logit

demand functions.15

           A brief review of Berry’s (1994) model will serve to introduce parameters and

their interpretation in the present context. At time t let j ∈ {0,1,K N t } index the Nt +1

available varieties, with j = 0 corresponding to the “outside” variety. Further, assume that

the product varieties can be grouped into G+1 < Nt +1 nests. In our application the

outside product will be a composite imported variety, and the remaining varieties will


15
     A simple logit demand system would also work; we use the nested logit for added generality.




                                                                                                   15
map one-to-one onto the set of active domestic plants. We will also define product nests

according to the geographic region where the plants are located. For example, nest 1

includes the varieties of pulp and paper products manufactured in Bogota, nest 2 includes

the varieties manufactured in Medellin or Cali, and so on.

         Next, let the consumers active in period t be indexed by l ∈ (0, Yt ] . Each period,

each consumer in the market chooses a single unit of the variety that yields her the largest

net indirect utility, where variety j yields consumer l net utility:

                                 uljt = u jt + ς lg j t + (1 − σ )ε ljt .                                 (7)

Here g j ∈ {1,LG} denotes the index for the group (nest) that contains the jth variety, and

u jt is the cross-consumer mean utility delivered by good j. The last two terms on the

right hand side of (5) are unobserved error components that capture individual taste

differences among consumers. The first component, ς lg j t , varies across nests but not

within them, while ε ljt exhibits within-nest variation. Thus the parameter 0 ≤ σ < 1

indexes the degree of substitutability among, versus within, the nests.16 Finally, ε is

distributed type-1 extreme value across consumers, given j and t, and [ς + (1 − σ )ε ] is

distributed type-1 extreme value across consumers, given t. This implicitly defines the

distribution ς , which is itself a function of σ (Cardell, 1997).

         The mean utility delivered by domestic good j in period t depends on both its

quality and price:

16
  As σ goes to zero, within-group correlation of utilities goes to zero, and as σ goes to unity, within-group
correlation goes to unity. A more general specification lets σ vary across groups, allowing richer
substitution patterns (Berry, 1994; Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes, 1995). This specification has important
advantages, but it requires that we observe information about the distinctive features of each group, which
makes it infeasible for the present application.



                                                                                                          16
                                 u jt = ξ jt − α d P jt ,    ∀j = 1,..., N ,                               (8)

where ξjt measures product quality, Pjt is the price, and α d measures the price effect on

the mean indirect utility of a given domestic good. Similarly, the mean indirect utility

delivered by a unit of the composite imported good is:

                                           u 0t = ξ 0t − α f ⋅ P0t ,                                       (9)

where P0t is the domestic currency price of a unit of imports, calculated as the product of

the tariff-inclusive real price of imports in U.S. dollars and the real effective peso-dollar

exchange rate. Since the imported good is a composite, we allow α d and α f to differ.

         Integrating over consumers yields a logit-based functional form for the N t

                                          v            v           v        v
demand functions (3), with arguments Yt , Pt = ( P0t , Ptd ) , and ωt = (0, ωtd ) ,

      v
               {                 }      v
                                                {                                     }
where Pt d = P1t , P2t , K , PN t t and ω td = ξ1t − ξ ot , ξ 2t − ξ ot , K , ξ N t t − ξ ot (see appendix 1).

Note that all domestic product qualities are measured relative to the quality of the

imported good. Also, as Berry (1994) demonstrates, under the assumption of pure

Bertrand-Nash pricing and flat marginal cost schedules, these demand functions imply a

specific functional form for the N t profit maximizing conditions (4) (see appendix 1).

Finally, the expressions:


                                R jt = P jt ⋅ Q jt          j ∈ {1, L , N t }                             (10)

                                TC jt = Q jt ⋅ C jt         j ∈ {1, L , N t }                             (11)

provide 2 N t additional restrictions.17


17
  More generally, one might assume that the cost function is common across plants up to a single unknown
parameter that captures idiosyncratic efficiency and/or factor price effects.



                                                                                                            17
                                                 (          )
        Suppose the demand parameters α d , α f , σ are known and the data ( P0t ,Yt ,

v    v
Rt ,TCt ) are available. Then the demand functions (3), the profit maximization

conditions (4), the revenue expression (10) and the total variable cost expression (11)
                                                                       v v v v
                                                                                   (
provide 4 ⋅ N t equations with which to identify the 4 ⋅ N t unknowns, Qtd , Ptd , ωtd , Ct .         )
                                          Nt
Similarly, if total market size (Yt = ∑ Q jt ) is unobserved but the quantity of imports
                                          j =0

                                    v    v
                                                                        (
                                                                    v v v v
                                                                                            )
( Q0t ) is available, ( P0t , Q0t , Rt ,TCt ) can used to solve for Qtd , Ptd , ωtd , Ct . Appendix

1 proves that a unique solution exists for the case of a nested logit and sketches an

algorithm for finding it.



B.      The evolution of product quality and marginal costs

        It remains to link product quality and market costs to the business environment

and managerial decisions. To this end we assume that product quality and the log of

marginal costs evolve over time according to a vector autoregressive (VAR) process,

conditioned on a vector X jt of weakly exogenous variables, including things like R&D

expenditures, participation in foreign markets, and the extent of multinational ownership:

                        L                   2L
          ω jt = ω0 + ∑ λ s ω j , t − s + ∑ λ s ln C jt + L − s + λx X jt + ε ωjt ,                 (12a)
                       s =1               s = L +1

                             L                       2L
          ln C jt = c 0 + ∑ ϕ s ln C j ,t − s + ∑ ϕ s ω j ,t + L − s + ϕ x X jt + ε cjt ,           (12b)
                            s =1                 s = L +1

                                                                j = 1, L , N , t = L + 1, L , T .




                                                                                                      18
Accordingly, once the complete vector of parameters has been estimated, it will be

possible to trace the welfare effects of any deviation from observed X jt trajectories. We


                                 (     )
shall assume that the errors ε ω , ε c are jointly normal and serially uncorrelated after

controlling for plant effects.



C.      Estimation

        Without the VAR system described above, the demand parameters
                                                               v v           v v v v
(α d , α f , σ) are not identified. A different mapping from (TCt , Rt ) to (Pt , Qt ,ωt , C t )

exists for each feasible set of (α d , α f , σ) values, and without more structure, each is

equally likely. Equations (12a) and (12b) help with identification by constraining the
                                v v
shapes of the cross-sectional ( ωt , Ct ) distributions and the way that individual ( ω jt , C jt )

pairs evolve through time. However, these constraints bear only obliquely on the demand

parameters, and they introduce some new unknowns to be estimated. Prospects for

successful maximum likelihood estimation are further dimmed by the irregular shape of

the likelihood function for the nested logit (Lahiri andf Gao, 2001). Therefore we impose

further structure by specifying priors on the unknown parameters and estimating the

system (3), (4), (10), (11), (12) using Bayesian techniques.

        To summarize this estimation strategy, let us collect all of the parameters we have

                                                                     ε  ε  
introduced in the vector θ = [α d , α f , σ, λ, ϕ, Σ] , where Σ = E  c  c ' , and define
                                                                     ε ω  ε ω  

the joint density p (θ) to describe our priors, which we will discuss shortly. Also, let us

collect all of the observable data on revenues, costs, imports, the exchange rate, and



                                                                                                     19
weakly exogenous firm characteristics in the matrix D. Then the posterior distribution for

                        p (θ) ⋅ L( D | θ)
θ is: π(θ | D) =                           ∝ p (θ) ⋅ L ( D | θ) , where L ( D | θ) is the likelihood
                      ∫ p(θ) ⋅ L( D | θ)dθ
                      θ

function based on (3), (4), (10), (11), and (12).

           Excepting elements of the covariance matrix, Σ , we have no reason to expect that

the parameters of our model are correlated. Thus we write the joint prior distribution as a

product of our prior marginal densities for the individual parameters:


                             p (θ ) = p σ (σ ) ⋅ p α , γ (α, γ ) ⋅ p ϕ, λ (ϕ, λ ) ⋅ p Σ (Σ ) .

Let us describe each component of p (θ) in turn. First, the demand system priors we

impose are similar to those used by Poirier (1996) and Lahiri and Gao (2001).18 The

underlying utility maximization problem implies that σ ∈ [0,1] , so we specify uniform

priors on this region of support. 19 Second, we believe the price coefficients α d and α f

should be positive but we do not know much about their magnitudes, so we specify

uniform priors with support [0, 10] for each of these parameters. The remaining

parameters describe the VAR (equations 12a and 12b). For the autoregressive parameters

we assume joint normality, p ϕ, λ (ϕ, λ ) = N 2 L (0 2 L ,100 × I 2 L ) , where L is one plus the

number of right-hand side variables appearing in each VAR equation. Finally, as is


18
     These studies also estimate nested logit models using Bayesian techniques. However,         unlike ours, they
are concerned with the problem of ill-defined nesting structures.
19
  Restricting σ to be greater or equal to zero reflects our prior knowledge that the products within each
nest are at least as good substitutes for each other as those products outside the nest. Values of σ greater
than one are not consistent with the underlying assumption of the extreme value distribution of consumer
tastes. As σ goes to unity, consumers would purchase only the goods with the highest mean indirect utility
in each nest. Restricting σ to be less than or equal to one ensures that all products get consumed.




                                                                                                               20
standard in the literature, for the covariance matrix we assume an inverted-Wishart

distribution, p Σ (Σ) = InvWish(6, 100 × I 2 ) . Overall then, with the exception of σ , we are

doing little to constrain the range of plausible realizations on θ .

        Closed-form representations of the posterior π(θ | D ) are not available; nor is it

feasible to make i.i.d. draws directly from π(θ | D ) . We therefore use a Markov chain

Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithm to generate correlated draws from π(θ | D ) and we

analyze the moments of the resulting empirical distributions (Gilks, et al, 1996).

        The vector θ is relatively large, so we exploit Gibbs sampling techniques to

generate our Markov chain. That is, we partition θ into three sub-vectors:

θ = [θ1 , θ 2 , θ 3 ], where θ1 = (α d , α f , σ) , θ 2 = (λ, ϕ) and θ 3 = Σ . Then we update the

sub-vectors sequentially by drawing from the full conditional distributions of each in

turn. The full conditional distribution of ( θ 2 | θ1 , θ 3 , D) is multivariate normal because D

and θ1 imply the (ω, ln C ) trajectories, which contain all of the available information on

θ 2 . For the same reason, the full conditional distribution of ( θ 3 | θ1 , θ 2 , D) is inverted-

Wishart. Thus closed-form expressions for the full conditional distributions of θ 2 and θ3

are easy to construct, and sampling from these distributions is straightforward (Zellner,

1971). However, no simple expression for the full conditional distribution of ( θ1 | θ 2 , θ 3 ,

D) is available, so we use a Metropolis-Hastings sampling algorithm. Appendix 2

provides further details.

E.      Constructing Performance Measures

        Once we have estimated our posterior distribution, π(θ | D ) , we solve for the

marginal cost and product quality trajectories of each producer in the sample using the



                                                                                                     21
expected value of θ .20 The remaining task is then to translate these trajectories into

meaningful performance measures, and to examine the relationship between those

measures and the traditional Tornqvist indices described in Part I above.

         For the ith producer, we calculate the increment to consumer surplus that it

generates each period by evaluating consumer surplus with, versus without the ith good:21



                                                                                      
     ∆CS ti =    yt ⋅ [∑ exp(u jt /(1 − σ))](1− σ) } − [ ∑ exp(u jt /(1 − σ))](1− σ) }                   (13)
                       j                                 j ≠i                         
                                                                                      


Prices and market shares are allowed to adjust to re-establish equilibrium when good m is

removed. Similarly, we calculate the ith producer’s own surplus as (Pit − Cit )Qit , and

from this we subtract the negative externality this producer imposes on the surplus of


                                                                   (         )
other firms. The latter is imputed by evaluating ∑ P jt − C jt Q jt with, versus without,
                                                            j ≠i

the ith producer present, letting prices and market shares adjust to re-establish

equilibrium.

         To evaluate these firm-specific welfare contributions, we express them as ratios to

firms’ reported capital stock to obtain a crude social rate of return on investment. (All

other costs of operation are captured by variable costs and will already be netted out of

producer surplus.) Obviously we miss pre- and post-sample costs and benefits and our


20
  It would, of course, be possible to also study the distributions for these trajectories that are induced by
π(θ | D) ; we have not pursued this yet.
21
  Ackerberg and Rysman (2001) argue that the nested logit demand system overstates the contribution to
consumer surplus provided by each product because it implies very high marginal utility from the first units
consumed of each good. Thus our results may over-emphasize consumer surplus relative to producer
surplus.



                                                                                                                22
measure of firms’ assets will be very crude, but we feel we will come closer to a

comprehensive basis for assessment than the standard methodologies. For the sake of

comparison, we also calculate the usual Tornqvist measures of total factor productivity

under the standard assumptions that deflated revenues measure real output, and deflated

expenditures on intermediate goods measure physical intermediate good usage:

                                                     I
                          ~                                      ~
                          φ jt = ln( R jt / Pt ) − ∑ µˆ ijt ln(V jti ) ,                 (14)
                                                    i =1



where µ̂ ijt is the share of the ith factor in total costs at firm j during period t.



IV.       An Application to the Colombian Pulp and Paper Mill Industry

A.        The Data

          We base our empirical example on panel data describing the Colombian pulp and

paper mill industry over the period 1981-1991. These data were originally collected by

Colombia’s official statistical agency (Departmento Administrativo Nacional de

Estadistica) and have been cleaned as described in Roberts (1996). To keep the analysis

simple we exclude plants that entered or exited during the sample period, leaving a total

of 13 plants over an 11 year period.22 This naturally creates some selection bias, although

the entering and exiting plants were quite small and thus had a minor influence on market

shares.

          We construct total domestic sales, R jt , as total sales revenue less the value of

exports divided by a general wholesale price deflator. To construct total variable costs,

TC jt , we first sum payments to labor, intermediate input purchases net of inventory




                                                                                                23
accumulation, and energy purchases. Then we scale this aggregate by the ratio of total

domestic sales to total sales and we divide the result by the same wholesale price deflator

we used for output. This definition of total variable cost implies, of course, that

expenditures on physical capital are fixed costs. 23

         Our real exchange rate series, et , is taken from Ocampo and Villar (1995), who

include an adjustment for tariffs. To impute imports we assume that all imported goods in

the relevant industrial classification maintain their same exogenous dollar price during

the sample period. Further, we assume that the imported varieties are consumed in fixed

proportion to one another, so that they can be treated as a single bundle whose domestic

price fluctuates only with the exchange rate. Then, calling the period t dollar value of

imports R0t , we construct our index of the quantity of imports as Q0t = R0t . The units in
                                                                                          P0t

which Q0t is measured determine the units in which all domestic varieties are measured

and effectively fix the size of the market.24

         Finally, the vector of weakly exogenous variables ( X jt ) includes the book value

of each plant’s initial (1981) capital stock, a trend term, and two dummy variables that


22
  Entry and exit would complicate the VAR portion of the likelihood function by creating an unbalanced
panel.

23
  An equally simple approach would be to assume that capital stocks are perfectly flexible, and to include a
rental cost of capitalsay 10 percent of the book valuein our total cost measure. The intermediate case
in which capital stocks (and perhaps other inputs) are subject to finite adjustment costs is difficult to deal
with because it means introducing dynamic optimization into the analysis.
24
 Unfortunately, the choice of the units of Q0 also has implications concerning import volume shares. If we
were to halve the imputed quantity of imports, the imputed volume share of imports would also be smaller.
This reflects the fact that domestic quantities are not linear in Q0 . An increase in Q0 does imply bigger
domestic quantities but the increase is less than proportional. In practice, we normalize the series of real
exchange rate so that in the base year revenue share of imports equals its volume share.



                                                                                                               24
summarize plants’ participation in foreign markets. The first takes a value of one if the

plant was importing some or all of its intermediate inputs in year t-1, but not exporting

any of its output. The second dummy takes a value of one if the plant was both importing

some intermediates and exporting some output in year t-1. No plant in our sample

exported output without importing intermediate inputs, so the omitted category is simply

plants that did not buy inputs or sell outputs in international markets in year t-1.25



 B.       Posterior Parameter Distributions

          Means, standard errors and other summary statistics for our estimated posterior

distribution π(θ | D ) are reported in Table 1 below. The estimates are constructed using

Wooldrich’s (2001) correction for persistent unobserved heterogeneity in the disturbance

term.26

          Overall, the results appear quite well behaved, although the posterior distribution

for the price coefficient α d is rather diffuse.27 Given the small sample size we are

working with, this is perhaps unsurprising. The mixing parameter σ tends to be close to

unity, suggesting that most of the variation in tastes across consumers has to do with

region of origin. The VARs for product quality and marginal cost both show a plausible

25
 It would have been desirable to also include R&D spending, and to distinguish firms according to
whether they were partly owned by foreigners. Unfortunately, this information was not available.

26
  Wooldrich’s (2001) correction takes care of initial conditions problem. It amounts to including the initial
value of the lagged dependent variables as explanatory variables in all years, and using a standard error
components specification for the disturbance. Kraay et al (2001) provide further discussion in the context
of a similar VAR. Our results indicate that the variance of the random effect is sufficiently small to ignore,
so we simply include initial values of the lagged dependent variables.
27
  The standard errors can be misleading because these are not symmetrically distributed random variables.
For example, although a standard t-test would not reject the null hypothesis that α =0, with 90 percent
confidence, the 90 percent confidence intervals for σ lie entirely in the positive domain.



                                                                                                           25
amount of persistence. On the other hand, there is less dynamic interaction among these

variables than we expected. (That is, we thought high marginal cost in one year might

lead to higher product quality in the next year.) Nonetheless, as we will see shortly, these

variables do exhibit contemporaneous covariance across plants because of persistent plant

effects. Finally, our coefficients for trends, international transactions, and capital stocks

are not estimated with much accuracy. However, the impact of importing intermediate

goods on marginal costs and product quality is large and negative, on average. We will

return to explore the implications of these international transactions coefficients in

section D below.



C.        Plant performance measures

          Using the posterior means of our demand parameters, we impute relative product

qualities ( ω j ), marginal costs (Cj), contributions to consumer surplus over total

                     ∆U j                                                               Πj
production costs,           , producer surplus over value of the fixed capital stock,        ,
                     TC j                                                               Kj

external effects on the producer surplus of other plants over value of the fixed capital

          ∆ ∑Πk
           k≠ j
stock ,             , and net total surplus created over fixed capital stocks,
            Kj

                  ∆ ∑Πk
∆U j + Π j         k≠ j
              +             . Then pooling all 11 years of observations on the 13 plants in
     Kj             Kj

continuous operation, we obtain the descriptive statistics in table 2. The results imply that

the ratio of operating profits to fixed capital is roughly 7 percent, so the average rate of

return on fixed capital investment is quite sensible. Domestic products are, on average,


                                                                                                 26
somewhat more attractive than the imported goods, but the cross-product standard

deviation in relative appeal is substantial. (Robustness tests, not reported, show that it

also depends on our pσ (⋅) specification.) Most social surplus comes from the consumer

side rather than the producer side (but see footnote 21). Indeed, the only reason that

plants make a positive contribution to welfare is that this consumer surplus effect

dominates the negative externality each plant imposes on the others by shrinking their

market. (Some plants actually reduce net total welfarethis is a well known possibility

in the case of monopolistic competition.)

         We next calculated the cross-plant correlations in these variables reported in

tables 3.28 The implications are intriguing. First, relative product quality, ω j , and the log

of marginal production costs, ln C j , are weakly correlated ( ρ = 0.201). Thus on average,

it costs relatively more to produce a relatively desirable good, and it is probably

inappropriate to equate low production costs with superior performance.
                                                                  ~
         Second, the standard total factor productivity measure ( φ jt ) is weakly associated

with product quality ( ρ = 0.238) because of the elasticity effect mentioned in sections II

            ~
and III. So φ jt does partly capture an aspect of performance that is directly related to

                                         ~
welfare ( ρ = 0.435). On the other hand, φ jt is orthogonal to marginal costs ( ρ = 0.022),

which in turn reflects factor prices and technical efficiency. We cannot unbundled these

two cost components without plant-specific information on factor prices, but if the




28
  We also looked at correlations of firms’ rankings in terms of each of these variables. The results are
nearly identical to those reported in Table 3, so we do not report them here.


                                                                                                           27
                                                                      ~
dominant source of variation is technical efficiency, it follows that φ jt does a poor job of

capturing φ jt .

                ~                                                             Π jt
        Fourth, φ jt is fairly strongly associated with own-producer surplus,
                                                                              K jt

( ρ = 0.600). This association with own surplus appears to reflect underlying variation in

                                                               ~
plant size. Specifically, low product quality not only reduces φ jt , it dampens output and

scales back Π jt = Q jt (Pjt − C jt ) .

                                                                         ~
        Finally, although producer surplus is positively associated with φ jt , the opposite

is true of consumer surplus ( ρ = -0.153). Thus total surplus created over own fixed

                                  ~
capital is only weakly related to φ jt ( ρ = 0.220). This correlation is the only one that

matters if we are exclusively concerned with contributions to social welfare. Taken at

face value, it implies that traditional Tornqvist indicesand, we suspect, the entire class

of indices discussed in section IItell us little about which firms are do well from a

social perspective.



D.      Linking performance to policy
                                                           ~
        It is popular to regress performance measures like φ jt on policy variables or plant

                                                                                   ~
characteristics that are considered to respond to policy. For example, variants of φ jt have

often been regressed on measures of exposure to foreign technology, including foreign

direct investment in the firm or its industry, and indicators for whether the firm is an




                                                                                             28
exporter. As a final exercise, we demonstrate an alternative exercise using the welfare-

based performance measures described in the previous section.

        Specifically, we use the estimates in table 1 to quantify the effects of prohibiting

firms from becoming exporters and/or importing intermediate goods. It would be

straightforward to also prohibit consumers from importing foreign substitutes, but we will

not do so in order to focus on these two production-side trade restrictions. Also, for the

same reason, we will assume that total domestic demand evolves exactly as it would have

in the absence of our policy shock, and that each producer draws the same VAR shocks

(ε cjt , ε ωjt ) that were actually observed.

        Under these assumptions we can use our VAR parameters to calculate the paths

for (ω jt , ln C jt ) that would have emerged if, beginning in 1982, all international

producer trade had been shut down. The cross-plant temporal averages for these variables

are graphed in Figure 1. As one could have predicted, since the use of imported

intermediate imports reduces marginal costs (Table 1), our hypothetical policy regime

results in marginal cost increases. It also results in slight quality increases as firms

substitute toward domestic sources. The latter seems counter-intuitive, but it follows from

our finding that high quality is weakly associated with high cost.

        Substituting our parameter estimates and these counterfactual trajectories for

(ω jt , ln C jt ) into equations (8), (9) and (12), we next re-solve for equilibrium each

period and calculate the new trajectories for producer and consumer surplus. These are

graphed in figure 2. On net, not much happens to producer surplus because prices and

costs move in the same direction. (This helps explain why some producers use imported

inputs and others do not.) More surprisingly, not much happens to consumer surplus


                                                                                            29
either. The reason is that the higher prices of domestic varieties due to higher marginal

costs are accompanied by slight increases in quality, and our demand system estimates

imply that consumers care a great deal about quality. We caution that this result appears

to depend upon our priors. Other priors led to posterior parameter distributions (not

reported) that implied a 10 percent loss in consumer surplus when producers were

prohibited from foreign trade.
                                                                         ~
           A very different story would have emerged if we had relied on φ jt -type measures

for policy analysis. Fitting an AR(1) like those in table 1 to the Tornqvist index discussed

earlier, we find that firms that imported their intermediate goods had significantly lower

measured productivity. 29 Thus cutting firms off from foreign trade would appear to

significantly improve performance. This may reflect the fact that our sample period

includes a major devaluation, which presumably encouraged exporting and the use of
                                                               ~
imported intermediate goods at the same time that it depressed φ jt through relative price

effects (refer to equation 6). The top panel of figure 3 presents average trajectories of the
                    ~
performance measure φ jt with, versus without, producer trade.

                                                                       ~
           It is noteworthy that the time series average value of this φ -type index tracks our

welfare based index in figure 2 rather closely. Thus, in sense, the cross-producer variation
   ~
in φ -type measures is much more problematic than temporal variation that is typical of

the population of plants. However, the reason for the high temporal correlation between


                   ~      ~
29
     We regressed φ jt on φ jt −1 and the same weakly exogenous variables that appear in the VAR
specifications of table 1, making the same correction for unobserved heterogeneity. We obtained a
coefficient of –0.163 (standard error 0.068) on our dummy for use of imported intermediates without
exporting, and a coefficient of -0.220 (standard error 0.071) on our dummy for use of imported
intermediates while simultaneously exporting.


                                                                                                      30
     ~
mean φ jt values and social welfare is that the market for pulp and paper products

expands during the sample period, not that firms improved in terms of their marginal

costs or product qualities (refer to Figure 1).



V.     Concluding Remarks

       The analysis we have presented here is crude in many ways. We have used a very

simple demand system, we have assumed that marginal costs are flat with respect to

output, we have ignored producers that were not present for the entire sample period, and

we have ruled out any form of forward looking behaviordue either to dynamic pricing

games or to capital accumulation. Finally, we have paid no attention to the institutional

and technological features of the Colombian pulp and paper industry.

       For all of these reasons, we do not wish to argue that the numbers we have

presented here are the best that one can do. Rather, our objectives have been to argue that

much of the literature on plant-level performance is fundamentally flawed, and to sketch

an alternative approach to inference that we feel holds more promise. Significant

refinements in most of the dimensions mentioned above are possible; we are optimistic

that they will enhance the usefulness of our methodology.




                                                                                            31
                                    Bibliography

Ackerberg, Daniel and Mark Rysman (2002) “Unobserved Product Differentiation in
      Discrete Choice Models: Estimating Price Elasticities and Welfare Effects,”
      NBER Working Paper No. 8798.

Aitken, Brian, and Ann Harrison (1999) "Do Domestic Firms Benefit from Foreign
       Direct Investment? Evidence from Panel Data," American Economic Review, pp.
       605-618

Anderson, Simon, Andre de Palma and Jacques-Francois Thisse (1992) Discrete Choice
      Theory of Product Differentiation. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Aw, Bee-Yan, Xiaomin Chen, and Mark Roberts (2001) "Firm-Level Evidence on
      Productivity Differentials and Turnover in Taiwanese Manufacturing," Journal of
      Development Economics, pp. 51-86.

Bahk, Byong and Michael Gort (1993) “Decomposing Learning by Doing in New
       Plants,” Journal of Political Economy, 101(4), pp. 561-583.
Baily, Martin, Charles Hulten and David Campbell (1992) “Productivity Dynamics in
       Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity:
       Microeconomics, pp. 187-249.

Baldwin, John R. and Paul K. Gorecki (1991) “Entry, Exit, and Productivity Growth,” in
      P. Geroski and J. Schwalbach, eds. Entry and Market Contestability: An
      International Comparison. Oxford and Cambridge: Blackwell, pp. 244-56.

Bernard, Andrew, Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen and Samuel Kortum (2000) “Plants
       and Productivity in International Trade,” NBER Working Paper 7688.

Berry, Steven. (1994) “Estimating Discrete-Choice Models of Product Differentiation,”
       Rand Journal 25(2), pp. 242-262.

Berry, Steven, James Levinsohn and Ariel Pakes (1995) “Automobile Prices in Market
       Equilibrium,” Econometrica 63(4), pp. 841-890.

___________________ (1999) “Voluntary Export Restraints in Automobiles,” American
      Economic Review 89(3), pp. 400-430.

Blomstrom, Magnus and Ari Kokko (1997). “How Foreign Investment Affects Host
      Countries,” World Bank PRD Working Paper No. WPS 1745.

Caplin, Andrew and Barry Nalebuff (1991) “Aggregation and Imperfect Competition: On
       the Existence of Equilibrium,” Econometrica 59, pp. 25-60.




                                                                                     32
Cardell, Scott (1997) “Variance Components Structures for the Extreme Value and
       Logistic Distributions with Application to Models of Heterogeneity,”
       Econometric Theory 13, pp. 185-213.

Caves, Douglas, Lau Christiansen and W. Erwin Diewert (1982) “Output, Input and
       Productivity Using Superlative Index Numbers,” Economic Journal 92, pp. 73-96.

Caves, Richard and David Barton (1990) Efficiency in U.S. Manufacturing Industries.
       Cambridge: MIT Press.

Gilks, Walter R., Sylvia. Richardson and David J. Spiegelhalter (1996) “Introducing
       Markov Chain Monte Carlo,” in Gilks, W. R., S. Richardson and D. J.
       Spiegelhalter, eds., Markov Chain Monte Carlo in Practice. London: Chapman
       and Hall/CRC.

Griliches, Zvi. (1986). “Productivity, R&D and Basic Research at the Firm Level in the
       19870s,” American Economic Review 76(1), pp. 141-154.

Griliches, Zvi and Haim Ragev (1995) "Firm Productivity in Israeli Industry: 1979-
       1988," Journal of Econometrics, 65(1), pp.175-203.

Henderson, Vernon (2001) “Marshall’s Scale Economies,” processed, Department of
      Economics, Brown University.

Jorgenson, Dale and Zvi Griliches (1967). “The Explanation of Productivity Change,”
       Review of Economic Studies 34(3), pp. 249-83.

Klette, Tor and Zvi Griliches (1996) “The Inconsistency of Common Scale Estimators
        When Output Prices Are Unobserved and Endogenous,” Journal of Applied
        Econometrics, 11(4), pp. 343-61.

Klette, Tor and Arvid Raknerud (2001) “How and Why do Firms Differ?” processed,
        Department of Economics, University of Oslo.

Kraay, Aart, Isidro Soloaga and James Tybout (2001) “Product Quality, Productive
       Efficiency, and International Technology Diffusion: Evidence from Plant-Level
       Panel Data,” World Bank Policy Research Working Paper No. 2759.

Lahiri, Kajal and Jian Gao (2001) “Bayesian Analysis of Nested Logit Model by Markov
        Chain Monte Carlo,” processed, Department of Economics, University at
        Albany-SUNY.

Levinsohn, James and Amil Petrin (forthcoming) "Estimating Production Functions using
       Inputs to Control for Unobservables," Review of Economic Studies.




                                                                                       33
Liu, Lili and Tybout, James (1996) “Productivity Growth in Chile and Colombia: The
        Role of Entry, Exit and Learning,” in Mark Roberts and James Tybout, eds.,
        Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries. Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Marshak, J. and W. H. Andrews (1944). “Random Simultaneous Equations and the
      Theory of Production,” Econometrica, 50, pp. 649-670.

Mairesse, Jacques and Mohamed Sassenou (1991). “R&D and Productivity: A Survey of
       Econometric Studies at the Firm Level.” STI Review (OECD, Paris), 1991, pp. 9-
       43.

McFadden, Daniel (1974) “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior,”
     in Paul Zarembka, ed., Frontiers in Econometrics. New York: Academic Press,
     1974.

Melitz, Marc (2000) “Estimating Productivity in Differentiated Product Industries,”
        Department of Economics, Harvard University.

Ocampo, Jose Antonio and Leonardo Villar (1995) “Colombian Manufactured Exportes,
     1967-91,” in Gerald Helleiner, editor, Manufacturing for Export in the
     Developing World: Problems and Possibilities. New York, N.Y.: Routledge.

Olley, Steven and Ariel Pakes (1996) “The Dynamics of Productivity in the
       Telecommunications Equipment Industry,” Econometrica, 64(6), pp. 1263-1297.

Pakes, Ariel and Paul McGuire (1994). “Computing Markov-Perfect Nash Equilibria:
       Numerical Implications of a Dynamic Differentiated Product Model,” RAND
       Journal of Economics, 25(4), pp. 555-589.

Pavcnik, Nina (2002) “Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improvements:
       Evidence from Chilean Plants,” The Review of Economic Studies 69: 245-276.

Poirier, Dale (1996) “A Bayesian Analysis of Nested Logit Models,” Journal of
        Econometrics 75, pp. 163-181.

Roberts, Mark (1996) “Colombia, 1977-85: Producer Turnover, Margins, and Trade
       Exposure,” in Mark Roberts and James Tybout, editors, Industrial Evolution in
       Developing Countries. New York: Oxford University Press.

Tybout, James (2000) “Manufacturing Firms in Developing Countries: How Well do
      They do, and Why?” Journal of Economic literature 38(1), pp. 11-44.

___________________ (forthcoming) “Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on the ‘New’
      Trade Theories,” in James Harrigan (ed.) Handbook of International Trade,
      Oxford: Basil-Blackwell.



                                                                                       34
Tybout, James, Jaime de Melo and Vittorio Corbo (1991) “The Effects of Trade Reforms
      on Scale and Technical Efficiency: New Evidence from Chile,” Journal of
      International Economics 31, pp. 231-250.

Tybout, James and M. Daniel Westbrook (1995). "Trade Liberalization and Dimensions
      of Efficiency Change in Mexican Manufacturing Industries," Journal of
      International Economics 39, pp. 53-78.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey (2000) “The Initial Conditions Problem in Dynamic, Nonlinear
      Panel Data Models with Unobserved Heterogeneity,” unpublished working paper,
      Department of Economics, Michigan State University.

Zellner, Arnold (1971) An Introduction to Bayesian Inference in Econometrics. New
       York: Wiley.




                                                                                    35
      Appendix 1: Inferring Qualities and Quantities from Revenues and Costs
                                                                                   v v
        This appendix demonstrates that a unique mapping exists from (P0t , Q0t , TCt , Rt )
    v v v v
to (Pt , Qt ,ωt , C t ) and sketches an algorithm for finding it. The mapping is done period

by period, so we shall hereafter drop t subscripts to reduce clutter.

        First, let us replicate some well-known expressions for nested logit demand

systems. Under the assumptions reviewed in section IIa, demand for the jth domestic

variety, expressed as share of total demand for varieties in the jth product’s nest (region),

is:

                           exp[(ω j − α d P j + α f P0 ) /(1 − σ)]
         S j| g =                                                                                   (A1.1)
               j
                         ∑          exp[(ω k − α d Pk + α f P0 ) /(1 − σ)]
                     k ∋ gk = g j


Also, expressed as a share of total demand for the industry’s product, demand for the

products in the jth product’s nest as is:

                                                                                  (1−σ)
                                                                 
                                                                 
                        ∑ exp[( ω k − α d Pk + α f P0 ) /(1 − σ)]
                       k ∋ g k = g j                                                            (A1.2)
         S g ,t =                                                                               .
            j                                                                     (1−σ )
                     G 
                                                                           
                    ∑ ∑              exp[( ω k − α  P
                                                    d k + α  P
                                                            f 0 ) /(1 − σ )]              +1
                    m =1 
                         k ∋ g k = m                                        

Therefore our functional form for the jth producer’s demand function (equation 3) is
      v v
m j ( P, ω, Y | θ) = s j | g ⋅ s g ⋅ Y , and profits for the jth producer may be written as:

 Π j = ( P j − C j ) ⋅ S j | g j ⋅ S g j ⋅ Y . Further, given pure Bertrand-Nash pricing strategies,

the standard first order conditions for profit maximization imply that equation (4) may be

written as (Berry,1994):




                                                                                                       36
                                           (1 − σ) / α d
              P j = C jt +                                                 , j = 1,K N             (A1.3)
                             1 − σ ⋅ S j | g − (1 − σ) ⋅ S j | g ⋅ S g
                                            j                   j      j



                                                 v v                          v r v v
                                                                                         (
Our objective is to show that, given (P0 , Q0 , TC , R ) , the 4 ⋅ N unknowns P, Q, ω, C are        )
uniquely determined by (A1.1) through (A1.3) and (10) and (11) of the text.

        First, by equation (11), total variable costs at the jth plant are TC j = Q j C j , so the

                                                                   TC j
within-group market share of the jth firm is: S j | g j =                   Q gtot where total output from
                                                                    Cj         j



                                                   TC k
the jth plant’s group is Q gtot =        ∑              and total domestic output is
                              j
                                     k ∋ g k = g j Ck


Q tot = ∑ Q gtot . Also, by equation (10), total revenues at the jth plant are R j = P j Q j ,
        g =1, G

so the jth plant’s price-cost markup may be expressed in terms of observable variables as

        Rj
mj =          − 1 , and once its marginal cost is known, its price can be calculated as
       TC j

P j = (m j + 1)C j .

        Substituting these market share and price expressions into the pricing rule (A1.3)

and solving for marginal cost, we obtain:

                                                          TC                    
                                 TC j                         j     1           
                       C j = σ ⋅            + (1 − σ ) ⋅  tot   +               .              (A1.5)
                                   tot
                                 Qg                       Q + Q0 α ⋅ m j        
                                    j                                           

This expression defines the unobservable C j as a monotonic decreasing function of


Q gtot , given data on TC j , m j , Qtot and Q0 . Thus, once the nest quantity subtotals are
     j




                                                                                                        37
known, each firm’s marginal costs are implied by (A1.1). With these marginal costs,

prices can be retrieved from P j = (m j + 1)C j . In turn, these imply quantities

Q j = R j / P j , and market shares follow trivially. Finally, once prices and market shares

are known, the vector of product qualities can be found by substituting into:



                                                                        (               )
            ω j ≡ ξ j − ξ 0 = α d Pj − α f P0 − σ ln(S j | g j ) + ln S j | g j ⋅ S g j − ln(S 0 )
                                                                                                     ,   (A1.6)
                                                                                        j = 1,..., N


                                                                            G
which follows from (A1.1) and (A1.2). 30 (Here S 0 = 1 − ∑ S g is the market share of
                                                                         g =1

the imported variety.)

                                                                                                TC k
           To solve for the nest quantity subtotals, note that Q gtot =               ∑              .
                                                                    j
                                                                                  k ∋ g k = g j Ck


Substituting the marginal cost expression (A1.5) into this sum, and dividing both sides by

Q gtot , one obtains:
       j


                                                                                          
                                                           1                              
            1= ∑                                                                          ,            (A1.7)
                          
                          
                                            g      (
              k ∋ g k = g  σ + (1 − σ) ⋅ Q tot ⋅  Q tot + Q
                                                   
                                                               0)−1                   −1  
                                                                    + (α ⋅ TC k ⋅ mk )  
                                                                                         

                                                                                      g = 1, K G .

The right-hand side of (A1.6) is a monotonic negative function of Q gtot with value


n g σ −1 > 1 at Q gtot = 0 and limit 0 as Q gtot → ∞ , where n g is the number of producers



30
     Berry, Levinsohn and Pakes (1995) use a similar inversion to study the quality of automobile models.



                                                                                                            38
in nest g. Thus, for all g ∈ {1, KG}, Q0 > 0 , and Q tot ≥ 0 , equation (A1.7) has a unique,

positive root: Q gtot = f g (Q tot | Q 0 ) , which can be found using a bisection algorithm at


any Q tot .

          Finally, we will show that Q tot −                   ∑ f g (Q tot | Q0 ) = 0 has a unique positive
                                                           g =1, G


root for any given Q0 > 0 . The existence of at least one root follows from the fact that


                                                                    lim                                 
  ∑   f g (Q tot | Q0 ) is continuous in Q tot ,                          
                                                                Q tot → 0 
                                                                           Q tot
                                                                                 −   ∑ g  f (Q tot
                                                                                                   | Q0  < 0 and
                                                                                                       )
                                                                                                         
g =1, G                                                                           g =1, G               

    lim                                 
          
Q tot → ∞ 
           Q tot
                 −   ∑ g  f (Q tot
                                   | Q0  > 0 . Uniqueness follows from the fact that:
                                       )
                                         
                  g =1, G               

                        Q tot                       f g (Q tot | Q 0 )
                       tot        0
                                      =    ∑             tot        0
                                                                          =    ∑ s g (Q tot | Q 0 )           (A1.3)
                   Q         +Q           g =1, G    Q         +Q             g =1, G


is a continuous decreasing function of Q tot . This can be seen by restating (A1.2) as:

                                                                                       
                                           1
1= ∑                                                                                    , g = 1, K G which implies
                                     ( (
  k ∋ g k = g  σ + (1 − σ) ⋅ s g ⋅ 1 + Q
              
                                          tot
                                                               )
                                              + Q0 (α ⋅ TC k ⋅ mk )−1                   )
                                                                                        
                                                                                        
                                                                                                      ,


that s g falls with Q tot , g = 1, K G . Again, a bracketing and bisection algorithm suffices

to generate numerical solutions.




                                                                                                                  39
                             Appendix 2: The Gibbs Sampler

       Because it is not feasible to sample independent draws from the density π(θ | D )

∝ p (θ) ⋅ L ( D | θ) , we use Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) techniques. The idea is to

                                                                                    {   }
draw a sequence of realizations on θ from some Markov process, θ (1) , θ ( 2) ,L, θ (i ) ,

with elements whose unconditional distributions converge to π(θ | D ) as i → ∞ . After

discarding the early draws to eliminate the effects of the starting values, one can

approximate the posterior moments of θ by constructing their sample counterparts from

the chain.

        The mostly commonly used MCMC algorithm is the Gibbs sampler. It generates

a Markov chain by breaking the parameter vector into sub-vectors with full conditional

distributions that can be sampled from, then using these conditional distributions to

update the sub-vectors sequentially (Gilks, et al, 1996). We exploit Gibbs sampling

                                                          (                 )
techniques by breaking θ into 3 sub-vectors: θ1 = α d , α f , σ , θ 2 = (λ, φ) , and

θ 3 = vec(Σ) . These we update according to the following algorithm:

                                                           (
                                                       ( 0) ( 0) ( 0)
               Step 0: Set the initial values θ (0) = θ1 , θ 2 , θ 3 , and i = 0.   )
               Step 1: Draw θ (i +1) as follows:

                                (i +1)
                       a) Draw θ1                (
                                       ~ π1 θ1 | θ (2i ) , θ3(i ) , D   )
                       b) Draw θ 2
                                    (i +1)
                                             ~ π (θ | θ
                                                2   2
                                                        (i +1) (i )
                                                        1     , θ3 , D      )
                       c) Draw θ 3
                                    (i +1)
                                             ~ π (θ | θ
                                                3   3
                                                        (i +1) (i +1)
                                                        1     , θ2 , D          )
               Step 2: Set i = i + 1, and go to step 1.




                                                                                             40
          The distribution π1 (θ1 | θ 2 , θ 3 , D ) is the most difficult to construct. It is

proportional to L(D | θ1 , θ 2 , θ3 ) pθ1 (θ1 ) where L(D | θ 1 ,θ 2 ,θ 3 ) is the likelihood function

based on (10)-(12) and (A1.1)-(A1.3); and pθ1 (θ1 ) is the prior distribution defined in the

text. But L(D | θ1 , θ 2 , θ3 ) f θ1 (θ1 ) does not have a closed form expression, so we draw θ 1

using the random-walk Metropolis algorithm with a normal proposal density. The

performance of the random-walk Metropolis algorithm depends crucially on the variance

–covariance matrix of the proposal density. If the variance-covariance matrix is too big,

then nearly all proposed moves will be accepted (high acceptance) but the random walk

will move around the parameter space very slowly (slow mixing). On the other hand, if

the variance-covariance matrix is too small, then an excessively large fraction of

proposed moves will be rejected (low acceptance), although those draws that are accepted

will move the chain by large increments. To balance these two effects, the convention is

to choose the variance-covariance matrix in such a way that the empirical overall

acceptance rate is around between 0.15 and 0.5. For more details, see Gilks, et al, (1996,

chapter 7). We experimented until this condition was satisfied.

          To describe π 2 (θ 2 | θ1 , θ 3 , D ) and π 3 (θ 3 | θ1 , θ 2 , D ) , let us rewrite (13a) and (13b)

                                               (         )            (                    )
as Y jt = β′Z jt + ε jt where Y jt = ω jt , c jt ′ , Z jt = 1, ω jt −1 , c jt −1 , X ′jt ′ ,

                                    ω0   λω       λC   λ ′X   
ε jt = (ε ωjt , ε cjt ) , and β′ =                            . Also, stacking observations, let us
                                    c0   φω       φC   φ′X     

define:




                                                                                                           41
                                                              ′
                  Y = [Y12 L Y1T              L L YN 2 L YNT ] ,
                           [
                  X = X 12' L X 1'T L L X N' 2 L X NT
                                                    '
                                                                            ]′
                                                      ′
                  Z = [Z 12 L Z 1T L L Z N 2 L Z NT ] ,
                                                        ′
                  U = [U 12 L U 1T L L U N 2 L U NT ]

Then, we can write the VAR system as Y = Zβ + U . Further, conditional on θ1 , our one-

                       v v                        v v
to-one mapping from ( TCt , Rt | Q0t , P0t ) to ( ωt , Ct ) allows us to infer (Y, Z) from

(θ1 , D ) . Thus the construction of π 2 (θ 2 | θ1 , θ 3 , D ) and π 3 (θ 3 | θ1 , θ 2 , D ) is a standard
exercise (Zellner, 1971).

         Specifically, the likelihood-based full conditional distribution of θ 2 , given

(θ1 , θ3 , D ) , is normal with mean ((Z ' Z )−1 Z '⊗I 2 )⋅ vec(Y ' ) and variance (Z ' Z )−1 ⊗ Σ .

The full conditional posterior distribution for θ 2 efficiently blends this information with

our priors. We have assumed that θ 2 has prior distribution N (u 0 ,V0 ) , so

                                                                          [(           )
π 2 (θ 2 | θ1 , θ3 , D ) is multivariate normal with mean u n = Vn Z ′ ⊗ Σ −1 vec(Y ′) + V0−1u 0             ]
                      [(              )
and variance Vn = (Z ′Z ) ⊗ Σ −1 + V0−1         ]
                                                −1
                                                     .

        Similarly, using the mapping (θ1 , θ 2 , D ) → (β, Y , Z ) , we may write the likelihood-

based full conditional estimator of Σ , given (θ1 , θ 2 , D ) , as

    1      N T
           ∑ ∑ (Yit − Z it β )(Yit − Z it β )' . When multiplied by N(T-1), this estimator has a
N (T − 1) i =1t = 2

Wishart distribution with N(T-1) degrees of freedom. Thus, given that we have assumed

                                          (              )
Σ has prior distribution InvWish m0 , G0−1 , the full conditional posterior distribution for




                                                                                                             42
θ 3 = vec(Σ) , i.e., π 3 (θ 3 | θ1 , θ 2 , D ) , is the vector version of a Inv Wish ( m n , G n−1 )

distribution, where mn = m0 + N (T − 1) and Gn−1 = G0−1 + (Y − Zβ)′ (Y − Zβ) .




                                                                                                       43
                      TABLE 1: POSTERIOR PARAMETER DISTRIBUTIONS

                                             Std.
                                  Mean      Error     Median Skewness       5%   95%
                                                      Demand System
αd (prior: α ~ U [0,10] )         4.194     2.845     3.696  0.375      0.437    9.198
αf (prior: γ ~ U [0,10] )         1.086     0.779     0.997  0.463      0.070    2.423
σ (prior: σ ~ U [0,1] )           0.970     0.023     0.975  -1.029     0.927    0.997

                                                  Product Quality VAR
λ 1 (constant)                    -0.436    3.186  -0.229   -0.199    -5.876     4.608
λ 2 ( ω it −1 )                    0.469    0.376     0.468    0.008    -0.152   1.086
λ 3 ( ln C it −1 )                0.053     0.237      0.056   -0.032   -0.343   0.437
λ 4 (trend)                       -0.021    0.046     -0.020   -0.219   -0.098   0.052
λ 5 (initial capital stock)       -0.009    0.101     -0.007   -0.133   -0.179   0.153
λ 6 (exported, t-1)               0.029     0.374     0.022     0.059   -0.578   0.648
λ 7 (imported intermediates, t-1) -0.040    0.385     -0.041   0.030    -0.679   0.595
ϑ1ω ( ω i1 )                      0.788     1.373     0.781    0.051    -1.467   3.051
ϑω2 ( ln C i1 )                   -0.192    0.382     -0.157   -0.511   -0.897   0.353

                                                    Log Marginal Cost VAR
φ1 (constant)                      0.291    3.211     0.069    0.286    -4.684   5.896
φ 2 ( ln C it −1 )                 0.551    0.244     0.554    -0.060    0.152   0.946
φ 3 ( ω it −1 )                    0.314    0.383     0.311     0.020   -0.306   0.942
φ4   (trend)                       0.001    0.045     0.001     0.080   -0.071   0.076
φ5   (initial capital stock)       -0.003   0.105     -0.004   0.062    -0.170   0.169
φ6   (exported, t-1)               -0.146   0.387     -0.145   -0.042   -0.788   0.490
φ7   (imported intermediates, t-1) -0.098   0.403     -0.104   0.029    -0.764   0.557
ϑ1C ( ln C i1 )                   -0.799    1.382     0.255    0.435    -0.267   0.954
ϑ1c ( ω i1 )                       0.286    0.384     -0.788   -0.064   -3.129   1.433
                                                      Covariance Matrix
Σ11                                0.943    0.127     0.931    0.532    0.755    1.168
Σ12                                0.010    0.093     0.010    0.009    -0.143   0.164
Σ 22                               1.004    0.137     0.992    0.535     0.802   1.245




                                                                                    44
                                                  TABLE 2:
       DESCRIPTIVE STATISTICS ON PERFORMANCE MEASURES (Colombian Pulp Mills)
                                                ∆ ∑Πk                            ∆ ∑Πk
                    ∆U j           Πj            k≠ j         ∆U j + Π j          k≠ j     ln C j
                                                                             +                          ωj
                      Kj           Kj             Kj             Kj                Kj

    Mean           0.065         0.071          -0.221                 -0.085               -3.198     1.868
    Median         0.004         0.067          -0.156                 -0.057               -3.252     1.886
    Std. Dev.      0.134         0.041           0.222                 0.147                 0.496     0.279
    Skewness       12.516        2.082           4.752                 7.266                -0.208    -0.026


                                                  TABLE 3:
            CORRELATIONS OF PERFORMANCE MEASURES (Colombian Pulp Mills)*
                                        ∆ ∑Πk
                 ∆U j       Πj                                      ∆ ∑Πk
                                         k≠ j     ∆U j + Π j                      ln C j              ~
                                                                +
                                                                      k≠ j                    ωj      φj
                 Kj         Kj            Kj            Kj             Kj

∆U j
                1.000      0.322    -0.488                   -0.002               -0.314    0.536    -0.153
 Kj
Πj
Kj
                           1.000    -0.413                   0.003                -0.441    0.152    0.600

∆ ∑Πk
    k≠ j                                1.000                0.699                0.466     0.194    0.073
     Kj
∆U j + Π j
      Kj
    ∆ ∑Πk                                                    1.000                0.186     0.435    0.220
     k≠ j
+
      Kj

ln C j                                                                            1.000     0.201    0.022

ωj                                                                                          1.000    0.238
~                                                                                                    1.000
φj



    * All variables are purged of annual time effects. Productivity normalizations are based
    on Caves et al (1982).



                                                                                                        45
                              FIGURE 1:
EFFECTS OF PRODUCER TRADE ON QUALITY AND MARGINAL COST TRAJECTORIES


                                    Quality Indices: Base Case vs No Trade

                    2.5

                     2                                                                base
relative quality




                                                                                      case
                    1.5
                                                                                      no
                     1                                                                producer
                                                                                      trade
                    0.5

                     0
                      81

                               82

                                     83

                                           84

                                                 85

                                                       86

                                                              87

                                                                    88

                                                                          89

                                                                                90
                     19

                              19

                                    19

                                          19

                                                19

                                                      19

                                                            19

                                                                   19

                                                                         19

                                                                               19
                                                       year



                                Marginal Cost Indices: Base Case vs No Trade

                    0.07
                    0.06
    marginal cost




                    0.05                                                             base
                                                                                     case
                    0.04
                    0.03                                                             no
                                                                                     producer
                    0.02                                                             trade
                    0.01
                          0
                          81

                                82

                                      83

                                            84

                                                  85

                                                        86

                                                              87

                                                                    88

                                                                          89

                                                                                90
                      19

                               19

                                     19

                                           19

                                                 19

                                                       19

                                                             19

                                                                   19

                                                                         19

                                                                               19




                                                       year




                                                                                                46
                 FIGURE 2: EFFECTS OF PRODUCER TRADE ON WELFARE MEASURES



                         Consumer Welfare: Base Case vs No Trade

                100000

                80000                                                      base
welfare index




                                                                           case
                60000

                40000                                                      no
                                                                           producer
                20000                                                      trade

                     0
                      81
                      82

                      83
                      84
                      85
                      86
                      87

                      88
                      89
                      90
                      91
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                                           year


                            Total Surplus: Base Case vs No Trade

                100000
                 90000
                 80000
total surplus




                 70000                                                     base
                 60000                                                     case
                 50000
                 40000                                                     no
                 30000                                                     producer
                 20000                                                     trade
                 10000
                     0
                       81
                       82
                       83
                       84
                       85
                       86
                       87
                       88
                       89
                       90
                       91
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19
                    19




                                            year




                                                                               47
                             FIGURE 3:
  EFFECTS OF PRODUCER TRADE ON TRADITIONAL PERFORMANCE MEASURES



                   TFP: Base Case vs No Trade

      0.5

      0.4

      0.3                                                  base
                                                           case
tfp




      0.2

      0.1                                                  no
                                                           produce
                                                           r trade
        0

      -0.1
           81
        19




                            year




                                                                     48
