NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANK SUPERVISION AND CORPORATE FINANCE
Thorsten Beck
Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
Ross Levine
Working Paper 9620
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9620
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

This paper’s findings, interpretations, and conclusions are entirely those of the authors and do not necessarily
represent the views of the World Bank, its Executive Directors, or the countries they represent. We thank J.
Boyd, G. Caprio, C. Schenone, seminar participants at the University of Minnesota and the Banco Central
de Chile for helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Bank Supervision and Corporate Finance
Thorsten Beck, Asli Demirgüç-Kunt, and Ross Levine
NBER Working Paper No. 9620
April 2003
JEL No. G3, L51, O16, G21
ABSTRACT
We examine the impact of bank supervision on the financing obstacles faced by almost 5,000
corporations across 49 countries. We find that firms in countries with strong official supervisory
agencies that directly monitor banks tend to face greater financing obstacles. Moreover, powerful
official supervision tends to increase firm reliance on special connections and corruption in raising
external finance, which is consistent with political/regulatory capture theories. Creating a
supervisory agency that is independent of the government and banks mitigates the adverse
consequences of powerful supervision. Finally, we find that bank supervisory agencies that force
accurate information disclosure by banks and enhance private monitoring tend to ease the financing
obstacles faced by firms.

Thorsten Beck
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
tbeck@worldbank.org

Asli Demirgüç-Kunt
World Bank
Washington, DC
ademirguckunt@worldbank.org

Ross Levine
Carlson School
of Management
University of Minnesota
Minneapolis, MN 55455
and NBER
rlevine@csom.umn.edu

1
1. Introduction
Banks provide a substantial proportion of external finance to corporations around the
globe (Mayer, 1988). Yet, there have been no studies of whether international differences in
bank supervision influence the obstacles that corporations face in raising external finance.
This paper examines competing theories regarding which bank supervisory approaches
work best to facilitate the flow of credit to firms. Due to information and transaction costs, core
theories of public policy and regulation imply that strong official supervision of banks can
improve the corporate governance of banks (Atkinson and Stiglitz, 1980; Stigler, 1971).1 This
“official supervision view” holds that private agents frequently lack the information, incentives,
and capabilities to monitor powerful firms and banks (Becker, 1968; Becker and Stigler; 1974).
From this perspective a powerful supervisory agency will enhance corporate governance of
banks, improve the incentives facing bank managers, and thereby boost the efficiency with
which banks intermediate society’s savings. The official supervision theory assumes that
governments have both the expertise and the incentives to ameliorate information, enforcement,
and transaction costs and improve corporate governance of banks.
An alternative to the official supervision view also draws on core theories of public
policy and regulation. The “political/regulatory capture view” argues that politicians do not
maximize social welfare; they maximize their own welfare (Hamilton, et al., 1788; Buchanan
and Tullock, 1962; Becker, 1983). Thus, politicians may induce banks to divert the flow of
credit to politically connected firms, or powerful banks may “capture” politicians and induce
official supervisors to act in the best interests of banks rather than in the best interests of society

1

In a world with (i) no information or transactions costs, (ii) governments that maximize social welfare, and (iii)
well-defined and efficiently enforced property rights, market participants will achieve efficient outcomes (Coase,
1960). If the prerequisites for this laissez-faire – invisible hand – theory hold, government supervision of banks
would be at best irrelevant and potentially harmful to social welfare (Stigler, 1975).

2
(Becker and Stigler, 1974; Stigler, 1975; Rajan and Zingales, 2003). This political/regulatory
capture theory suggests that direct official supervision of banks may actually reduce the
efficiency with which banks allocate credit. Specifically, while powerful official supervision
may increase the flow of credit to a few well-connected firms, the political/regulatory capture
theory holds that powerful supervision will hurt the availability of credit to firms in general.
Economists have attempted to derive mechanisms that simultaneously recognize the
importance of market failures, which motivate government intervention, and political failures,
which suggest that politicians and regulators do not necessarily have incentives to ease market
failures (Becker and Stigler, 1974). From this perspective, the challenge is to create mechanisms
that negate the “grabbing hand” of politicians while creating incentives for official agencies to
improve social welfare (North, 1990; Shleifer and Vishny, 1998; Haber, 2003).2
In the area of bank supervision, proponents of the “independent supervision view”
argue that creating an independent agency is a useful mechanism for balancing market and
political failures. This view holds that if supervisors are independent from the government and if
supervisors have proper incentives, then this reduces the likelihood that politicians will use the
supervisory agency to induce banks to funnel credit to favored ends. Similarly, if the
supervisory agency is independent from banks and if supervisors have proper incentives, then
this lowers the probability that banks will capture supervisors. Thus, the independent
supervision view proposes a compromise to create a supervisory agency that has the resources to
overcome information asymmetries but that is sufficiently independent so that it avoids

2

Shleifer and Vishny (1998) use the phrase “grabbing hand” to describe the maximizing behavior of politicians in
contrast to the “helping hand” view, which assumes that governments maximize social welfare. These phrases
contrast nicely with the “invisible hand” theory, which posits that with (i) no market frictions, (ii) social maximizing
governments, and (iii) well-defined and enforced property rights, private agents will produce efficient outcomes.

3
political/regulatory capture. Under these conditions, independent supervision can enhance the
corporate governance of banks and lower firms’ external financing obstacles.
The “private empowerment view” takes a different approach to confronting information
and enforcement costs while recognizing that politicians act in their own interests. The private
empowerment theory suggests that bank supervisory strategies should (1) focus on enhancing the
ability and incentives of private agents to overcome informational barriers and exert corporate
control over banks and (2) limit the power of official supervisors. Thus, the “private
empowerment” theory seeks to limit the powers of the supervisory agency so that the
government is unable to use bank supervision to achieve political ends. Simultaneously, the
private empowerment theory seeks to provide the supervisor with sufficient power to force
accurate information disclosure so that private agents can more easily monitor banks (Hay and
Shleifer, 1998). This will boost private monitoring of banks and thereby enhance the incentives
of bank managers to allocate capital based on efficiency considerations (Grossman and Hart,
1980). Furthermore, this view argues that many empowered bank creditors will be less
susceptible to capture by politicians and banks than a single government supervisory agency.
Thus, special connections and corruption may play less of a role in countries that foster private
monitoring. Finally, a second component of the private empowerment view stresses incentives.
Private creditors will more effectively exert corporate governance of banks and therefore
enhance corporate financing if the government does not distort incentives through excessively
generous deposit insurance.
This paper is further motivated by basic finance theory, banking sector policy concerns,
and broad public policy debates. Consider first corporate finance theory and core theories of
financial intermediation. An enormous theoretical literature examines the role of banks, along

4
with shareholders and other financiers, in easing financing constraints and exerting corporate
governance (Shleifer and Vishny, 1997). Based on some of these models, new research
examines how laws and regulations concerning shareholders influence corporate finance (e.g., La
Porta et al., 2000). Yet, there exists no corresponding work that examines how bank supervision
influences corporate finance. Also, core theories of financial intermediation provide a theoretical
mechanism linking bank supervisory approaches to credit availability. Calomiris and Kahn
(1991), Flannery (1994), and Diamond and Rajan (2001) develop models in which the fragile
structure of banks, i.e., liquid deposits and illiquid assets, serves as an effective commitment
device that keeps banks from assuming excessive risks or from shirking on collecting payment
from firms. Put succinctly, the sequential service constraint on bank deposits creates a collective
action problem among depositors that induces depositors to run if they acquire information that
the bank is not monitoring firms and managing risk appropriately. In this context, generous
deposit insurance impedes the commitment device (threat of a run) and raises barriers to firm
financing (Diamond and Rajan, 2001). Similarly, supervisory policies that induce greater
information disclosure by banks will enhance the commitment mechanism and facilitate external
finance. This paper is an initial attempt to understand how different supervisory strategies affect
the obstacles faced by firms in raising external finance.
Second, bank supervision is frequently discussed in the context of avoiding banking
crises. However, crises cannot be the only criterion because policymakers can essentially
eliminate banking crises through a 100 percent reserve requirement. Thus, an important
objective of bank supervision – though often under-stated – is to foster efficient capital
allocation; i.e., to finance worthy firms. This is the first paper to assess the impact of bank
supervision on the firms’ financing obstacles across a broad cross-section of countries.

5
Finally, this paper provides information on a broad public policy issue. In a host of
circumstances, policymakers face the question, should governments do nothing, empower the
private sector, or directly oversee private activities? This paper addresses this concern by
conducting an investigation of different bank supervisory approaches.
This paper uses firm-level data on almost 5,000 firms across 49 countries to examine the
impact of bank supervision on the obstacles that firms encounter in raising external capital. The
firm-level data comes from the World Business Environment Survey (WBES), which was
conducted in 1999. This dataset includes information on firm characteristics, including (i) the
obstacles that firms face in raising capital, (ii) the degree to which special connections are
important to raising bank loans, and (iii) the degree to which bank corruption is important to
raising capital. These data are based on survey questions in which firms rank the impediments
on a scale from one to four, in which larger values imply greater obstacles and greater needs for
special connections and corruption. The dataset has extensive coverage of small firms, which
distinguishes it from other cross-country studies of financing constraints that rely on data from
large corporations.
The bank supervisory data are for 1999 and come from Barth, Caprio and Levine (2003,
henceforth BCL). This database includes information on the official supervisory power, such as
the ability to intervene banks, replace managers, force provisioning, stop dividends and other
payments, acquire information, etc. BCL also have information on the degree of supervisory
independence from the government and whether banks can sue bank supervisors. BCL collect
information on the empowerment of the private sector. This includes information on whether
bank directors and officials face criminal prosecution for failure to accurately disclose
information, whether banks must disclose consolidated accounts, whether international

6
accounting firms audit banks, etc. Finally, to measure incentives facing private creditors, we use
data on the deposit insurance system from Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache (2003).
Econometrically, we use an ordered probit, where the dependent variable is either
financing obstacles faced by firms, the need for special connections, or the extent of corruption
in raising external finance. The main explanatory variables are measures of (1) official
supervisory power, (2) the independence of the official supervisory agency from the government
and banks, (3) the degree to which the bank regulations facilitate private monitoring of banks,
and (4) the generosity of the deposit insurance regime to measure the incentives of the private
sector to monitor banks. In assessing the impact of bank supervision strategies on the financing
obstacles faced by firms, we also control for a range of firm-specific traits and numerous country
specific characteristics, such as inflation, economic growth, and overall financial development.
In the sensitivity analyses, we further control for state-ownership of banks, regulatory restrictions
on bank activities, minority shareholder rights, and checks and balances in the political system.
The results are inconsistent with the official supervision view and supportive of the
political/regulatory capture view. Specifically, official supervisory power is positively
associated with the financing obstacles faced by firms and positively associated with both special
connections and corruption in raising external finance. Even after controlling for firm-specific
traits and country-specific factors, the results suggest that official supervisory power hinders
external financing opportunities and raises the need for special connections and corruption.
The data also lend support to the independent supervision view. In particular, when the
supervisory agency is independent, this is associated with lower obstacles to obtaining external
finance. Moreover, independence reduces the negative effects from powerful supervision. As
independence rises, the negative effect of powerful supervision dissipates and indeed vanishes at

7
the highest levels of supervisory independence. More specifically, as the supervisory agency
becomes more independent from the government, this mitigates the positive impact that powerful
official supervision has on firms’ reliance on special connections and corruption. Thus, the
results suggest that independence tends to reduce political control of the supervisory authority
and hence political manipulation of the flow of credit to firms.
The paper also presents evidence that supports the private empowerment view.
Regulations that force accurate information disclosure lower obstacles to firm financing and
lower the impression that corruption of bank officials is important for raising external finance.
Furthermore, moral hazard – as measured by the generosity of the deposit insurance system – is
also important. Greater moral hazard tends to raise the corporate financing obstacles faced by
firms. The data are consistent with the view that governments that force accurate information
disclosure to the private sector and do not distort the incentives of banks through excessively
generous insurance of bank liabilities will tend to lower financing obstacles.
This paper is related to recent research. BCL (2003) conduct a purely cross-country
analysis and find that financial development is (1) positively associated with supervisory
approaches that empower private monitoring of banks and (2) negatively associated with
powerful supervisory agencies that directly monitor banks. In this paper, we use microeconomic
data to examine the channels running from bank supervision to corporate finance, rather than
examining the cross-country connections between bank supervision and banking system size. In
a pure cross-country analysis, La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (2002) find that securities
market regulations that empower private monitoring of corporations promote stock market
development, while securities market regulations that rely on official oversight of markets only

8
promote equity market capitalization in countries with efficient government bureaucracies.3 In
this paper, we focus on bank supervision and use firm-level data in assessing whether national
approaches to bank supervision influence firms’ financing obstacles.
A number of methodological concerns need to be noted. First, individual firms
subjectively report financing obstacles. Thus a firm facing the same obstacles in two different
countries may report different obstacles for reasons that do not depend on actual constraints.
Although it is not clear that this would bias the results in any particular direction, we provide
evidence on the validity of the survey information below. Second, this paper faces the problem
that the supervisory variables might proxy for some other country specific factor. Importantly,
however, we get the same results when including official supervisory power and the private
empowerment variables simultaneously. Thus, supervisory power and private monitoring are not
proxying for the same unspecified factor. Also, the results hold even when controlling for many
economic growth, macroeconomic stability, overall financial development, differences in
political systems, state-ownership of banks, regulatory restrictions on bank activities, laws
governing the rights of shareholders, and the degree to which the state controls or represses the
media. Third, simultaneity bias may influence the results. For instance, the banking crises may
raise financing obstacles and boost official supervisory power. When we control for the
presence of systemic banking crisis, however, this does not change the findings.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 presents the data and the
methodology is described in Section 3. Section 4 gives the results and Section 5 concludes.

3

There is a literature on balancing law and regulations to enhance securities market operations. Glaeser, Johnson,
and Shleifer (2001) provide theory and examples concerning the incentives facing judges and regulators in
monitoring financial markets. More broadly, Glaeser and Shleifer (2001) analyze the reasons underlying the

9
2. Data and Summary Statistics
a. Obstacles to firms obtaining external finance: Definitions
To examine the relationship between bank supervisory strategies and corporate financing
obstacles, we use data from two main sources: the World Business Environment Survey (WBES)
for firm-level data and BCL (2001a,b, 2003) for country-level data on bank supervision.
From the WBES firm-level survey data, we use information on almost 5,000 firms across
49 countries. While the WBES comprises 80 countries and the BCL database includes data on
107 countries, there is limited overlap, which reduces our sample to 49 countries. The WBES
surveyed firms of all sizes; small firms (between 5 and 50 employees) represent 40% of the
sample, medium-sized (between 51 and 500 employees) firms are 40% of the sample, and the
remaining 20% are large firms (more than 500 employees). The survey comprises mostly firms
of the manufacturing, construction and services sectors. We also have information on whether
these are government-owned, foreign-owned, or privately-owned domestic firms. The data
indicate whether the firm is an exporter and provide information on firm employment, sales,
industry, growth, financing patterns, and the number of competitors.
Financing Obstacles are measured by using responses to the following question: “How
problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between
1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Table 1 shows
that perceived financing obstacles do not only vary across firms within a country, but also across
countries. Portuguese firms rate financing obstacles as relatively insignificant (1.73), while firms
in Moldova rate financing obstacles as more than moderate (3.44). Overall, 35% of the firms in

increased use of regulation in the United States, while Glaeser and Shleifer (2002) develop a theory and provide
evidence from England and France concerning why different legal systems evolve to regulate behavior.

10
our sample rate financing as major obstacle, 27% as a moderate obstacle, 19% as a minor
obstacle, and 20% as no obstacle.
Apart from this general financing obstacle, firms were also asked about the need for
special connections (Special Connection) and corruption of bank officials (Bank Corruption)
in obtaining external funding. Answers vary between one and four, where higher values indicate
a greater needs for special connections and corruption. Table 2 provides summary statistics and
indicates that general financing obstacles is positively correlated with the needs for special
connections and corruption to obtain financing.
b. Obstacles to firms obtaining external finance: Justification
The corporate finance literature has used several different approaches to identify firms
that are constrained (Kaplan and Zingales, 1997). Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (1988) use a
priori reasoning to argue that low-dividend firms are constrained. Rajan and Zingales (1998) use
the external financing patterns by US firms as a benchmark for the “natural” dependence of
industries on external financing. Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) rely on a financial
planning model to identify firms that have access to long-term external financing.
We use survey responses as indicators of the incidence and severity of financial obstacles
for four reasons. First, the survey acquires direct information from firms about perceived
obstacles and therefore does not infer the existence of financing constraints from other
information. Second, the survey data not only has information on general financing obstacles. It
also provides information on the specific types of obstacles that firms face, e.g., special
connections or corruption. Third, the WBES database has excellent coverage of small and
medium size firms (as well as large firms), while other cross-country studies use data that focus

11
heavily on large corporations. Finally, the WBES has very broad country coverage that is
important for linking the firm-level data with the bank supervision data.
As noted in the Introduction, using data based on self-reporting by firms may produce
concerns that a firm facing the same obstacles will respond to questions differently in different
institutional and cultural environments. If this were pure measurement error, it would bias the
results against finding a relationship between bank supervision and firm financing obstacles.
While problems with survey data may bias the results against this paper’s conclusions,
we (a) control for many country-specific traits in our analyses and (b) present four pieces of
information that support the validity of the survey data. First, Hellman et al. (2000) show that in
a sub-sample of 20 countries there is a close connection between responses and measurable
outcomes. They find no systematic bias in the survey responses.
Second, reported firm financing obstacles are highly, negatively correlated with firm
growth. Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Maksimovic (2002) show that the negative impact of
reported financing obstacles on firm growth hold after controlling for many factors and using
instrumental variables to control for endogeneity. Thus, firms’ responses to the survey on
financing obstacles are capturing more than idiosyncratic differences in how firms rank
obstacles.
Third, we examined the connection between reported firm financing obstacles and
Wurgler’s (2000) measure of the efficiency of investment flows. This is an investment elasticity
that gauges the extent to which a country increases investment in growing industries and
decreases investment in declining ones. We find the reported financing obstacles are negatively
and significantly correlated with this efficiency of investment indicator. Again, the survey data
are associated with a measurable outcome: the efficient allocation of capital.

12
Fourth, we study the link between survey responses regarding firm financing obstacles
and industrial expansion. Based on Rajan and Zingales (1998), we examine whether industries
that are naturally heavy users of external finance grow faster in economies that face lower
reported financing obstacles. Thus, we use the same data and specification employed by Rajan
and Zingales (1998). We find that externally dependent industries grow faster in countries where
firms report lower obstacles. While these observations certainly do not eliminate concerns about
the survey data, they suggest that the reported obstacles are closely associated with (i) the growth
of externally dependent industries, (ii) the efficient flow of investment, and (iii) firm growth.
c. Firm-specific traits
In our analysis of bank supervision and corporate finance, we control for several firm
attributes such as ownership. Government takes on the value one if the government owns any
percentage of the firm, and Foreign takes on the value one if foreign entities own any fraction of
the firm.4 Our sample includes 12% government owned firms and 20% foreign firms.
We also control for each firm’s business, competitive environment, and size. The
regressions include dummy variables for whether the firm is an exporting firm (Exporter),
whether it is a manufacturing firm (Manufacturing), and whether it is a service sector firm
(Services). The analyses also include the log of the number of competitors that each firm faces
(Number of Competitors). In sum, 36% of the firms in our sample are in manufacturing and
46% in service, and on average they face 2.3 competitors. Finally, we include the log of sales in
USD as indicator of size (Sales), which ranges from –2.12 to 25.3, with an average of 12.

4

While these simple zero-one indicators of ownership may not capture the varying degrees of influence that arise
from different levels of government or foreign ownership, information on the percentage of ownership is available
for less than 10 percent of the sample. However, among the firms for which we have data on the percentage of
foreign and government ownership, more than two thirds of firms with foreign ownership are majority foreign
owned and more than 60% of firms with government ownership are majority state-owned.

13
The correlation analysis in Table 2 Panel B indicates that government-owned firms,
domestically owned firms, non-exporting firms, smaller firms (as measured by sales), and firms
with more competitors suffer more financing obstacles.
d. Bank supervisory policies
We use four indicators of supervisory practices to test the empirical validity of the
competing hypotheses outlined in the Introduction.
Official Supervisory Power indicates whether the supervisory authorities have the
authority to take specific actions to prevent and correct problems in banks. This indicator is
constructed from 14 dummy variables that indicate whether bank supervisors can take specific
actions against external auditors, bank management and bank shareholders both in normal times
and times of distress. The exact definition is provided in the data appendix. We use the first
principal component indicator of these variables, which varies between –3.05 (Singapore) and
1.14 (U.S.) with a mean of –0.08, and higher values indicating wider authority for bank
supervisors.5
Supervisory Independence indicates independence of supervisors from both banks and
the government. Supervisory Independence-Banks is a dummy variable that indicates whether
supervisors are legally protected against lawsuits brought by banks. Supervisory
Independence-Government is the sum of three dummy variables indicating the involvement of
government in appointment, control and removal of supervisors. Supervisory Independence is
the sum of the individual indicators. We examine Supervisory Independence, Supervisory
Independence-Banks and Supervisory Independence-Government.

5

The mean is not exactly equal to zero because we use the raw data available from Barth et al. (2003)on the
supervisory indicators. These data are available for a larger number countries than the corresponding data on firm
obstacles.

14
Regarding the theories discussed in the Introduction, the official supervision view
predicts a negative relation between Financing Obstacles and Official Supervisory Power.6 In
contrast, the political/regulatory capture view predicts a positive relationship between Financing
Obstacles and Supervisory Power. The independent supervision view predicts a negative
relation between Supervisory Independence and financing obstacles and also predicts that
independence will reduce the adverse impact of supervisory power on Financing Obstacles.
We use two indicators to measure the tools and incentives of private bank creditors to
monitor banks and exercise market discipline.
Private Monitoring is designed to measure the degree to which bank supervision forces
banks to disclose accurate information to the public and induces private sector monitoring of
banks. Private Monitoring is constructed from nine dummy variables that measure whether bank
directors and officials are legally liable for the accuracy of information disclosed to the public,
whether banks must publish consolidated accounts, whether banks must be rated and audited,
whether banks must be audited by certified international auditors, and whether subordinated debt
is allowable (which may create a class of private monitors). The Private Monitoring Index is
constructed as principal component indicator, with higher values indicating more tools and
incentives for private bank creditors to monitor banks, ranging from –1.83 (Moldova) to 1.46
(United Kingdom).
Moral Hazard, a principal component indicator, measures the generosity of the deposit
insurance scheme and thus proxies for the incentives or the lack thereof for private bank

6

See Polinsky and Shavell’s (2000) review of the theory of public enforcement and the discussion in Coase (1988).
Also, Spiller and Ferejohn (1992) note that lawmakers do not have sufficient information to anticipate all possible
circumstances. Thus, there may be efficiency gains to delegating power to a supervisory agency that has the
expertise and resources to set and change the specific rules as events evolve.

15
creditors to monitor banks. As noted, the Appendix provides the precise definitions of Moral
Hazard and the Private Monitoring variables.
In terms of theory, the private empowerment view predicts a negative relationship
between Private Monitoring and financing obstacles. The private empowerment view predicts a
positive link between Moral Hazard and the degree of external financing obstacles. As
emphasized, the private empowerment theory presumes that there are market failures and that
these market failures can be ameliorated though information disclosure that facilitates private
sector monitoring, not by direct official monitoring of banks.
d. Country-level control variables
To assess the robustness of the relation between bank supervision and firms’ access to
external financing, we include other country-level variables. We include the growth rate of GDP
per capita (Growth) since firms in faster growing countries are expected to grow faster and face
lower obstacles. We use the inflation rate (Inflation) to proxy for monetary instability,
conjecturing that firms in more stable environments face fewer obstacles and grow faster (Boyd,
Smith, and Levine, 2001).
We also include the level of financial development (Priv), which measures bank credit to
the private sector as a share of GDP. We include financial development to assess the impact of
supervision on corporate finance independent of overall financial development. Overall financial
development is positively associated with economic and firm performance (King and Levine,
1993; Levine and Zervos, 1998; Levine, Loayza, and Beck, 2000; Rajan and Zingales, 1998; and
Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic, 1998). Thus, we examine the independent impact of bank
supervision on the financing obstacles faced by firms after controlling for overall financial
development and conditions in the macroeconomic economy.

16
Firms in countries with higher inflation, lower financial development, less independent
supervisors and less private monitoring report higher financing obstacles (Table 2 Panel C).
In our sensitivity analyses, we run regressions including a variety of legal and
institutional indicators and a dummy variable indicating the occurrence of systemic banking
crisis. Specifically, we control for (i) Checks and Balances in the political process, i.e., the
number of veto players in the political system; (ii) Banking Freedom, which measures the
absence of government regulatory restrictions on bank activities; (iii) State-Owned Banks, which
equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are held by banks that are more than 50 percent
government owned; (iv) Shareholder Rights, which is a measure of the legal rights of minority
shareholders vis-à-vis management and large shareholders and (v) the occurrence of a Systemic
Banking Crisis. The Appendix defines each of these variables in detail and we discuss the use of
these variables further when we present the sensitivity analyses.

3. The Empirical Model
To examine the relationship between bank supervision and corporate finance, we use the
following regression:

Financing Obstaclej,k = α + β1 Governmentj,k + β2 Foreignj,k + β3 Exporterj,k + β4 No. of
Competitorsj,k + β5 Manufacturingj,k + β6 Servicesj,k + β7 Sizej,k + β8Inflationk + β9 Growthk +
β10Privk +β11 Supervisionk + εj,k.

(1)

The j and k subscripts indicate firm and country respectively. The variable Supervision
in equation (1) represents one – or more – of the various supervision variables discussed earlier.
These supervisory indicators change across the different specifications as we discuss below.

17
Given that Financing Obstacle is a polychotomous dependent variable with a natural
order, we use the ordered probit model to estimate regression (1). We assume that the
disturbance parameter ε is normally distributed and use standard maximum likelihood
estimation.7 The coefficients, however, cannot be interpreted as marginal effects of a one-unit
increase in the independent variable on the dependent variable, given the non-linear structure of
the model. Rather, the marginal effect is calculated as φ(β’x)β, where φ is the standard normal
density at β’x. We use the same estimation procedure when using (a) the importance of special
connections for obtaining external finance (Special Connection) and (b) the importance of bank
corruption (Bank Corruption) for obtaining external finance as dependent variables.

4. Results
A. Initial Findings
The results in Table III suggest that (1) firms in countries with powerful supervisors face
higher financing obstacles and (2) firms in countries with strong private monitoring and lower
moral hazard face lower financing obstacles. These results are consistent with the
political/regulatory capture view, but inconsistent with the official supervision view. These
findings also support the private empowerment view since firms face lower financing obstacles
in countries where private bank creditors have the tools and incentives to monitor banks. Official
Supervisory Power and Moral Hazard enter significantly and positively in the regressions of
General Financing Obstacle, while Private Monitoring Index enters significantly and negatively.
The results also support the independent supervision view. The independence of bank
supervisors is negatively related with financing obstacles (column 2), and it helps alleviate the
7

Alternatively, we can assume a logistic function for the distribution of e, resulting in the application of the logit

18
adverse effect of official supervisory power (column 3). Indeed, at the maximum level of
supervisory independence (4), the marginal impact of additional supervisory power is zero. The
results also indicate that supervisory independence is particularly important for reducing
financing obstacles when bank supervisors have extensive powers.8
The effect of supervisory practices on firms’ financing obstacles is not only statistically
significant, but also economically relevant. Table IV provides information on the change in the
probability that a firm rates financing obstacles as major (i.e., the probability that a firm rates
financial obstacles as a four) when changing bank supervisory policies. In other words, using the
coefficient estimates from Table III, we examine the impact of changing bank supervisory
policies from the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile on the probability that a firm will rank
financing obstacles as major. As we move from the country at the 25th percentile of Official
Supervisory Power to the country at the 75th percentile, the probability that a firm rates financing
as major obstacle increases from 33% to 38%, compared to the sample mean of 35%. The
probability decreases from 38% to 20% and 38% to 30% in the case of Supervisory
Independence and Private Monitoring respectively. As another example, consider Chile and
Canada. The Table III regression estimates indicate that if Chile had the Official Supervisory
Power of Canada (-2.15) instead of its own level (0.05), there would be a nine percent decrease
in the probability that Chilean firms rank financing obstacles as extreme. If Chile had the
Supervisory Independence of Canada (4) instead of the current value in Chile (1), the regression
estimates predict that there would be a 53 percent drop in the probability that Chilean firms rank
financing obstacles as extremely high. Finally, the coefficient estimates on Private Monitoring
model. However, it is difficult to justify the preference of one over the other, and in practice, the two models seem
to give very similar results (Greene, 2000).

19
indicate that if Chile had the private monitoring values of Canada (1.05 instead of 0.29), there
would be a six percent drop in the probability that Chilean firms rank financing obstacles as
major.
B. Robustness of the Initial Findings
Table V confirms our finding for the sub-sample of firms that actually received bank
financing. Our sample might contain firms that have not applied for bank credit, either because
they feel discouraged or because they do not see the need. Excluding firms that have not
received bank finance does not change our results. Official Supervisory Power and Moral
Hazard enter significantly and positively, while Supervisory Independence and Private
Monitoring enter significantly and negatively. The interaction of Official Supervisory Power
and Supervisory Independence enters significantly and negatively, indicating that supervisory
independence alleviates the adverse effect of supervisory power.
The relationship between supervisory practices and financing obstacles is robust to
controlling for other legal and institutional variables and the occurrence of banking crisis (Table
VI). Here we include Checks and Balances, Banking Freedom, State-Owned Banks, Shareholder
Rights and a dummy variable indicating a systemic banking crisis in the country during the
1990s. We confirm all of the results reported above when controlling for either the extent to
which the political system impedes the exercise of power by one part of government (Checks and
Balances, Panel A) or regulatory restrictions on bank activities (Banking Freedom, Panel B).
Unsurprisingly, state-ownership of banks is highly, positively correlated with supervisory power.
Thus, when we include the State-owned bank variable, neither supervisory power nor stateowned banks enters independently significantly (Panel C). All the other results hold. We also
8

The bulk of the paper uses linear regressions. We experimented with including quadratic terms for official
supervisory power and private monitoring. Although we find some attenuation at high levels of official supervisory

20
find that shareholder rights, i.e., the degree to which the law protects the rights of minority
shareholders against large shareholders and management, enters negatively and significantly
(Panel D). Stronger shareholder rights reduce external financing obstacles. We also see a
weakening of the link between supervisory power and financing obstacles when controlling for
shareholder rights. This is consistent with the view that when savers have greater legal
protection as equity holders, they feel more comfortable providing equity finance so that firms
have easier access to non-bank forms of external finance. All the other results on private
monitoring and moral hazard hold when controlling for shareholder rights.9 Finally, our results
hold when controlling for the occurrence of a systemic banking crisis in the country (Panel E).
Conceivably, a banking crisis could increase the financing obstacles facing firms and change
supervisory policies. While we do find that systemic crises are associated with firms perceiving
greater financing obstacles, this paper’s core results hold. Overall, the data support the
supervisory independence and private empowerment view, and are inconsistent with the official
supervision view.
We also conducted further robustness checks on the negative impact of supervisory
power and the positive effects of supervisory independence by controlling or the competitiveness
of the political system and the freedom of the media. Specifically, we ran regressions where we
include supervisory power and independence and their interaction as well as indicators of (i)
competitiveness of legislative elections, (ii) degree of state ownership of media, and (iii) degree
to which the state represses media (Table VII Panel A). While the competitiveness of legislative
elections and absence of state ownership and repression of media decreases financing obstacles,
controlling for these effects does not change (i) the positive impact of supervisory power on

power and private monitoring, we find that the direct effects do not change in these non-linear specifications.
9
We also ran regressions using Creditor Rights instead of Shareholder Rights. All results hold.

21
financing obstacles, (ii) the negative impact of supervisory independence, and (iii) the
dampening impact of supervisory independence on the relation between supervisory power and
financing obstacles.
We also include interaction terms between supervisory power and indicators of political
and media openness. Thus, we assess whether political openness and media openness ameliorate
the negative impact of supervisory power (Table VII Panel B). We find that state ownership and
repression of media exacerbates the impact of supervisory power on financing obstacles. Thus,
empowering the supervisory authority in countries with high levels of state-ownership of the
media and state repression of the media is likely to aggravate the financing obstacles faced by
firms.
C. Simultaneous Examination of the Bank Supervision Indicators
In Table VIII, several of the bank supervision variables are included simultaneously.
Specifically, we include (i) Official Supervisory Power, or Supervisory Independence and (ii)
Private Monitoring or Moral Hazard. We also include Private Monitoring and Moral Hazard in
the same regression to assess whether both components of the private empowerment view
independently influence firm financing obstacles.
When including the bank supervision variables simultaneously, we again find evidence
that is inconsistent with the official supervision view, but consistent with both the
political/regulatory capture view and the private empowerment view. Supervisory power tends
to be associated with greater financing obstacles. Independence of the supervisory authority is
associated with lower obstacles.
The data further indicate that Private Monitoring enters significantly and negatively,
while Moral Hazard enters significantly and positively. This underlines the importance of both

22
components of the private empowerment view: private agents can more effectively exert
corporate control over banks if they have the tools (high levels of Private Monitoring) and sound
incentives (low levels of Moral Hazard).
D. Channels: Special Connections and Corruption
Next, we turn to the channels through which supervision operates. We examine whether
supervision influences external financing constraints by raising the need for special connections
and corruption in raising capital. Thus, we use alternatively the variables measuring (1) the
importance of special connections and (2) the importance of bank corruption in obtaining
external finance.
The Table IX results indicate that firms in countries with more powerful and less
independent supervisors are more likely to report the need of special connections for obtaining
corporate finance. While the official supervision view posits the need for powerful official
supervision to minimize favoritism and nepotism in banks’ lending decisions, the
political/regulatory capture view holds that politicians or banks will capture official supervisors
and thus increase the likelihood of favoritism and nepotism.
Official Supervisory Power enters significantly and positively, supporting the
political/regulatory capture view. Supervisory Independence also enters significantly and
negatively, suggesting the beneficial effects of an independent supervisory agency. Finally, note
that the interaction of Official Supervisory Power and Supervisory Independence enters
significantly and negatively. Thus, independence reduces the negative effects of having a
powerful supervisory agency. These results are consistent with the Political/Regulatory Capture
and Independent Supervision predictions, but inconsistent with the Official Supervision View.

23
The Table X results indicate that firms in countries with more powerful and less
independent supervisors are also more likely to report that corruption of bank officials is
important for raising corporate financing. Official Supervisory Power enters significantly and
positively, which again runs counter to the Official Supervisory theory. Supervisory
Independence enters significantly and negatively. These results are consistent with the
political/regulatory view, but inconsistent with the official supervision view. Furthermore,
Private Monitoring enters significantly and negatively, which suggests that empowering private
monitoring of banks tends to reduce the importance of corruption in raising external funds.
Thus, the results lend support to the political/regulatory capture view, the private empowerment
view, and the independent supervision view and run counter to the official supervision view.
E. More on Independence
Table XI underlines the importance of supervisory independence from both the
government and banks. Here, we break apart the two components of the Supervisory
Independence index separately into supervisory independence from banks (Supervisory
Independence-Banks) and supervisory independence from the government (Supervisory
Independence-Government). We then examine the independent effects of these two components
of supervisory independence in the regressions.
We find that supervisory independence from the government and banks decreases general
financing obstacles. Furthermore, independence from banks has a direct, negative impact on both
the need for special connections and bank corruption in raising capital.
We also find evidence that supervisory independence from the government helps
alleviate the effect of official supervisory power on the general financing obstacles faced by
firms. Thus, the interaction term between Supervisory Independence-Government and Official

24
Supervisory Power enters with a negative and significant coefficient. Similarly, the Table XI
regressions indicate that supervisory independence from the government also reduces the effect
of supervisory power on the need for firms to have special connection in order to raise funds
from banks. Official Supervisory Power enters positively and significantly in all regressions.
Again, these results are inconsistent with the official supervision view and underline the
importance of an independent supervisory body to avoid both political and regulatory capture.

5. Conclusion
This paper provides evidence on different theories of bank supervision. The results
provide four tentative conclusions about which bank supervisory practices work best to ease the
external financing obstacles faced by firms.
First, we examined whether strong official supervision of banks facilitates corporate
finance. Here, the answer is a resounding no. Countries with stronger bank supervisory agencies
– countries where supervisory agencies can intervene banks, replace managers, force
provisioning, stop dividends, etc. – tend to have firms that face greater financing obstacles than
firms in countries where the supervisory agency is less powerful. Even after controlling for
firms-specific traits and country-specific characteristics, we find that supervisory power hinders
external financing opportunities and raises the need for special connections and corruption. The
results are inconsistent with theories that hold that official supervisory agencies will promote
social welfare by overcoming the information and enforcement costs faced by private agents.
Rather, these findings are consistent with the view that politicians will use powerful supervisory
agencies to divert the flow of credit to politically connected firms and that powerful banks will

25
“capture” politicians and induce bank supervisors to support the interests of banks, not the
interests of society (Stigler, 1975; Shleifer and Vishny, 1998; Rajan and Zingales, 2003).
Second, we evaluate whether creating an independent supervisory agency mitigates the
adverse effects of having a powerful official regulator. We find evidence consistent with this
view. Greater supervisory independence from the government and from banks tends to lower
impediments to obtaining external finance. Furthermore, independence reduces the negative
effects from power supervision. As independence rises, the negative impact of powerful
supervision on firm financing obstacles dissipates. Specifically, as supervisory independence
from the government rises, the adverse impact of powerful supervision on firms’ reliance on
special connections and corruption in raising capital falls. These findings are consistent with the
view that supervisory independence moderates political control of the supervisory agency and
therefore reduces political manipulation of the flow of credit to firms.
Third, we examine whether bank supervisory strategies that focus on empowering the
private sector facilitate corporate finance. The answer is yes. In countries where bank
supervision forces accurate information disclosure by banks and eases private monitoring of
banks, firms tend to face lower obstacles to raising external finance. We also find that greater
moral hazard – as measured by the generosity of the deposit insurance regime – tends to raise the
financing obstacles faced by firms. The results support the view that forcing accurate
information disclosure and not distorting the incentives of private agents tends to lower financial
obstacles. These findings are consistent with approaches that simultaneously recognize that
private agents face substantive information and enforcement costs when monitoring banks, while
also recognizing that politicians and regulators will act in their own interests and not necessarily
act to reduce market frictions.

26
Finally, at a very general level, these results emphasize the importance of both market
and political failures. Bank supervision clearly matters. Bank supervisory policies that seek to
ameliorate market failures by forcing the accurate disclosure of information reduce the obstacles
that firms face in raising external finance. This is not a laissez faire – invisible hand – finding.
This result suggests that active bank supervision can help ease information and enforcement
costs and enhance corporate finance. Just as clearly, however, the results highlight the
importance of theories that emphasize that politicians act in their own interests. Countries with
powerful bank supervisors tend to have firms that face (i) greater financing obstacles and (ii)
greater reliance on special connections and corruption in raising capital. Thus, mechanisms that
simultaneously recognize the importance of market and political failures – such as creating bank
supervisory agencies that focus on forcing accurate information disclosure by banks and easing
private monitoring of banks – tend to foster more efficient financial intermediation.

27
References:
Atkinson, A.B. and J.E. Stiglitz. 1980. Lectures on Public Economics, London: McGraw-Hill.
Barth, J. R., Caprio, G. Jr., and R. Levine. 2003. “Bank Supervision and Regulation: What
Works Best?” Journal of Financial Intermediation, forthcoming.
Beck, T., Demirguc-Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic. 2002. “Financial and Legal Constraints to
Firm Growth: Does Size Matter,” World Bank mimeo.
Beck, T., Clarke, G., Groff, A., Keefer, P., and P. Walsh, 2001. “New Tools and New Tests in
Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political Institutions”, World Bank
Economic Review 15, 165-176.
Becker, G. 1983. “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 371-400.
Becker, G. 1968. “Crime and Punishment: An Economic Approach,” Journal of Political
Economy 76, 169-217.
Becker, G. and G. Stigler. 1974. “Law Enforcement, Malfeasance, and the Compensation of
Enforcers,” Journal of Legal Studies 3, 1-18.
Boyd, J.H., Levine, R., and B.D. Smith. 2001. “The Impact of Inflation on Financial Sector
Performance,” Journal of Monetary Economics 47, 221-48.
Buchanan, J.M. and G. Tullock. 1962. The Calculus of Consent. University of Michigan Press.
Calomiris, C., and C. Kahn, 1991. “The Role of Demandable Debt in Structuring Optimal
Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review 81, 497-513.
Caprio, G. and D. Klingebiel, 1999, “Episodes of Systematic and Borderline Financial Distress”,
World Bank.
Coase, R.H. 1960. “The Problem of Social Cost,” Journal of Law and Economics 3, 1-44.
Coase, R.H. 1988. The Firm, the Market, and the Law, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache. 2003. “Does Deposit Insurance Increase Banking
System Stability? An Empirical Investigation.” Journal of Monetary Economics.
Demirgüç-Kunt, A. and V. Maksimovic. 1998. “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,” Journal of
Finance 53, 2107-2137.
Diamond, D.W. and R.G. Rajan. 2001. “Liquidity Risk, Liquidity Creation, and Financial
Fragility: A Theory of Banking,” Journal of Political Economy 109, 287-327.

28

Djankov, A, C. McLiesh, T. Nenova, and A. Shleifer. 2003 “Who Owns the Media,” Journal of
Law and Economics, forthcoming.
Fazzari, S. M., R. G. Hubbard, and B. C. Petersen. 1988, Financing constraints and corporate
investment, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 19, 141-195.
Flannery, M. 1994. “Debt Maturity and the Deadweight Cost of Leverage: Optimally Financing
Banking Firms, American Economic Review 84, 320-331.
Glaeser, E., Johnson, S. and A. Shleifer. 2001. “Coase versus the Coasians,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 116, 853-899.
Glaeser, E. and A. Shleifer. 2001. “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” NBER WP# 8650.
Glaeser, E. and A. Shleifer. 2002. “Legal Origin,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 11931230.
Greene, W. 2000, Econometric Analysis, 4th Edition, Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall.
Grossman, S. and O. Hart. 1980. “Disclosure Laws and Takeover Bids,” Journal of Finance 35,
323-334.
Haber, S.H. 2003. The Politics of Property Rights: Political Instability, Credible Commitments,
and Economic Growth in Mexico (Cambridge University Press).
Hamilton, A., Lay, J. and J. Madison. 1788. Federalist Papers (In C. Rossiter, Ed., New York:
New American Library, 1961).
Hay, J.R. and A. Shleifer. 1998. “Private Enforcement of Public Laws: A Theory of Legal
Reform,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings 88, 398-403.
Hellman, J., Jones, G., Kaufmann, D. and M. Schankerman. 2000, “Measuring Governance and
State Capture: The Role of Bureaucrats and Firms in Shaping the Business
Environment,” European Bank for Reconstruction and Development, WP #51.
Kaplan, S. N. and L. Zingales. 1997. “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities Provide Useful
Measures of Financing Constraints?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112.
King, R. G. and R. Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 108, 717-38.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., and A. Shleifer. 2002. “What Works in Securities Laws?”
Harvard University, mimeo, October.

29
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1997. “Legal Determinants of
External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A., and R.W. Vishny, 1998. “Law and Finance”,
Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-1155
La Porta, R., Lopez-de-Silanes, F., Shleifer, A. and R. Vishny. 2000. “Investor Protection and
Corporate Governance,” Journal of Financial Economics 57, 3-26.
Levine, R. and S. Zervos. 1998. "Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth," American
Economic Review 88, 537-558.
Levine, R., Loayza, N., and T. Beck. 2000. “Financial Intermediation and Growth: Causality and
Causes”, Journal of Monetary Economics 46, 31-77.
Mayer, C. 1988. “New Issues in Corporate Finance,” European Economic Review 32, 1167-88.
North, D. 1990. Institutions, Institutional Change, and Economic Performance. New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Olson, M. 1965. The Logic of Collective Action. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Polinsky, M. and S. Shavell. 2000. “The Economic Theory of Public Enforcement of Law,”
Journal of Economic Literature 38, 45-76.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth,” American Economic
Review 88, 559-587.
Rajan, R. and L. Zingales. 2003. Saving Capitalism from the Capitalists, New York, NY:
Random House.
Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance,” Journal of Finance
52, 737-783.
Shleifer, A. and R.W. Vishny. 1998. The Grabbing Hand: Government Pathologies and Their
Cures. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Spiller, P. and J. Ferejohn. 1992. “The Economics and Politics of Administrative Law and
Procedures: An Introduction,” Journal of Law, Economics and Organization 8, 1-7.
Stigler, G. 1971. “The Theory of Economic Regulation,” Bell Journal of Economics and
Management Science 2, 3-21.
Stigler, G. 1975. The Citizen and the State: Essays on Regulation, University of Chicago Press.

30
Wurgler, J. 2000. “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of Financial
Economics 58, 187-214.

31
Table I
Financing Obstacles and Supervisory Practice across Countries
General Financing Obstacle is the response to the question “How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary
between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Supervisory Power indicates the power of the supervisor vis-àvis banks; Supervisory Independence the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. Private Monitoring is the amount of
information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme. Detailed variable definitions and sources
are given in the appendix.
General Financing Supervisory Supervisory
Private
Obstacle
Power Independence
Monitoring
Moral Hazard
Argentina
3.03
-0.30
1
1.13
Belarus
3.28
-2.24
4
-1.55
Bolivia
3.04
0.22
2
0.06
Botswana
2.34
0.82
2
0.97
-2.49
Brazil
2.71
1.00
1
0.97
Canada
2.07
-2.15
4
1.05
2.86
Chile
2.43
0.05
1
0.29
2.20
China
3.34
0.28
1
1.05
Croatia
3.34
0.17
2
0.29
Czech Republic
3.13
1.00
1
-0.03
Egypt
3.00
0.38
4
-0.13
-2.49
El Salvador
2.87
0.09
1
0.29
-2.49
Estonia
2.49
0.27
1
0.29
France
2.76
-1.16
3
0.69
1.16
Germany
2.54
-0.91
4
0.97
1.93
Ghana
3.07
-0.09
4
-1.56
1.71
Guatemala
2.97
-0.42
1
-1.14
-2.49
Honduras
2.85
0.82
2
-0.42
-2.49
Hungary
2.67
1.00
2
-0.43
India
2.54
-0.36
3
-0.42
2.95
Indonesia
2.86
0.74
2
0.25
-2.49
Italy
2.11
-1.66
2
1.27
2.09
Kenya
2.84
1.00
2
-1.00
3.41
Lithuania
2.88
-0.34
2
0.29
Malawi
2.74
-0.10
2
-1.25
-2.49
Malaysia
2.65
-0.25
3
0.55
-2.49
Mexico
3.40
-0.17
1
-0.43
3.98
Moldova
3.44
-0.18
2
-1.83
Namibia
1.91
-0.54
-0.13
Nigeria
3.14
0.61
2
0.39
3.09
Panama
2.18
1.14
3
-0.13
-2.49
Peru
3.04
0.09
3
0.29
2.34
Philippines
2.68
0.95
1
-0.63
3.33
Poland
2.41
0.58
3
0.29
Portugal
1.73
1.00
4
0.97
-2.49
Romania
3.30
-0.71
1
0.42
Russia
3.22
-0.40
2
-1.25
Singapore
1.85
-3.05
3
0.35
-2.49
Slovenia
2.29
1.00
4
-0.43
South Africa
2.45
-2.95
2
0.77
-2.49
Spain
2.24
-0.32
3
0.97
Sweden
1.89
-1.55
3
0.69
-2.49
Thailand
3.11
0.72
2
-0.42
-2.49
Trinidad & Tobago
3.03
-0.91
2
-0.43
Turkey
3.13
-0.30
4
0.69
3.45
United Kingdom
2.25
0.59
4
1.46
0.73
United States
2.33
1.14
4
0.97
3.39
Venezuela
2.49
1.14
3
-0.43
2.52
Zambia
2.71
0.51
2
-0.13
-2.49

32

Table II
Summary Statistics and Correlations
Summary statistics are presented in Panel A and correlations in Panel B and C, respectively. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the
question “How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor
obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Special Connection, and Bank Corruption are defined in a similar way. Government
and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy
variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales equals the logarithm of sales in
US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money
banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Supervisory Power
indicates the power of the supervisor vis-à-vis banks. Supervisory Independence is the independence of the bank supervisor from government and
banks. Private Monitoring is the amount of information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit
insurance scheme. Detailed definitions and the sources are in the data appendix.

Panel A: Summary Statistics:

Mean

Median

St.Dev.

Maximum

Minimum Observations

General Financing obstacle

2.76

3.00

1.13

4.00

1.00

Special Connection

2.13

2.00

1.05

4.00

1.00

4.632

Bank Corruption

1.64

1.00

0.98

4.00

1.00

4,109

4,812

Government

0.12

0.00

0.32

1.00

0.00

5,072

Foreign

0.20

0.00

0.40

1.00

0.00

5,072

Exporter

0.39

0.00

0.49

1.00

0.00

5,072

Sales

10.41

13.82

8.16

25.33

-2.12

5,072

Number of Competitor

0.83

0.69

0.32

2.20

0.00

5,072

Manufacturing

0.36

0.00

0.48

1.00

0.00

5,072

Services

0.46

0.00

0.50

1.00

0.00

5,072

Inflation

0.12

0.07

0.15

0.71

0.00

49

Growth

0.02

0.02

0.02

0.07

-0.03

49

Priv

0.39

0.27

0.32

1.16

0.00

49
49

Supervisory Power

-0.08

0.09

1.04

1.14

-3.05

Supervisory Independence

2.40

2.00

1.07

4.00

1.00

48

Private Monitoring

0.09

0.29

0.81

1.46

-1.83

49

Moral hazard

0.12

0.73

2.65

3.98

-2.49

31

33

Panel B: Correlations between firm-level variables

Special Connection
Bank Corruption
Government
Foreign
Exporter
Sales
Number of Competitors
Manufacturing
Services

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.29***
0.26***
0.04***
-0.16***
-0.06***
-0.18***
0.09***
0.02
-0.10***

Special
Connection
1.0000
0.42***
-0.10***
-0.08***
-0.07***
0.01
0.01
-0.02
0.01

Bank
Corruption

Government

Foreign

Exporter

Sales

Number
Competitors

Manufacturing

1.0000
-0.07***
-0.07***
-0.09***
-0.09***
0.067**
-0.04**
0.03

1.0000
-0.04***
0.09***
-0.21***
-0.04***
0.056**
-0.07***

1.0000
0.24***
0.24***
-0.11***
0.11***
-0.05***

1.0000
0.11***
-0.05**
0.34***
-0.25***

1.0000
-0.34***
0.05***
0.06***

1.0000
-0.07***
-0.02

1.0000
-0.70***

34

Panel C: Correlations between country-level variables

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence
Private Monitoring
Moral Hazard

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.42***
-0.16
-0.42***
0.014
-0.40***
-0.44***
0.21

Inflation
1
-0.16
-0.52***
-0.08
0.08
-0.42***
0.19

Growth

Priv

Supervisory
Power

Supervisory Private
Independence Monitoring

1
0.03
-0.12
0.20
0.16
0.310

1
-0.13
0.26*
0.51***
-0.15

1
-0.15
-0.10
0.06

1
0.09
0.12

1
0.03

35

Table III
Supervision and Financing Obstacles
The regression estimated is: General Financing Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6
Sales +β7 No. of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the
question “How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor
obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has
government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing
and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors
the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log
difference of the consumer price index. Supervision is one of four supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the
supervisor vis-à-vis banks. Supervisory Independence is the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. Private
Monitoring is the amount of information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme.
The regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in
parentheses.

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.515
(0.000)***
-5.874
(0.000)***
-0.092
(0.000)***
0.042
(0.011)**

Supervisory Independence

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.773
(0.000)***
-3.525
(0.000)***
-0.064
(0.000)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.740
(0.000)***
-3.811
(0.000)***
-0.068
(0.000)***
0.145
(0.003)***
-0.177
-0.168
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.362
(0.004)***
-5.531
(0.000)***
-0.088
(0.000)***

-0.072
(0.003)***

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

General
Financing
Obstacle
-0.429
(0.111)
-16.333
(0.000)***
-0.124
(0.000)***

0.028
(0.004)***
4812

4777

-0.045
(0.007)***
4777
4812

*,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10,5, and 1 percent, respectively.

2377

36
Table IV
Supervision and Financing Obstacles
Quantifying the Effect
Based on the regressions of Table III, estimated probabilities of rating financing as a major obstacle to the operation and growth of the enterprises
(Financing Obstacle=4) are presented for the 25%, 50% and 75% percentiles (Panel A) and at the actual level for Chile and Canada (Panel B) of
the respective supervisory variable. Estimated probabilities are calculated for each enterprise setting all variables at its actual value, except for
the supervisory variables, which is set at either the 25%, 50% or 75% percentile of the sample (Panel A) or the values for Chile and Canada.

Panel A:

Supervisory power
Supervisory
independence
Private monitoring
Moral hazard

25%

50%

75%

0.33
0.38

0.35
0.38

0.38
0.20

Change between
25% and 75%
percentiles
0.05
-0.18

0.38
0.20

0.33
0.29

0.30
0.35

-0.08
0.15

Chile

Canada

0.35
0.55

0.26
0.02

Change between
Chile and Canada
0.09
-0.53

0.33
0.33

0.27
0.35

-0.06
0.02

Panel B:
Supervisory power
Supervisory
independence
Private monitoring
Moral hazard

37

Table V
Supervision and Financing Obstacles – Firms with Access to Bank Finance
The sample is limited to firms that receive bank financing. The regression estimated is: General Financing Obstacle = β1 Government + β2
Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 No. of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision
+ ε. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the question “How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?”
Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy
variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the
firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is
the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is
the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Supervision is one of four supervisory variables. Supervisory
Power indicates the power of the supervisor vis-à-vis banks. Supervisory Independence is the independence of the bank supervisor from
government and banks. Private Monitoring is the amount of information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of
the deposit insurance scheme. The regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. Pvalues are reported in parentheses.

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.492
(0.009)***
-7.152
(0.000)***
-0.104
(0.000)***
0.045
(0.021)**

Supervisory Independence

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.714
(0.000)***
-5.149
(0.000)***
-0.074
(0.000)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.689
(0.001)***
-5.029
(0.000)***
-0.076
(0.000)***
0.176
(0.004)***
-0.152
-0.143
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.377
(0.044)**
-7.006
(0.000)***
-0.103
(0.000)***

-0.063
(0.042)**

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

General
Financing
Obstacle
-0.202
(0.537)
-18.380
(0.000)***
-0.099
(0.012)**

0.032
(0.003)***
2925

2890

-0.053
(0.011)***
2890
2925

1859

38
Table VI
Supervision and Financing Obstacles – Controlling for Legal and Regulatory Variables
The regression estimated is: General Financing Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6
Sales +β7 No. of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + β11X +β12 Supervision + ε. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the
question “How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor
obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has
government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing
and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors
the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log
difference of the consumer price index. Supervision is one of four supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the
supervisor vis-à-vis banks; Supervisory Independence the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. Private Monitoring
is the amount of information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme. X is one of
five variables. Checks and Balances indicates the number of veto players in the political process; Banking Freedom indicates the absence of
government interference in banking; State-Owned Banks is the share of assets in banks that are majority-owned by the government in total
banking assets; Shareholder Rights is an indicator of minority shareholder rights vis-à-vis blockholders and management. Systemic Banking
Crisis is a dummy variable that takes on the value one if the country has suffered a systemic banking crisis during the 1990s. The regression is
run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.

Panel A:

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Checks and Balances
Supervisory Power

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.442
(0.001)***
-6.428
(0.000)***
-0.077
(0.000)***
-0.055
(0.000)***
0.033
(0.044)**

Supervisory Independence

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.743
(0.000)***
-3.769
(0.000)***
-0.062
(0.000)***
-0.014
(0.311)

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.718
(0.000)***
-3.986
(0.000)***
-0.066
(0.000)***
-0.010
(0.464)
0.141
(0.005)***
-0.169
-0.162
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.315
(0.012)**
-6.114
(0.000)***
-0.074
(0.000)***
-0.055
(0.000)***

-0.062
(0.011)**

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

General
Financing
Obstacle
-0.462
(0.087)*
-16.345
(0.000)***
-0.105
(0.006)***
-0.025
(0.175)

0.033
(0.001)***
4812

4777

0.479
(0.000)***
-6.020
(0.000)***
-0.075
(0.000)***
-0.110
(0.000)***
0.045
(0.007)***

0.740
(0.000)***
-3.696
(0.000)***
-0.056
(0.000)***
-0.064
(0.014)**

-0.044
(0.008)***
4777
4812

2377

Panel B:
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Banking Freedom
Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence

0.708
(0.000)***
-3.988
(0.000)***
-0.059
(0.000)***
-0.068
(0.010)**
0.150
(0.000)***
-0.171
-0.161
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

0.339
(0.007)***
-5.817
(0.000)***
-0.074
(0.000)***
-0.097
(0.000)***

-0.057
(0.020)**

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

-0.219
(0.425)
-15.702
(0.000)***
-0.090
(0.012)**
-0.126
(0.000)***

0.024
(0.012)**
4812

4777

-0.046
(0.001)***
4777
4812

2377

39

Panel C:

Inflation
Growth
Priv
State-owned Banks
Supervisory Power

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.472
(0.002)***
-9.129
(0.000)***
-0.055
(0.044)**
0.099
(0.217)
-0.011
(0.555)

Supervisory Independence

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.900
(0.000)***
-6.305
(0.000)***
0.018
(0.538)
0.120
(0.134)

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.734
(0.000)***
-6.974
(0.000)***
-0.002
(0.952)
0.114
(0.155)
0.113
(0.028)**
-0.138
-0.128
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.490
(0.001)***
-8.086
(0.000)***
-0.008
(0.784)
0.069
(0.391)

-0.127
(0.000)***

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

General
Financing
Obstacle
-0.370
(0.185)
-15.771
(0.000)***
-0.107
(0.003)***
0.244
(0.041)**

0.022
(0.034)**
4413

4413

0.412
(0.003)***
-9.598
(0.000)***
-0.116
(0.000)***
-0.040
(0.004)***
0.027
(0.133)

0.573
(0.000)***
-7.434
(0.000)***
-0.095
(0.000)***
-0.048
(0.000)***

-0.049
(0.005)***
4413
4413

2232

Panel D:
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Shareholder rights
Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence

0.545
(0.000)***
-7.959
(0.000)***
-0.103
(0.000)***
-0.033
(0.022)**
0.188
(0.001)***
-0.117
-0.101
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

0.266
(0.045)**
-9.212
(0.000)***
-0.114
(0.000)***
-0.050
(0.000)***

-0.075
(0.007)***

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

-0.361
(0.212)
-13.765
(0.000)***
0.018
(0.723)
-0.071
(0.001)***

0.054
(0.000)***
4134

4134

0.490
(0.000)***
-5.295
(0.000)***
-0.086
(0.000)***
0.166
(0.000)***
0.011
(0.520)

0.770
(0.000)***
-3.418
(0.000)***
-0.064
(0.000)***
0.042
(0.286)

-0.061
(0.001)***
4134
4134

1982

Panel E:
Inflation
Growth
Priv
Systemic banking crisis
Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence

0.734
(0.000)***
-3.774
(0.000)***
-0.068
(0.000)***
0.020
(0.644)
0.140
(0.006)***
-0.170
-0.165
(0.000)*** (0.000)***

Private Monitoring

0.384
(0.002)***
-4.343
(0.000)***
-0.078
(0.000)***
0.202
(0.000)***

-0.094
(0.000)***

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

-0.495
(0.066)*
-14.044
(0.000)***
-0.123
(0.000)***
0.129
(0.038)**

0.025
(0.010)**
4812

4777

-0.045
(0.008)***
4777
4812

2377

40
Table VII
Supervision and Financing Obstacles – Controlling for the Political Environment
The regression estimated is: General Financing Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4 Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6
Sales +β7 No. of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + β11X +β12 Supervision + ε. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the
question “How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor
obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has
government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing
and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors
the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log
difference of the consumer price index. Supervision is one of two supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the supervisor
vis-à-vis banks; Supervisory Independence the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. X is one of three variables.
Legislative Competition indicates the degree of competitiven4ess of legislative elections. State repression of media is an indicator of the degree
to which the government represses a country’s media. State ownership of media indicates the share of media owned by the government. The
regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.

Panel A:

Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Legislative competition

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.132
(0.008)***
-0.140
(0.000)***
-0.046
(0.006)***
-0.066
(0.000)***

State repression of media

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.193
(0.000)***
-0.128
(0.000)***
-0.047
(0.006)***
0.079
(0.000)***

State ownership of media
Observations

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.218
(0.000)***
-0.148
(0.000)***
-0.053
(0.002)***

4777

4325

0.459
(0.000)***
4325

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.160
(0.373)
-0.140
(0.000)***
-0.045
(0.018)**
-0.065
(0.001)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.110
(0.052)*
-0.124
(0.000)***
-0.053
(0.002)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.186
(0.000)***
-0.146
(0.000)***
-0.066
(0.000)***

Panel B:

Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Legislative competition
State repression of media

0.088
(0.000)***

State ownership of media
Legislative competition*
Supervisory power
State repression of media*
Supervisory power
State ownership of media*
Supervisory power
Observations

0.483
(0.000)***
-0.005
(0.872)
0.022
(0.001)***
4777

4325

0.197
(0.008)***
4325

41
Table VIII
Supervision and Financing Obstacles – The Horserace
The regression estimated is: General Financing Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales
+β7 No. of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. General Financing Obstacle is the response to the question
“How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3
(moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or
foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are
industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Priv
is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the
consumer price index. Supervision is one of four supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the supervisor vis-à-vis banks;
Supervisory Independence the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. Private Monitoring is the amount of
information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme. The regression is run with
ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power
Supervisory Independence
Private Monitoring
Moral Hazard
Observations

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.445
(0.001)***
-5.245
(0.000)***
-0.086
(0.000)***
0.040
(0.014)**

General
Financing
Obstacle
-0.405
(0.133)
-14.975
(0.000)***
-0.104
(0.003)***
0.068
(0.001)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.712
(0.000)***
-3.034
(0.000)***
-0.060
(0.000)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.099
(0.727)
-12.820
(0.000)***
-0.035
(0.364)

General
Financing
Obstacle
0.075
(0.791)
-12.613
(0.000)***
-0.004
(0.922)

-0.174
-0.144
(0.000)*** (0.000)***
-0.070
-0.058
(0.004)***
(0.018)**
0.025
0.033
(0.009)***
(0.001)***
4812
2377
4777
2377

-0.211
(0.000)***
0.031
(0.002)***
2377

*,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10,5, and 1 percent, respectively.

42
Table IX
Supervision and the Need for Special Connection
The regression estimated is: Special Connection = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 No.
of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. Special Connection is the response to the question “Is the need of
special connections with banks an obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor
obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has
government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing
and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors
the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log
difference of the consumer price index. Supervision is one of four supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the
supervisor vis-à-vis banks; Supervisory Independence the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. Private Monitoring
is the amount of information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme. The
regression is run with ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power

Special
Connection
-0.338
(0.011)**
-6.466
(0.000)***
-0.086
(0.000)***
0.090
(0.000)***

Supervisory Independence

Special
Connection
-0.409
(0.002)***
-6.253
(0.000)***
-0.080
(0.000)***
-0.055
(0.001)***

Special
Connection
-0.328
(0.017)**
-6.166
(0.000)***
-0.081
(0.000)***
0.202
(0.000)***
-0.040
(0.018)**

Private Monitoring

Special
Connection
-0.516
(0.000)***
-6.925
(0.000)***
-0.088
(0.000)***

-0.018
(0.460)

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

Special
Connection
-0.599
(0.020)**
-9.684
(0.000)***
-0.028
(0.433)

0.014
(0.151)
4632

4595

-0.043
(0.012)**
4595

*,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10,5, and 1 percent, respectively.

4632

2373

43

Table X
Supervision and Bank Corruption
The regression estimated is: Bank Corruption = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 No. of
Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. Bank Corruption is the response to the question “Is the corruption of
bank officials an obstacle for the operation and growth of your business?” Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3
(moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle). Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or
foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are
industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Priv
is claims on the private sector by deposit money banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the
consumer price index. Supervision is one of four supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the supervisor vis-à-vis banks;
Supervisory Independence the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks. Private Monitoring is the amount of
information available to bank creditors and Moral Hazard indicates the generosity of the deposit insurance scheme. The regression is run with
ordered probit. Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.

Inflation
Growth
Priv
Supervisory Power

Bank
corruption
0.533
(0.000)***
-5.821
(0.000)***
-0.039
(0.018)**
0.162
(0.000)***

Supervisory Independence

Bank
corruption
0.357
(0.017)**
-6.046
(0.000)***
-0.036
(0.032)**
-0.054
(0.007)***

Bank
corruption
0.615
(0.000)***
-5.178
(0.000)***
-0.031
(0.067)*
0.126
(0.022)**
-0.044
(0.030)**

Private Monitoring

Bank
corruption
0.208
(0.154)
-6.185
(0.000)***
-0.038
(0.022)**

-0.084
(0.002)***

Moral Hazard
Supervisory Power*
Supervisory Independence
Observations

Bank
corruption
0.492
(0.085)*
-14.883
(0.000)***
0.010
(0.806)

-0.005
(0.683)
4109

4072

0.011
(0.564)
4072

*,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10,5, and 1 percent, respectively.

4109

2139

44
Table XI
Independent Supervisors and Financing Obstacles
The regression estimated is: Financing Obstacle = β1 Government + β2 Foreign + β3 Exporter + β4Manufacturing + β5 Services + β6 Sales +β7 No.
of Competitors +β8 Inflation + β9 Growth + β10 Priv + +β11 Supervision + ε. Financing Obstacle is either the General Financing Obstacle, Special
Connection or Bank Corruption. Answers vary between 1 (no obstacle), 2 (minor obstacle), 3 (moderate obstacle), and 4 (major obstacle).
Government and Foreign are dummy variables that take the value 1 if the firm has government or foreign ownership and zero if not. Exporter is a
dummy variable that indicates if the firm is an exporting firm. Manufacturing and Services are industry dummies. Sales is the logarithm of sales
in US$. Number of Competitors is the logarithm of the number of competitors the firm has. Priv is claims on the private sector by deposit money
banks as share of GDP. Growth is the growth rate of GDP. Inflation is the log difference of the consumer price index. Supervision is one of
three supervisory variables. Supervisory Power indicates the power of the supervisor vis-à-vis banks; Supervisory Independence from
Banks/Government the independence of the bank supervisor from government and banks, respectively. The regression is run with ordered probit.
Detailed variable definitions and sources are given in the appendix. P-values are reported in parentheses.
General
Financing
Obstacle
0.819
(0.000)***
-4.332
(0.000)***
-0.065
(0.000)***

General
Financing
Obstacle
Inflation
0.708
(0.000)***
Growth
-4.969
(0.000)***
Priv
-0.066
(0.000)***
Supervisory Power
0.116
(0.022)**
Supervisory Independence
-0.125
-0.117
from government
(0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supervisory Independence
-0.303
-0.298
from banks
(0.000)*** (0.000)***
Supervisory Power*
-0.072
Supervisory Independence – Govt
(0.000)***
Supervisory Power*
0.045
Supervisory Independence – Banks
(0.289)
Observations
4777
4777

Special
Connection
-0.370
(0.005)***
-7.098
(0.000)***
-0.080
(0.000)***
0.001
(0.958)
-0.189
(0.000)***

4595

*,**,*** indicate significance levels of 10,5, and 1 percent, respectively.

Special
Connection
-0.378
(0.007)***
-7.264
(0.000)***
-0.078
(0.000)***
0.178
(0.001)***
0.007
(0.754)
-0.158
(0.000)***
-0.075
(0.000)***
0.056
(0.186)
4595

Bank
Corruption
0.379
(0.011)**
-6.980
(0.000)***
-0.034
(0.037)**
0.004
(0.864)
-0.194
(0.000)***

4072

Bank
Corruption
0.650
(0.000)***
-5.687
(0.000)***
-0.032
(0.056)*
0.117
(0.034)**
-0.006
(0.803)
-0.137
(0.001)***
0.028
(0.217)
-0.033
(0.479)
4072

45

Appendix : Variables and Sources
Variable

Definition

Banking Freedom

Indicator of openness of banking and financial system: specifically,
whether the foreign banks and financial services firms are able to
operate freely, how difficult it is to open domestic banks and other
financial services firms, how heavily regulated the financial system
is, the presence of state-owned banks, whether the government
influences allocation of credit, and whether banks are free to provide
customers with insurance and invest in securities (and vice-versa).
The index ranges in value from 1 (very low – banks are primitive) to
5 (very high – few restrictions). Averaged over 1995-97.
Checks and Balances
Measure of the number of veto-players in the political decision
process, both in the executive and the legislature. Average for 199095.
Corruption of bank officials Is the corruption of bank officials no obstacle (1), a minor obstacle
(2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a major obstacle (4)?

Original source
Heritage Foundation

Beck, Clarke, Groff, Keefer, and
Walsh (2001)
World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Exporter

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm exports, zero
otherwise.

Foreign

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if any foreign company World Business Environment
or individual has a financial stake in the ownership of the firm, zero Survey (WBES)
otherwise.

General Financing Obstacle How problematic is financing for the operation and growth of your
business: no obstacle (1), a minor obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle
(3) or a major obstacle (4)?

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Government

Dummy variable that takes on the value one if any government
agency or state body has a financial stake in the ownership of the
firm, zero otherwise.

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Growth

Growth rate of GDP, average 1995-99

World Development Indicators

Inflation rate

Log difference of Consumer Price Index

International Financial Statistics
(IFS), line 64

Legislative competition

Index of the number of parties competing in the last legislative
election, ranging from 1 (non-competitive) to 7 (competitive).
Average for 1990-95.
Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm is in the
manufacturing industry, zero otherwise.

Beck, Clarke, Groff, Keefer, and
Walsh (2001)

Manufacturing
Moral Hazard

Need special
connections with
banks
Number of Competitors

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

Principal component indicator measuring the generosity of deposit Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache
insurance, based on co-insurance, coverage of foreign currency and (2003)
interbank deposits, type and source of funding, management,
membership and level of explicit coverage.
Is the need of special connections with banks/financial institutions no World Business Environment
obstacle (1), a minor obstacle (2), a moderate obstacle (3) or a major Survey (WBES)
obstacle (4)?
Regarding your firm's major product line, how many competitors do World Business Environment
you face in your market?
Survey (WBES)

46
Priv

{(0.5)*[F(t)/P_e(t) + F(t-1)/P_e(t-1)]}/[GDP(t)/P_a(t)], where F is IFS
credit by deposit money banks to the private sector (lines 22d ), GDP
is line 99b, P_e is end-of period CPI (line 64) and P_a is the average
CPI for the year.

Private Monitoring

Principal component indicator of nine dummy variables that measure Barth, Caprio and Levine (2003)
whether (1) bank directors and officials are legally liable for the
accuracy of information disclosed to the public, (2) whether banks
must publish consolidated accounts, (3) whether banks must be
audited by certified international auditors, (4) whether 100% of the
largest 10 banks are rated by international rating agencies, (5)
whether off-balance sheet items are disclosed to the public,
(6) whether banks must disclose their risk management procedures to
the public, (7) whether accrued, though unpaid interest/principal
enter the income statement while the loan is still non-performing (8)
whether subordinated debt is allowable, and (9) whether there is no
explicit deposit insurance system and no insurance was paid the last
time a bank failed..
Dummy variable that takes on the value one if firm is in the service World Business Environment
industry, zero otherwise.
Survey (WBES)

Services
Shareholder rights

Summary indicator of the rights of minority shareholders vis-à-vis
management and blockholders

La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes,
Shleifer and Vishny (1997, 1998)

Size

Logarithm of firm sales

World Business Environment
Survey (WBES)

State ownership of media

Average of percentage of state ownership in press media and TV
media

Djankov, McLiesh, Nenova and
Shleifer (2002)

State repression of media

Degree to which government represses media freedom

State-owned banks

Percentage of banking system’s assets in banks that are 50% or more Barth, Caprio and Levine (2003)
government owned

Supervisory Independence

The degree to which the supervisory authority is independent from
the government and legally protected from the banking system

Supervisory Independence
from banks

The degree to which the supervisory authority is legally protected
from the banking system

Supervisory Independence
from government

The degree to which the supervisory authority is independent from
the government (To whom are the supervisory bodies responsible or
accountable? How is the head of the supervisory agency (and other
directors) appointed? How is the head of the supervisory agency (and
other directors) removed?) Ranges from one (low) to three (high
independence).
Principal component indicator of 14 dummy variables: 1.Does the Barth, Caprio and Levine (2003)
supervisory agency have the right to meet with external auditors to
discuss their report without the approval of the bank? 2.Are auditors
required by law to communicate directly to the supervisory agency
any presumed involvement of bank directors or senior managers in
elicit activities, fraud, or insider abuse? 3.Can supervisors take legal
action against external auditors for negligence? 4.Can the
supervisory authority force a bank to change its internal
organizational structure? 5.Are off-balance sheet items disclosed to
supervisors? 6. Can the supervisory agency order the bank's directors
or management to constitute provisions to cover actual or potential
losses? 7. Can the supervisory agency suspend the directors' decision
to distribute: a) Dividends? b) Bonuses? c) Management fees? 8.Can
the supervisory agency legally declare-such that this declaration
supersedes the rights of bank shareholders-that a bank is insolvent?
9.Does the Banking Law give authority to the supervisory agency to
intervene that is, suspend some or all ownership rights-a problem

Supervisory Power

Barth, Caprio and Levine (2003)

47

Systemic banking crisis

bank? 10.Regarding bank restructuring and reorganization, can the
supervisory agency
or any other government agency do the following: a) Supersede
shareholder rights? b) Remove and replace management? c) Remove
and replace directors?
Dummy variable that takes on the value one if the country suffered a Caprio and Klingebiel (1999)
systemic banking crisis during the 1990s

