                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             DEFLATION: PREVENTION AND CURE

                                           Willem H. Buiter

                                          Working Paper 9623
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9623


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




This paper is an extended version of the 2003 JSG Wilson Lecture in Economics, given at the University of
Hull, 5th February 2003, under the title “The return of deflation: What can central banks do?” I would like
to thank Anne Sibert for helpful comments and Toshiaki Sakatsume for able research assistance. The views
and opinions expressed are those of the author. They do not necessarily represent the views and opinions of
the European Bank for Reconstruction and Development or the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Willem H Buiter. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Deflation: Prevention and Cure
Willem H. Buiter
NBER Working Paper No. 9623
April 2003
JEL No. E31, E62, E63, F41

                                           ABSTRACT


       After an absence of almost half a century, the spectre of deflation is once again haunting the
corridors of central banks and finance ministries in the industrial world. While preventing or
combating deflation poses some unique difficulties not present in preventing or combating inflation,
deflation can be prevented and, if it has taken hold, can be overcome, using conventional
instruments of monetary and fiscal policy. These include open market purchases of government
securities and monetary financing of government deficits caused by expansionary fiscal measures.
Base money-financed tax cuts or transfer payments n the mundane version of Friedman’s helicopter
drop of money n will always boost aggregate demand.

       Unconventional monetary and fiscal measures are also available. These include open market
purchases of private and foreign securities, negative nominal interest rates (through a carry tax on
currency) and temporary tax measures aimed at shifting private consumption from the future to the
present, by tilting the intertemporal terms of trade. An example is a cut in VAT today coupled to the
credible commitment of a VAT increase in the future.

       Deflation results from a combination of bad luck and poor economic management, including
the failure to coordinate monetary and fiscal policy. Sustained unwanted deflation is evidence of
policy failure. Both the knowledge and the tools exist to prevent unwanted deflation.



Willem H. Buiter
Chief Economist and Special Counselor to the President
European Bank for Reconstruction and Development
One Exchange Square
London EC2A 2JN
UK
and NBER
willembuiter@whsmithnet.co.uk
Introduction

         After an absence of almost half a century, the spectre of deflation is once again

haunting the corridors of central banks and finance ministries in the industrial world.

The great deflations of the 19th century and 1930’s made way for the post-World War

II era of persistent inflation - low to moderate in the advanced industrial countries,

moderate to high with occasional bursts of hyperinflation in developing countries,

transition countries and emerging markets.                   The recent renewed concern with

deflation is due in part to the historical association, at least during the interwar years,

of deflationary episodes with financial crises, recession, stagnation and even

depression. It is also prompted by the fear that in deflationary conditions, nominal

interest rates may come close to their lower bound of zero, at which point monetary

policy is thought to lose most if not all of its effectiveness.

         I define deflation to be a sustained decline in the general price level of current

goods and services, that is, a persistently negative rate of inflation. In principle, the

price index is the ideal cost of living index. Real-world approximations include the

Consumer Price Index (CPI) in the US, the Retail Price Indexes (RPI, RPIX and

RPIY) in the UK and the Harmonised Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) in the EMU

area. For many practical and policy issues, the distinctions between these indices are

important. For the purpose of this paper, they are irrelevant.1



1
  There is a widely held view that real-world price indices present us with systematically upward-
biased estimates of true inflation. This is important for issues ranging from cost-of-living indexation to
the choice of an appropriate inflation target by the monetary authority. For reasons of space I will not
consider these issues here. A Commission headed by Michael Boskin studied the CPI bias and
presented the results of its report on December 5, 1996. It concluded that that CPI inflation in the US
was likely to overestimate true inflation by about 1.0 percent to 2.0 percent per year. The sources of
this bias in CPI inflation identified by the Boskin Commission were: 1. Substitution bias (0.2 - 0.4
points per year); 2. Outlet bias (0.1 - 0.3 points); 3. Quality changes (0.2 - 0.6 points); 4. New products
(0.2 - 0.7 points); 5. Formula bias (0.3 - 0.4 points) (see Boskin et. al. [1996, 1997]). While not every
aspect of the methodology used by the Commission, or the magnitude of the bias it found, have been
universally accepted, there is widespread agreement that there was a significant upward bias. Changes
made since then by the Bureau of Labour Statistics have probably reduced the magnitude of the bias.


                                                    1
         What is important is that deflation as used in this paper refers to a declining

general price level for current goods and services. It does not refer to asset price

deflation – a fall in the prices of existing stores of value, either real or financial. Asset

price movements are an important part of the transmission mechanism of monetary

and fiscal policy actions and other shocks. Asset price movements often complicate

the task of the monetary and fiscal authorities and prevent the simultaneous

achievement of price stability, full employment and balanced structure of production

and demand. Asset price deflation may at times precede, be associated with or even

cause downward movement in the general price level of goods and services. Asset

price deflation is, however, conceptually quite distinct from deflation in the sense

used in this paper.

         The timing of the renewal of political concern with and scholarly interest in

deflation is not surprising. As shown in Figure 1, in Japan, the central bank discount

rate has been at 50bps or less since 1995, raising concern about the zero lower bound

on nominal interest rates, at least at the short end of the maturity spectrum. Japan is in

a protracted economic slump that started in 1992. Money wages have declined in four

of the past five years; the GDP deflator has declined in each of the past 5 years and

the CPI in four out of the past 5 years. Short nominal interest rates in Japan are near

zero.2

                                            Figure 1 here




 2

 Percentage annual growth rates of nominal price and wage indices in Japan
                        1998          1999           2000          2001      2002*
 Nominal                -0.7          -1.2           0.5           -0.1      -1.2
 Compensation**
 GDP Deflator           -0.1          -1.4           -2.1          -1.2      -1.0
 CPI                    0.7           -0.3           -0.7          -0.7      -1.1
Source: OECD [2002], Annex Table 12.


                                                 2
       A number of observers have concluded that there is a liquidity trap at work,

that is, monetary policy is incapable of stimulating aggregate demand (see e.g.

Krugman [1998a, b, c, d; 1999, 2000], Ito [1998], McKinnon and Ohno [1999], Itoh,

Motoshige and Naoki Shimoi [2000], Miyal [2000], Iwata, Shigeru and Wu [2001],

Svensson [2001] and Taylor [2001]); for a view that liquidity traps are unlikely to

pose a problem, see Meltzer [1999, 2001] and Hondroyiannis, Swamy and Tavlas

[2000]).

       The risk of the zero lower bound becoming a binding constraint on monetary

policy has more recently become a factor also in Western Europe and the United

States of America. In the Euro area inflation, on the HIPC measure, averaged 1.1

percent per annum during 1999. The ECB’s repo rate reached a local trough of 2.5

percent during April 1999. At the time, this raised the question as to whether a

margin of two hundred and fifty basis points provided enough insurance against a

slump in aggregate demand. In March 2003 the ECB’s repo rate again stands at 2.50

percent and HICP inflation runs at just over 2.0 percent per annum (Issing [2002]).

                                      Figure 2 here

       The UK has its Repo rate at 3.75 percent with RPIX inflation just over 2.5

percent.3 While this appears to provide a reasonable cushion against the risk of

getting stuck at the zero lower bound, the fear of deflation is not completely absent

even in the UK.

                                      Figure 3 here

       Finally, in the US too, with the Federal Funds target rate in February 2003

down at 1.25 per cent, the Fed has shown some concern about the possibility that

monetary policy could become constrained by the zero lower bound on nominal




                                          3
interest rates (see e.g. Bernanke [2002]). As early as the Fall of 1999, the Fed

organised a conference to discuss the ‘zero bound problem’ (see e.g. Clouse,

Henderson, Orphanides, Small and Tinsley [1999]) and recently its staff have

produced a thorough study of Japan’s experience in the 1990s and the lessons this

holds for preventing deflation (Ahearne et. al. [2002]).4

                                            Figure 4 here

        There is also a growing number of theoretical contributions on liquidity traps,

the zero bound problem, low inflation and deflation (see e.g. Akerlof, Dickens and

Perry [1996], Fuhrer and Madigan [1997], Orphanides and Wieland [1998, 2000],

Wolman [1998], Porter [1999], Johnson, Small and Tryon [1999], Cristiano [2000],

Freedman [2000], Goodfriend [2000], Bryant [2000], McCallum [2000, 2002],

Benhabib, Schmitt-Grohé and Uribe [2001, 2002], Buiter and Panigirtzoglou [2001,

2003], Feldstein [2002a,b] and Nishizaki and Watanabe [2002]).

        The longest deflationary episode for which we have acceptable quality data is

also the one that is probably most relevant for today. It is the great deflation of the

19th century, shown, for the UK, in Figures 5 and 6 .

                                            Figure 5 here

                                            Figure 6 here

        As Figure 5 shows, the average rate of inflation over this 115-year period was

slightly negative (certainly if we start our count at the end of the Napoleonic wars),

and the variability of the inflation rate was high. Figure 6 shows that Bank Rate did




3
  UK HICP inflation rates are between 0.50 percent and 0.75 percent per annum below its RPIX
inflation rate.
4
  The proceedings of the conference were published in the Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
[2002].


                                                 4
not fall below 2 per cent throughout 115 years preceding World-War I.5 The UK got

through a deflationary century without encountering the zero lower bound constraint

on nominal interest rates, let alone the liquidity trap.                The deflationary periods

between the two World Wars are less relevant to our current experience. Although

the failure to deal effectively with deflation no doubt prolonged and deepened the

Great Depression of the 1930s, deflation then was the result of a catastrophic collapse

of aggregate demand, not the cause of it.

        Figures 5 and 6 demonstrate that deflation is an old phenomenon. Is it also an

old problem? Deflationary episodes have often, but not always, been periods of

recession or depression. Can policy makers prevent deflation or eliminate deflation

once it has taken hold simply by reversing the policies that have been proven to be

effective in preventing or eliminating inflation?

        Some of the costs and benefits of deflation are not qualitatively different from

the costs and benefits of inflation – there is no obvious discontinuity at zero inflation.

For instance, menu costs (costs of changing prices) apply symmetrically to price

increases and to price cuts.6 Anticipated inflation causes welfare losses due to shoe-

leather costs of cash management if the opportunity cost of holding cash (the risk-free

short nominal interest rate) increases with the expected rate of inflation. Deflation

reduces the opportunity cost of holding non-interest bearing cash. Bailey [1956] and

Friedman’s [1969] optimal quantity of money theorem is the proposition that welfare

is maximised when the opportunity cost of holding money is zero, that is, when the

risk-free nominal interest rate is zero. If welfare is maximised when the expected rate

of inflation equals minus the short real interest rate, and if the short real interest rate is

5
 The temporary collapse in the external value of the U.S. dollar starting in 1861 reflects the
exceptional circumstances of the American Civil War and its aftermath, the Greenback period.




                                                  5
positive, deflation characterises the optimal monetary rule. In a Bailey--Friedman

world, deflation is not a problem, it is part of the solution.

         Unanticipated inflation redistributes wealth from creditors whose contracts are

nominally denominated and not index-linked to debtors.                     Unanticipated deflation

redistributes wealth from debtors to creditors. If and to the extent that higher inflation

is associated with greater uncertainty about relative prices, higher inflation increases

the noise-to-signal ratio of the price signals sent and received by households and

enterprises. The same may well apply if the rate of deflation increases in absolute

value.

         There are four reasons why deflation is not just inflation with the sign

reversed. First, there is the problem of a zero lower bound on risk-free nominal

interest rates caused by the existence of stores of value with a risk-free zero nominal

interest rate. These are coin and currency and commercial bank reserves with the

central bank.7 The zero nominal interest rate on base money (high-powered money,

the monetary liabilities of the central bank) sets a zero floor under risk-free nominal

interest rates for all other stores of value, private and public. If in order to stimulate

demand lower real interest rates are required but nominal interest rates are already at

their zero lower bound, conventional monetary policy is powerless. Nominal interest

rates are more apt to hit the zero floor when there is deflation.

         Second, redistributions from debtors to creditors associated with unexpectedly

high deflation in a world with imperfectly index-linked debt contracts is more likely

to lead to default and bankruptcy than redistributions from creditors to debtors

associated with unexpectedly high inflation.                Default, bankruptcy and corporate

6
  Menu costs do not, of course, attach only to changes in the prices of goods and services included in
the CPI or GDP deflator. They presumably apply also to changes in money wages and intermediate
goods and services and even to changes in the prices of existing assets.




                                                   6
restructuring are not just mechanisms for redistributing ownership and control of

assets. These processes also destroy real resources.

        ‘Debt deflation’, the increase in the real value of nominal debt caused by a

falling general price level was considered an important source of financial distress by

the great monetary economists of the 19th century and the first half of the 20th century.

Irving Fisher [1932, 1933a] went as far as arguing that the interaction of deflation and

large accumulations of private nominal debt could account for every major recession

in the USA. Borrowers with short-maturity nominal liabilities and illiquid and/or real

or foreign currency-denominated assets are especially vulnerable to deflationary

shocks. Commercial banks fit that description, and the incidence of banking crises

and bank defaults during the Great Depression of the 1930s and other severe

recessions are consistent with a role for debt deflation in the propagation of the

business cycle (see e.g. Fisher [1932, 1933a], Keynes [1931, 1936] and Haberler

[1937]). Homeowners with mortgages or households with significant outstanding

unsecured consumer debt have similar vulnerabilities in their portfolios, as do highly

indebted enterprises, (see Minsky [1975, 1986] and King [1994]).

        Hyman Minsky’s theory of financial fragility, distress and instability (Minsky

[1975, 1986]) and modern theories of asymmetric information, adverse selection,

moral hazard and agency problems in financial markets (see e.g. Bernanke [1983],

Bernanke and Gertler [1995] and King [1994]) have sharpened our understanding of

the links between balance sheet revaluations, access to credit and other sources of

external finance, investment and consumption demand and fluctuations in output and

employment.




7
 There are countries where commercial bank reserves with the central bank are remunerated,
sometimes with close-to-market interest rates.


                                                 7
           Third, there is a widely-held view that there exists an asymmetry in nominal

wage and price adjustment. According to this view, the degree of downward rigidity

in some nominal prices, and especially in money wages, is not matched by a similar

degree of upward nominal rigidity.8 This means that disinflation, the process of

bringing down the rate of inflation through a reduction in the growth rate of nominal

demand will be more costly, in terms of output and employment foregone (that is, the

sacrifice ratio will be higher) when the inflation rate falls into the negative range than

when it remains in the positive range.

           Fourth, in living memory, there has been considerable experience of inflation,

and even of hyperinflation, while there has been only limited experience of deflation

(and none of hyperdeflation). This fourth point will turn out to be relevant also to the

interpretation of the third point.

           The proximate cause of deflation is the failure of nominal demand to grow at

least at the rate of growth of potential output. It may therefore be descriptively correct

that recent deflationary episodes have been the result of faster than expected

productivity growth in some (significant) parts of the world – the USA and emerging

Asia (China, India etc.) are often mentioned in this context. Even if, in an accounting

sense, a reduction in inflation is associated mainly with an increase in real GDP

growth driven by higher productivity growth rather than with a reduction in nominal

GDP growth, such a diagnosis does not absolve the monetary and fiscal policy

authorities. Whatever the supply-side of the economy may generate by way of a

growth rate of potential output, it is always possible to use monetary and fiscal policy

to generate any growth rate of nominal demand and therefore any rate of inflation, in




8
    Note that menu costs do not produce such asymmetries.


                                                   8
the medium term.9 Sustained deflation is therefore either a policy choice, or the result

of policy failure.



1. Three Preliminary Questions

1.1 Why don’t we see negative nominal interest rates?

        Financial instruments, henceforth securities, can be divided into two

categories: bearer securities and registered securities.               Registered securities are

financial instruments for which the identity of the owner is known to the issuer and

can be verified by third parties. Bearer securities are financial instruments for which

the owner is anonymous - the identity of the owner is unknown to the issuer and

cannot be verified by third parties.

        Paying interest, at a positive or a negative rate on registered securities is a

simple task. Take, for instance, checking accounts or deposit accounts. The bank

knows the owner of each account. Payment of interest at any rate, positive, zero or

negative, is administratively straightforward. The bank periodically credits or debits

the account.10

        With bearer securities, paying any non-zero interest rate is administratively

non-trivial. If the interest rate is positive, care must be taken that the interest due is

paid only once during a given payment period. Since the identity of the owner is

unknown to the issuer, the same security could be presented multiple times during any


9
  Former Governor Hayami [2002] of the Bank of Japan shows an appreciation of the relationship
between technological change, changes in market structure, relative price changes and inflation in the
following quote “At the same time, the basic relationships between structural reforms and prices must
be correctly understood. The recent price decline is attributable to various factors such as
technological innovation, deregulation, and an increase in low-priced imports. But above all, the
major factor is that Japan's economy was not able to achieve a full-scale recovery in the 1990s and
that the negative output gap expanded due to lack of demand.”
10
   Positive nominal interest rates on bank accounts have been common for decades. During the 1970s,
the Swiss authorities taxed non-resident holders of Swiss bank accounts by paying a negative nominal
interest rate during the 1970s. After allowing for bank fees, the net nominal rate of return on many
checking accounts with a (low) positive nominal interest rate is frequently negative.


                                                  9
given payment period, either by the same holder or by a sequence of different holders.

The way around this is to identify, label or mark the security rather than the owner.

The security in question is marked in a verifiable manner by the issuer or his agent,

whenever the security is presented for payment of interest due. Historically, bearer

securities had coupons attached to them that were cut off (clipped) one at a time

whenever an interest payment was made.11                     Other ways of identifying bearer

securities as being ‘ex-interest’12, such as stamping, or more high-tech identification

methods can no doubt be thought of.

         If the interest rate on the bearer security is negative, the issuer faces the

opposite problem of the holder not presenting himself to pay the issuer the negative

interest due on the security. The solution is to find a way first of identifying the

bearer security as being ex-interest and second to ensure that securities that are not ex-

interest are unattractive to potential owners.

        The reason for the second condition becomes clear when one considers the

bearer security that is of special interest for this paper: currency, that part of the

monetary liabilities of the central bank that is generally accepted as means of payment

and medium of exchange in the central bank’s jurisdiction.13                 14
                                                                                  Today, currency is

fiat money. It has no intrinsic value as a consumer good, a capital good or an

intermediate input, other than the value of the paper it is printed on. It has value

today if and only if the public believe it will have value tomorrow. For the issuer (the

central bank) to put an expiry date on a bank note would be ineffective if the public

chose to ignore it. To make paying negative interest on currency possible it must (a)

11
   This would be problematic for a bearer perpetuity such as the British Consols.
12
   I use ‘ex-interest’ analogously with ‘ex-dividend’ for common stock. A security is ex-interest for a
given payment period if the interest due on it (positive or negative) has been paid.
13
   And at times are accepted outside that jurisdiction, as with the US dollar and the Euro today.
14
   The monetary liabilities of the central bank consist of currency in circulation and commercial bank
balances with the central bank. Banks’ balances with the central bank are registered securities. The



                                                   10
be possible to identify bank notes as being ex-interest and (b) be possible to attach a

sufficiently severe penalty to holding money that is not ex-interest after the date the

interest is due. Fines, and, in the limit, confiscation or worse, would be required to

enforce negative interest on currency.

        The idea of taxing currency is not new. It goes back at least to Gesell and the

Social Credit movement in the second and third decades of the 20th century. No less

an economist than Irving Fisher viewed the idea sympathetically. (See Gesell [1949],

Fisher [1933b], Porter [1999]). It has recently been revived and proposed by Buiter

and Panigirtzoglou [2001, 2003] and by Goodfriend [2000]. Taxing currency by

paying negative interest on it would be a costly administrative exercise. These costs

must be set against the cost of being stuck at the zero nominal interest rate floor or the

cost of pursuing a sufficiently high inflation target to minimise the risk of the zero

nominal interest rate floor becoming a binding constraint.



1.2 Do asymmetric, downward nominal price and wage rigidities make deflation
particularly costly?
       Conventional economic theory has a rather easy time explaining real rigidities,

but a hard time explaining any kind of nominal rigidities, let alone asymmetric

nominal rigidities. Empirically there appear to be important nominal rigidities, but

mainstream economic theory does a poor job explaining why the numéraire matters.

A fortiori, mainstream economic theory has little to say about asymmetries in the

incidence and or severity of nominal rigidities. For instance, menu costs do not

generate asymmetries between upward and downward price adjustments, although

they can account for the spike in the frequency distribution of individual price




identity of the owner is known to the issuer. Any interest rate, positive or negative, can be charged on
it with negligible administrative expense.


                                                   11
changes at zero. Neither do other state-contingent or time-contingent contracting

stories.15

        Nominal price rigidity, symmetric or asymmetric, has never been attributed to

nominal asset prices, or to the prices of freely traded homogeneous commodities. Its

domain has never been argued to encompass more than the money prices of highly

processed goods and services and to money wages.                      With nominal price cuts

becoming more frequent in the low inflation environment of the last ten years (see e.g.

the divergent behaviour of prices for goods and prices for services in the UK, shown

in Table 1), those who argue for the importance of asymmetric downward nominal

rigidity are focussing mainly on the labour markets (see e.g. Bewley [1999]).

                                             Table 1 here

        There is no coherent theory of asymmetric nominal rigidity in the labour

market. Arguments based on fairness (Kahneman, Knetch and Thaler [1986], justice

and morale miss the point, since fairness, justice and morale should concern real

wages and/or relative real wages, over time and across reference groups, not money

wages (see Blinder [1995], Akerlof, Dickens and Perry [1996], Card and Hyslop

[1997] and OECD [2002]). Detailed micro-data based empirical studies for the UK,

include Smith [2000] and Nickell and Quintini [2003] for the UK and McLaughlin

[1994] for the US.         The observation, painstakingly documented in hundreds of

interviews by Bewley [1999], that both workers and managers will strongly resist

money wage cuts can plausibly be attributed to the fact that the interviewees (in the

1990s) had known only positive inflation rates during their working lives. When

nominal prices and wages have on average been rising for more than forty years, a

15
  Surveys on price setting by supermarkets and other firms show a marked bunching of the frequency
distribution of price changes at zero, for instance - but such observations tell us nothing about the
existence of asymmetries in the degrees of downward and upward nominal price stickiness or rigidity.



                                                 12
nominal wage cut is likely to be a real wage cut also. Resisting a cut in money wages

is a pretty good first stab at (indeed almost certainly a necessary condition for)

resisting a real wage cut and, in decentralised labour markets, a relative wage cut.

       Nickell and Quintini [2003], using a unique UK micro-date set on nominal

wage changes for the period 1975-99, find that the proportion of individuals whose

nominal wages fall from one year to the next is large (reaching 20 percent in periods

of low inflation). They also find that there is evidence of some rigidity at a nominal

wage change of zero. However, while this causes a statistically significant distortion

in the distribution of real wage changes, the magnitude of the impact is “very

modest”.16

       The policy relevance of even this very modest estimated impact is contingent

on the degree of downward nominal wage rigidity being ‘structural’, that is, invariant

under changes in the long-run rate of inflation. With high and even moderate inflation

becoming a thing of the past throughout the industrial world, any nominal rigidities,

and asymmetries in downward and upward nominal wage rigidity due to memories

acquired and mental reference frames constructed during inflationary episodes will

become less important as time passes. Finally, the spike in the empirical frequency

distribution of contract wage changes at zero is, at most, evidence of nominal wage

rigidity, not of asymmetric nominal wage rigidity. I conclude that while there is

convincing empirical evidence that nominal price and wage rigidities exist, there is no

evidence that these nominal rigidities are asymmetric.




                                           13
1.3 How can we disentangle the effects of monetary and fiscal policy?

         The distinction between monetary and fiscal policy instruments is an

unimportant definitional issue. It sometimes gets tangled up with important issues

involving the institutional arrangements for the decentralisation and delegation of the

fiscal, financial and monetary management activities of the state. To understand the

economic fundamentals that determine how monetary and fiscal policy affect

aggregate demand, one should think of the central bank and the general government

sector as a single, consolidated unit – the state, or the sovereign. The balance sheet,

budget constraint and solvency constraint that matter are the balance sheet, budget

constraint and solvency constraint of the consolidated general government and central

bank. When we consider the practical, operational aspects of implementing certain

policies in a specific country, it is indeed helpful to consider the particular

institutional arrangements in that country. Often we will have to focus on the central

bank as a separate agency of the state, with a distinct legal personality, charged with

the management of the legal tender liabilities of the state and frequently also with the

management of the official international foreign exchange reserves.

         I could define monetary policy as ‘whatever the central bank does’, but a

slightly more restrictive definition will turn out to be more useful in framing the

analysis and organising the argument.

         I consider four potential monetary instruments, one of them unconventional,

the other three conventional.17            The unconventional monetary instrument is the

nominal interest rate on base money (conventionally zero on coin and currency, but

16
   They calculate that, if long-run inflation were to rise from 2.5 percent to 5.5 percent per annum, the
equilibrium unemployment rate would fall from around 6 percent to around 5.87 percent (Nickell and
Quintini [2003]).
17
   I restrict the analysis to monetary and fiscal policy in reasonably well-functioning market economies.
Quantitative credit controls and other government-imposed forms of credit rationing are not




                                                  14
not necessarily on the other component of the monetary base, commercial bank

reserves held with the central bank).               The three conventional monetary policy

instruments are (1) the short risk-free nominal interest rate on non-monetary financial

claims, henceforth the short nominal interest rate (in the UK this would be the 2-week

Repo rate; in the US the Federal Funds rate, although the Fed does not peg that rate

exactly); (2) the stock of base money; and (3), the nominal spot exchange rate (the

relative price of foreign currency in terms of domestic currency). Of these four

monetary instruments, the interest rate on base money will, except in Section 3.4c, be

treated as a policy instrument whose value is set equal to zero. Out of the short

nominal interest rate, the quantity of base money and the exchange rate, only one can

be chosen independently by the authorities if there is unrestricted international capital

mobility and the country is small in global capital markets.18

         In practice, countries either have a managed exchange rate (the exchange rate

is the policy instrument) or they use the short nominal interest rate as the monetary

instrument. I know of no country that uses (or used) the monetary base as the policy

instrument, although in principle it is possible. Only when, in Section 4.3, I consider

a rigorous version of Friedman’s ‘helicopter drop of money’, is the stock of base

money treated as a policy instrument.

         I define a conventional monetary policy action as any change in the quantity of

base money, in the short nominal interest rate, or in the exchange rate which, at given

prices and activity levels, does not change the financial net worth of the state (the

consolidated general government and central bank), now or in the future.




considered. Changes in deposit reserve requirements are best viewed as fiscal measures (changes in the
taxation of deposit-taking activities).
18
   A ‘small’ country in a particular market is a price taker in that market. All countries except the US,
can for practical policy purposes be treated as small in global capital markets.


                                                  15
       Conventional monetary policy is therefore a subset of the state’s financial

portfolio management. The state’s financial portfolio management comprises any

changes in the composition of the government’s portfolio of financial assets and

liabilities which, at given prices and activity levels do not change the financial net

worth of the state now or in the future. This includes the sale and purchase of long-

dated government debt instruments financed by matching changes in shorter-maturity

instruments, changes in the currency composition of the government’s financial assets

and liabilities (including sterilised and non-sterilised foreign exchange market

intervention, changes in the mix of nominal and index-linked debt, public debt

retirement financed through privatisation of state assets, swaps, trading in contingent

claims markets etc).

       Monetary policy involves a subset of such asset swaps. For our purposes, it

always includes issuance or retirement (contraction) of base money financed through

the purchase or sale of government interest-bearing debt (generally of a short

maturity) or of foreign exchange reserves.       Sterilised foreign exchange market

intervention (purchases or sales of foreign in exchange for non-monetary liabilities of

the government that do not alter the monetary base) also are generally conducted by

the central bank. Note, however, that in the UK, most of the foreign exchange

reserves are owned by the general government (the Treasury), although the Bank of

England manages them as agent of the government.             Most debt management

operations not involving changes in the monetary base are no longer conducted by the

Bank of England.

       Fiscal policy includes any change in public spending or tax rules, regardless of

whether they alter, at given prices and activity levels, the sequence of net financial

balances of the state.



                                          16
2. A Model of Aggregate Demand and Money Demand

          The purpose of this Section is to present a simple formal model to guide the

discussion of the conditions under which monetary and fiscal policy, conventional and

unconventional, can or cannot stimulate aggregate demand. Monetary (and fiscal)

policy ineffectiveness concerns the inability of monetary and fiscal policy to influence

nominal aggregate demand. How a change in nominal aggregate demand is translated

into changes in real GDP or in the general price level, depends on the details of the

specification of the ‘supply side’ of the economy. As regards the key issues involved

in preventing or curing deflation, the details of the determination of equilibrium prices

quantities are irrelevant. Any combination of real output and general price level

increases (including the two extremes of real output only and price level only) would

be satisfactory. The paper therefore does not try to determine how any change in

aggregate demand affects the general price level of prices of goods and services, real

output and employment, asset prices or other variable of interest.19 The detailed

derivation of the decision rules of Section 2 can be found in Buiter [2003].

          There are two goods, domestic output and imports. Aggregate demand for

domestic output, e , is the sum of private consumption demand for domestic output,

cH , private investment demand for domestic output, ιH , government spending on

domestic output, g H and export demand, x , that is,

                                       e = cH + ι H + g H + x                                (1)20 21




19
   In Buiter and Panigirtzoglou [2001, 2003], a simple continuous time, closed, endowment economy,
represent agent version of the aggregate demand and money demand model developed here is
combined with an old Keynesian (in Buiter and Panigirtzoglou [2001]) and a New Keynesian Phillips
curve (in Buiter and Panigirtzoglou [2003]).
20
   For brevity’s sake, we do not differentiate between public consumption spending and public sector
investment.
21
    e, c , ι , g and x are all measured in units of domestic output.
      H   H   H




                                                 17
2.1 Households

       There is a composite private consumption good that is a constant elasticity of

substitution (CES) function of the consumption of domestic output and imports.

Consumption of imports is denoted cF , and aggregate consumption, measured in

                                              SP*
terms of domestic output is c ≡ cH +              cF . The domestic currency price of domestic
                                               P

output is P , the foreign currency price of imports is P* and S is the spot price of

foreign currency in terms of domestic currency, or the nominal spot exchange rate.

Let θ > 0 be the static elasticity of substitution between private consumption of

domestic output and of imports, and let 0 < η ≤ 1 . The CES price index for the private

domestic consumption bundle, P% , is given by


                             (                             )
                                                                1

                       P% = η P1−θ + (1 − η ) ( SP* )
                                                     1−θ       1−θ
                                                                      if θ ≠ 1
                                                                                             (2)
                       P% = P    η
                                     ( SP )
                                         * 1−η
                                                                      if θ =1

       Private consumption of domestic output is related to aggregate private

consumption of the composite commodity as follows:

                                                        1−θ      −1
                  P
                       1−θ                       SP*  
           cH = η          c = η η + (1 − η )        c                     if θ ≠ 1
                   P%                         P                                      (3)
              = ηc                                                                if θ = 1

       The home country is fully specialised in the production of the domestic good.

Domestic households supply the labour used in domestic production and own the

domestic capital stock. There are four stores of value, base money, M , issued by the

central bank, with a one-period nominal interest rate iM , one period nominal domestic

government bonds, B , with a one-period nominal interest rate i, one-period foreign

bonds, B* , with a one-period nominal interest rate i* and the capital stock, K . The




                                                  18
nominal value of a unit of installed capital is PK . All non-monetary stores of value

are perfect substitutes in private portfolios and earn the same expected rate of return.

Money yields direct utility (‘convenience services’) in addition to being a store of

value.

         Domestic output equals domestic value added in our model, which does not

have imported intermediate or raw materials inputs. The proportional rate of change

                                                 P (t )
in the price of domestic output, π (t ) ≡                − 1 is therefore also the GDP-deflator
                                                P(t − 1)

rate of inflation. The real interest rate using domestic output as the numéraire, r , is

                 1+ i
defined by r ≡        − 1 . Let Ω be the nominal value of the dividend paid out to
                 1+ π

shareholders per unit of capital and let ξ be the proportional rate of depreciation of

the capital stock. Equalisation of expected rates of return on non-monetary assets

then implies

                         1                  1
                               [Ω(t + 1) +      PK (t + 1)] = 1 + i (t + 1)                 (4)
                       PK (t )             1+ ξ
and
                                                                  S (t )
                                1 + i (t ) = 1 + i* (t )                                (5)
                                                                S (t − 1)

         There are two kinds of consumers. The first group always consumes its

current disposable income. It neither saves nor borrows. This group is meant to

capture the behaviour of consumers who are cash-flow constrained or liquidity-

constrained; they have no liquid assets that they can draw down to finance

consumption, nor can they obtain consumption loans.                         We refer to them as

‘Keynesian’ consumers. The aggregate real wage bill (measured in domestic output)

is denoted w and real aggregate taxes on labour income τ . For simplicity, everyone




                                                  19
currently alive is assumed to earn the same wage and pay the same taxes. Aggregate

consumption by Keynesian consumers, c K is given by

                         c K = λ (w −τ )                  0 ≤ λ ≤1                    (6)

where λ is the fraction of the household population that is liquidity-constrained.

       The second group of households has access to perfect financial markets.

These ‘permanent income’ consumers can lend and borrow freely subject only to the

constraint that the present value of their consumption programme not exceed the value

of their initial net financial resources plus the present discounted value of their future

after-tax labour income. Formally, we model these households using the discrete time

version of the Yaari-Blanchard overlapping generations model (Yaari [1965],

Blanchard [1985]) as generalised by Buiter [1988, 1990]. There is a constant birth

rate β ≥ 0 , and a constant death rate, 1 ≥ δ ≥ 0 . There are perfect annuities markets,

so no-one leaves involuntary bequests. The individual’s probability of death is also

the fraction of each age cohort (and therefore of the population as a whole) that dies in

any given period.     The probability of death raises both the effective subjective

discount rate and the market rate of interest earned by surviving households. There is

no other uncertainty. Agents have rational expectations. The aggregate consumption

of this group, c P , is proportional to its comprehensive wealth, the sum of its financial

wealth, a P , and its human wealth, h P

                                    cP = µ ( a P + hP )                               (7)

       In the model, all financial wealth, a , is owned by permanent income

       consumers, so a P = a . The human wealth of a Keynesian consumer is the

       same as that of a permanent income consumer; the difference between them is

       that the Keynesian consumer cannot borrow against the discounted value of




                                           20
            his future after-tax wage income. If economy-wide human wealth is denoted

             h , it follows that h P = (1 − λ )h . Equation (7) can be rewritten as

                                                 c P = µ [ a + (1 − λ )h ]                                          (8)

            Economy-wide aggregate consumption is given by:

                                   c = c P + c K = µ[a + (1 − λ )h] + λ ( w − τ )                                   (9)

            The law of motion for economy-wide financial wealth is given in equation

(10).

                                                                                                           M (t ) 
           a (t + 1) ≡ [1 + r (t + 1)]  a (t ) + (1 − λ )[ w(t ) − τ (t )] − c P (t ) − [i (t ) − iM (t )]         (10)
                                                                                                           P(t ) 

and
           [1 + i (t )] ( M (t ) + B(t ) ) + [1 + i* (t )]S (t ) B* (t ) + [ (1 − ξ ) PK (t ) + Ω(t )] K (t )
a (t ) ≡                                                                                                           (11)
                                                         P(t )

            Human wealth is the present discounted value of future after-tax labour

income. Aggregate labour income is assumed not to be risky, so the appropriate

discount rate is the risk-free real interest rate. Current consumption can only be

driven by the human wealth owned by those currently alive. We calculate this by

discounting future aggregate after-tax labour income at a higher rate than the risk-free

rate of interest. The difference is the birth rate, β , the rate at which ‘new entrants’

arrive to join the future labour force and the future cohorts of tax payers.

            Note that the government will tax both current and future generations. The

birth rate does not enter the government’s intertemporal budget constraint. If current

generations were linked to future generations through an operative chain of

intergenerational gifts and bequests, the birth rate will also be absent from the human

wealth definition in equation (12) below.




                                                             21
                                       ∞     j                         
                                                            1
                              h(t ) = ∑∏                               [ w( j ) − τ ( j ) ]                        (12)22
                                      j =t l =t  [1 + r (l ) ][1 + β ] 



           The marginal propensity to consume out of comprehensive wealth, µ is given

in equation (13):
                                                                                                                  −1
            j               1            1−α                                          1−ϕ          
           ∏                           1 +         ( ( i ( j ) − iM ( j ) ) (1 + δ ) )             
            l =t  [1 + r (l)](1 + δ )    α                                                         
                                                                                                    σ −ϕ  
         ∞                                                                                         ϕ −1  
µ (t ) = ∑                                 1−α                                                                     (13)
                                                      ( ( i(l) − iM (l) ) (1 + δ ) )
                                                                                         1−ϕ
                                         1+ 
          j = t  j  1 + r (l )              α                                                 
                                   σ
                                             
          *∏                                                                                    
           l =t  1 + ρ  1 +  1 − α  ( ( i (l − 1) − iM (l − 1) ) (1 + δ ) )   
                                                                                              1−ϕ

                                 
                                       α                                                          

           The expression for the marginal propensity to consume out of comprehensive

wealth in (13) simplifies when future real and nominal interest rates are expected to

be constant. In that case, we get
                                                                  −1
                           1−α                      1−ϕ   (1 + δ )(1 + ρ )σ − (1 + r )σ −1 
                µ = 1 +        [ (i − i  )(1 + δ ) ]                                                              (14)
                            α                                       (1 + δ )(1 + ρ )σ
                                          M
                                                                                             

           When ϕ = σ = 1 (logarithmic intertemporal preferences and a unitary elasticity

of substitution between the composite consumption good and real money balances),

the marginal propensity to consume out of comprehensive wealth simplifies to the

expression given in equation (15) below.

                                                      (1 + ρ )(1 + δ ) − 1 
                                            µ =α                           
                                                      (1 + ρ )(1 + δ )                                                (15)
                                            ρ > 0; δ ≥ 0; 0 < α ≤ 1

           Assuming that only permanent income consumers hold money balances, the

demand for money is given by




                                                     t
22
     We adopt the notational convention that       ∏ x (l ) = 1
                                                    l =t




                                                            22
                                                           ϕ
             M (t )  1 − α            1               
                   =                                  ( c(t ) − λ[ w(t ) − τ (t )])
             P (t )  α   [i (t ) − iM (t )] (1 + δ ) 
                                                                                           (16)
                                    0 < α ≤ 1; ϕ > 0; i ≥ iM

       The parameter ρ > 0 is the subjective rate of time preference.                      The

intertemporal substitution elasticity is σ > 0 and ϕ > 0 is the static elasticity of

substitution between the composite consumption good and real money balances.

       The demand for real base money depends negatively on the financial

opportunity cost of holding money, that is, the excess of the short nominal interest

rate over the short nominal interest on base money. The aspect of equation (16) that

matters most is the second line, constraining the nominal interest rate on non-

monetary financial claims to be at least as high as the nominal interest rate on base

money. This floor on the nominal interest rate will be present as long as the non-

pecuniary marginal utility of money does not become negative. A simple arbitrage

argument then suffices to establish the floor. Consider the case where iM = 0 . If the

short nominal interest rate on non-monetary assets could be negative, there would be

risk-free way of making infinite profits by borrowing at the negative rate of interest

and investing in base money. Our money demand function also has the property that

the non-pecuniary marginal utility of money goes to zero only as the real stock of

money balances relative to consumption goes to infinity, but that is not important for

anything that follows.



2.2 The government

       The government’s budget identity is given in equation (17) below and its

intertemporal budget constraint or solvency constraint in equation (18). Note that

government here means the consolidated general government and central bank.


                                                23
Government non-monetary debt refers to general government debt held outside the

central bank.23              The government spends g H on domestic output, g F on foreign

output, raises taxes T in nominal terms, issues base money with a nominal interest

rate iM , issues domestic currency-denominated debt with a nominal interest rate i and

holds foreign exchange reserves D* that earn a nominal interest rate i* .24 We shall

call S (t ) D* (t ) − B(t ) − M (t ) the financial net worth of the government. Assuming

                                                                                              T
only households pay taxes to the government, we have τ ≡                                        . We also define
                                                                                              P

            SP*
g ≡ gH +        gF .
             P

                             M (t + 1) + B (t + 1) − S (t ) D* (t + 1)
                             ≡ P (t ) g H (t ) + S (t ) P* (t ) g F (t ) − T (t )                               (17)
                             +[1 + iM (t )]M (t ) + [1 + i (t )]B (t ) − S (t )[1 + i* (t )]D* (t )

                     [1 + i (t )]B (t ) − [1 + i* (t )]S (t ) D* (t )
                                          P (t )
                                                                                                               (18)25
                         ∞      j
                                   1                               ∆M ( j + 1)            M ( j) 
                     = ∑∏                      τ ( j ) − g ( j ) +             − iM ( j )        
                       j = t l =t  1 + r (l )                        P( j )               P( j ) 

         We assume that government spending decisions can be represented by an

exogenous sequence of aggregate public spending measured in domestic output,

{g ( j ); j ≥ t} .       International relative prices then distribute this aggregate across

domestic goods and imports according to equation (19) with 0 < ηˆ < 1, θˆ > 0 ,

                                                                                    −1
                                       1−θˆ                          SP*  
                                                                            1−θˆ
                         P 
                g H = ηˆ  H                 g = ηˆ ηˆ + (1 − ηˆ )        g                      θˆ ≠ 1
                          P                                        PH                                     (19)
                                                                                
                       = ηˆ g                                                                         θˆ = 1

23
   In general, it would also include central bank non-monetary liabilities held outside the general
government. We ignore this in what follows.
24
   We assume for simplicity that the government earns the same interest rate on its international
reserves as the private sector does on its foreign-currency-denominated securities.



                                                                24
           Forward-looking permanent income consumers internalise the government’s

intertemporal budget constraint.                           In equation (20) below, private aggregate

consumption is represented after interest-bearing government debt is eliminated from

the consumption function of the permanent income consumers given in (8), using (11)

and the government’s intertemporal budget constraint (18).                                              It aggregates the

behaviour of the permanent income consumers who fully internalise the future taxes

and monetary issuance decisions of the government, and the behaviour of the myopic

Keynesian consumers.

                        [1 + i (t )]M (t ) + [1 + i* (t )]S (t )[ B* (t ) + D* (t )]                                  
                                                                                                                    
                                                   + ( (1 − ξ ) PK (t ) + Ω(t ) ) K (t )                              
                                                         P (t )                                                         
                                                                                                                        
                       ∞                     j 
                                                               1                           j
                                                                                                 1                   
                      + ∑ (1 − λ )∏                                        w ( j ) − ∏                 g ( j )   
       c(t ) = µ (t )  j =t                    
                                             l =t  [1 + r (l ) ] (1 + β ) 
                                                                                         l =t  1 + r (l )            (20)
                        ∞ j                                                                                              
                       +   1  − (1 − λ )                                                       
                                                                       j
                                                                                        1                                 
                        ∑      ∏ 
                           j =t  l = t  1 + r (l ) 
                                                                   ∏                              τ ( j)
                                                                     l = t  [1 + r (l )](1 + β )  
                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                         
                        ∞  j  1  ∆M ( j + 1) i ( j ) M ( j )                                                       
                        + ∑ ∏                                          −   M
                                                                                                                        
                        j =t  l =t  1 + r (l)  P ( j )                        P( j )                              
             + λ[ w(t ) − τ (t )]

           The real value of a unit of capital carried into period t is (from equation (4))

given by the present discounted value of the future dividend stream:

                                    PK (t ) ∞ j               1           Ω( j ) 
                                           ≡ ∑∏                                                                           (21)
                                    P(t ) j =t l =t  (1 + ξ )[1 + r (l)]  P ( j ) 



2.3 Private investment

           There is a composite private investment good, ι% , represented by a CES

function of domestic output and imports.                                  The price index for the composite

investment good is, with 0 < η ≤ 1 and θ > 0 ,

25
     ∆ is the backward difference operator, that is, ∆M (t + 1) = M (t + 1) − M (t ) .

                                                                25
                                                             1

                        P%I = η P1−θ + (1 − η ) ( SP* ) 
                                                        1−θ 1−θ
                                                                   if θ ≠ 1
                                                                                (22)
                                 η      * 1−η
                            = P ( SP )                             if θ = 1

        There are quadratic internal adjustment costs associated with investment.

Both the production function and the adjustment cost function are constant returns to

scale. Private investment can therefore be represented as a function of ‘Tobin’s q’.

                                           P%I
With v > 0, we have, letting ι =               ι% :
                                            P

      1  PK (t ) − P%I (t ) 
ι (t ) =                     K (t )
        v
              P(t )         
                                                      1
                                                           
     1  PK (t )                 S (t ) P (t ) 
                                            *        
                                                  1−θ θ −1
                                                           
    =           η + (1 − η )                    − 1 K (t )         if θ ≠ 1   (23)
     v  P(t )                   P (t )               
                 
                                                          
                                  η
     1  P (t )  S (t ) P* (t )         
                                    −1

    =  K                        − 1 K (t )                           if θ = 1
     v  P(t )  P(t )                   
       

        Private investment demand for domestic output is given by

                                                       −1
                                    EP* 
                                           1−θ
                                                      
                       
                ιH = η η + (1 − η )                  ι               if θ ≠ 1
                                     P                                          (24)
                                                     
                   = ηι                                                 if θ =1

Private investment demand for imports is denoted ιF .

2.4 Export demand

        Without modelling the rest of the world in any detail, we want to specify

export demand for domestic output, x , analogously to the import demand functions

implicit in our specification of consumption, public spending and private investment.

We therefore assume that the home country takes as given aggregate spending in the

rest of the world in terms of foreign output, and that the ideal price index for foreign

spending (the price, in terms of foreign currency) of some appropriate foreign



                                                      26
composite                                             commodity,                                       is

                                              1
                                             1−θ *
                                        *
                                  1−θ
                 *             P                                            * P *
P% * = η * P*1−θ + (1 − η * )                    if θ * ≠ 1 and P% * = P*η ( )1−η if θ * = 1 .
                             S                                            S


        Let f * denote aggregate rest-of-the-world demand measured in foreign

output. Export demand for home country output is given by:

                                                                    −1
                                 P θ              P 
                                                  *


                x = (1 − η ) η *  *  + (1 − η * ) * 
                           *
                                                                         f*      if θ * ≠ 1
                                 SP             SP 
                                                                                                    (25)
                                   *
                                SP *
                  = (1 − η * )       f                                           if θ * = 1
                                 P

        In the next Section, we study the effects of monetary and fiscal policy on

aggregate demand using the model developed in this Section as a benchmark, but

going beyond it where necessary.



3. Monetary Policy and Aggregate Demand

        The model of aggregate demand for domestic output is summarised in

equations (1), (3), (18), (19), (20), (21), (23), (24) and (25). In the formal model, the

effect of conventional monetary policy on aggregate demand for domestic output

means the effect on current aggregate demand for domestic output, e(t ) , of changes in

the current short nominal interest rate, i (t + 1) ,26 and/or credible announcements about

changes in one or more future short nominal interest rates, i( j ), j > t + 1 , holding

constant all other (expected) future short nominal interest rates. Also held constant

are the initial values of all asset stocks (money, M (t ) , government debt, B (t ) , net

private holdings of foreign debt, B* (t ) , foreign exchange reserves, D* (t ) and the

domestic capital stock, K (t ) ), and current and future (anticipated) values of (1) the




                                                       27
domestic general price level                  {P( j ),      j ≥ t} ;27 (2) the nominal exchange rate

{S ( j ),    j ≥ t} ;(3) real wage income                     {w( j ),   j ≥ t} ; (4) real tax revenues

{τ ( j ),   j ≥ t} ; (5) aggregate real public spending                  { g ( j ),   j ≥ t} ; (6) aggregate real

spending in the rest of the world                {f   *
                                                          ( j ), j ≥ t} ; (7) nominal interest rates on base

money {iM ( j ), j ≥ t} ; (8) foreign nominal interest rates {i* ( j ), j ≥ t} ; (9) foreign

prices {P* ( j ), j ≥ t} ; (10) capital rental rates                     {Ω( j ),     j ≥ t} ; (11) seigniorage

∆M ( j + 1), j ≥ t .



3.1 A cut in the current short nominal rate of interest

            As long as the lower bound on the nominal interest rate is not binding

( i (t + 1) > iM (t + 1) ) the monetary authorities can reduce the current short nominal rate

of interest, i (t + 1) . A reduction in the current short nominal interest rate i (t + 1) will

boost both private consumption demand and investment demand (because we allow

for endogenous changes in the value of capital, PK ).

            For n ≥ t

                            ∂c(t )                ∂a (t )                       ∂h(t ) 
                                        = µ (t )                 + (1 − λ )                 
                         ∂ (1 + i (n) )            ∂ (1 + i (n) )            ∂ (1 + i (n) ) 
                                                                                                                 (26)
                                                                        ∂µ (t )
                                         + ( a(t ) + (1 − λ )h(t ) )
                                                                     ∂ (1 + i (n) )

            In general, consumption demand is affected by changes in real interest rates

through three channels: the income effect, the substitution effect and the revaluation

effect. In our model, the income and substitution effect work through the marginal


26
     Note that i (t ) is predetermined in period t.
27
     and therefore also current and anticipated future values of domestic inflation rates,        {π ( j ),   j ≥ t} .


                                                            28
propensity to spend out of comprehensive wealth, µ . It is clear from equation (13)

that the marginal propensity to spend out of comprehensive wealth will be

independent of current and future real interest rates if and only if (1) income and

substitution effects of a real interest rate change cancel each other exactly, that is, if

σ = 1 and (2) the income effect and substitution effect of a change in i − iM , the

opportunity cost of holding base money, cancel each other out, that is, if ϕ = 1 . In our

model this will be the case if the period utility function is logarithmic in a Cobb-

Douglas function of aggregate consumption and real money balances (see Buiter

[2003]).

        From equation (13), ceteris paribus, a lower real rate of interest (in the current

period or anticipated in the future) will raise (lower) the marginal propensity to

consume out of comprehensive wealth if and only if σ > 1 ( σ < 1 ).28 Also, ceteris

paribus, a lower nominal rate of interest (in the current period or anticipated in the

future) will raise (lower) the marginal propensity to consume out of comprehensive

wealth if and only if ϕ < 1 ( ϕ > 1 ).29

        This is intuitively obvious: if there is a sufficiently strong willingness to shift

consumption between the present and the future in response to changes in

intertemporal relative prices, a cut in current or anticipated future real interest rates

will boost consumption. Also, if the elasticity of real money demand with respect to

28
   For instance, from equation (14), the steady-state effect of a permanent change in the real interest
rate on the marginal propensity to consume (holding constant the nominal interest rate) is
                                                                                  −1
            ∂µ                                    1 − α  [ (i − i )(1 + δ ) ]1−ϕ  (σ − 1)(1 + r ) .
                                                                                                     σ −2
                                            
                                         = − 1+ 
                                                       
                                                  α                               (1 + δ )(1 + ρ )σ
                                                                   M
         ∂ (1 + r )   i − i M = i − iM
29
   For instance, from equation (14), the steady-state effect of a permanent change in the nominal
interest rate, holding constant the real interest rate, is given by




                                                                     29
the nominal interest rate is less than unity (in absolute value), a lower nominal interest

rate will raise the share of consumption of the composite commodity in total spending

on the composite commodity and the services provided by money balances.

           In our Sidrauski-type model, money is not super-neutral unless both the

intertemporal substitution elasticity and the elasticity of substitution between the

composite consumption good are equal to one.30                                                When only the elasticity of

substitution between money and consumption is unity, there will be no steady-state

nominal interest rate effect on the marginal propensity to consume (equation (14)), but

there will be temporary effects.                                 Only when both the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution and the elasticity of substitution between money and consumption are

unity ( σ = ϕ = 1 , see equation (13)) will there be neither steady-state nor dynamic

effects of the nominal rate of interest on the marginal propensity to consume.

           There is no consensus on the magnitude of the intertemporal substitution

elasticity.               Empirical studies based on the representative agent, time-separable

expected utility paradigm in which the constant of relative risk aversion is the

reciprocal of the intertemporal substitution elasticity, typically find that the

intertemporal substitution elasticity is close to zero (or equivalently, that the degree of

relative risk aversion is very high). Examples are Hansen and Singleton [1983], Hall

[1988] and Yogo [2002]. Allowing the period felicity function to be non-separable in

consumption and leisure can raise the (implied) estimate of the elasticity of




     ∂µ
                      =
∂ ( i − iM )   r= r




                 ( )                                     1 − α  [ (i − i )(1 + δ ) ]−ϕ (1 + δ )  (1 + δ )(1 + ρ ) − (1 + r ) 
                                                          −2



(ϕ − 1) 1 +
                      1−α
                                                                                                                   σ         σ −1



                            [ (i − i       )(1 + δ ) ]
                                                         α 
                                                   1− ϕ



                                                                         M                                                    
                                                                                                                                
                                       M                                                                                σ
                       α                                                                                    (1 + δ )(1 + ρ )
30
  See Sidrauski [1967] and Fischer [1979a,b] for a similar result for the case where money is separable
from consumption in the direct utility function.


                                                                          30
intertemporal substitution to around 0.35 which, while significantly different from

zero is also significantly below one (see Basu and Kimball [2000]).

        There have been four distinct approaches that attempt to rebut this finding.

Mulligan [2002] argues that earlier studies measured rates of return incorrectly and

that making the appropriate corrections yields results consistent with an intertemporal

elasticity of substitution of one.           The second rejects the representative agent

assumption and models heterogeneous consumers/portfolio holders. For instance,

Guvenen [2003], permits the intertemporal elasticity of substitution to increase with

household wealth and assumes that many low wealth consumers do not participate in

the financial markets at all (rather like the Keynesian consumers of this paper).

        The third alternative drops time-separability, that is, the current period felicity

function depends not just on current consumption, but also on past consumption.

Habit formation is a portmanteau explanation for such specifications (e.g. Abel

[2000]).    Finally, the expected utility hypothesis has been dropped in favour of

alternatives, such as the Epstein-Zinn [1989, 1991] utility functions, that allow

intertemporal substation and risk aversion to be modelled and estimated

independently (see e.g. Hyde and Sherif [2002]). An outsider trying to sum up the

results of this literature can only conclude that it is difficult to argue that the

intertemporal substitution elasticity is close to unity and virtually impossible to

conclude that it is significantly above unity.

        As regards the interest elasticity of the demand for base money, most

empirical studies do not favour the constant elasticity specification of the model.31

The popular log-linear specification implies a negative nominal interest rate elasticity

whose absolute value starts at zero when the nominal interest rate is zero and

31
  Few empirical studies use private consumption as the scale variable in the money demand function.
Income (current or permanent) and financial wealth are more commonly found in that role.


                                                31
increases without bound as the level of the nominal interest rate increases. When the

nominal interest rate is near the zero floor, the (absolute value of the) interest

elasticity of money demand is therefore likely to be less than one, which would

strengthen the positive impact on aggregate demand of a cut in the nominal rate of

interest.

        The revaluation effect of a change in a real interest rate refers to the change in

comprehensive wealth as some element in the sequence of current and future real

interest rates changes (see equations (11), (12) and (20)). We can further distinguish

the financial wealth revaluation effect and the human wealth revaluation effect.

        The effect of a change in the period n real interest rate ( n ≥ t + 1 ) on human

wealth in period t is:

                      ∂h(t )
                                  =
                   ∂ [1 + r (n) ]
                                                                                                (27)32
                            1        ∞    j           1            
                   −               ∑∏                              [ w( j ) − τ ( j )]
                       [1 + r (n)] j =n l=t  [1 + r (l)] (1 + β ) 
        The revaluation effect of a cut in the period n real interest rate (brought about

in our example by a cut in the period n nominal interest rate holding constant the

(anticipated) period n rate of inflation) is positive if after-tax labour income in period

n and beyond is ‘on average’ positive.

        As regards the financial wealth revaluation effect, the lower real interest rate

associated with a lower nominal interest rate at a given inflation rate will also boost

Tobin’s q, the market value of a unit of installed capital (see equation (21)).33 By

                PK
boosting q ≡       , both private consumption (equation (20)) and private investment
                P

32
  In equation (27), the government’s intertemporal budget constraint has not been substituted into the
private sector comprehensive wealth definition.




                                                        32
(equation (23)) will be stimulated. The revaluation effect of a lower interest rate

boosts demand regardless of the value of the intertemporal substitution elasticity.

             The marginal propensity to consume multiplies the change in comprehensive

wealth due to the valuation effect to get the effect on consumption. The marginal

propensity to consume out of comprehensive wealth is likely to be a rather small

number, probably similar in magnitude to the long-run real rate of return on an

annuity, say 0.045 at most (that is 4.5 percent per annum).34

             A cut in short nominal interest rates may further boost private spending

through a number of channels not considered in the formal model. With imperfect

financial markets (due, for instance, to asymmetric information and associated

adverse selection and agency problems) there can be further effects on the cost and

availability of funds to enterprises (or through the lending channel or the credit

channel) and further effects on private investment. Inventory investment, including

investment in working capital (not formally modelled here) are further transmission

mechanisms of changes in short nominal interest rates.



3.2 Credible announcements of future cuts in nominal interest rates

             The effect of a cut in current nominal interest rates can be leveraged through

credible announcements of future cuts in interest rates. Permanent income consumers

will respond to such anticipated future cuts in interest rates through the same



     ∂ ( PK (t ) / P (t ) )       1  ∞ n                            1           Ω( j )
                                                ∑∏ 
33
                              = −                                                           n>t.
      ∂ [1 + r ( n ) ]            1 + r ( n )  j = n l =t  [1 + r (l)](1 + ξ )  P ( j )
34
   Interpret the unit period to be one year. The rate of pure time preference, ρ is, say, 0.03. The death
rate δ is, say, 0.015. In the Cobb-Douglas case, α is the ratio (for permanent income households) of
annual consumption to the sum of annual consumption and the value of the annual liquidity services
yielded by money. The monetary base in the UK in 2002 was about £36bn. Household consumption
(which includes the consumption of the Keynesian consumers who don’t hold money) was probably
around £650 bn. That sets a lower bound on α of 0.945 approximately. These numerical values
imply µ ≈ 0.0412 .


                                                                     33
substitution, income and revaluation channels (see equations (26) and (27) and

footnote (28)). In addition, both permanent income consumers and enterprises will

raise spending through the effect of lower anticipated future interest rates on Tobin’s

q (see footnote (33)).



3.3 Devaluation

        Instead of treating the short nominal interest rate as the monetary instrument,

we can take the current nominal exchange rate to be the instrument.35 It is easily

checked that, for given sequences of current and expected future values of economy-

wide endogenous variables and exogenous variables, and for given values of current

and future nominal interest rates i ( j ), j ≥ t + 1 , a devaluation will increase the demand

for domestic output if and only if it increases the trade balance surplus. The trade

balance surplus, measured in domestic output, is denoted ς , that is,

                                             SP*
                                    ς ≡ x−       ( cF + ι F + g F )                               (28)
                                              P

        First consider the effect on the trade balance of an increase in the real

                     SP*
exchange rate,           , holding constant the three domestic aggregate spending
                      P

components, c, ι and g in terms of domestic output and holding constant f * , rest-of

the world spending in terms of foreign output. A depreciation of the real exchange

rate, or (for given values of the domestic and foreign GDP deflators) a devaluation

will increase the trade balance surplus from an initial position of balance if and only if

sum of the export and import price elasticities of demand is greater than one - the

familiar Marshall-Lerner conditions.


35
   We should think of this devaluation as an unanticipated, immediate and permanent devaluation, if it
is to be consistent with given sequences of domestic and foreign nominal interest rates and UIP.


                                                  34
        Consider the case where the public spending and private investment are split

among domestic output and imports in the same way as private consumption, that is,

θ = θ = θˆ and η = η = ηˆ . In this case

                                                                    −1
            x  *  SP*                                                                         * −1 
                             −θ *                          −1                         *
                                                                                   * −θ
 ∂ς                                               SP* 
                                                                          * *  SP 
                                                                         θ η                *  SP 
          =     η                 + (1 − η * )                                   + (1 − η )     
 ∂S ιc==ιc S   P                               P                          P              P  
     g =g                                                                                             
                                                                                     (29)
                            * −θ
                                                    −1        −θ                   
                          SP              SP    SP 
                                                *         *
                                                                       *  SP  
                                                                             *   
−(cF + ιF + g F ) 1 − η      + (1 − η )       θη     + (1 − η )      
                     P                 P     P               P   
                                                                                   
                                                                ˆ
       In the Cobb-Douglas case, for instance, with θ = θ = θ = θ = 1 , the Marshall-
                                                                   *



Lerner conditions are satisfied because the sum of the import and export price

elasticities equals two.

        As defined here, the Marshall-Lerner conditions therefore do not necessarily

capture the total effect of a devaluation on the trade balance or on aggregate demand.

While g and f * can for our purposes be taken to be exogenous, both aggregate

private consumption, c , and aggregate private investment, ι , are endogenous and will

in general depend on the exchange rate.

        Aggregate consumption will also be affected by a devaluation through a

wealth effect. From equation (20) it is clear that:

                                    ∂c(t )
                                            = µ (t )[1 + i* (t )][ B* (t ) + D* (t )]                        (30)
                                    ∂S (t )

        Thus if B* + D* , the net stock of foreign-currency-denominated assets held by

the domestic private sector and government, is positive (negative), devaluation will

boost (lower) aggregate demand through a wealth effect.

        Total private investment measured in domestic output, ι , will decline, other

things being equal, when the exchange rate is devalued. From equation (23) it is

apparent that



                                                           35
                                                              2 −θ

                             P PK                 SP*    SP* 
                                                         1−θ θ −1   −θ
              ∂ι               *
                 = −(1 − η )      K η + (1 − η )              < 0.          (31)
              ∂S             vP 2                P    P 

The reason is that a devaluation raises the price of the composite investment good, PI

relative to the price of installed capital, that is, it reduces Tobin’s q.

         A devaluation or sharp depreciation of the yen has been recommended as a

cure for Japan’s deflationary ills by McKinnon and Ohno [1999] and Svensson

[2000]. It is clear that devaluation is not guaranteed to work: the Marshall-Lerner

conditions may not be satisfied; a country may be a net debtor in foreign currency-

denominated assets B* (t ) + D* (t ) < 0 , and the effect of a real depreciation on

aggregate investment is negative in our model. On the other hand, if a devaluation

boosts aggregate demand, it does so regardless of the level of nominal interest rates:

devaluation can boost demand even when nominal interest rates are at their zero lower

bound.

         Empirical evidence on the response of the trade balance to a devaluation

appears to be supportive of the proposition that the Marshall-Lerner conditions are

satisfied at least in the long run. The short-run picture is mixed (see Goldstein and

Khan [1985] and Rose [1991]). This conclusion appears to have survived the co-

integration revolution (see e.g. Bahmani-Oskooee and Alse [1994]).


3.4 Unconventional monetary policy when short nominal interest rates are zero.

         Without loss of generality, consider practically relevant case where the

nominal interest rate on base money, iM , is zero. Assume the current short nominal

interest rate i is at its zero lower bound. Assume also that the authorities have

credibly committed themselves to keep future short nominal interest rates at zero.

What else can monetary policy do to stimulate aggregate demand?


                                              36
3.4a. Generalised open market operations.

       Our formal model assumes that all non-monetary stores of value are perfect

substitutes. If this is not the case, even the credible announcement of a future policy

of systematically keeping future short nominal interest rates at zero would not

necessarily reduce the nominal yields on outstanding stocks of longer-maturity

government securities to zero. The could be term premia, liquidity premia and a

variety of risk premia not recognised in models of efficient financial markets. If such

is the case, it is clear that monetary policy has not been exhausted. Open market

purchases of all government securities that have a positive nominal yield can be

undertaken. As long as there is a positive amount outstanding of any nominally

denominated government security with a positive nominal yield, monetary policy has

not yet run out of steam.

       The central bank can also expand the monetary base through purchases of

foreign exchange reserves or indeed through purchases of foreign-issued and foreign-

currency-denominated securities of any maturity, including options and other

derivatives. It can also engage in purchases of foreign exchange reserves financed not

by issuing additional base money but by reducing its holdings of general government

securities. There is little evidence to support the view that such ‘sterilised foreign

exchange market intervention’ is an effective and reliable instrument for bringing

down domestic interest rates, but even if it does not help, it is unlikely to hurt (unless

markets begin to wonder why the central bank is engaging in pointless financial

transactions).

       Even after monetising the entire public debt and purchasing large amounts of

foreign securities, the central bank has options left. It could turn its attention to the



                                           37
domestic private sector by purchasing private domestic securities.                      In times of

financial stress and turbulence, central banks already have a well-established practice

of easing the eligibility requirements for private securities that are acceptable as

collateral in Repo operations.36 The central bank can also expand the list of eligible

counterparties that it is willing to deal with. Beyond that, open market purchases of

private bonds and other private financial instruments, including stocks and shares,

options and other derivatives are, in principle possible. Conceivably, the central bank

could engage in ‘open market’ purchases of commercial, industrial or residential real

estate.

          There are difficult issues involved in such transactions, including integrity

problems, moral hazard, adverse selection and governance problems. To make the

(temporary) socialisation of private financial securities palatable, the central bank

would have to buy something like a representative index fund of the eligible classes of

securities, and refrain from interfering in the management of any enterprises it might

acquire a significant ownership stake in.



3.4b Spitting in the wind: introducing an inflation target or raising the target
rate of inflation when the zero lower bound is binding everywhere

          Some authors (e.g. Krugman [1998d, 1999, 2000]) have proposed the credible

announcement and immediate introduction of an inflation target as a means of

escaping from the zero interest floor. Assume the economy experiences deflation and

that not only current short and long nominal rates of interest but also all anticipated

future nominal interest rates are zero. Under these circumstances, introducing an

inflation target, or raising the inflation target rate, is spitting in the wind: it will not


36
  The Bank of Japan now accepts a broader range of private debt as eligible collateral, and provides
loans directly to private commercial banks at very low interest rates (see Bank of Japan [2003]).


                                                  38
affect the behaviour of the economy, as the target announcement has no implications

for the current and future behaviour of the monetary policy instruments.

       Adopting a sufficiently high inflation target while one is not in the zero bound

trap and pursuing it assiduously may well prevent one from ever getting into a

generalised zero nominal interest rate trap and will in any case make such an

eventuality less likely (King [. Once you are in a generalized zero bound trap,

announcing an inflation target without having any instruments, now or in the future,

for achieving it is a pointless gesture (see Buiter and Panigirtzoglou [2001, 2003] for a

formal demonstration of this intuitively obvious point).

       A number of Japanese monetary policy makers have argued against the

aggressive use of monetisation of government debt as counter-deflationary policy on

the grounds that this risked creating hyperinflation. An inflation target and a credible

commitment to use the available policy instruments to pursue but not to exceed that

target could be useful if it allayed fears that the implementation of an effective anti-

deflationary policy would create excessive inflation (or even hyperinflation).



3.4c Lowering the zero floor on nominal interest rates by imposing a carry tax on
currency.

       The reason we don’t see negative nominal interest rates on private securities

and non-monetary government debt instruments is that the zero interest rate on base

money sets a floor under all nominal interest rates. If the authorities could pay

negative interest on base money (effective impose a ‘carry tax’ on base money), the

zero nominal interest rate floor would be lowered, and this constraint on the conduct

of monetary policy would be removed. Once the policy-determined nominal interest

on base money ( iM in our model) has been set below zero, other, market-determined




                                           39
nominal yields on non-monetary public and private securities would follow, driven by

the forces of arbitrage and competition.

         Paying negative interest on commercial bank reserves held with the central

bank is trivially simple. Think of these reserves as akin to bank accounts held by the

general public. Households and enterprises get paid interest on the balance in these

accounts and are charged for the cost of operating the accounts. Commercial bank

balances with the central bank (electronic ledger entries) are ‘registered securities’, in

the terminology of Section 1 of this paper. Paying any interest rate, negative or

positive, can be done by electronically debiting or crediting the account. It would be

an administratively costless exercise.

         Paying negative interest on currency, the bearer bond component of the base

money stock, would be administratively cumbersome and costly. There would have

to be a sufficiently large and credible penalty for non-payment to induce the

anonymous holders of currency to come forward, receive their negative interest (pay

their tax) and have their currency notes marked as ‘current’ in a way that cannot be

forged easily and is recognisable by all. Resort to a carry tax on currency would be

justified if the cost of the alternative (either living with a binding zero floor or the best

alternative policy for escaping from the zero nominal interest rate floor trap) were

higher. We shall see in Section 4 that there is at least one alternative policy that

always will boost aggregate demand, and does not involve significant implementation

costs.



4. Fiscal Policies To Stimulate Aggregate Demand

         If the deflationary problem has not been solved by any of the monetary

measures considered in Section 3, the state still is not powerless. Fiscal or mixed



                                             40
monetary and fiscal policy options remain and one of these, the ‘helicopter drop of

money’ of Friedman fame, will always be able to boost nominal aggregate demand.

To focus the argument, I will in what follows assume that iM = 0 , that is, the nominal

interest rate on base money is zero, and that i ( j ) = 0, j ≥ t + 1 , that is, all current and

future short nominal interest rates are also zero. In the formal model, monetary policy

has become incapable of boosting nominal aggregate demand.


4.1 Debt-financed tax cuts.

        It is clear from equation (20), that a debt-financed tax cut in period t will

stimulate aggregate private consumption demand in period t through two channels:

increased spending by Keynesian consumers whose current disposable income has

increased and increased spending by permanent income consumers for whom

postponing taxes through borrowing raises the present discounted value of lifetime

taxes. Permanent income consumers raise their consumption because part of the

postponed taxes will be paid by new households who are not yet born at the time of

the tax cut, and who therefore will not reduce their consumption.

        Consider the effect of a tax cut in period t accompanied by the credible

announcement of an increase in taxes in period t+1 of equal present value, that is,

dτ (t + 1) = −[1 + r (t + 1)]dτ (t ) > 0 . The effect of the period t tax cut on the Keynesian

                              ∂c K (t )
consumers is given by −                                                = λ . The future tax increase does
                              ∂τ (t ) dτ (t +1) =−[1+ r (t +1)]dτ (t )

not affect the current spending behaviour of the Keynesian consumers.

        Forward-looking permanent income consumers change their period t

consumption by −(1 − λ ) µ dτ (t ) in response to the period t tax cut, and their period t


consumption by − µ
                               (1 − λ )         dτ (t + 1)   = µ
                                                                   (1 − λ ) dτ (t )   in response to the
                       [1 + r (t + 1)] (1 + β )                    (1 + β )

                                                 41
anticipated increase in taxes in period t+1. The net effect of this postponement of

taxes financed by borrowing is

                        ∂c(t )                                                      β 
                    −                                             = λ + µ (1 − λ )          (32)37
                        ∂τ (t ) dτ (t +1) =−[1+ r ( t +1)]dτ (t )                   1+ β 

Only part of the boost to aggregate consumption demand will fall on consumption

demand for domestic output (see equation (3)).

       If there are no Keynesian consumers, λ = 0 , there still is a positive effect on

consumer demand of a debt-financed tax cut that satisfies the government’s

intertemporal budget constraint. In that case:

                                ∂c(t )                                          β 
                            −                                               = µ              (33)
                                ∂τ (t ) dτ ( t +1) =−[1+ r ( t +1)]dτ ( t )     1+ β 
                                        λ =0

       Only if the birth rate is zero ( β = 0 ) and we are effectively in a representative

agent model, will there be debt neutrality or Ricardian equivalence: debt-financed tax

cuts will not stimulate aggregate demand:

                                       ∂c(t )
                                   −                                                =0         (34)
                                       ∂τ (t ) λdτ=(0t +1) =−[1+ r ( t +1)]dτ ( t )
                                                 β =0




4.2 A tax- or debt-financed temporary increase in public spending on goods and
services.

       Without Keynesian consumers and with a zero birth rate, temporary increases

in public spending will still stimulate aggregate demand. Consider a one-period

increase in government spending on goods and services in period t. The public

spending increase directly raises aggregate demand one-for-one. Aggregate demand

for domestic output increases by the increase in public spending increase times the

marginal share of public spending on domestic output in total public spending (see




                                                          42
equation (19). Aggregate private consumption by permanent income consumers will

be reduced less than one-for-one, even if the period t public spending increase is

financed with a balanced budget (by raising taxes in line with public spending in

period t). The impact of any tax increase on consumption by a permanent income

household is spread out over its remaining lifetime.                                                     When λ = β = 0 (and, for

simplicity also ϕ = σ = 1 ), we have:

                                  ∂c(t )                                  (1 + ρ )(1 + δ ) − 1 
                                                              = − µ = −α                                                   (35)
                                  ∂g (t ) dτ ( t ) = dg ( t )             (1 + ρ )(1 + δ ) 

            Since 0 < µ < 1 , a temporary increase in public spending financed ultimately

or immediately by tax increases, will boost aggregate demand. A permanent increase

in public spending would have associated with it an increase in the present discounted

value of future taxes whose negative effect on current private consumption would be

similar in magnitude to that of the public spending increase.

                 ∞
                      ∂c(t )                                                            ∞      j
                                                                                                    1 
                ∑
                j = t ∂g ( j )
                                  ∞    j
                                                1    
                                                                                 = − µ ∑∏                      
                                                                                       j = t l = t  1 + r (l ) 
                                 ∑ ∏  1+ r ( l ) ( dτ ( j ) − dg ( j ) )=0
                                 j =t l =t                                                                                 (36)38
                                                  1+ r 
                                          = −µ            if r (l) = r , l ≥ t
                                                  r 
            In an open economy, a permanent, tax-financed public spending increase can

boost demand for domestic output even if it does not boost aggregate demand for the

composite commodity. This will be the case if at the margin government spending is

more concentrated on domestically produced goods than private spending, that is, if

η̂ > η .




37
  We know that the tax cut is debt financed, because, from equations (18) and (20), if either public
spending were cut or base money were issued to finance the tax cut, there would be additional effects
to be considered.
                                                       1+ r      (1 + ρ )(1 + δ ) − 1   1 + r 
38
     In the double logarithmic case,                 µ       =α                                ≈1.
                                                       r         (1 + ρ )(1 + δ )   r 


                                                                                 43
         Only if public consumption were a private substitute for private consumption

would a temporary, tax financed increase in public spending could fail to boost

aggregate demand in a world with just permanent income consumers. The formal

model assumed that any utility households may derive from public spending is

separable from that of private consumption, so such ‘direct crowding out’ does not

occur.



4.3 The one that always works: Friedman’s helicopter drop of money.

         Finally, there is the monetary-fiscal policy combination that always succeeds

in stimulating aggregate demand: the tax cut or transfer payment financed by issuing

base money. We reproduce the consumption function of equation (20) as equation

(37), making all the assumptions necessary to emasculate monetary and fiscal policy

to the maximum extent: iM ( j ) = i ( j ) = 0, j ≥ t + 1 (all nominal interest rates are at

their zero lower bound), λ = 0 (there are no Keynesian consumers) and β = 0 (there

is debt neutrality).

                     ( M (t ) + [1 + i* (t )]S (t )[ B* (t ) + D* (t )] + ( (1 − ξ ) PK (t ) + Ω(t ) ) K (t ) ) 
                                                                                                                
                                                                  P (t )                                        
                     ∞ j                                                                                        
                             1                                                                              
     c(t ) = µ (t ) + ∑ ∏                       [ w( j ) − g ( j )]                                          (37)
                      j =t  l = t  1 + r ( l )                                                               
                      ∞  j                                                                                      
                    + ∑   1  ∆M ( j + 1)  
                     j =t ∏
                                                                                                                 
                                                                                                             
                              l = t  1 + r (l )        P( j )  

         The effect of a tax cut in, say, period t , financed through an increase in the

nominal money stock in, say, period t, is given by:




                                                        44
                                      ∂c(t )
                                  −                                      =µ >0                   (38)39
                                      ∂τ (t ) dτ (t ) =− d ∆M ( t +1) <0
                                                        P (t )



         This effect can be enhanced by announcing a sequence of current and future

tax cuts, all financed by increasing the future stock of base money. The timing of the

tax cuts and timing of their monetisation does not matter; as long as the future tax cuts

are credible, only their present value matters for private consumption.

         What we are describing here is, of course, Milton Friedman’s ‘helicopter drop

of money’.40 The lump-sum gift or transfer payment from the state (equivalent to a

lump-sum tax cut for households) is financed by printing money (and dropping it from

a great height). There are no future tax liabilities implied by this transfer payment,

because it is financed through the issuance of zero nominal interest-bearing base

money. Even if there are no Keynesian consumers, such money-financed tax cuts or

transfer payments will boost aggregate demand. In the current Japanese context this

would be called a combination of tax cuts and ‘quantitative monetary easing’.

         The proposition that money-financed tax cuts or transfer payments always

boost consumption demand is not contingent on the details of the specification of the

objective function of households. All that is required is that aggregate consumption in

any given period is a normal good. As long as this holds, an increase in household

resources (and a-fortiori an increase in household resources that takes the form of an

perfectly liquid increase in current disposable income) will boost aggregate demand.

         The effect of a public spending increase in period t , financed through an

increase in the nominal money stock in, say, period t, (or equivalently, though any


39
   We know that increase in the base money stock finances a tax cut because we are holding the
sequence of public spending constant. From equations (18) and (20) (or (37)), the counterpart to the
base money increase can only be a tax cut.
40
   Technically, Friedman’s helicopter drop of money represents a capital transfer rather than a one-off
tax cut or current transfer payment. Behaviourally, the distinction between capital and current transfers
is irrelevant.


                                                      45
sequence of current and future money issues equal in present discounted value to the

increase in current public spending) is given by:

                                              ∂c(t )
                                                                             =0                        (39)41
                                              ∂g (t ) dg ( t ) = d ∆M (t +1)
                                                                 P (t )



        This means that aggregate demand (for domestic and foreign goods) increases

by the same amount as the increase in public spending, when the increase in public

spending is financed by printing money.


4.4 Feldstein’s proposal: using indirect tax changes to tilt the intertemporal
terms of trade in favour of current consumption

        During the past few years, Martin Feldstein has made proposals for tax policy

measures to counteract deflation in Japan that do not in the first instance work through

the income or wealth effects of tax cuts (see Feldstein [2002a, b]). Feldstein relies on

the strength of the intertemporal substitution effect in household consumption

behaviour.      He proposes an immediate cut in value added tax (VAT) rates

accompanied by the credible announcement of a future VAT rate increase above its

current level. This combination early tax rate cut and later tax rate increase could be

made revenue-neutral in present value terms. The effect of such a tax package would

be to reduce the real interest rate ‘at market prices’ relevant to household consumption

decisions.     This real interest rate ‘at market prices’, denoted r , involves the
                                                                   %
comparison of market price indices at two dates. Market prices are the sum of prices

at factor cost plus indirect taxes. More precisely, letting P denote the GDP deflator at

factor cost, r the real interest rate ‘at factor cost’ and θ the VAT tax rate, we have

                                            P(t − 1) [1 + θ (t − 1)]                 [1 + θ (t − 1)]
               1 + r (t ) ≡ [1 + i (t ) ]                            = [1 + r (t ) ]                    (40)
                   %                           P (t ) [1 + θ (t ) ]                    [1 + θ (t )]
41
  We know that increase in the base money stock finances a tax cut because we are holding the
sequence of public spending constant. From equations (18) and (20) (or (37)), the counterpart to the
base money increase can only be a tax cut.


                                                            46
       At any given real interest rate at factor cost, a lower VAT rate today and/or a

higher VAT rate tomorrow reduce the current real interest rate. It becomes cheaper to

consume today and more expensive to consume tomorrow. If we interpret Feldstein’s

proposal as revenue-neutral in present value terms, the income effect of the tax rate

changes is approximately zero, and the effect on current consumption will reflect

solely the substitution effect of a cut in the current real interest rate (at market prices)

faced by consumers. This will boost consumption.

       There is a long history of temporary tax and subsidy measures of this kind that

were targeted at enterprise investment decisions rather than at household

consumption.     For instance, a temporary investment tax credit or a temporary

investment subsidy will bring investment forward to take advantage of the shift in the

intertemporal terms of trade in favour of earlier rather than later investment.

Measures targeted at the enterprise investment decisions are generally thought to have

been reasonably effective.



5. Institutional Arrangements To Tackle Deflation: How Much Can
The Central Bank Do On Its Own?
       To evaluate implementation issues, we break down the consolidated budget

constraint and solvency constraint of the general government and central bank into

separate accounts each for the general government and the central bank.

       The central bank has the monetary base ( M , currency plus commercial bank

reserves with the central bank) on the liability side of its balance sheet.42 On the asset

side it has the stock of international foreign exchange reserves ( D* ) and the stock of

domestic credit. For simplicity, in what follows domestic credit is restricted to central




                                            47
bank credit to the general government, that is, central bank holdings of nominally

denominated general government interest-bearing debt ( B CB ).43

               Equation (41) is the budget identity of the general government and equation

(42) that of the central bank.44 Note that B is the stock of general government

interest-bearing debt held outside the central bank, that τ P is real value of the tax

payments by the domestic private sector to the general government, τ CB the real value

of taxes paid by the central bank to the general government and h the real value of the

transfer payments made by the central bank to the private sector (‘helicopter drops’ if

they are monetised).



                  B (t + 1) + B CB (t + 1)                                          [ B(t ) + B CB (t )]
                                           ≡ g (t ) − τ P (t ) − τ CB (t ) + i (t )                                                        (41)
                           P (t )                                                          P(t )

                                    M (t + 1) B CB (t + 1)          D* (t + 1)
                                             −             − S (t )
                                     P(t )       P (t )              P(t )
                                                                                                                                           (42)
                                                                            B CB (t )                       D* (t )
                                    ≡ τ (t )    CB
                                                     + h(t ) − [1 + i (t )]           − [1 + i* (t )]S (t )
                                                                             P (t )                         P(t )

               The usual solvency constraints, ruling out Ponzi finance by both the

government and the central bank, imply the following intertemporal budget

constraints for the general government (equation (43)) and for the central bank

(equation (44)).


42
     For simplicity, all of the monetary base is treated as non-interest bearing ( iM = 0 ).
43
   In many transition countries and developing countries the central bank also holds significant amounts
of private sector debt instruments among its assets and interest-bearing, non-monetary liabilities among
its liabilities.
44
   Note that the familiar proposition that the change in the monetary base equals domestic credit
expansion plus the value of the change in the stock of foreign exchange reserves is correct if and only if
the central bank makes no after-tax profits, that is, its before-tax profits,
          CB                             *
         B (t )                        D (t )
                    + S ( t )i ( t )             − h(t ) , are paid as taxes to the Treasury or Ministry of Finance:
                                *
i (t )
         P (t )                        P (t )
                                                                                            CB                         *
                                                                                           B (t )                    D (t )
∆M (t + 1) ≡ ∆B (t + 1) + S (t ) ∆D (t + 1) iff                          τ (t ) ≡ i (t )            + S (t )i (t )            − h (t ) .
                           CB                            *                 CB                                *

                                                                                           P (t )                    P (t )


                                                                            48
                        B(t ) + B CB (t )  ∞ j  1  P
          [1 + i (t )]                     = ∑∏                     (τ ( j ) + τ ( j ) − g ( j ) )
                                                                                    CB
                                                                                                         (43)
                             P(t )         j = t l = t  1 + r (l ) 


                         [1 + i (t )]B CB (t ) + [1 + i* (t )]S (t ) D* (t ) 
                      −                                                      
                                                 P (t )                      
                                                                                                         (44)
                          ∞      j
                                     1  CB                              ∆M ( j + 1) 
                      ≤ ∑∏                       −τ ( j ) − h( j ) +                
                         j = t l =t  1 + r (l )                              P( j ) 

       Summing (41) and (42) and noting that τ ≡ τ P − h gives the budget identity of

the state, that is, of the consolidated general government and central bank, in equation

(17) and the intertemporal budget constraint of the state in equation (18).

       Consider the balance sheet of the central bank in Table 2

                                        Table 2

                                        Central Bank Balance Sheet

                                        Assets                Liabilities

                                         B CB                  M

                                         SD*

                                                               N CB



       The central bank’s financial net worth, N CB , is the excess of its financial

assets, general government debt, B CB , and foreign exchange reserves, D* , over its

monetary liabilities, M . Note that, in principle, there is nothing to prevent N CB from

being negative. Financial net worth excludes the present value of anticipated or

planned future non-contractual outlays and revenues.                            It is therefore perfectly

possible, in principle, for the central bank to survive and thrive with a negative

financial net worth.




                                                      49
        From the central bank’s balance sheet in Table 2 and its budget identity in (42)

, it follows that

                                           N CB ≡ B CB + SD* − M                                       (45)

The central bank’s intertemporal budget constraint given in (44) can therefore also be

written as (46).

                          N CB (t ) [1 + i (t )]  B (t ) − M (t )  + [1 + i (t )]S (t ) D (t )
                                                     CB                        *             *

             [1 + r (t )]          ≡
                          P(t − 1)                             P(t )
                                                                                                       (46)
                                       ∞     j
                                                  1  CB                                  M ( j) 
                                   = ∑∏                      τ ( j ) + h ( j ) − i ( j )        
                                     j = t l = t  1 + r (l )                             P( j ) 

        The value of the central bank’s financial net worth has to be sufficient to pay

(in present discounted value) for future transfers to the Treasury and to the private

sector, allowing for the fact that future interest savings permitted by the issuance of

non-interest-bearing base money are another source of revenue that the central bank

can draw upon.


5.1 What kind of open market operations can the Central Bank engage in on its
own?

        While most central banks can buy and sell most general government securities

and are permitted to buy or sell foreign exchange reserves, many central banks are not

permitted to buy and sell private financial sector instruments such as corporate bonds

or stocks, shares and real estate (other than their own offices). Whenever the central

bank is not permitted to buy a particular financial instrument (private or public,

domestic or foreign), the economically equivalent outcome can be achieved by the

general government (typically the Treasury or the Ministry of Finance) buying that

financial instrument and borrowing from the central bank to finance that purchase.

The central bank then monetises the transaction.




                                                      50
       In the Euro area, the ECB and the other members of the European System of

Central Banks are not permitted to extend credit directly to the general government

sector or to purchase general government securities directly, in the primary issue

market. However, the economically equivalent result can always be achieved by the

general government selling its debt instruments to the market and the central bank

purchasing the same amount of general government debt in the secondary market.

       Equations (44) or (46) allow us to give precise expression to a concern

expressed by the Bank of Japan when confronted with proposals that it purchase

private sector debt instruments, equity or other nominal or real assets. If these assets

were to be bought at a price in excess of their fundamental values (or if, despite

having been bought at a fair price, unexpected subsequent developments were to

depress the value of these assets), the central bank can maintain its solvency only by

building up its holdings of earning assets ( B CB or D* ) either through the issuance of

                         ∆M
additional base money,      , or through transfers by the general government, −τ CB ,
                          P

that is, by being recapitalised by the general government.

       What is surprising is that, even under deflationary conditions, senior members

of the Bank of Japan Policy Board worry about possible inflationary consequences of

additional monetary issuance. In this case (and up to a point), higher inflation (a

lower rate of deflation) is not a problem but part of the solution (see e.g. Bank of

Japan [2002] and Kirchner [2002]).



5.2 Can the central bank perform a ‘helicopter money drop’ on its own?

       Technically, if the central bank could make transfer payments to the private

sector, the entire Friedmanian helicopter money drop could be implemented by the

central bank.   At time t there would be a large increase in H (t ) financed by


                                          51
increasing the monetary base (‘printing money’). A vivid example would be for the

Governor of the central bank to issue a $1,000 cheque (or its local currency

equivalent), drawn upon the central bank’s account, to every man, woman and child in

the country. On the balance sheet of the central bank this would show up as an

increase in the stock of base money and a corresponding reduction in the financial net

worth of the central bank. In its budget constraint there would be a transfer payment

to the private sector finance through base money issuance.

       The legality of such an implementation of the helicopter drop of money by the

central bank alone would be dubious in most countries with clearly drawn boundaries

between the Central Bank and the Ministry of Finance or the Treasury. The Central

Bank would be undertaking an overtly fiscal action, which is normally the exclusive

province of the Treasury or the Ministry of Finance. An economically equivalent

implementation of the helicopter drop of money would be a tax cut (or a transfer

payment) implemented by the general government, financed through the sale of

government debt to the Central Bank, with the Central Bank then monetising that debt

increase. If the direct sale of general government debt to the Central Bank (or Central

Bank lending to the general government) is prohibited (as it is for the countries that

belong to the Euro area), the monetisation of the government tax cut could be

accomplished by the general government financing the tax through the sale of

interest-bearing debt to the domestic private sector or overseas, with the Central Bank

purchasing that same amount of interest-bearing debt in the secondary markets. If a

$1,000 cheque does not do an adequate job of boosting demand, the number of zeros

on the cheque can be increased until spending picks up as required.




                                          52
6. Conclusion

        Preventing or combating deflation poses some unique difficulties for the

monetary authorities - difficulties that are not present in preventing or combating

inflation. Nevertheless, deflation can always be prevented and, if it has taken hold,

can always be overcome by co-ordinated actions of the monetary and fiscal

authorities.

        Monetary policy alone cannot always prevent or cure deflation, if we restrict

ourselves to conventional monetary policy, that is, reductions in the risk-free short

nominal interest rate or a devaluation of the nominal exchange rate. Monetary policy

alone is likely to prevent or cure deflation if the monetary authority is willing and able

to monetise (if necessary without limit) the outstanding stock of public debt (short,

long, nominal or index-linked), and/or perform open market purchases of a wide

range of foreign and private domestic securities. If the monetary authorities are

willing and able to contemplate an even more unconventional monetary instrument -

the payment of negative nominal interest rates on base money through the imposition

of a carry tax on currency - the zero lower bound on nominal interest rates disappears

as a constraint on monetary policy.

        To say that deflation can be prevented or cured using conventional monetary

and fiscal policy is not to say that all economic problems faced by the most prominent

current example of a deflation-afflicted economy - Japan - can be solved using

conventional monetary and fiscal policy. The Japanese banking sector is paralysed by

a massive overhang of bad debt. Other financial intermediaries, especially insurance

companies, are suffering the cumulative impact on their balance sheets of the most

spectacular asset boom and collapse in modern history – the stock market and real

estate boom of the 1980s and its unravelling since 1989 (see Figure 1).



                                           53
       Cleaning up the balance sheet of the Japanese banking sector, reducing the

size of the banking sector and recapitalising key viable non-bank intermediaries will

be a painful and protracted process. In the non-financial economy it will manifest

itself as increased redundancies, idle capacity, bankruptcies and business failures. It

does not seem plausible, however, that this inevitably painful structural adjustment

would be facilitated by persisting with the deflationary demand management policies

of the last few years.

       Deflation is problem that can be avoided. If it has taken hold, it is a problem

that can be solved. A tax cut (or transfer payment) directly aimed at households and

financed by increasing the stock of base money will surely boost aggregate demand.

So will a base-money-financed increase in public spending.


       Achieving a sustained reduction in inflation is likely to require tax increases or

public spending cuts. It therefore tends to be politically unpopular. Anti-deflationary

policies involve tax cuts, increased transfer payment or increased public spending.

They will tend to be politically popular. It is therefore somewhat of a mystery why a

policy programme that makes economic sense and should be politically popular does

not get implemented. The clue to solution of this mystery probably lies in the fact

that, with conventional monetary policy nearly exhausted, further effective anti-

deflationary policy requires the co-operation of the central bank and the Ministry of

Finance in the design and implementation of a co-ordinated monetary-fiscal stimulus.


       Some of the central banks that acquired operational independence only

recently have interpreted central bank independence to means the absence of co-

operation, co-ordination and at times even communication with the fiscal authorities.




                                          54
Mutual distrust between operationally independent monetary and fiscal authorities is

probably the root cause of a persistent failure to address a deflation problem.


        Milton Friedman argued that inflation (and by implication deflation) is always

and everywhere a monetary phenomenon – and he was right.45 Sargent and Wallace

[1981] showed that, in the long-run, because of the government’s intertemporal

budget constraint which limits the government’s capacity to borrow, money (and

therefore inflation and deflation) is always and everywhere a fiscal phenomenon – and

they too were right. Structuralists, and political economists inform us that excessive

public sector deficits are the result of unresolved social and political conflict about the

size and composition of state spending and about who should pay for it. They too

may well be right. I would like to add to this sequence of truths the proposition that

persistent unwanted deflation is always and everywhere evidence of unnecessary,

avoidable macroeconomic mismanagement.                  Governments through the ages have

demonstrated an uncanny ability to create inflation, often to undesirable and at times

disastrous levels. It is hard to believe that the very simple analytics and attractive

politics of making inflation have been forgotten in the new Millennium.




45
   It follows from the propositions I have so far stated that inflation is always and everywhere a
monetary phenomenon in the sense that it is and can be produced only by a more rapid increase in the
quantity of money than in output. However, the reason for the rapid increase in the quantity of money
may be very different under different circumstances. It has sometimes reflected gold discoveries,
sometimes changes in banking systems, sometimes the financing of private spending, sometimes—
perhaps most of the time—the financing of governmental spending. (Friedman [1973])




                                                 55
References
Abel, A.B. [1990], “Asset prices under habit formation and catching up with the
Joneses”, American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 80, pp. 38-42.

Ahearne, Alan, Joseph Gagnon, Jane Haltmaier, Steve Kamin and Christopher Erceg,
Jon Faust, Luca Guerrieri, Carter Hemphill, Linda Kole, Jennifer Roush, John Rogers,
Nathan Sheets and Jonathan Wrigth [1001], “Preventing Deflation: Lessons from
Japan’s Experience in the 1990’s”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System, International Finance Discussion Paper No. 729, June.

Akerlof, G.A. W.T. Dickens and W. L. Perry [1996], “The macroeconomics of low
inflation”, Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1.

Bahmani-Oskooee, M., and J. Alse [1994], “Short-Run Versus Long-Run Effects of
Devaluation: Error-Correction Modelling and Cointegration,” Eastern Economic
Journal, 20, 4, pp. 453-64.

Bailey, Martin J. [1956], “The Welfare Costs of Inflationary Finance,” Journal of
Political Economy, vol. 64, no. 2, April, pp. 93–110.

Bank of Japan [2002], “How Should the Recent Increase in Japan’s Monetary Base
Be Understood?”, Issue Papers on Monetary Policy, Policy Planning Office,
September 5.

Bank of Japan [2003], “Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting on January 21 and
22, 2003, February 19, http://www.boj.or.jp/en/seisaku/03/pb/g030122_f.htm.

Basu, Susanto and Miles S. Kimball [2000], “Long-Run Labor Supply and the
Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution for Consumption”, University of Michigan
mimeo, December.

Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe [2001], “The Perils of
Taylor Rules”, Journal of Economic Theory, 96, January/February 2001, 40-69.

Benhabib, Jess, Stephanie Schmitt-Grohé and Martín Uribe [2002], “Avoiding
Liquidity Traps”, Journal of Political Economy, 110, June 2002, 535-563.

Bernanke, Ben S. [1983], "Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in
Propagation of the Great Depression." American Economic Review 73, June, pp. 257-
76.

Bernanke, Ben S. [2002], “Deflation: Making Sure “It” Doesn’t Happen Here.”
Remarks before the National Economists Club, Washington D.C., November 21.
http://www.federalreserve.gov/BoardDocs/speeches/2002/20021121/default.htm

Bernanke, Ben S. and Mark Gertler [1995], “Inside the Black Box: The Credit
Channel of Monetary Policy Transmission”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9,
Fall, pp. 27-48.



                                        56
Bewley, T.F. [1999], Why Wages Don’t Fall During a Recession, Harvard University
Press, Cambridge MA.

Blanchard, Olivier [1985], “Debt, Deficits and Finite Horizons”, Journal of Political
Economy, VOL. 93, PP. 223-47.

Blinder, A.S. [1995], “On sticky prices: academic theories meet the real world”, in
Monetary Policy, Studies in Business Cycles, Vol. 28, N.G. Mankiw ed., University of
Chicago Press.

Boskin, Michael J., E. Dulberger, R. Gordon, Z. Griliches and D. Jorgenson [1996],
"Toward a More Accurate Measure of the Cost of Living: Final Report to the Senate
Finance Committee,", Washington, DC, U.S. Government Printing Office, for the
U.S. Senate Committee on Finance, December.

Boskin, Michael J., E. Dulberger, R. Gordon, Z. Griliches, and D. Jorgenson [1997],
"Consumer Prices, the Consumer Price Index and the Cost of Living," Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Fall 1997.

Bryant, Ralph C. [2000], “Comment on: Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate
Policy”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 32, No. 2, Pt. 2, November, pp.
1036-1050.

Buiter, Willem H. [1988], “Death, Birth, Productivity Growth and Debt Neutrality”,
Economic Journal, June, pp. 279-293.

Buiter, Willem H. [1990], “Debt Neutrality, Redistribution and Consumer
Heterogeneity: A Survey and Some Extensions”, in Macroeconomics, Finance and
Economic Policy; Essays in Honor of James Tobin, W. Brainard, W. Nordhaus and H.
Watts, eds. MIT Press, Cambridge MA. 1991. Also in Willem H. Buiter Principles of
Budgetary and Financial Policy, MIT Press, pp. 183-222.

Buiter, Willem H. [2003], Appendix to Deflation: Prevention and Cure, European
Bank for Reconstruction and Development mimeo, http://www.nber.org/~wbuiter/defap

Buiter, Willem H. and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou [2001], “Liquidity Traps: How to
Avoid Them and How to Escape Them”, in Wim F.V. Vanthoor and Joke Mooi,
Reflections on Economics and Econometrics, Essays in Honour of Martin M. G. Fase,
2001, De Nederlandsche Bank, pp. 13-58.

Buiter, Willem H. and Nikolaos Panigirtzoglou [2003], "Overcoming the Zero Bound
on Nominal Interest Rates with Negative Interest on Currency: Gesell’s Solution",
forthcoming Economic Journal, 2003.

Card, David and D. Hyslop [1997], “Does inflation grease the wheels of the labor
market”, in C.D. Romer and D. Romer (eds,) Reducing Inflation, NBER Studies in
Business Cycles, Vol. 30, University of Chicago Press.




                                         57
Clouse, James, Dale Henderson, Athanasios Orphanides, David Small and Peter
Tinsley [1999], “Monetary Policy When the Nominal Short-Term Interest Rate is
Zero”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Mimeo, July 13.

Cristiano, L. J [2000], “Comments on McCallum, “Theoretical Analysis Regarding a
Zero Lower Bound on Nominal Interest Rates””, Journal of Money, Credit and
Banking, 32, pp. 905-930.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin [1989], “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: A Theoretical Framework,”
Econometrica, Vol. 57, No. 4., pp. 937-969.

Epstein, Larry G. and Stanley E. Zin [1991], “Substitution, Risk Aversion, and the
Temporal Behavior of Consumption and Asset Returns: An Empirical Analysis,
Journal of Political Economy, , 99 (2), April, pp. 263-286.

Feldstein, Martin [2002a], “Deflation”, remarks made at the BIS Central Bankers
dinner in Mexico City on November 11, 2002, mimeo.

Feldstein, Martin [2002b],“The Role for Discretionary Fiscal Policy in a Low Interest
Rate Environment,” NBER Working Paper 9203 (www.nber.org/papers/w9203),
forthcoming in the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City annual Jackson Hole
conference volume for 2002.

Fischer, Stanley [1979a], “"Anticipations and the Non-Neutrality of Money," Journal
of Political Economy, April, 225-52.

Fischer, Stanley [1979b], "Capital Accumulation on the Transition Path in a Monetary
Optimizing Model," Econometrica, November, 1433-40.

Fisher, I., [1932]. Booms and Depressions, New York: Adelphi Company.

Fisher, Irving [1933a], “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions”,
Econometrica, March, pp. 337-57.

Fisher, Irving [1933b], Stamp Scrip, Adelphi Company, New York.

Freedman, Charles [2000], “Comment on: Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest
Rate Policy”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol 32, No. 2, Pt. 2, November,
pp. 1051-1057.

Friedman, Milton [1969], “The Optimum Quantity of Money,” in The Optimum
Quantity of Money and Other Essays, Chicago: Aldine, 1969, pp.1–50.

Friedman, Milton [1973], Money and Economic Development; the Horowitz Lectures
of 1972. Praeger, New York.

Fuhrer, J. C. and B. F. Madigan [1997], “Monetary Policy when Interest Rates are
Bounded at Zero,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, pp. 573-585.




                                         58
Gesell, Silvio [1949], Die Natuerliche Wirtschaftsordnung, Rudolf Zitzman Verlag,
available in English as The Natural Economic Order, Peter Owen Ltd, London, 1958.

Goldstein, M. and M.S. Khan [1985], Income and Price Effects in Foreign Trade, in
R.W. Jones and P.B. Kenen, eds., Handbook of International Economics, Vol. II,
1040-1105.

Goodfriend, Marvin [2000], “Overcoming the Zero Bound on Interest Rate Policy”,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 32, No. 4, Pt. 2, November, pp. 1007-
1035.

Guvenen, Fatih [2003], “Reconciling Conflicting Evidence on the Elasticity of
Intertemporal Substitution: A Macroeconomic Perspective”, University of Rochester
Mimeo, January.

Haberler, Gottfried von [1937], Prosperity and Depression. A Theoretical Analysis of
Cyclical Movements, Geneva: League of Nations, revised and enlarged editions, 1939,
1941, 1958.

Hall, Robert E. [1988], “Intertemporal Substitution in Consumption,” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 96, No.2, pp. 339-357.

Hansen, Lars P., and Kenneth J. Singleton [1983], “Stochastic Consumption, Risk
Aversion, and the Temporal Behavior of Asset Returns,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol 91, No.2, pp. 249-265.

Hayami, Masaru [2002], Toward Revitalization of Japan's Economy, Speech given at
the Keizai (Economic) Club, on January 29, 2002.

Hondroyiannis, George, P.A.V.B. Swamy and George S. Tavlas [2000], “Is the
Japanese Economy in a Liquidity Trap?”, Economics Letters, 66, pp. 17-23.

Hyde, Stuart and Mohamed Sherif [2002], “Risk Aversion versus Intertemporal
Substitution: Consumption Models in the UK”, Manchester School of Accounting and
Finance, mimeo, September.

Issing, Otmar [2002], “The Euro After Four Years: Is there a Risk of Deflation” ,
paper presented at the 16th European Finance Convention, 2 December 2002,
London.

Ito, Takatoshi [1998], “Japan and the Asian Financial Crisis: The Role of Financial
Supervision in Restoring Growth”; paper presented at a conference on “The Japanese
Financial System”, New York: Columbia University, October.

Itoh, Motoshige and Naoki Shimoi [2000], “On the Role of Monetary Policy in a
Deflationary Economy: the Case of Japan”, Journal of the Japanese and International
Economies, Vol. 14, No. 4, December, pp. 238-260.

Iwata, Shigeru and Shu Wu [2001], “Estimating Monetary Policy Effects When
Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero”, Department of Economics, University of Kansas
mimeo, May.


                                        59
Johnson, Karen, David Small and Ralph Tryon [1999], “Monetary Policy and Price
Stability”, Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, International Finance
Discussion Papers, No 641, July.

Journal of Money, Credit and Banking [2000], Monetary Policy in a Low-Inflation
Environment, 32, No 4, Part 2, November.

Kahneman, D. , J. Knetch and T. Thaler [1986], “Fairness as a constraint on profit
seeking: entitlements in the market”, American Economic Review, Vol. 76, No. 4.

Keynes, John Maynard [1931], “The Consequences to the Banks of the Collapse of
Money Value”, in J.M. Keynes, Essays in Persuasion, London, MacMillan.

Keynes, John Maynard [1936], The General Theory of Interest, Money and
Employment, Macmillan, London.

King, Mervyn [1994], “Debt Deflation: Theory and Evidence.”, European Economic
Review, 38, pp. 419-445.

King, Mervyn [2002], “The inflation target ten years on”, Bank of England Quarterly
Bulletin, Vol. 42, No. 4, Winter, pp.459-474.

Kirchner, Stephen [2002], “Japan, Deflation and the BoJ: An Institutional Perspective
on Japanese Monetary Policy”, Paper prepared for the 31st Conference of Economists
Adelaide, Australia 30 September – 3 October 2002, mimeo School of Economics,
Faculty of Commerce, University of New South Wales.

Krugman, Paul [1998a], "Japan's trap", mimeo, May.

Krugman, Paul [1998b] "Further notes on Japan's liquidity trap", mimeo, June

Krugman, Paul [1998c] "Japan: still trapped", mimeo, November.

Krugman, Paul [1998d], "It's baaack! Japan's slump and the return of the liquidity
trap", Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2, pp. 137-205.

Krugman, Paul [1999], "Inflation targeting in a liquidity trap: the law of the excluded
middle", mimeo February 1999

Krugman, Paul [2000], “Thinking About the Liquidity Trap”, Journal of the Japanese
and International Economies, Vol. 14, No.4, December 2000, pp. 221-237.

McCallum, Bennett T. [2000], “Theoretical Analysis Regarding a Zero Lower Bound
on Nominal Interest Rates”, Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 32, No 4, Pt. 2,
pp. 870-904.

McCallum, Bennett T. [2002], “Inflation Targeting and the Liquidity Trap”, in
Norman Loyaza and Raimundo Soto eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance,
Challenges, Santiago, Central Bank of Chile, pp. 395-437.


                                          60
McKinnon, Ronald and Kenichi Ohno [1999], “The Foreign Exchange Origins of
Japan’s Economic Slump in the 1990s: The Interest Rate Trap”, Mimeo, Bank of
England, March.

McLaughlin K. J. [1994], “Rigid Wages”, Journal of Monetary Economics, 34(3), pp.
384-414.

Meltzer, Allan H. [1999],”The Transmission Process”, mimeo, March

Meltzer, Allan H. [2001], “Monetary Transmission at Low Inflation: Some Clues
from Japan in the 1990s”, in Monetary and Economic Studies (Special Edition),
February, pp. 13-34.

Minsky, Hyman [1975], John Maynard Keynes, Columbia University Press.

Minsky, Hyman [1986], Stabilizing an Unstable Economy, Yale University Press.

Miyal, Ryuzo [2000], “The Role of Monetary Policy in Japan: A Break in the
1990s?”, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, Vol. 14, No. 4,
December, pp. 366-384.

Mulligan, Casey B. [2002], “Capital, Interest, and Aggregate Intertemporal
Substitution During the 20th Century”, University of Chicago Department of
Economics Mimeo, August.

Nickell, S. and G. Quintini [2003], “Nominal wage rigidity and the rate of inflation”,
Discussion Paper No. 489, Centre for Economic Performance, London School of
Economics, September 2001, revised November 2002, forthcoming Economic
Journal.

Nishizaki, Kenj and Tsutomu Watanabe [2002], “Output-Inflation Trade-Off and
Near-Zero Inflation Rates”, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
Vol. 14, No. 4, December, pp. 304-326.

OECD [2002], Economic Outlook, Vol. 2002/2, No. 72, December.

Orphanides, Athanasios and Volker Wieland [1998], “Price Stability and Monetary
Policy Effectiveness when Nominal Interest Rates are Bounded at Zero”, Finance and
Economics Discussion Series, Federal Reserve Board, Divisions of Research and
Statistics and Monetary Affairs.

Orphanides, Athanasios and Volker Wieland [2000], “Efficient Monetary Policy
Design near Price Stability”, Journal of the Japanese and International Economies,
Vol. 14, No. 4, December, pp. 327-365.

Porter, William [1999], “Negative Rates – An Exploration”, Credit Suisse First
Boston Market Analysis, 25 May.




                                         61
Rose, A.K. [1991], “The Role of Exchange Rates in a Popular Model of International
Trade: Does the ‘Marshall-Lerner Condition Hold?”, Journal of International
Economics, 30, pp. 301-316.

Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace [1981], “Some Unpleasant Monetarist
Arithmetic”, Quarterly Review, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, Fall.

Sidrauski, M. [1967], “Inflation and Economic Growth”, Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 75, No. 4, December, pp. 796-810.

Smith, J.C. [2000], “Nominal wage rigidity in the United Kingdom”, Economic
Journal (Conference Papers), 110. No. 462, pp. C176-C195.

Svensson, L.E.O. [2000], “The Zero Bound in an Open Economy: A Foolproof Way
of Escaping from a Liquidity Trap”, Monetary and Economic Studies (Special
Edition), February, pp. 277-316.

Taylor, John B. [2001], “Low Inflation, Deflation, and Policies for Future Price
Stability”, Monetary and Economic Studies (Special Edition), February, pp. 35-51.

Wolman, A. L. [1998], “Staggered Price Setting and the Zero Bound on Nominal
Interest Rates,” Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond Economic Quarterly, 84, pp. 1-
24.

Yaari, M. [1965], “The uncertain lifetime, life insurance and the theory of the
consumer”, Review of Economic Studies, Vo.l 32, April, pp. 137-50.

Yogo, Motohiro [2002], “Estimating the Elasticity of Intertemporal Substitution when
Instruments are Weak”, Harvard University Mimeo, April.




                                        62
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                      4
                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                  8
                                                                                                                                                          10
                                                                                                                                                                  12
                                                                                                                                                                       14
                                                                                                                                                                               16
                                                                                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                                                                                                 20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               30




                                                                                                                                                                                                         (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                (%)


                                                                                                                 1950                                                                                                                                                                                  1950
                                                                                                                 1951
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      Japan


                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1951
                                                                                                                 1952                                                                                                                                                                                  1952
                                                                                                                 1953                                                                                                                                                                                  1953
                                                                                                                 1954                                                                                                                                                                                  1954
                                                                                                                 1955
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1955
                                                                                                                 1956
                                                                                                                 1957                                                                                                                                                                                  1956
                                                                                                                 1958                                                                                                                                                                                  1957
                                                                                                                 1959                                                                                                                                                                                  1958
                                                                                                                 1960                                                                                                                                                                                  1959
                                                                                                                 1961                                                                                                                                                                                  1960




                                                  Short-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                 1962                                                                                                                                                                                  1961
                                                                                                                 1963                                                                                                                                                                                  1962
                                                                                                                 1964                                                                                                                                                                                  1963
                                                                                                                 1965                                                                                                                                                                                  1964




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Real GDP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                 1966                                                                                                                                                                                  1965
                                                                                                                 1967                                                                                                                                                                                  1966
                                                                                                                 1968                                                                                                                                                                                  1967
                                                                                                                 1969                                                                                                                                                                                  1968
                                                                                                                 1970                                                                                                                                                                                  1969




     Sources: UN Common Database and Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                 1971
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1970
                                                                                                                 1972
                                                                                                                 1973
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1971
                                                                                                                 1974                                                                                                                                                                                  1972




                                                  Long-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1973




63
                                                                                                                 1975
                                                                                                                 1976                                                                                                                                                                                  1974




                                                                                                                                                                                                                        Sources: UN Common Database and European Commission.
                                                                                                                 1977                                                                                                                                                                                  1975
                                                                                                                 1978                                                                                                                                                                                  1976
                                                                                                                 1979                                                                                                                                                                                  1977
                                                                                                                 1980                                                                                                                                                                                  1978
                                                                                                                 1981                                                                                                                                                                                  1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               CPI Inflation (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              Figure 1




                                                                                                                 1982                                                                                                                                                                                  1980
                                                                                                                 1983                                                                                                                                                                                  1981
                                                                                                                 1984                                                                                                                                                                                  1982
                                                                                                                 1985                                                                                                                                                                                  1983
                                                                                                                 1986                                                                                                                                                                                  1984
                                                                                                                 1987                                                                                                                                                                                  1985
                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                 1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       1986
                                                                                                                 1990                                                                                                                                                                                  1987
                                                                                                                 1991                                                                                                                                                                                  1988
                                                                                                                 1992                                                                                                                                                                                  1989
                                                                                                                 1993                                                                                                                                                                                  1990
                                                                                                                 1994                                                                                                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                                 1995                                                                                                                                                                                  1992
                                                                                                                 1996                                                                                                                                                                                  1993
                                                                                                                 1997                                                                                                                                                                                  1994
                                                                                                                 1998                                                                                                                                                                                  1995
                                                                                                                 1999                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                 2000                                                                                                                                                                                  1997
                                                                                                                 2001                                                                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                 2002                                                                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               Money Wage Growth (%)




                                                  Equity Index (TOPIX, deflated by CPI, 1950=100, Second Axis)
                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2000
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2001




                                                                                                                                500
                                                                                                                                          1,000
                                                                                                                                                  1,500
                                                                                                                                                               2,000
                                                                                                                                                                       2,500
                                                                                                                                                                                    3,000
                                                                                                                                                                                                 3,500




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                         (1950 = 100)
                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                       2
                                                                                                                                            4
                                                                                                                                                  6
                                                                                                                                                        8
                                                                                                                                                              10
                                                                                                                                                                    12
                                                                                                                                                                          14
                                                                                                                                                                                16
                                                                                                                                                                                      18
                                                                                                                                                                                            20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                  (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (%)



                                                                                                                            1950                                                                                                                                                 1961
                                                                                                                            1951
                                                                                                                            1952                                                                                                                                                 1962
                                                                                                                            1953                                                                                                                                                 1963
                                                                                                                            1954                                                                                                                                                 1964
                                                                                                                            1955
                                                                                                                            1956                                                                                                                                                 1965
                                                                                                                            1957                                                                                                                                                 1966
                                                                                                                            1958                                                                                                                                                 1967
                                                                                                                            1959
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                European Union




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1968
                                                                                                                            1960
                                                                                                                            1961                                                                                                                                                 1969




                                                               Short-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                            1962                                                                                                                                                 1970
                                                                                                                            1963                                                                                                                                                 1971
                                                                                                                            1964
                                                                                                                            1965                                                                                                                                                 1972




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Real GDP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                            1966                                                                                                                                                 1973
                                                                                                                            1967                                                                                                                                                 1974




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Sources: IMF and European Commission.
                                                                                                                            1968
                                                                                                                            1969                                                                                                                                                 1975
                                                                                                                            1970                                                                                                                                                 1976
                                                                                                                            1971                                                                                                                                                 1977
                                                                                                                            1972
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1978
                                                                                                                            1973
                                                                                                                            1974                                                                                                                                                 1979




64
                                                               Long-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                            1975                                                                                                                                                 1980
                                                                                                                            1976                                                                                                                                                 1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Figure 2




     Sources: UN Common Database, Bundes Bank and Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                            1977
                                                                                                                            1978                                                                                                                                                 1982
                                                                                                                            1979                                                                                                                                                 1983
                                                                                                                            1980                                                                                                                                                 1984
                                                                                                                            1981
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         CPI Inflation (%)

                                                                                                                            1982                                                                                                                                                 1985
                                                                                                                            1983                                                                                                                                                 1986
                                                                                                                            1984                                                                                                                                                 1987
                                                                                                                            1985
                                                                                                                            1986                                                                                                                                                 1988
                                                                                                                            1987                                                                                                                                                 1989
                                                                                                                            1988                                                                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                                            1989
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1991
                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                            1991                                                                                                                                                 1992
                                                                                                                            1992                                                                                                                                                 1993
                                                                                                                            1993                                                                                                                                                 1994
                                                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                                            1995                                                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                            1996                                                                                                                                                 1996
                                                                                                                            1997                                                                                                                                                 1997
                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                            1999                                                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                            2000                                                                                                                                                 1999
                                                                                                                            2001
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Money Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000
                                                                                                                            2002




                                                               Equity Index (DAX, deflated by CPI, 1976=100, Second Axis)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001




                                                                                                                                   0
                                                                                                                                                                                                  (1959 = 100)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002




                                                                                                                                       50
                                                                                                                                            100
                                                                                                                                                  150
                                                                                                                                                        200
                                                                                                                                                              250
                                                                                                                                                                    300
                                                                                                                                                                          350
                                                                                                                                                                                400
                                                                                                                                                                                      450
                                                                                                                                                                                            500
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                            2
                                                                                                                                                 4
                                                                                                                                                           6
                                                                                                                                                                8
                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                           12
                                                                                                                                                                                  14
                                                                                                                                                                                             16
                                                                                                                                                                                                   18
                                                                                                                                                                                                        20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                        -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                             0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                               20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                    25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         30




                                                                                                                                                                                                              (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                UK


                                                                                                                                 1950                                                                                                                                                                                            1950
                                                                                                                                 1951                                                                                                                                                                                            1951
                                                                                                                                 1952                                                                                                                                                                                            1952
                                                                                                                                 1953                                                                                                                                                                                            1953
                                                                                                                                 1954                                                                                                                                                                                            1954
                                                                                                                                 1955                                                                                                                                                                                            1955
                                                                                                                                 1956                                                                                                                                                                                            1956
                                                                                                                                 1957
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1957
                                                                                                                                 1958
                                                                                                                                 1959                                                                                                                                                                                            1958
                                                                                                                                 1960                                                                                                                                                                                            1959
                                                                                                                                 1961                                                                                                                                                                                            1960
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1961




                                                                   Short-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                 1962
                                                                                                                                 1963                                                                                                                                                                                            1962
                                                                                                                                 1964                                                                                                                                                                                            1963
                                                                                                                                 1965                                                                                                                                                                                            1964




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Real GDP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                                 1966                                                                                                                                                                                            1965
                                                                                                                                 1967                                                                                                                                                                                            1966
                                                                                                                                 1968                                                                                                                                                                                            1967
                                                                                                                                 1969                                                                                                                                                                                            1968
                                                                                                                                 1970                                                                                                                                                                                            1969
                                                                                                                                 1971                                                                                                                                                                                            1970
                                                                                                                                 1972                                                                                                                                                                                            1971
                                                                                                                                 1973                                                                                                                                                                                            1972
                                                                                                                                 1974                                                                                                                                                                                            1973




65
                                                                   Long-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                 1975                                                                                                                                                                                            1974
                                                                                                                                 1976                                                                                                                                                                                            1975
                                                                                                                                 1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     Figure 3




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1976
                                                                                                                                 1978
                                                                                                                                 1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1977




     Sources: UN Common Database, Bank of England and Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                                 1980                                                                                                                                                                                            1978
                                                                                                                                 1981                                                                                                                                                                                            1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         RPI Inflation (%)

                                                                                                                                 1982                                                                                                                                                                                            1980
                                                                                                                                 1983                                                                                                                                                                                            1981
                                                                                                                                 1984                                                                                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                                                 1985                                                                                                                                                                                            1983
                                                                                                                                 1986                                                                                                                                                                                            1984
                                                                                                                                                                                                                             Sources: UN Common Database, Wolfbane Cybernetic and European Commission.




                                                                                                                                 1987                                                                                                                                                                                            1985
                                                                                                                                 1988                                                                                                                                                                                            1986
                                                                                                                                 1989                                                                                                                                                                                            1987
                                                                                                                                 1990                                                                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                 1991                                                                                                                                                                                            1989
                                                                                                                                 1992                                                                                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                                 1993                                                                                                                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                                 1994                                                                                                                                                                                            1992
                                                                                                                                 1995                                                                                                                                                                                            1993
                                                                                                                                 1996                                                                                                                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                                                 1997                                                                                                                                                                                            1995
                                                                                                                                 1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1996
                                                                                                                                 1999
                                                                                                                                 2000                                                                                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                 2001                                                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         Money Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2000




                                                                   Equity Index (FTSE, deflated by RPI, 1976=100, Second Axis)
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2001




                                                                                                                                            50
                                                                                                                                                     100
                                                                                                                                                               150
                                                                                                                                                                     200
                                                                                                                                                                            250
                                                                                                                                                                                       300
                                                                                                                                                                                                  350
                                                                                                                                                                                                        400




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 2002
                                                                                                                                                                                                              (1984 = 100)
                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                             2
                                                                                                                                                  4
                                                                                                                                                        6
                                                                                                                                                              8
                                                                                                                                                                    10
                                                                                                                                                                          12
                                                                                                                                                                                14
                                                                                                                                                                                      16
                                                                                                                                                                                            18
                                                                                                                                                                                                  20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                         -5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                              0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  5
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                      10
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           15
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                20
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                     25
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          30




                                                                                                                                                                                                    (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                           (%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 USA


                                                                                                                                  1950                                                                                                                                                            1950
                                                                                                                                  1951                                                                                                                                                            1951
                                                                                                                                  1952                                                                                                                                                            1952
                                                                                                                                  1953                                                                                                                                                            1953
                                                                                                                                  1954                                                                                                                                                            1954
                                                                                                                                  1955                                                                                                                                                            1955
                                                                                                                                  1956                                                                                                                                                            1956
                                                                                                                                  1957
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1957
                                                                                                                                  1958
                                                                                                                                  1959                                                                                                                                                            1958
                                                                                                                                  1960                                                                                                                                                            1959
                                                                                                                                  1961                                                                                                                                                            1960




                                                                 Short-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                  1962                                                                                                                                                            1961
                                                                                                                                  1963                                                                                                                                                            1962
                                                                                                                                  1964                                                                                                                                                            1963
                                                                                                                                  1965                                                                                                                                                            1964




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Real GDP Growth (%)
                                                                                                                                  1966                                                                                                                                                            1965
                                                                                                                                  1967                                                                                                                                                            1966
                                                                                                                                  1968                                                                                                                                                            1967
                                                                                                                                  1969                                                                                                                                                            1968
                                                                                                                                  1970                                                                                                                                                            1969
                                                                                                                                  1971                                                                                                                                                            1970
                                                                                                                                  1972                                                                                                                                                            1971
                                                                                                                                  1973                                                                                                                                                            1972
                                                                                                                                  1974                                                                                                                                                            1973




66
                                                                 Long-term Interest Rate
                                                                                                                                  1975                                                                                                                                                            1974
                                                                                                                                  1976



                                                                                                                                                                                                                   Sources: UN Common Database and European Commission.
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1975
                                                                                                                                  1977
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                       Figure 4




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1976




     Sources: UN Common Database, Federal Funds and Bloomberg.
                                                                                                                                  1978
                                                                                                                                  1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1977
                                                                                                                                  1980                                                                                                                                                            1978
                                                                                                                                  1981                                                                                                                                                            1979
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          CPI Inflation (%)

                                                                                                                                  1982                                                                                                                                                            1980
                                                                                                                                  1983                                                                                                                                                            1981
                                                                                                                                  1984                                                                                                                                                            1982
                                                                                                                                  1985                                                                                                                                                            1983
                                                                                                                                  1986                                                                                                                                                            1984
                                                                                                                                  1987                                                                                                                                                            1985
                                                                                                                                  1988                                                                                                                                                            1986
                                                                                                                                  1989                                                                                                                                                            1987
                                                                                                                                  1990                                                                                                                                                            1988
                                                                                                                                  1991                                                                                                                                                            1989
                                                                                                                                  1992                                                                                                                                                            1990
                                                                                                                                  1993                                                                                                                                                            1991
                                                                                                                                  1994                                                                                                                                                            1992
                                                                                                                                  1995                                                                                                                                                            1993
                                                                                                                                  1996                                                                                                                                                            1994
                                                                                                                                  1997                                                                                                                                                            1995
                                                                                                                                  1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  1996
                                                                                                                                  1999
                                                                                                                                  2000                                                                                                                                                            1997
                                                                                                                                  2001                                                                                                                                                            1998
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                          Money Wage Growth (%)




                                                                                                                                  2002                                                                                                                                                            1999
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2000




                                                                                                                                         0
                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2001




                                                                 Equity Index (S&P 500, deflated by CPI, 1950=100, Second Axis)
                                                                                                                                             50
                                                                                                                                                  100
                                                                                                                                                        150
                                                                                                                                                              200
                                                                                                                                                                    250
                                                                                                                                                                          300
                                                                                                                                                                                350
                                                                                                                                                                                      400
                                                                                                                                                                                            450
                                                                                                                                                                                                  500
                                                                                                                                                                                                    (1950 = 100)




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                                  2002
                                                 Figure 5


                              Price Level and Inflation, UK 1800-1914

20




15




10




 5




 0
  1800 1806 1812 1818 1824 1830 1836 1842 1848 1854 1860 1866 1872 1878 1884 1890 1896 1902 1908 1914


                                                                                                        RPI
 -5
                                                                                                        RPI (annual % change)




-10




-15




-20




-25




                                                     67
                                        Figure 6

Bank rate, inflation and £/$ exchange rate, 1817-1914
Per cent                                                                          US dollar
15                                                                                       11
             Inflation (lhs)                                           Bank rate (lhs)
10                                                                                       10

 5                                                                                      9

 0                                                                                      8

 -5                                                                                     7

-10                                                                                     6
                                                                  £/$ exchange
-15                                                                 rate (rhs)          5

-20                                                                                     4
  1817     1827    1837        1847   1857        1867   1877   1887   1897      1907




                                             68
                                                 Table 1

Total, Goods and Services Inflation in the UK

                                   UK                   US                 Euro area            Japan

CPI inflation*                     1.9                  1.7                2.2                  -0.9

CPI goods*                         -1.1                 -0.1               1.4                  -1.6

CPI services*                      4.6                  3.1                3.3                  0.0

Services - goods inflation,        1.6                  1.6                1.6                  1.3

1990-97

Services - goods inflation,        2.3                  1.8                1.3                  1.3

1990-2002

* year to August 2002.
Inflation rates are calculated as the total increase in the price index over the indicated period, based on
monthly data , expressed as a twelve month growth rate.
Sources: Table taken from King [2002]; ultimate source: ONS (for UK) and Thomson Financial
Datastream for data on US, Euro Area and Japan.




                                                       69
