NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW TO RESTRUCTURE FAILED BANKING SYSTEMS:
LESSONS FROM THE U.S. IN THE 1930'S
AND JAPAN IN THE 1990'S
Charles W. Calomiris
Joseph R. Mason
Working Paper 9624
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9624
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

This paper was prepared for the Twelfth Annual East Asian Seminar on Economics: Privatization, Corporate
Governance, and Transition Economies, Takatoshi Ito and Anne Krueger, organizers, Hong Kong, June 2830, 2001. The authors thank Nobu Hibara for his comments and for his help assembling data on Japanese
banks. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2003 by Charles W. Calomiris and Joseph R. Mason. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

How to Restructure Failed Banking Systems:
Lessons from the U.S. in the 1930's and Japan in the 1990's
Charles W. Calomiris and Joseph R. Mason
NBER Working Paper No. 9624
April 2003
JEL No. G2, E5, N2
ABSTRACT
The costs of government assistance to banks depend on the way rescues are managed. The central
questions of policy reference do not revolve around whether to bail out banks, but rather around the
choice of which banks to rescue and the means for doing so. If a rescue is handled skillfully, the
cost can be greatly reduced. The history of assistance to U.S. banks during the Great Depression
illustrates these themes well, and can provide useful lessons for Asia today. This paper reviews the
history of bank distress and assistance in the United States during the 1930's and examines in detail
the role of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation - how it targeted banks, the effect of its
assistance, the cost of providing assistance, and the way that it tried to align bank incentives to
protect against abuse of government protection. Then, the paper contrasts that experience with the
recent government loans and preferred stock purchases for Japanese banks. We argue that
combining subsidized preferred stock purchases with mandatory matching contributions of common
stock, limits on bank dividend payments, and reforms on bank capital regulation that credibly
incorporate market discipline into the regulatory process would increase the benefits and reduce the
costs of government support for banks.
Charles W. Calomiris
Columbia University
Graduate School of Business
601 Uris Hall
3022 Broadway
New York, NY 10027-6902
and NBER
cc374@columbia.edu

Joseph R. Mason
Drexel University
LeBow College of Business
3141 Chestnut Street
Philadelphia, PA 19104
joe.mason@drexel.edu

1

I. Introduction
When banking systems are in distress, should they be rescued? If so, in what form
and on what terms should resources be transferred to banks? Is it possible to derive
lessons from relatively successful bank rescue efforts of the past that would be useful to
Japanese and other would-be bank rescuers? These three questions motivate our attempt
to come to grips with the lessons that U.S. bank rescue efforts during the Depression hold
for banking policy in Asia today. The key challenge in any bank rescue policy is to
design a balanced approach that accomplishes the main objectives of bank rescues –
salvaging local information capital about borrowers in the long run and increasing credit
flows to worthwhile investments in the short run – while minimizing the damage to
market discipline and bank incentives toward risk that comes with government bailouts.

Should Banks Be Helped?
To the first question we posed – whether banks should be rescued – we offer a
brief and informal reply. There is certainly a respectable argument in favor of rescuing
banking systems from insolvency. Bank finance is crucial to the process of capital
allocation, particularly for investment by small and medium-sized firms for which there
are no alternative sources of funding. Smaller firms can be a key source of recovery from
recession. That is especially true under current circumstances in Japan, Korea, and
elsewhere in Asia. In Japan and Korea, the growth of small firms is needed as part of
long-run structural adjustment away from excessive reliance on large firm conglomerates.
Part of that adjustment requires that the financial sector finance the growth of small

2

firms. Thus, in Asia, there may be a particularly strong argument in favor of preserving a
viable banking system that can act as a source of finance for smaller firms.
To a large extent the argument in favor of assisting banks relies on attendant
reforms in bank lending practices that will ensure that bank credit is channeled to firms
on the basis of the merit of their investments. Those incentives are part and parcel of a
proper regulatory structure that encourages market discipline, which rewards value
creation and prudent risk management by banks. Banks operating under skewed
incentives will often make unwarranted, value-destroying loans to insiders or to
politically influential borrowers. For example, Krueger and Yoo (2001) show that in
Korea resources have been channeled in large part to value-destroying large firms. Thus,
bank recapitalization must be combined with effective reforms of lending practices.
To what extent can one argue that bank assistance is unnecessary in a world of
free foreign entry by banks? Foreign bank entry is a potential alternative source of funds
for small firms, and one that is less likely to be diverted to value-destroying investments.
And foreign entrants into distressed banking systems tend to enjoy a relatively low cost
of capital, for two reasons: first, they have not suffered capital destroying loan losses, and
second, they are better able to raise new capital because the absence of loan losses also
means that markets will impose lower adverse-selection (“lemons”) discounts on any new
bank capital offerings (Calomiris and Wilson 2003).
While there is substantial evidence that foreign entry enhances the efficiency of
banking systems (Demirguc-Kunt and Levine 1998, Kane 1998), it takes time for foreign
entrants to establish information about borrowers and familiarity with local legal and
institutional arrangements. Calomiris and Carey (1994) found that foreign bank entrants

3

into the United States during the U.S. bank “capital crunch” of the 1980s tended to lend
disproportionately to lower-risk borrowers, tended to purchase rather than originate
loans, and tended to act as syndicate participants rather than lead managers. Furthermore,
despite their conservative loan purchases and originations, foreign banks tended to suffer
worse loan losses than domestic U.S. banks in the early 1990s, which further suggests an
information cost disadvantage. Although relaxing barriers to foreign entry is clearly a
crucial part of resolving a credit crunch and reforming long-term lending practices,
foreign bank lending may not be a perfect substitute for domestic bank lending in the
short run. Thus, it is still potentially beneficial to provide some assistance to the most
capable existing domestic banks.
There is, of course, another reason governments wish to protect banks – call it the
“dark side” of bank bailouts. Banks are repositories of economic and political power – a
source not only of funds but also of substantial discretionary power over the economy. In
Asia, as elsewhere, banks have been used as tools of economic planning and also as a
primary means of channeling favors to influential parties (so-called crony capitalism).
The idea that the banking system should be turned into an efficient, competitive
mechanism for attracting and distributing funds may make for a good speech, but it still
cannot realistically be described as the sole or overriding purpose of banking policy in
most countries. Never mind that the banking crises that gave rise to the losses that now
plague virtually every economy in East Asia were the direct result of the perverse
incentives of government protection (the so-called “moral hazard problem”); too many
influential people simply have too much at stake to allow banking to be reorganized
efficiently. Banks are only able to channel such favors if they themselves are recipients

4

of subsidies from the government, hence the need to preserve banks’ (and their related
firms’) exclusive rights, and the need to offer banks subsidized deposit insurance,
subsidized purchases of bad loans, or subsidized capital injections.
Crony capitalists will appeal for bank assistance on the basis of the “capitalcrunch” motive, while in fact hoping to channel government assistance for banks into
their own coffers (indeed, there is much anecdotal evidence that aid to Korean banks in
1997-1998 ended up being channeled to distressed chaebol). Thus, the central goal of
bank bailout policy is to design bank assistance to meet the legitimate goals of mitigating
credit supply contraction for value-creating bank-dependent borrowers, while minimizing
the potential abuse of assistance.
In this paper, we take it for granted that domestic banking systems will be helped,
even if, from the narrow economic standpoint, the likely costs of such assistance exceed
the likely benefits. To emphasize the importance of combining aid with proper incentives
for banks, however, it is worth pausing a moment to consider how costly assistance to
banks can be.
There have been over one hundred cases of banking system crises worldwide over
the past two decades (where a crisis is defined as losses to insolvent banks that exceed
one percent of GDP – see Beim and Calomiris 2001, Chapter 7). The direct costs of bank
bailouts are often above 20% of GDP and above 30% of GDP in the recent Asian crises
countries of Thailand, Korea, and Indonesia. Estimated resolution costs in Japan are
harder to estimate, but likely will exceed 20% of GDP. While that cost represents a
transfer of resources from taxpayers to bank claimants, rather than a loss to society as a
whole, there are significant social losses associated with such an enormous transfer. First,

5

the fiscal consequences of having to finance that transfer are disastrous, and often result
in substantial tax increases and severe currency depreciation, both of which are highly
distortionary. Furthermore, there are additional economic costs from foregone output in
the wake of the economic collapse that accompanies financial crises, and there are
additional deadweight costs from continuing to support inefficient, value-destroying
firms via the lifelines that distressed banks provide to distressed borrowers.
The magnitude of the transfers that accompany current day bailouts is staggering
in comparison to historical experience. Waves of bank insolvency used to be far less
frequent and far less costly to resolve. The cost of bailing out all the insolvent U.S. banks
during the Great Depression would have been roughly 3% of GDP. From 1870-1913,
there were seven major episodes of banking system insolvency worldwide (defining
major episodes as producing negative bank net worth in excess of 1% of GDP), and only
two of those produced situations where the negative net worth of insolvent banks
exceeded 5% of GDP; in both of those cases, bank losses did not exceed 10% of GDP
(Calomiris 2001).
The implication is clear: safety nets themselves, through their effects on bank
behavior have been a significant contributor to the cost of resolving bank distress
(Demirguc-Kunt and Detragiache 2000, Demirguc-Kunt and Huizinga 2000, Barth,
Caprio, and Levine 2001). And it is worth reiterating that one of the supposed benefits of
safety net assistance – limiting the reduction in bank credit supply in the wake of
macroeconomic shocks – is usually illusory: Financial crises produce the worst credit
crunches because “resurrection strategies” by banks magnify initial bank losses from
macroeconomic shocks and ultimately reduce credit supply accordingly. Once banking

6

systems collapse under the weight of safety net-induced risk taking, the ultimate credit
crunch is deeper and lasts longer (Caprio and Klingabiel 1996a, 1996b, Cull, Senbet and
Sorge 2000, Honahan and Klingabiel 2000, Boyd, Gomis, Kwak, and Smith 2000).

Important Policy Choices
The costs of government assistance to banks depend on the way rescues are
managed. The central questions of policy relevance do not revolve around whether to bail
out banks, but rather around the choice of which banks to rescue and the means for doing
so. If a rescue is handled skillfully, the cost can be much reduced.
First, bank rescues need not involve all banks. While new foreign entrants may
not be a perfect substitute for existing domestic franchises from the standpoint of
allocating loans to small and medium-sized businesses, that does not imply that all, or
even most, domestic banks are worth saving. If government can find a way to identify
and target relatively solvent banks with relatively high franchise values (a task made
easier by the fact that relatively healthy banks also tend to be the ones with higher
franchise values), and if it is politically feasible to limit assistance to those banks, then
the costs of a partial bailout could be much less than that of a system-wide bailout.
Second, to the extent that the rescue mechanism chosen to assist the designated
banks can be designed to minimize moral-hazard, the risk of continuing bank weakness
(and future government expenses on bailouts) can also be reduced substantially. For
example, conditions that limit the ability or incentive of banks to channel credit
inefficiently or to take on high risk after receiving infusions of government capital can
make assistance much more cost-effective.

7

The history of assistance to U.S. banks during the Great Depression illustrates
these themes well, and can provide useful lessons for Asia today. Section II reviews the
history of bank distress and assistance in the United States during the 1930s and
examines in detail the role of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation – how it targeted
banks, the effects of its assistance, the cost of providing assistance, and the way that it
tried to align bank incentives to protect against abuse of government protection. Section
III contrasts that experience with the recent government loans and preferred stock
purchases for Japanese banks. Section IV concludes with some specific policy
recommendations. We argue that combining subsidized preferred stock purchases with
mandatory matching contributions of common stock, limits on bank dividend payments,
and reforms of bank capital regulation that credibly incorporate market discipline into the
regulatory process would increase the benefits and reduce the costs of government
support for banks.

II. U.S. Bank Distress During the Great Depression
The banking crisis in the United States during the Great Depression provides a
useful historical example of how policy makers can balance the opposing needs of
protecting banks and maintaining market discipline over banks. The authorities managed
to mitigate the loss of capital in the banking system and its effects on credit supply, while
retaining market forces that continued to reward relatively prudent banks.
In this section, we begin with a review of the severity of the shocks banks faced
and the extent of bank distress. We show how market discipline transformed the
contraction in bank capital into a contraction in credit supply. At the same time, there

8

was an increase in the illiquidity of risky assets as the result of protracted bank asset
liquidation.
We then consider the response of the Reconstruction Finance Corporation to
banking system distress. Specifically, we present evidence on how the RFC combined
assistance with conditions for receiving assistance in a way that preserved market
discipline and protected the government from excessive exposure to loss.

The Severity of Bank Distress During the Depression
Measured by bank failure rates, depositor loss rates, or the extent of bank credit
contraction, the Great Depression was, and remains, the largest and most persistent shock
suffered by the U.S. banking system since (at least) the 1830s. Figure 1 presents data on
bank suspensions, monthly, from 1921-1936, and Figure 2 reports corresponding data on
the deposits of suspended banks. As these figures show, banking collapse during the
Great Depression was not a single event, but rather several waves of bank distress. As
Wicker (1996) and Calomiris and Mason (2003) show, these waves of bank failures
reflected fundamental shocks that were often region- and bank-specific – reflecting
region-specific shocks to income and bank-specific investment and risk management
choices. Contrary to the view espoused by Friedman and Schwartz (1963), which saw the
waves of bank failures as the result of autonomous waves of panic in the financial system
unrelated to prior fundamental disturbances, Calomiris and Mason (2003) find that when
one disaggregates by region and bank, it is possible to link prior local and national
shocks to subsequent bank failures. Calomiris and Mason (2003) find that autonomous
sources of bank failure (resulting either from “illiquidity crises” or failure “contagion”)

9

were not important prior to January-March 1933 (at the trough of the Depression); thus,
bank failures for most of the Depression period (1929-1932) reflected a similar process to
that of bank failure during previous economic downturns.
As during previous periods of national depression or regional agricultural distress
(e.g., the 1890s and the 1920s), the United States suffered larger numbers of bank failures
than countries experiencing comparable shocks. For example, Canada experienced few
bank failures in the 1930s (Haubrich 1990). The primary reason that the United States
suffered unusual rates of bank failure in response to shocks was the peculiar U.S. “unit
banking” system – that is, regulatory limits on bank branching that limited bank
opportunities to diversify their loan portfolios across locations (Calomiris 2000).
The consequences of bank distress for credit supply were large and protracted,
lasting several years beyond the March 1933 trough of the Depression, as noted by Fisher
(1933) and Bernanke (1983). Figures 3 and 4 shows the synchronous contraction in bank
capital and bank lending, expressed either as aggregates or as ratios to total assets.
Table 1 measures the extent of depositor losses during the period 1921-1942.
During the pre-Depression era, losses to depositors in failed banks during the preDepression era averaged roughly 5%. In contrast, losses suffered by depositors during the
Depression were several times larger. Since the 1860s (the period for which data are
available), the ratio of negative net worth of banks relative to GDP never exceeded one
tenth of one percent of GDP (which it reached in 1893). The combination of the high
failure rate and high depositor loss rate during the Depression produced a loss rate on
total deposits in excess of 2% in 1933, and a loss rate relative to GDP of roughly 3% for

10

the period 1929-1933 (measured as the ratio of total depositor losses relative to average
GDP, for the period 1930-1933).

The Role of Market Discipline in Limiting Bank Distress
Although these losses were large relative to previous U.S. experience, as we
noted above, they are quite small relative to the experiences of many countries today,
including many cases of countries experiencing much milder shocks than the economic
collapse of the Great Depression. The low loss rates of historical banking systems,
including that of the United States in the 1930s, reflected the presence of market
discipline. Calomiris and Wilson (2003) show that depositors of banks (and to a lesser
extent, their minority stockholders) required banks to hold capital commensurate with
their portfolio risk, effectively requiring banks to target low levels of default risk. Banks
that suffered losses on their investments were required to find ways to either curtail their
asset risk (cut credit) or increase capital (cut dividends) to restore their prior low risk of
default. Those that failed to do so suffered deposit withdrawals, as funds flowed to lower
risk banks and postal savings. When losses on investments were sufficiently sudden or
large, banks that failed to restore market confidence were forced to close.
The existence of deposit market discipline does not imply that all or even most
depositors were capable of judging bank balance sheet condition. Rather, as Calomiris
and Kahn (1991) suggest, discipline was concentrated in the hands of a few depositors
(often large depositors or interbank depositors) who had the wherewithal and the
incentive to monitor bank condition and react to deterioration in that condition. Passive
depositors could, of course, magnify the effects of withdrawals from monitoring

11

depositors by reacting with a lag to monitors’ withdrawals or other publicly available
signals of bank weakness (e.g., stock price declines, or newspaper accounts of bank
condition, which were widely available).
This process of market discipline is visible in a variety of facts about bank failure
and risk management. Table 2 reports the results of the “basic” bank survival model from
Calomiris and Mason (2003). The coefficients in Table 2 – derived from a model of bank
survival during the period 1930-1932 – show the effects of variation in bank or county
characteristics (which are observed periodically) on the predicted survival duration of
banks. As Table 2 shows, banks with lower net worth relative to assets, or with higher
portfolio risk tended to be less likely to survive, ceteris paribus. Portfolio risk is
measured here by bank size (smaller banks tend to be less diversified), and by asset
composition (riskier banks have higher proportions of non-cash assets, higher proportions
of risky “ineligible” loans, and higher holdings of dispossessed real estate). Other
variables related to the location of the bank (including county unemployment or reliance
on crop income) are also important determinants of bank distress.
Interestingly, Table 2 shows that liability mix is also important for predicting
bank survival, a result that echoes similar findings from many other studies of U.S. bank
failures in the 1920s and 1930s (Calomiris and Mason 1997). Calomiris and Mason
(2003) interpret the predictive power of liability mix as reflecting the fact that banks that
relied heavily on interbank deposits and bills payable for their funding had been rationed
from the consumer deposit market because of their higher than average probability of
default.

12

Calomiris and Wilson (2003) model the “capital crunch” phenomenon – the
tendency of falling bank capital (due to loan losses) to produce declines in subsequent
bank loan supply – and connect that phenomenon to market discipline by depositors.
They argue that a bank credit crunch requires two key assumptions: “risk-intolerant”
deposits and adverse-selection costs of raising new equity, both of which are the natural
result of bank specialization in creating private information about borrowers. Depositor
risk intolerance (a form of credit rationing in which depositors withdraw funds in
reaction to increased default risk) depends on asymmetric information about the quality
of the bank loan portfolio. Asymmetric information can motivate deposit rationing for
two reasons: agency costs, as in Calomiris and Kahn 1991, or depositors’ preferences for
claims that are easily accepted in secondary markets, as in Gorton and Pennacchi 1990.
Adverse-selection costs of raising equity are also a necessary ingredient to any marketdriven capital crunch; without adverse-selection costs of raising equity, banks would
typically prefer to respond to capital losses with new stock issues rather than with
shrinking credit supply.
Tables 3-5 provide more direct evidence on the relationships among bank capital,
loan losses, depositor discipline, and credit contraction from Calomiris and Wilson
(2003) using a sample of publicly traded New York City banks for the period 1920-1940.
As Table 3 shows, during the 1920s, as lending opportunities expanded and the economy
remained relatively healthy, bank asset risk expanded alongside the market capital ratio.
The growth in asset risk and capital ratios reflected substantial increases in banks’ loanto-asset ratios, and frequent bank stock offerings. With the exception of the postrecession year (1922), banks maintained constant and very low default risk during the

13

1920s, as measured by implied default premia on bank debt (derived from equity returns
and balance sheet data, using the Black-Scholes model). In the wake of the loan losses of
1929-1933, bank default risk rose substantially. In order to reestablish low default risk in
the face of declining capital, banks cut loans and accumulated cash to keep asset risk
from rising. They also cut dividends to mitigate the decline in their capital ratios. As
Table 3 shows, even as late as 1936 banks had not fully returned to their pre-1929 level
of default risk. The recession of 1937-1938 again produced loan losses and further
encouraged cuts in lending and dividends.
Table 4 reports the findings from an annual panel regression that examines the
role of deposit rationing in encouraging banks to adopt this strategy. The dependent
variable is individual bank deposit growth. Table 4 shows that banks with high default
premia lost more deposits than other banks. Table 5 in an annual panel regression shows
how banks cut dividends in response to capital scarcity. Banks with higher default risk
tended to cut dividends more. Banks with higher bid-ask spreads (where the bid-ask
spread is expressed as a percentage of stock value) also tended to cut dividends by more.
Calomiris and Wilson (2003) use the bid-ask spread as a proxy for high adverse-selection
costs of raising capital. They interpret the negative coefficient on the bid-ask spread in
Table 5 as indicating a precautionary demand for preserving capital by banks that knew
they faced high costs of raising capital if they were forced to do so.
The evidence in Tables 2-5 indicates that during the Great Depression U.S. banks
were subject to market discipline, which required them to respond to loan losses with
reduced lending and dividends. Market discipline was able to operate on banks in the
1930s because government assistance to banks was limited, and thus insolvent banks

14

were not protected from market discipline by the various forms of government assistance
that banks received. Assistance during the 1930s included loans from the Fed, loans and
preferred stock purchases from the Reconstruction Finance Corporation (RFC), and
federal deposit insurance on small deposits. Deposit insurance was limited to small
deposits (see Calomiris and White 1994), and banks that were insolvent in 1933 were not
permitted to qualify for deposit insurance in 1934. And, as we will discuss in detail
below, loans and preferred stock were supplied in a way that limited the potential abuse
of such assistance.
In today’s world of expanded safety nets and generous bailouts – as, for example,
in Japan – credit crunches can (and should) still occur, but typically depend on
regulatory, rather than market, discipline to link bank losses to contractions in risk. The
creation of a bank safety net makes it necessary to impose risk-based capital regulation to
protect against abuse of government protection. Risk-based capital regulation seeks to
mimic market discipline by measuring asset risk (e.g., loan default risk and interest rate
risk) and linking capital requirements to the level of bank risk.
Although this approach is generally not fully effective, and has been the subject
of much critical examination (Calomiris 1997, Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee
2000, Barth, Caprio and Levine 2001), it can serve to limit at least some means of bank
risk taking. For example, Baer and McElravey (1993) examined U.S. bank asset growth
in the 1980s (under the new regime of capital regulation and enforcement that was
enacted following the loan losses of the post-1986 period). They and others have found
that bank asset growth was closely related to the adequacy of regulatory capital. Banks
with low capital tended to grow the slowest.

15

Asset or loan growth, however, do not measure overall bank risk. Others have
found substantial evidence that true default risk may be high even when banks reduce
their loans to comply with risk-based capital standards. Thus, unlike market discipline
(which evaluates the overall riskiness of the bank), regulatory discipline based on rules of
thumb that measure bank risk will tend to invite “risk arbitrage” by regulated banks (the
search for asset positions whose risks are underestimated by regulatory capital standards).
We return to this problem in our discussion of Japan in Section III below, and in Section
IV’s discussion of policy options.

The Cumulative Effects of Banking Distress on Illiquid Asset Markets
Although market discipline was present in the 1930s, and insolvent banks were
allowed to fail, the removal of bank assets from bankers’ control did not imply the
speedy resolution of borrowers’ distress. Non-performing loans of insolvent banks were
not liquidated quickly during the Depression. As in many Asian countries today, as the
stock of failed banks’ loans accumulated, the speed of loan resolution slowed. This loan
resolution backlog effect is analyzed by Anari, Kolari, and Mason (2002). They find that
this measure of financial sector distress is a better forecaster of economic activity, and a
better explanatory variable for the persistence of output decline during the Depression,
than previously used measures of financial sector distress.
Figure 5 plots the cumulative “stock” of outstanding (unpaid) deposits in failed
national banks over time, their measure of the stock of unresolved bank assets. The
authors estimate this quantity using data on the speed of liquidations by receivers and
conservators of failed banks. Uninsured depositors were paid on a pro rata basis as the

16

asset liquidation of their failed bank proceeded. The average liquidation time for national
banks ran a little more than six years.
Anari, Kolari, and Mason cite numerous qualitative sources that saw the slow
pace of asset liquidation as a source of depositor illiquidity and reduced consumption.
Mason (2002) suggests that low liquidation speed was the result of concerns about the
real option forgone by selling into a liquidity-depressed market. Observers saw the
backlog of unsold assets as depressing investment; the vast supply of property put up for
sale depressed property values – which contributed to the unprecedented losses suffered
by depositors – and produced a form of gridlock in local markets. Buyers lacked liquidity
and sellers trying to realize the full value of assets were reluctant to sell at prices that
were perceived as containing a hefty illiquidity discount.
The important implication of this research is that system-wide bank failures pose
special costs to society, not just because of the loss of lending capacity by banks that
have lost capital, but additionally, because of the effects of bank asset liquidation on
consumer liquidity and the accentuated liquidity premium in property markets. It follows
that an additional benefit of assistance to banks, and counter-cyclical macroeconomic
policy, during a Depression is their positive effect on the liquidity of bank assets and
liabilities.

The Policy Response to Financial Sector Distress During the Depression
To understand the way central bankers and government officials responded to the
Depression one must be familiar with the histories of previous business cycles, which had
produced certain policy rules, and with the ways in which the shocks of the 1930s

17

differed from those of earlier business cycles. Of central relevance was the fact that, prior
to the interwar period, the price process under the classical gold standard tended to be
mean-reverting. As Eichengreen (1992) and Temin (1989) have noted, the establishment
of the interwar gold exchange standard suffered from a long-run deflationary bias which
was aggravated by the failure of coordination among central banks in response to shocks
to global liquidity.
As more and more countries began to return to gold in the mid-1920s, and as
income growth further increased the demand for gold, international imbalances produced
contractionary monetary policy in some countries (in keeping with the so-called “rules of
the game” for central banks under the gold standard), but that contraction was not offset
by appropriate expansion in other countries. World War I had undermined the ability of
the major countries to coordinate policy in response to this global deflationary shock.
Instead of working together to expand the global supply of money, central banks
scrambled for gold and shrank the world money supply, thus driving the price level down
and producing a global debt deflation.
The Fed was a relatively new institution as of 1929. It developed an approach to
counter-cyclical monetary policy during the 1920s that reacted to interest rates, free
reserves, and gold flows. Those policy reaction rules of thumb worked reasonably well in
the 1920s, but aggravated the contraction in monetary policy in the 1930s (Wheelock
1991, Calomiris and Wheelock 1998). In that deflationary environment, contrary to the
Fed’s interpretation, low nominal interest rates and high reserve holdings did not imply
loose monetary conditions.

18

The Fed’s role as a lender of last resort was ill-defined. The Federal Reserve Act
contemplated the role of the Fed as primarily influencing the seasonal availability of
reserves, not giving assistance to improve individual banks’ chances of survival, and
certainly not bailing out insolvent banks. And because the previous macroeconomic
environment had never witnessed the like of the monetary policy-induced collapse of the
1930s, the American experience with banking crises had never provided any motive for
interventionist policies to prop up banks. Banking panics in 1857, 1873, 1884, 1890,
1893, 1896, and 1907 were short-lived moments of confusion about the incidence of loss,
and resulted in few bank failures (Calomiris and Gorton 1991). They were very mild
affairs compared to the bank failure waves of the 1930s. Moreover, bank failures in
agricultural areas and nationwide bank panics were understood to be closely linked to the
fragmented unit banking system; rapid bank industry consolidation during the 1920s
seemed to point toward a more stable future.
The bank failures of the 1920s were severe in some agricultural areas, but were
directly linked to the post-World War I collapse of prices. That, along with the fact that
agricultural states that had enacted deposit insurance in the 1910s and 1920s experienced
the worst bank failure waves in the 1920s, led policy makers to view efforts to prop up
banks as counter-productive. Deposit insurance had been a disastrous policy when tried
at the state level, and the experience was fresh in the minds of policy makers in the late
1920s. The eight state deposit insurance systems lay in ruins at that time, and were
clearly and properly understood by observers (including President Roosevelt, who
opposed deposit insurance) as examples of what happens to banking systems that relax
the discipline of the marketplace (Calomiris 1989, 1990, Calomiris and White 1994).

19

The banking collapse of the 1930s, however, was simply too severe and too
widespread to be ignored, and politicians found in the severity of banking collapse new
opportunities. For Henry Steagall, the Depression offered the chance to pass a longdormant proposal for federal deposit insurance (which had been understood for fifty
years to be special interest legislation for small agricultural banks). For Carter Glass, the
Depression provided the opportunity to push through his decades-long quest to separate
commercial banks from capital markets by fostering the now discredited view that the
mixing of commercial and investment banking had caused banks to collapse during the
Depression (White 1986, Calomiris and White 1994).
Political opportunism was not the only reason for intervention in the landmark
Banking Act of 1933. Banks were collapsing as never before, and even surviving banks
were slashing credit. President Hoover’s initial reaction to bank collapse in 1930-1932
was understandably reluctant and cautious about federal assistance to distressed banks.
By January 1933, however, the financial system was in free fall. February and March saw
most states declaring banking holidays to avoid the runs that were bringing so many
banks down so quickly. The Fed, and the RFC, both of which had been making
collateralized loans to banks, were criticized for failing to provide adequate assistance.
And so, in March 1933, there was a sudden shift: a national bank holiday was
enacted, federal deposit insurance (for small deposit accounts) was passed, and the RFC
was authorized to purchase preferred stock in banks and other enterprises. Suspended
banks would be examined; those that were solvent would be permitted to reopen and join
the FDIC. Some would be nudged to solvency by the RFC, if necessary. Deeply insolvent
banks would be shut down. Perhaps even more importantly, President Roosevelt took the

20

country off of the gold standard. Deflation, and deflationary expectations, came to a halt.
Industrial production immediately began to recover. That same pattern of immediate
recovery was enjoyed by other countries that abandoned the gold standard in 1931, as
Eichengreen and Sachs (1985) show.

The Operation of the RFC
Initially (from its founding in February 1932 until July 21, 1932) the RFC
operated under the same conservative lending rules as the Fed. After the ouster of its
Chairman (who also served as Chairman of the Federal Reserve Board) in July, RFC
collateral standards were relaxed. Lending to banks and other firms grew thereafter.
Beginning in March 1933, the RFC’s preferred stock purchase program dominated its
assistance to banks, as shown in Table 6, and Figures 6 and 7.
Part of the shift to preferred stock reflected the widespread view that secured
loans did not stabilize weak banks (James 1938, p. 1044). Secured loans represented a
senior claim on bank assets relative to deposits, and thus effectively worsened the default
risk faced by junior depositors. Olson (1977, p. 154) writes that: “High collateral
requirements forced [banks] to isolate their most liquid assets as security for RFC loans.
In April 1932, for example, the Reconstruction Finance Corporation loaned the Reno
National Bank over $1,100,000, but in the process took as collateral over $3,000,000 of
the bank’s best securities. This in itself left the bank unable to meet any future emergency
demands for funds by depositors.” In Olson’s (1972, p. 177) view, loans from “…the
RFC helped only those basically sound enterprises which needed temporary liquidity.” It

21

was not a means of reducing default risk for a capital-impaired bank; thus, it provided
little relief to banks from default risk-intolerant market discipline.
Preferred stock, in contrast, was junior to bank deposits, and was not secured by
high-quality bank assets. Thus, it offered a means of lowering deposit default risk and
thus insulating risky banks from the threat of deposit withdrawal. By March 1934 the
RFC had purchased preferred stock in nearly half the commercial banks in the United
States. By June 1935, these RFC investments made up more than one third of the
outstanding capital of the banking system (Olson 1988, p. 82).
Mason (1996, 2001a) examines the relative effectiveness of loans and preferred
stock purchases by the RFC, after controlling for differences in the characteristics of
banks receiving both kinds of assistance. As Table 7 and Figure 8 show, using a model of
bank failure risk to compute exogenous probabilities of default, Mason found little
difference in the exogenous default risk of banks receiving loans vs. those receiving
preferred stock assistance. Table 8 examines the effects of the two types of assistance on
the probability of bank failure, after controlling for differences in exogenous
characteristics using a Heckman correction. According to these results, receiving a loan
from the RFC actually raised the probability of bank failure, while receiving preferred
stock assistance reduced the probability of failure.
Although this evidence indicates that preferred stock purchases were effective in
insulating banks from deposit withdrawal, it is important to emphasize that the RFC
preferred stock program was successful because it was neither too conservative nor too
liberal with its assistance. The RFC would have made little difference if it had only
targeted the lowest risk banks for its subsidies. As Figure 8 and Table 7 show, that was

22

not the case. At the same time, the RFC did not provide assistance to deeply insolvent
banks, nor would its assistance have been a sufficient subsidy to bail out such banks.
Moreover, the conditions attached to RFC preferred stock purchases served to limit bank
risk transference to the RFC, which ensured that preferred stock issuers had incentives to
limit risk. Thus capital-impaired (but not deeply insolvent) banks were offered protection
from market discipline essentially on condition that they did not abuse such protection by
transferring too much risk to the government.
How did RFC conditionality ensure this “happy medium” of controlled risk?
First, it offered limited subsidies to banks, and avoided trying to save “basket cases” (see
RFC Circular #1, 1932). The RFC required banks to submit their regulatory examinations
for RFC inspection, and banks that were judged as hopelessly insolvent were rejected.
Further evidence of the selective nature of assistance is provided in Table 9, which shows
that dividend rates on RFC preferred stock were typically less than one percent below
those earned in the marketplace, and were above market rates on short-term business
loans.
In part, the limited subsidy offered by the RFC reflected its independent corporate
status. The RFC was a separately capitalized institution – essentially, a governmentsponsored enterprise, not a budget line for the executive branch. Table 10 reviews the
financing structure of the RFC from its inception through the end of 1937. Its financial
independence led its chief executive, Jesse Jones, to see a need to make the RFC
profitable on a cash flow basis, and he proudly proclaimed that it never saw a year of
negative profit under his direction. That constraint, obviously, also limited the potential
size of the subsidy the RFC could offer. For this very limited subsidy to have made a

23

difference for bank failure risk (as Table 8 shows it did), recipients could not have been
deeply insolvent.
Second, many restrictions on recipients of RFC assistance ensured that banks
would not take advantage of RFC aid by increasing their default risk. The RFC was
intended to protect banks from a dramatic decline in their capital, but not to encourage
capital-impaired banks from imprudently expanding their portfolio risk. Indeed, the RFC
went to great pains to impose conditions that substituted for depositor discipline on bank
risk taking.
Those conditions included seniority of RFC dividends to all other stock dividends
and voting rights that effectively gave the RFC the ability to direct institutions toward
solvency and profitability and limit excessive risk. In many instances, the RFC used its
control rights to replace bank officers and significantly alter business practices (Upham
and Lamke 1934, p. 234, Cho 1953, pp. 29-34, Commercial and Financial Chronicle
1933, pp. 1625-6.).
The RFC preserved its seniority of claim on bank earnings by limiting common
stock dividend payments. Common stock dividends were strictly limited to a specified
maximum and remaining earnings were devoted to a preferred stock retirement fund.
Some firms avoided applying for RFC preferred stock purchases out of reluctance to
submit themselves to RFC authority.
Finally, although there were numerous attempts by politicians to influence RFC
decisions, Mason (2001b) suggests that the budgetary structure of the RFC and its
decentralized process of decision making insulated the RFC from political manipulation.
Field offices were given a large degree of autonomy over valuation of collateral and other

24

judgmental decisions, but were held accountable to the central office for having made
errors that impacted RFC earnings (Delaney 1954, pp. 47-8). Mason (1996) shows that
objective characteristics of recipients, including their financial condition, their economic
importance within their regions, and other reasonable economic criteria influenced the
RFC’s choice of recipients; purely political variables (e.g., locations connected to
prominent politicians) did not add explanatory power to models explaining the allocation
of RFC assistance.
As Figure 9 and Table 11 show, bank dividends fell dramatically from 1929 to
1934. To what extent was this decline in dividends, and other measures to limit bank
default risk, the result of RFC conditionality? Tables 12 and 13 examine the extent to
which the conditions attached to RFC assistance made a difference for the risk choices of
recipient banks. Table 12 divides banks into those that received RFC preferred stock
assistance between March 1933 and December 1934 and those that did not. Most of this
assistance was provided in late 1933. Table 12 compares mean bank characteristics of
recipients and non-recipients prior to, and subsequent to, preferred stock purchases.
Clearly, preferred stock recipients (with average failure probabilities of 0.056) were
much more at risk of failure as of 1933 than non-recipients (with average failure
probabilities of 0.021). Recipients’ probabilities of failure fell faster than non-recipients
from 1933 to 1934, and that relative decline in risk reflected much greater reductions in
dividend payout, much greater contraction of total assets in 1934, and less of a decline in
capital-to-asset ratios.
Table 13 examines the role of preferred stock conditionality on bank choice of
capital ratios and dividend payout more formally. Table 13A is a first-stage regression

25

predicting preferred stock assistance. Table 13B is the second-stage regression analyzing
the effect of preferred stock assistance on banks’ choices of dividends and capital ratios
(using a Heckman correction to control for the endogeneity of the preferred stock
assistance). The last two columns of Table 13B show that receiving preferred stock
assistance significantly increases banks’ capital ratios and reduces their dividend payout.
These results confirm that banks that received preferred stock assistance were effectively
constrained in the extent to which their stockholders could transfer risk to the RFC.
RFC preferred stock assistance was a way to help banks smooth the adjustment
process toward low default risk. It insulated banks from the threat of sudden deposit
withdrawal by reducing deposit default risk, but substituted RFC discipline for market
discipline to ensure that banks adopted prudent long-run risk management and capital
accumulation policies.

III. Recent Japanese Experience
The Japanese banking collapse of the 1990s occurred in a very different
institutional context from that of the U.S. banking collapse of the Great Depression. The
existence of implicit deposit insurance protection (which was made explicit in the 1990s)
meant that Japanese bank depositors were little concerned about the potential loss of
deposits placed in Japanese banks, and therefore, had scant incentive to exercise
discipline on banks.
Additionally, Japanese banks have much closer relationships with affiliated firms
than American banks have had traditionally, and Japanese banks own substantial equity
positions in those firms. That complicates the valuation of Japanese bank loan holdings,

26

since banks may have special obligations or incentives to absorb loan losses in ways that
are not transparent from an examination of balance sheet data. For example, Sheard
(1989) argues that main banks provide implicit insurance to other creditors that
participate in loans to their client firms. And there have been some recent claims that
equity investments in Japanese banks by client firms may represent “fictitious capital” in
the sense that bank borrowers may be encouraged to buy capital in exchange for
continuing credit access (which amounts to banks lending money for the purpose of
financing the purchase of bank stock).
Furthermore, reflecting the absence of market pressures on banks to provide
informative signals to private debtholders, Japanese accounting practices today are quite
different from American banks’ accounting practices in the 1930s, and much less
informative of actual bank condition. For all these reasons, the value of Japanese bank
investments (loans, stocks, and other assets) reported on balance sheets provides a poorer
indication of true value than do American bank accounts of the 1930s.
Indeed, the broad range of recent estimates of the amount of bad Japanese bank
loans and the likely recovery rates on those loans illustrate how difficult it is to glean
reality from reported statistics. As of the end of May 2001, the official estimate of
outstanding financial sector non-performing loans was Y34,000bn, but Goldman Sachs
calculates that in the “worst-case scenario” non-performing loans could be as high as
Y63,000. Bank insolvency and the extent of negative bank net worth in the U.S. during
the 1930s were relatively easy to observe because market discipline forced insolvent
banks to fail. In Japan, however, “zombie” banks (to use the expression coined by Ed
Kane) can continue almost indefinitely, and it is very hard to measure their insolvency.

27

Another important difference between the U.S. Depression experience and the
current Japanese context is the duration of bank distress, the seemingly endless waves of
increasing bank loan losses that plague Japanese banks. By most accounts, Japanese
banks have been inadequately capitalized for a decade, and many have been insolvent for
more than five years.
Japanese bank loan write downs totaled Y10 trillion a year in both 1997 and
1998, when Japanese banks began to write down loan losses in earnest. In 1999, two of
the most informed authorities on Japanese bank accounts and solvency, Takeo Hoshi and
Hugh Patrick (2000, p. 20), thought that Japanese banks had turned a corner: “Late 1998
and early 1999 was a significant turning point. The ‘crisis’ in the banking system is
finally over, though most banks still have substantial restructuring problems. Japan is
now in the process of building a new financial system.” Yet loan write downs in 1999
and 2000 were roughly Y4.5 trillion in each year. And despite these formidable write
downs, Japanese bank losses have continued to grow, as new non-performing loans
replace those that were previously written down.
This continuing growth in non-performing loans reflects new deterioration in
asset values and deflationary monetary policy, as well as previously unrecognized earlier
losses. After a decade of flat growth and shrinking asset prices, Japan is now seen by
many observers as poised at the precipice of economic collapse. Japan, like the U.S. in
the early 1930s, has been caught in a deflationary trap, albeit a much longer-lived one.
Deflation weakens firms’ and banks’ balance sheets, producing further weakening of
aggregate demand, and further deflation (Irving Fisher’s debt-deflation cycle).

28

The combination of government protection and a deflationary environment also
affects bank strategies toward loan liquidation. In the current environment, the backlog of
unresolved loans and weak corporate and bank balance sheets have created a massive
liquidity premium in asset pricing. Ten-year bonds yield 1.2% while stock prices and real
estate prices continue to slip. Banks, particularly in a regime of government deposit
insurance, have little incentive to hurry to liquidate the assets of their distressed
borrowers, especially since banks are shareholders in many of these firms. Making
matters worse is the historical absence of bankruptcy or liquidation procedures, which
makes orderly liquidation even more challenging. Thus the backlog continues alongside
continuing deflation and deepening loan losses.
Banks have received substantial assistance from the government. In addition to
anemic early programs to purchase bad loans from banks – an initiative that has so far not
produced much incentive for rational disposal of bad loans (see Packer 2000) – the
government has offered financial assistance to banks twice, in March 1998 and March
1999. Table 14 summarizes the amounts and types of assistance, and the terms and
conditions of that assistance. Like the RFC, the Japanese government began to offer
assistance primarily in the form of loans and debt purchases, and subsequently came to
rely almost exclusively on preferred stock purchases.
The new Prime Minister, Mr. Koizumi, promises painful structural reform of
government expenditure policy, and talks of the need to accelerate bank loan write
downs, which he says are the keys to rebuilding the Japanese economy. Some speculate
that more preferred stock assistance will be forthcoming to help spur debt write downs.
But nowhere in sight (given the current Bank of Japan leadership) is there a credible

29

commitment to ending deflationary monetary policy. Without that change, bank balance
sheets will continue to deteriorate and banks will continue to postpone liquidation in the
hope that they can profit from future improvements in macroeconomic circumstances (the
“real option” incentive problem described in Mason 2002).

Regulatory Discipline a Substitute for Market Discipline?
Figures 10-11 provide a picture of bank capital and lending behavior that differs
greatly from the patterns shown in Figures 3 and 4. The differences between Japanese
lending behavior and that of the 1930s is even greater when one takes into account the
understatement of Japanese capital losses during the early and mid-1990s. Japanese bank
lending ratios grew substantially from 1995-1997 as Japanese bank capital ratios
plummeted. The mid-1990s saw substantial increases in Japanese lending elsewhere in
Asia, which some observers have characterized as a search for ways to increase loan risk
in order to take full advantage of the implicit put option value of government protection.
After 1997, bank losses were too large and too visible to continue the masquerade of
denial, and international and domestic pressures came to bear on the Japanese
government to recognize loan losses and to restrict bank lending accordingly.
Figure 12 tells a somewhat similar story through the window of the bank marketto-book value of equity ratio, weighted by bank asset size. The expansion of asset risk in
1996 boosted the value of bank capital (which incorporates the value of the implicit put
option). Since 1997, the combination of loan losses and restrictions on bank lending have
caused the ratio of the market-to-book value of equity to plummet.

30

That is not to say that banks have been effectively constrained by regulators in
their pursuit of increased asset risk. In his forthcoming Columbia Business School
dissertation, Nobu Hibara (2001) finds that regulatory capital standards have effectively
linked bank loans to the total amount of book capital. Nevertheless, banks in the weakest
condition (for whom the put option of government protection is most valuable) gravitate
toward the lowest quality loans, and boost asset risk by increasing the riskiness of their
loan portfolio (Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito 1998).
To what extent has government assistance in March 1998 and March 1999 been
targeted to banks with the best franchises, and to what extent has it been linked to
effective conditionality that limits banks’ ability to transfer risk to the government? The
evidence in Table 14 indicates that the Japanese government did not try to target
assistance selectively. Virtually every bank of any significant size received preferred
stock assistance. If anything, it appears that the weakest Japanese banks (Nippon Credit
and LTCB) were the earliest (1998) recipients of preferred stock purchases. Due to the
small sample of banks and the uncertain quality of the balance sheet data, we were not
able to perform a satisfactory analysis of the differences in condition between banks that
received preferred stock assistance and those that did not.
Figure 13 plots dividend payments by banks from 1993 to 2001. Interestingly,
dividend payments fell dramatically in 1999, but then more than rebounded. Thus, as
Japanese banks continued to experience rising loan losses and declines in capital, they
kept sending much of the cash inflow that they received from the government in 1998
and 1999 to their shareholders. Clearly, this is at odds with the purpose of a preferred
stock purchase program.

31

IV. Policy Implications
The essential point of our comparison of U.S. banks in the 1930s and Japanese
banks in the 1990s is that, in the historical case, assistance to banks occurred within a
context of market discipline, and the conditions attached to government assistance helped
to strengthen market discipline. In the current Japanese case, in contrast, assistance was
offered within the context of an absence of market discipline, and there is little evidence
that conditions attached to assistance have encouraged banks to move toward effective
long-run risk management. In part that failure reflects the relative extremity of Japanese
bank distress, and in part, the lack of incentives of Japanese banks to limit the
transference of risk to the government.
Is it possible, in the current protected environment, for government to find a way
of providing a credible combination of financial assistance to banks and conditionality
that limits the abuse of that assistance? We think it is possible to apply the lessons of the
RFC to contemporary assistance programs.
Doing so requires the adoption of three related and mutually reinforcing means of
limiting bank abuse of protection: (1) designing programs of assistance that are selective,
and thus able to target financial assistance to banks that are worth preserving, (2)
specifying clear quantifiable rules that limit access to preferred stock assistance, and tie
assistance to effective risk management by recipient banks, and (3) enacting new ongoing
capital regulation that establishes meaningful standards for risk-based capital.
With respect to selectivity, Calomiris (1998, 1999) suggests using a common
stock issuance matching requirement to encourage the best banks to “self-select” to

32

participate in subsidized preferred stock purchases. That approach would attract capitalimpaired but relatively healthy banks with high franchise values, but discourage deeply
insolvent banks from applying for government subsidies. Those banks’ stockholders
would be unable to qualify for subsidized preferred stock purchases because they would
be unable to find willing purchasers of new matching common stock offerings. The
beauty of this self-selection mechanism is that it brings market judgements to bear on the
allocation of scarce government funds. It does not require the government to pick and
choose; the same preferred stock purchase program would be available to all banks, but
not all would be able to participate.
Limits on common stock dividend payments, among other conditions attached to
preferred stock purchases, are an obvious way to encourage banks to use the new lease on
life granted by government protection to rebuild their capital, rather than to engage in
strategies that maximize the option value of deposit insurance.
Emergency assistance to banks should be linked to a phasing in of credible capital
regulation. Effective risk-based capital regulation would protect taxpayers’ investments
in bank preferred stock and limit taxpayer liability for insured deposits in rescued banks.
It would also restore effective discipline on bank risk management in the future by
eliminating incentives for risk arbitrage.
Effective capital regulation must provide a credible and flexible means to measure
the riskiness of bank positions and the adequacy of bank capital. Thus, bank capital
regulation must focus on ways to incorporate market signals about underlying bank risk
into the regulatory process. Calomiris (1997, 1999) and Shadow Financial Regulatory
Committee (2000) have argued that a subordinated debt requirement (which can be

33

structured to take account of the particular types of debt instruments that are available in
each country) is an essential part of an effective capital requirement (see also Calomiris
and Powell 2000). A minimum ratio of subordinated debt relative to bank assets would
ensure that, on the margin, someone bears the default risk of bank debt. That would make
banks care about limiting their default risk in order to maintain the requisite outstanding
issues of subordinated debt. Furthermore, the observed market yield on subordinated debt
would be of great value to regulators for measuring and enforcing capital adequacy
standards. A visible public signal of bank health would provide supervisors with new
information. Even more important, by making bank weakness publicly observable, it
would promote greater accountability of supervisors and regulators and undermine the
destructive phenomenon of regulatory “forbearance.”
Of course, effective bank regulatory policy by itself cannot make a healthy
banking system (see Cargill, Hutchison, and Ito 1997). Stable monetary and fiscal policy
are necessary preconditions for healthy banks. In some countries, a lack of fiscal
discipline makes banks prey to attacks on currency pegs. In other cases, including the
United States in the early 1930s and Japan today, banking system recovery is dependent
on bringing deflationary monetary policy to an end.

34

References
Anari, Ali, James Kolari, and Joseph R. Mason (2002). “Bank Asset Liquidation and the
Propagation of the Great Depression.” Wharton Financial Institutions Center Working
Paper #02-35, (August).
Baer, Herbert L., and John N. McElravey (1993). “Capital Shocks and Bank Growth,”
Economic Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (July/August).
Barth, James, Gerard Caprio, Jr., and Ross Levine (2001). “Prudential Regulation and
Supervision: What Works Best.” Working Paper, The World Bank.
Beim, David O., and Charles W. Calomiris (2001). Emerging Financial Markets. New
York: McGraw-Hill.
Bernanke, Ben S. (1983). “Nonmonetary Effects of the Financial Crisis in the
Propagation of the Great Depression,” American Economic Review 73 (June): 257-76.
Boyd, John, Pedro Gomis, Sungkyu Kwak, and Bruce Smith (2000). A User’s Guide to
Banking Crises, Working Paper, University of Minnesota.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1989). “Deposit Insurance: Lessons from the Record,” Economic
Perspectives, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago (May/June): 10-30.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1990). “Is Deposit Insurance Necessary?” Journal of Economic
History (June): 283-95.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1997). The Postmodern Bank Safety Net, Washington: American
Enterprise Institute.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1998). “Revitalizing Ailing Banks,” Nikko Capital Trends 3
(May): 3, 10.
Calomiris, Charles W. (1999). “Building an Incentive-Compatible Safety Net,” Journal of
Banking and Finance 23 (October): 1499-1519.
Calomiris, Charles W. (2000). U.S. Bank Deregulation in Historical Perspective,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Calomiris, Charles W. (2001). “Victorian Perspectives on the Banking Collapses of the
1980s and 1990s,” Working Paper, Columbia Business School.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Mark S. Carey (1994). “Loan Market Competition Between
Foreign and Domestic Banks: Some Facts About Loans and Borrowers,” Proceedings of

35

the 30th Annual Conference on Bank Structure and Competition, Federal Reserve Bank of
Chicago, 331-51.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Gary Gorton (1991). “The Origins of Banking Panics:
Models, Facts, and Bank Regulation,” in R. Glenn Hubbard, ed., Financial Markets and
Financial Crises, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 109-73.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Charles M. Kahn (1991). “The Role of Demandable Debt in
Structuring Optimal Banking Arrangements,” American Economic Review 81 (June):
497-513.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason (1997). “Contagion and Bank Failures
During the Great Depression: The June 1932 Chicago Banking Panic,” American
Economic Review 87 (December): 863-83.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Joseph R. Mason (2003). “Fundamentals, Panics, and Bank
Distress During the Depression,” Working Paper, Columbia Business School.
This paper is a revised version of “Causes of U.S. Bank Distress During the Depression,”
revised version of NBER Working Paper No. 7919, September 2000.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Andrew Powell (2000). “Can Emerging Market Bank
Regulators Establish Credible Discipline? The Case of Argentina, 1992-1999,” in F. S.
Mishkin, ed., Prudential Supervision, Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
forthcoming.
Calomiris, Charles W., and David C. Wheelock (1998). “Was the Great Depression a
Watershed for American Monetary Policy?” in M. Bordo, C. Goldin, and E. N. White,
eds., The Defining Moment: The Great Depression and the American Economy in the
Twentieth Century, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 23-66.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Eugene N. White (1994). “The Origins of Federal Deposit
Insurance,” in Claudia Goldin and Gary Libecap, eds., The Regulated Economy: A
Historical Approach to Political Economy, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 14588.
Calomiris, Charles W., and Berry Wilson (2003). “Bank Capital and Portfolio
Management: The 1930s ‘Capital Crunch’ and Scramble to Shed Risk,” Working Paper,
Columbia University, forthcoming in the Journal of Business. This paper is a revised
version of NBER Working Paper No. 6649, July 1998.
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingabiel (1996a). “Bank Insolvencies: Cross-Country
Experience,” Working Paper No. 1620, The World Bank.
Caprio, Gerard, Jr., and Daniela Klingabiel (1996b). “Bank Insolvency: Bad Luck, Bad
Policy, or Bad Banking?” Annual Bank Conference on Development Economics, The
World Bank.

36

Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison, and Takatoshi Ito (1997). The Political
Economy of Japanese Monetary Policy. Cambridge and London: MIT Press.
Cargill, Thomas F., Michael M. Hutchison, and Takatoshi Ito (1998). “The Banking
Crisis in Japan.” Preventing Bank Crises: Lessons From Recent Global Bank Failures.
Washington, DC: World Bank EDI Development Studies, 173-93.
Cho, Hyo Won (1953). The Evolution of the Functions of the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation: A Study of the Growth and Death of a Federal Lending Agency, Ph.D.
Dissertation, Ohio State University.
Cull, Robert, Lemma W. Senbet, and Marco Sorge (2000). “Deposit Insurance and
Financial Development,” Working Paper, The World Bank.
Delaney, John A. (1954). Field Administration in the Reconstruction Finance
Corporation, Ph.D. Dissertation, George Washington University.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Ross Levine (1998). “Opening to Foreign Banks: Stability,
Efficiency, and Growth,” Working Paper, The World Bank.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Enrica Detragiache (2000). “Does Deposit Insurance Increase
Banking System Stability?”, Working Paper, The World Bank.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli, and Harry Huizinga (2000). “Market Discipline and Financial
Safety Net Design,” Working Paper, The World Bank.
Eichengreen, Barry (1992). Golden Fetters: The Gold Standard and the Great
Depression, 1919-1939. New York: Oxford University Press.
Eichengreen, Barry, and Jeffrey D. Sachs (1985). “Exchange Rates and Economic
Recovery in the 1930s,” Journal of Economic History 45 (December): 925-46.
Fisher, Irving (1933). “The Debt-Deflation Theory of Great Depressions,” Econometrica
1 (October): 337-57.
Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz (1963). A Monetary History of the United
States, 1867-1960, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Gorton, Gary, and George Pennacchi (1990). “Financial Intermediaries and Liquidity
Creation,” Journal of Finance 45 (March): 49-72.
Hibara, Nobu (2001). “What Happens in Banking Crises? Moral Hazard vs. the Credit
Crunch,” Working Paper, Columbia Business School, June.

37

Haubrich, Joseph G. (1990). “Nonmonetary Effects of Financial Crises: Lessons from the
Great Depression in Canada,” Journal of Monetary Economics 25 (March): 223-52.
Honohan, Patrick, and Daniela Klingabiel (2000). “Controlling Fiscal Costs of Banking
Crises,” Working Paper, The World Bank.
Hoshi, Takeo, and Hugh Patrick, Editors (2000). Crisis and Change in the Japanese
Financial System. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
James, Cyril F. (1938). The Growth of Chicago Banks, New York: Harper & Bros.
Kane, Edward (1998). “Capital Movements, Asset Values, and Banking Policy in
Globalized Markets,” NBER Working Paper No. 6633.
Krueger, Anne O., and Jungho Yoo (2001). “Chaebol Capitalism and the CurrencyFinancial Crisis in Korea,” NBER Conference on Currency Crises Prevention,
Islamorada Florida, January.
Mason, Joseph R. (1996). The Determinants and Effects of Reconstruction Finance
Corporation Assistance to Banks During the Great Depression. Ph.D. Dissertation,
University of Illinois.
Mason, Joseph (2002). “A Real Options Approach to Bankruptcy Costs: Evidence from
Failed Commercial Banks During the 1990s.” Wharton Financial Institutions Center
Working Paper # 02-20 (March).
Mason, Joseph R. (2001a). “Do Lender of Last Resort Policies Matter? The Effects of
Reconstruction Finance Corporation Assistance to Banks During the Great Depression,”
Journal of Financial Services Research 20 (September): 77-95.
Mason, Joseph R. (2001b). “RFC Assistance to Financial Intermediaries and Commercial
and Industrial Enterprises in the U.S., 1932-1937,” in Simeon Djankov, ed., Resolving
Financial Distress. Washington: World Bank Press, 167-204.
Olson, James S. (1972). “The End of Voluntarism: Herbert Hoover and the National
Credit Corporation,” Annals of Iowa 41 (Fall): 1104-13.
Olson, James S. (1977). Herbert Hoover and the Reconstruction Finance Corporation,
1931-1933, Ames, Iowa: Iowa State University Press.
Olson, James S. (1988). Saving Capitalism, Princeton: Princeton University Press.
Packer, Frank (2000). “The Disposal of Bad Loans in Japan: The Case of the CCPC,” in
Takeo Hoshi and Hugh Patrick, eds., Crisis and Change in the Japanese Financial
System. Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers, 2000, pp. 137-57.

38

Rojas-Suarez, Liliana (2001). “Rating Banks in Emerging Markets: What Credit Rating
Agencies Should Learn from Financial Indicators,” Working Paper, Institute for
International Economics, March.
Shadow Financial Regulatory Committee (2000). Reforming Bank Capital Regulation,
Washington: American Enterprise Institute.
Sheard, Paul (1989). “The Main Bank System and Corporate Monitoring and Control in
Japan,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization 11: 399-422.
Temin, Peter (1989). Lessons from the Great Depression, Cambridge MA: MIT Press.
Upham, Cyril B., and Edwin Lamke (1934). Closed and Distressed Banks: A Study in
Public Administration, Washington: The Brookings Institution.
Wheelock, David C. (1991). The Strategy and Consistency of Federal Reserve Monetary
Policy, 1924-1933, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
White, Eugene N. (1986). “Before the Glass-Steagall Act: An Analysis of the Investment
Banking Activities of National Banks,” Explorations in Economic History 23 (January):
33-55.
Wicker, Elmus (1996). The Banking Panics of the Great Depression, Cambridge:
Cambridge University Press.

Figure 1
Number of Bank Suspensions, Monthly, 1921-1936
600

Bank
Holiday,
3,460
Suspensions

Number of Banks

500

400

300

200

100

Jan-21
Jul-21
Jan-22
Jul-22
Jan-23
Jul-23
Jan-24
Jul-24
Jan-25
Jul-25
Jan-26
Jul-26
Jan-27
Jul-27
Jan-28
Jul-28
Jan-29
Jul-29
Jan-30
Jul-30
Jan-31
Jul-31
Jan-32
Jul-32
Jan-33
Jul-33
Jan-34
Jul-34
Jan-35
Jul-35
Jan-36
Jul-36

0

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. "Federal Reserve Bulletin," September 1937, p. 907.

Figure 2
Deposits in Suspended Banks, Monthly Flow, 1921-1936 (Thousands of $)
500,000
450,000
400,000

Thousands of $

350,000
300,000

Bank Holiday,
$3,276,368,000
in Suspended
Banks

250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000
Jan-21
Jul-21
Jan-22
Jul-22
Jan-23
Jul-23
Jan-24
Jul-24
Jan-25
Jul-25
Jan-26
Jul-26
Jan-27
Jul-27
Jan-28
Jul-28
Jan-29
Jul-29
Jan-30
Jul-30
Jan-31
Jul-31
Jan-32
Jul-32
Jan-33
Jul-33
Jan-34
Jul-34
Jan-35
Jul-35
Jan-36
Jul-36

0

Source: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. "Federal Reserve Bulletin," September 1937, p. 909.

Figure 3: Bank Capital and Bank Lending, 1921-1937
9,000

30,000

8,500

Bank Lending
(Right-hand Scale)

8,000

25,000

20,000

7,000
6,500

15,000

Bank Capital
(Left-hand Scale)

6,000

10,000

5,500
5,000

5,000

4,500

Call Date

Source: Mason (2001b).

Apr-37

Apr-36

Apr-35

Apr-34

Apr-33

Apr-32

Apr-31

Apr-30

Apr-29

Apr-28

Apr-27

Apr-26

Apr-25

Apr-24

Apr-23

Apr-22

Apr-21

4,000

$ Millions

$ Millions

7,500

Figure 4: Capital-to-Asset and Loan-to-Asset Ratios, All Member Banks,
1927-1939 Call Dates
0.60

0.17
Capital-to-Asset Ratio
(Right-hand Scale)

0.55

0.16
0.15

0.50

0.14

0.45

0.13
0.40
0.12
0.35

0.11

Loan-to-Asset Ratio
(Left-hand Scale)

0.30

0.10

Source: Mason (2001b).

Mar-39

Mar-38

Mar-37

Mar-36

Mar-35

Mar-34

Mar-33

Mar-32

Mar-31

Mar-30

0.08
Mar-29

0.20
Mar-28

0.09

Mar-27

0.25

Table 1: Losses on Deposits in Suspended Banks, Annual, 1921-1942

Year
Pre-FDIC:
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933

Number of
Suspensions

Deposits
($ thousands)

506
366
646
775
617
975
669
498
659
1,350
2,293
1,453
4000*

172,806
91,182
149,601
210,150
166,937
260,153
199,332
142,386
230,643
837,096
1,690,232
706,187
3,596,708

Losses Relative Losses Relative
to Deposits in
to Deposits in
All Commercial
Suspended
Losses Borne by
Banks
Banks
Depositors
(percent)
(percent)
($ thousands)
59,967
38,223
62,142
79,381
60,799
83,066
60,681
43,813
76,659
237,359
390,476
168,302
540,396

Post-FDIC:
1934
61
37,332
6,502
1935
31
13,902
600
1936
72
28,100
185
1937
82
33,877
155
1938
80
58,243
293
1939
71
158,627
1,374
1940
48
142,787
57
1941
17
29,797
33
1942
23
19,517
20
*Includes banks suspended under Bank Holiday of March 1933.
Source: Friedman and Schwartz (1963), p. 438 and Authors' calculations.

34.70%
41.92%
41.54%
37.77%
36.42%
31.93%
30.44%
30.77%
33.24%
28.36%
23.10%
23.83%
15.02%

0.21%
0.13%
0.19%
0.23%
0.16%
0.21%
0.15%
0.10%
0.18%
0.57%
1.01%
0.57%
2.15%

17.42%
4.32%
0.66%
0.46%
0.50%
0.87%
0.04%
0.11%
0.10%

0.0228%
0.0018%
0.0005%
0.0004%
0.0008%
0.0033%
0.0001%
0.0001%
0.0000%

Table 2: Survival Regression for Individual Fed Member Banks, Dependent Variable: Log Probability of Survival (Daily)
Full Sample of Fed Member Banks (Standard Errors in Parentheses)
(Cont’d)
Constant

6.044
(0.283)

Log (Total Assets)

0.105
(0.011)

State-Chartered Bank Indicator

0.136
(0.031)

Log (Number of Branches)

-0.012
(0.006)

Deposit Market Share of Bank

0.259
(0.099)

Non-Cash Assets/Total Assets

-0.845
(0.124)

Loans/Other Non-Cash Assets

-0.229
(0.058)

Loans Eligible for Discount/Loans

0.115
(0.054)

Losses on Assets and Trading/Assets

0.027
(0.049)

Real Estate Owned/Non-Cash Assets

-3.415
(0.331)

(Change in Bond Yield)x(Securities)

-0.247
(0.239)

Net Worth/Assets

1.700
(0.184)

Share of Demand Dep.+Due to Banks

-0.164
(0.059)

Share of Deposits Due to Banks

-0.478
(0.203)

Share of Assets Due From Banks

0.059
(0.060)

Bills Payable+Rediscounts/Deposits

-1.490
(0.146)

Private Bills Payable/Total Bills Payable

-0.126
(0.050)

Interest Paid on Debt/Debt

-0.671
(0.428)

Crop Inc/Crop+Man. Inc in Co. 1930

0.317
(0.093)

Pasture Share of Farm Acres in Co. 1930

0.063
(0.063)

Value of Grains/Crop Value in Co. 1930

-0.016
(0.058)

Unemployment in Co. 1930

-1.204
(0.315)

Percentage of Small Farms in Co. in 1930

-0.075
(0.052)

(Investment)x(Crop Inc. Share) in Co. 1930

0.139
(0.036)

State Bank Share in Co. in 1930

-0.288
(0.047)

Lagged Value Building Permits in State

0.054
(0.010)

Lagged Liab. Failed Bus./Income in State

-0.005
(0.004)

Growth of Agric. Prices in Nation

-0.086
(0.264)

Growth of Liab. Of Failed Bus. In Nation

-0.057
(0.054)

Time

0.044
(0.001)

No. Observations (Bank-Months)
Log Likelihood
Source: Calomiris and Mason (2003).

269,683
-11,704

Table 3 Financial Ratios and Default Risk for a Stable Sample of 12 New York City Banks
Year

MVE / BVE

E/A %

SA

1920
1921
1922
1923
1924
1925
1926
1927
1928
1929
1930
1931
1932
1933
1934
1935
1936
1937
1938
1939
1940

1.23
1.40
1.51
1.54
1.89
2.36
2.27
2.81
3.82
2.80
2.06
1.02
1.16
0.88
0.98
1.34
1.32
0.94
0.91
1.39
0.93

16.73
18.03
18.40
20.25
21.70
24.77
26.10
32.16
34.16
33.10
26.86
18.54
19.24
15.02
13.88
16.96
16.74
12.95
12.05
14.70
9.55

2.33
2.78
4.27
1.85
3.72
5.49
2.88
5.89
8.28
17.45
8.32
8.03
10.62
6.10
3.75
6.32
4.31
3.74
3.49
5.55
2.01

BID-ASK %
2.53
2.41
2.09
1.73
1.78
1.47
1.26
1.47
2.58
2.74
2.05
4.18
5.64
5.41
5.48
4.41
3.66
4.28
5.49
5.63
6.71

P

St.Dev. P

0.00
0.0
0.30
1.0
7.75 26.5
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.07
0.2
0.00
0.0
0.00
0.0
0.08
0.2
33.46 71.3
1.24
2.8
9.18 10.4
34.73 46.8
41.69 112.5
11.72 40.5
23.09 75.4
1.32
4.5
0.60
1.0
7.08 19.5
0.50
1.6
2.14
7.4

MVA
306
317
363
352
434
482
530
573
858
1045
998
739
712
641
781
907
976
863
923
1133
1260

Source: Calomiris and Wilson (2003)
Note: The “stable sample” is defined as the sample of banks that are present in the data base throughout the
period. The sample of banks is restricted to banks with available stock prices, as described in the Data
Appendix. Data are measured at year end.
Variable Definitions:
MVE =
BVE =
E/A =
SA =
BID-ASK =
P-VALUE
St. Dev. P
MVA

average market value of equity
average book value of equity
average market capital-to-asset ratio
average asset volatility (standard deviation of asset returns)
average bid-ask spread as a percentage of share price
average deposit default premium in basis points (1.00 = 1 basis point)
standard deviation of P
average market value of assets ($million)

1

Table 4 Deposit Growth Regressions
Dependent Variable: Annual Percentage Change in Deposits.
Standard Errors in Parentheses.
Asterisks indicate coefficients that are significant at below the 5% significance level.
Variable

OLS
(1)

2SLS
(2)

OLS
(3)

2SLS
(4)

Constant

9.528*
(1.038)

10.234*
(1.093)

12.526*
(2.415)

14.192*
(2.547)

P

-0.0497*
(0.0136)

-0.1166*
(0.0289)

-0.0514*
(0.0137)

-0.1293*
(0.0301)

Trust Co.

-4.476
(2.809)

-5.275
(2.906)

Nat. Bank

-2.181
(2.998)

-2.995
(3.094)

Lagged Ind. Prod.

-2.678
(6.594)

-6.689
(6.915)

Adj. R-Sq.

0.021

0.026

0.021

0.028

Source: Calomiris and Wilson (2003).
Notes: P is the (end-of-year) deposit default premium, derived from the Black Scholes model, using
stock returns and balance sheet data over the last six months of the year. Nat. Bank and Trust Co. are
indicator variables for national banks and state trust companies. In the two-stage-least squares (2SLS)
regressions, P is treated as an endogenous variable, and the list of instruments includes lagged values of
the following variables: the market capital-to-asset ratio, the implied standard deviation of returns to
assets, and growth in industrial production.

2

Table 5 Dividend Growth Regressions (1929-1939)
Dependent Variable is Annual Percentage Change in Dividends.
Standard Errors in Parentheses.
Asterisks indicate coefficients that are significant at below the 5% significance level.
Variable

(1)

(2)

(3)

Constant

3.77
(4.13)

6.75
(8.91)

7.85
(9.21)

ba

-1.91*
(0.65)

-1.78*
(0.67)

-1.81*
(0.75)

P

-0.115*
(0.055)

-0.131*
(0.057)

-0.131*
(0.061)

ba-1

-0.225
(0.684)

P-1

0.02
(0.08)

year29
year30
year31
year32
year33
year34
year35
year36
year37
year38
Adj. R-Sq.

0.05

11.31
(11.01)
-22.31*
(10.75)
-1.16
(11.12)
-9.70
(11.76)
-11.12
(11.75)
-2.12
(11.81)
-2.86
(11.81)
-0.74
(11.69)
1.89
(11.66)
0.36
(11.66)

11.42
(11.15)
-22.38*
(11.00)
-1.35
(11.27)
-9.74
(11.90)
-11.16
(11.87)
-2.55
(12.00)
-3.09
(11.91)
-0.65
(11.81)
2.27
(11.83)
0.26
(11.76)

0.06

0.05

Source: Calomiris and Wilson (2003)
Notes: ba and P are the end-of-year bid-ask spread and deposit default premium. 1939 is the omitted year
dummy.

Figure 5: Failed National Bank Deposit Flows and Stocks: Monthly, January 1921-December 1940.
$1,400,000,000

$1,200,000,000

Stock of
Depos its in
Failed National
Banks

$1,000,000,000

$800,000,000

$600,000,000

Inflow of
Depos its in
Failed
National
Banks

$400,000,000

$200,000,000

Source: Anari, Kolari, and Mason (2002).

39
40
1-

1-

37
38
1-

1-

35
36
1-

1-

33
34
1-

1-

31
32
1-

1-

29
30
1-

1-

27
28
1-

1-

25
26
1-

1-

23
24
1-

1-

1-

1-

21
22

$0

Figure 6: RFC Authorizations Under Four Corporate Assistance Programs, Quarterly, 1932-1937
1,000
900
800
700

$ Millions

600
500

C&I Loans
Preferred Stock
Railroad Loans
FI Loans

400
300
200
100

1Q

19
2Q 32
19
3Q 32
19
4Q 32
19
1Q 32
19
2Q 33
19
3Q 33
19
4Q 33
19
1Q 33
19
2Q 34
19
3Q 34
19
4Q 34
19
1Q 34
19
2Q 35
19
3Q 35
19
4Q 35
19
1Q 35
19
2Q 36
19
3Q 36
19
4Q 36
19
1Q 36
19
2Q 37
19
3Q 37
19
4Q 37
19
37

0

Source: Mason (2001b).

Figure 7: Amounts Authorized to Open Banks Under the RFC Loan and Preferred Stock
Programs, Monthly, 1932 - 1936
450
400
350

Preferred Stock

$ Millions

300

Loans

250
200
150
100
50
Oct-36

Jul-36

Apr-36

Jan-36

Oct-35

Jul-35

Apr-35

Jan-35

Oct-34

Jul-34

Apr-34

Jan-34

Oct-33

Jul-33

Apr-33

Jan-33

Oct-32

Jul-32

Apr-32

Jan-32

0

Source: Mason (2001b).
Note: Figure includes only loans to open banks. Does not include loans to receivers or those made on preferred stock. The RFC preferred stock program
began in March 1933. Preferred stock includes investments made through notes and debentures to banks in states that prohibited preferred stock
investments.

Table 6: Preferred Stock vs. Loans, February 1932-December 1936
Preferred Stock

Notes and Debentures

Month

Number of
Authorizations

Amount of
Authorizations
($ millions)

Number of
Authorizations

Jan-28
Feb-28
Mar-28
Apr-28
May-28
Jun-28
Jul-28
Aug-28
Sep-28
Oct-28
Nov-28
Dec-28
Jan-29
Feb-29
Mar-29
Apr-29
May-29
Jun-29
Jul-29
Aug-29
Sep-29
Oct-29
Nov-29
Dec-29
Jan-30
Feb-30
Mar-30
Apr-30
May-30
Jun-30
Jul-30
Aug-30
Sep-30
Oct-30
Nov-30
Dec-30
Jan-31
Feb-31
Mar-31
Apr-31
May-31
Jun-31
Jul-31
Aug-31
Sep-31
Oct-31

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
4
3
12
20
27
24
23
27
11
795
1063
200
269
171
279
234
158
127
106
95
71
152
122
38
33
22
30
32
34
34
8
11
7

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
13.68
7.40
9.11
4.84
12.73
2.90
3.76
6.33
18.07
181.15
141.85
53.50
74.96
25.71
41.56
27.61
12.74
11.22
10.62
20.78
9.20
16.29
13.69
2.50
1.64
2.00
5.12
6.36
7.03
3.11
25.12
1.20
5.78

NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
NA
0
1
0
0
0
1
0
2
23
1250
1128
107
101
71
56
45
55
41
26
38
19
24
28
9
15
9
6
12
46
27
10
7
2

Loans to All Banks

Number of
Applications
(Authorizations
Amount of
Amount of
Authorizations used where no Authorizations
data was
($ millions)
($ millions)
available on
applications)
NA
108
45.27
NA
821
108.16
NA
1296
153.08
NA
1181
114.50
NA
1172
236.43
NA
1099
97.37
NA
899
85.06
NA
515
28.98
NA
484
21.45
NA
462
22.26
NA
633
49.79
551
NA
46.92
612
NA
89.37
0.00
702
74.78
0.20
234
60.66
0.00
193
64.11
0.00
160
38.84
0.00
112
100.91
0.50
148
36.18
0.00
103
20.97
25.04
108
104.57
71.70
195
40.54
129.72
358
109.03
258.54
447
53.06
18.25
356
36.67
23.28
289
55.48
4.05
279
47.61
5.43
161
32.70
6.61
138
19.08
2.73
111
40.04
15.91
90
104.73
1.87
63
11.74
2.90
97
26.53
1.03
97
20.85
1.85
133
22.78
1.83
46
12.14
0.79
80
9.72
1.41
92
15.78
0.25
75
10.73
0.07
72
21.13
0.44
56
14.10
1.17
44
10.05
0.84
45
7.04
6.18
47
7.45
0.31
42
6.23
0.07
48
13.49

Loans to Receivers/Conservators

Number of
Authorizations

Amount of
Authorizations
($ millions)

0
3
104
107
85
24
50
46
21
30
57
31
28
23
35
62
55
45
90
54
61
133
298
419
339
260
269
147
124
95
84
60
90
90
124
41
73
85
69
69
49
38
42
46
41
47

0.00
0.85
5.86
5.95
11.09
1.23
7.77
4.43
1.67
2.84
5.52
2.82
3.62
4.20
46.76
35.86
21.47
93.89
17.38
11.81
98.34
32.47
101.45
45.14
34.34
47.86
39.06
28.62
17.87
39.08
103.32
10.56
26.22
19.70
21.52
11.71
8.62
11.31
7.95
21.05
13.97
9.18
5.87
7.42
6.23
13.42

Figure 8: Distribution of Condition of Banks Receiving Assistance
Number of Banks Receiving
Assistance

60
50

Loans

40

Preferred Stock

30
20
10
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Predicted Probability of Bank Failure Based on Exogenous Characteristics,
December 31, 1931

Source: Mason (1996).

Table 7: Test of the Difference Between
the Mean Predicted Probability of Bank
Failure Based on Exogenous
Characteristics: Banks Receiving RFC
Loans and Preferred Stock
Banks
Receiving
Loans
Mean
0.31
Std. Dev
0.08
Source: Mason (1996).

Banks
Receiving
Preferred
Stock
0.29
0.10

t-Statistic
for
Difference
Between
Means
1.32

Table 8: Accelerated Failure Time Models with RFC Loans and
Preferred Stock Purchases
The model measures the determinants of log survival time, measured in days, from
December, 31, 1931 to December 31, 1935. Both survival models use a Weibull
parameterization. Bank financial data are from Federal Reserve Reports of Condition
and Income . RFC loan and preferred stock data are from monthly Reports of Activity
of the RFC . The RFC variable in the first column pertains to loans, while that in the
second column pertains to preferred stock purchases. Standard errors are in
parentheses.
Variable Name:
Constant

(1)

(2)

11.723 ***
(1.693)

Illiquid Assets / Total Assets

-8.220

***

(1.566)
Bonds, Stocks, and Securities Owned /
Illiquid Assets
Real Estate Owned / Illiquid Assets
Loans and Discounts / Illiquid Assets

3.225

***

(1.252)

Net Worth / Total Assets

3.406
(3.415)
***
**

(0.591)
2.040
-3.722
-1.763

Losses / Total Expenses

*

1.283

***

-2.750

***

(1.145)
**

-0.588
(0.704)

1.187

-0.222
(1.056)

-3.663

***

1.375

(1.135)
-1.058

***

(1.225)

***

(0.415)
Predicted Probability of RFC Loan

2.811

(0.513)

(0.904)
Recoveries / Total Earnings

***

(0.819)

(1.378)
Interest and Discount on Loans / Total Earnings

2.568

4.843

1.191

***

(1.031)

(1.384)
Bills Payable and Rediscounts / Debt

-3.564

(3.791)
3.975

***

(1.089)

(0.983)
Paper Eligible for Rediscount at the Fed /
Loans and Discounts

7.493
(1.013)

-0.586

*

(0.366)
***

(1.483)
Predicted Probability of RFC
Preferred Stock Purchase

6.873

***

(1.276)

Number of Individuals in Panel:

357

327

Number of Bank-Year Observations

979

979

Log-Likelihood:

-990.9

-971.9

Restricted (Slopes=0) Log-L.

-1094.8

-1094.8

207.9

227.6

Chi-Squared (k-1 df)

* (**) (***) statistically significant at the 10% (5%) (1%) level.
Source: Mason (2001a).

Table 9: Rates on RFC Assistance and Selected Private Market Alternatives, 1932-1937 (Percent per annum)

RFC Loans
RFC
to the
Preferred
Stock in
Commercial
RFC Loans RFC Loans
Financial
& Industrial
Sector
Year
to Banks
to Railroads Institutions
1932
5.77
6.00
1933
4.79
5.50
5.10
1934
4.00
5.00
4.92
6.00
1935
4.00
5.00
3.54
5.42
1936
4.00
5.00
3.54
5.42
1937
4.00
5.00
3.54
5.42
a
Source: Historical Statistics, series X 455, p. 1001.
b
Source: Historical Statistics, series X 474-486, p. 1003.
c
Source: Historical Statistics, series X 466, p. 1002.

Federal
Reserve
Moody's
Bank of NY
Railroad
Discount
Common
a
Rate (high) Stock Yieldsb
3.50
3.50
2.00
1.50
1.50
1.50

7.23
5.67
5.75
4.85
3.67
5.26

Preferred
b
Stocks
6.13
5.75
5.29
4.63
4.33
4.45

Bank Rates
on Shortterm
Business
Loansc
4.70
4.30
3.50
2.90
2.70
2.60

Table 10: Outstanding Obligations of the RFC
(In addition to those sold to the Treasury in the initial capitalization)
As of December 1932
Series A
Total

3.50% notes

$810,000,000.00

As of December 1933
Series D-1
0.13%
Series D-2
2%
Series D-3
0.13%
Series D-4
3%
Series Feb. 1, 1934
Series E
2.25%
Total
As of December 1934
Series D-1
Series D-2
Series D-3
Series D-4
Series DA-1
Series DA-2
Series E
Series F
Series G
Series H

$810,000,000.00

0.13%
2%
0.13%
3%

2.25%
2%
3%

$475,000,000.00
1,290,000,000.00
230,000,000.00
355,000,000.00
78,726,187.37
101,299,666.67
$2,530,025,854.04

$475,000,000.00
1,290,000,000.00
960,000,000.00
560,000,000.00
265,000,000.00
35,000,000.00
149,621,666.67
64,093,000.00
16,000,000.00
19,622,000.00
$3,834,336,666.67

As of December 1935
Series G
Series H
Series J-1
Series J-2
Series J-3
Series J-4
Series K

$16,000,000.00
87,288,000.00
1,715,000,000.00
1,525,000,000.00
635,000,000.00
220,000,000.00
149,171,666.67
$4,347,459,666.67

As of December 1936
Series H
Series K
Series L-1
Series L-2
Series L-3
Series L-4

$86,378,000.00
165,346,666.67
2,640,000,000.00
1,035,000,000.00
5,000,000.00
5,000,000.00
$3,936,724,666.67

As of December 1937
Series K
Series L-1
Series L-2
Series L-3
Series L-4

$297,272,666.67
2,640,000,000.00
815,000,000.00
25,000,000.00
125,000,000.00
$3,902,272,666.67

Source: Mason (1996).

Figure 9: US National Bank Common Dividend Payout Ratio (as Percent of Common Capital)
9
8
7
Percent

6
5
4
3
2
1

Ju
nD 29
ec
-2
Ju 9
nD 30
ec
-3
Ju 0
nD 31
ec
-3
Ju 1
nD 32
ec
-3
Ju 2
nD 33
ec
-3
Ju 3
nD 34
ec
-3
Ju 4
nD 35
ec
-3
Ju 5
nD 36
ec
-3
Ju 6
nD 37
ec
-3
7

0

Source: Annual Report s, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, various years.
Table 11: Dividends of US National Banks
Common
Dividends
Preferred /Common
Common
Dividends Dividends Capital
Jun-29
116,254
na
7.14
Dec-29
131,643
na
7.72
Jun-30
105,386
na
6.04
Dec-30
110,091
na
6.44
Jun-31
100,400
na
5.95
Dec-31
93,623
na
5.77
Jun-32
75,532
na
4.81
Dec-32
59,849
na
3.66
Jun-33
39,247
na
2.68
Dec-33
32,391
536
2.24
Jun-34
40,027
2,894
3.02
Dec-34
42,095
7,209
3.22
Jun-35
45,146
8,967
3.90
Dec-35
53,640
9,895
4.27
Jun-36
51,574
10,570
4.11
Dec-36
66,337
7,629
5.22
Jun-37
72,642
6,867
5.64
Dec-37
64,161
4,665
4.94
Source: Annual Report s, Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, various years.

Table 12: Univariate Attributes of Banks With and Without RFC Preferred Stock, Illinois Sample
Banks without Preferred Stock, December 31, 1934
Dividend Payout Rate, 1934
Change in Dividend Payout Rate, 1931-1934

N
161
161

Mean
0.008
-0.486

Std. Dev
0.017
5.477

Min
0.000
-11.408

Max
0.080
11.002

Change in Capital/Asset Ratio, 1929-1934
Change in Capital/Asset Ratio, 1931-1934
Change in Capital/Asset Ratio, 1933-1934

91
91
146

-0.242
-0.345
-0.262

0.336
0.313
0.180

-1.743
-1.701
-0.895

0.504
0.524
0.104

Asset Growth, 1929-1934
Asset Growth, 1929-1931
Asset Growth, 1929-1933

91
91
146

0.044
0.194
0.270

0.408
0.336
0.166

-0.713
-0.497
-0.116

1.589
1.725
0.951

Estimated P(Fail), 1929
Estimated P(Fail), 1931
Estimated P(Fail), 1933
Estimated P(Fail), 1934

69
88
144
158

0.138
0.096
0.021
0.004

0.145
0.129
0.064
0.014

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.662
0.696
0.543
0.110

Change in Estimated P(Fail), 1929-1934
Change in Estimated P(Fail), 1931-1934
Change in Estimated P(Fail), 1933-1934

68
86
142

-6.640
-5.761
-3.166

4.222
4.012
5.026

-18.602
-16.027
-32.353

4.721
5.233
9.242

Banks with Preferred Stock, December 31, 1934
Dividend Payout Rate, 1934
Change in Dividend Payout Rate, 1931-1934

N
75
75

Mean
0.001
-4.000

Std. Dev
0.007
5.951

Min
0.000
-11.408

Max
0.050
10.820

Change in Capital/Asset Ratio, 1929-1934
Change in Capital/Asset Ratio, 1931-1934
Change in Capital/Asset Ratio, 1933-1934

56
58
63

-0.201
-0.317
-0.210

0.405
0.339
0.266

-1.873
-2.049
-1.479

0.744
0.315
0.338

Asset Growth, 1929-1934
Asset Growth, 1929-1931
Asset Growth, 1929-1933

56
58
63

-0.090
0.098
0.205

0.349
0.293
0.187

-0.703
-0.374
-0.220

1.078
1.436
1.042

Estimated P(Fail), 1929
Estimated P(Fail), 1931
Estimated P(Fail), 1933
Estimated P(Fail), 1934

44
58
63
75

0.165
0.147
0.056
0.011

0.124
0.136
0.103
0.042

0.001
0.000
0.000
0.000

0.656
0.536
0.420
0.342

Change in Estimated P(Fail), 1929-1934
Change in Estimated P(Fail), 1931-1934
Change in Estimated P(Fail), 1933-1934

44
58
63

-7.521
-6.526
-4.388

5.311
5.342
4.998

-21.626
-19.975
-19.024

0.995
5.027
12.349

Table 13A: First-round RFC Preferred Stock Regression
RFC Preferred
Dependant Variable
Stock

Intercept

Coefficient
(Std. Error)
-9,657,421
(1,809,977)

Size (log of total assets)

633,609
(114,548)

Illiquid Assets (loans and discounts
over other bonds and securities)

1,279,659
(771,276)

P(Fail)31

Number of Obs.
R2
Adjusted R2

1,418,046
(1,230,609)

144
0.1809
0.1635

Table 13B: Second-round Regression of Predicted RFC Preferred Stock and Fundamentals on Capital and Dividends
Change in
Dividends/
Dividends/
Dependant Variable
Total
Change in Net
Total
Common
Worth/ Total
Common
Net Worth/
Capital
Assets
Capital
Total Assets

Intercept
P(Fail)31
Predicted Preferred
Stock Sold to RFC

Number of Obs.
R2
Adjusted R2

Coefficient
(Std. Error)
0.0068
(0.0019)

Coefficient
(Std. Error)
0.1373
(0.0066)

Coefficient
(Std. Error)
-0.0160
(0.0029)

Coefficient
(Std. Error)
-0.0670
(0.0072)

-0.0085
(0.0102)

0.0029
(0.0363)

0.0172
(0.0161)

0.0984
(0.0398)

1.850E-09
(1.540E-09)

-2.010E-08
(5.484E-09)

-1.244E-08
(2.432E-09)

1.169E-08
(6.012E-09)

144
0.0155
0.0016

144
0.0869
0.074

144
0.1643
0.1525

144
0.0624
0.0492

Table 14A: Approved Conditions for Public Funds Injection into Japanese Banks in March 1999
total
amount

convertible
preferred stock

Daiwa

408

408

0.25

1.06

0

Chuo Trust

150

150

0.25

0.90

0

Mitsui Trust
Sakura
Fuji

400.2
800
1,000

0.25
3.50
5.50
7.50
(non-convertible)
2.00
4.33
0.25
2.33
5.33
3.25
4.25
3.25
4.25
3.08
6.33
5.33
6.33
(non-convertible)
4.25
4.42
2.25

1.25
1.33
0.40
0.55
2.10
0.76
0.81
1.15
1.13
1.89
1.15
1.48
0.93
0.97
0.35
0.95
0.41
0.70
2.38
0.43
1.40
0.53

150
0
200

Table 14B: Approved Conditions for Public Funds Injection into Japanese Banks in March 1998
conditions of
issuance
amount
types of issuance
(%, initial 5 years) (billion yen)
Notes
(Nippon Credit Bank) preferred stock
6 m/s LIBOR + 3.00
60
(Ashikaga Bank)
perpetual subordinated bonds 6 m/s LIBOR + 2.95
30
regional bank
Daiwa
perpetual subordinated loans 3 m/s LIBOR + 2.70*
100
(*initial 10 years & 3 m/s)
(Yasuda Trust)
perpetual subordinated bonds 6 m/s LIBOR + 2.45
150
(LTCB 1)
perpetual subordinated loans 6 m/s LIBOR + 2.45
46.6
(LTCB 2)
preferred stock
6 m/s LIBOR + 1.00
130
Chuo Trust 1
perpetual subordinated loans 6 m/s LIBOR + 2.45
28
Chuo Trust 2
preferred stock
6 m/s LIBOR + 2.50
32
(Hokuriku Bank)
perpetual subordinated loans 6 m/s LIBOR + 2.45
20
regional bank
Mitsui Trust
perpetual subordinated bonds 6 m/s LIBOR + 1.45
100
Sakura
perpetual subordinated bonds 6 m/s LIBOR + 1.20
100
Fuji
perpetual subordinated bonds 6 m/s LIBOR + 1.10
100

100
100
0
100

Sumitomo Trust
Mitsubishi Trust
Toyo Trust
Bank of Yokohama

perpetual subordinated bonds
perpetual subordinated bonds
perpetual subordinated bonds
perpetual subordinated loans

6 m/s LIBOR + 1.10
6 m/s LIBOR + 1.10
6 m/s LIBOR + 1.10
6 m/s LIBOR + 1.10

100
50
50
20

100

Asahi

perpetual subordinated loans

6 m/s LIBOR + 1.00

100

0

Tokai

perpetual subordinated loans

6 m/s LIBOR + 0.90

100

0
200

Sumitomo
perpetual subordinated bonds
(Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubisperpetual subordinated bonds
DKB
preferred stock

6 m/s LIBOR + 0.90
6 m/s LIBOR + 0.90
6 m/s LIBOR + 0.75

100
100
99

250

IBJ

6 m/s LIBOR + 0.55

100

100

Sanwa

6 m/s LIBOR + 0.55

100

(billion yen)

Sumitomo Trust
Mitsubishi Trust
Toyo Trust
Bank of Yokoham

200
300
200
200

Asahi

500

Tokai

600

Sumitomo

501

DKB

900

IBJ

600

Sanwa

700

250.2
800
250
250
300
100
200
200
70
30
300
100
300
300
201
300
200
200
300
175
175
600

7,459

6,159

total

period until conversion dividend subordinated
can be done (years)
yield (%) bonds or loans

Sources: Nikkei Shinbun (March 13, 18, 1998, and March 5, 13, 1999)

1,300

total

subordinated bonds
(fixed periods)
subordinated bonds
(fixed periods)

1,726

regional bank

Figure 10: Capital and Loans of Japanese Banks, 1993-2000
Loans and Bills Discounted
(left-hand scale)

380,000,000

26,000,000

370,000,000
24,000,000
360,000,000
22,000,000

350,000,000

20,000,000

340,000,000

18,000,000

330,000,000
Capital
(right-hand scale)

320,000,000

16,000,000

310,000,000

14,000,000

300,000,000

12,000,000
1993

1994

1995

Source: Japanese Bankers Association.

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 11: Capital-to-Asset and Loan-to-Asset Ratios of Japanese Banks, 1993-2000
0.64
0.64

0.050
Loan-to-Asset Ratio
(left-hand scale)

0.045

0.63
0.040

0.63

0.035

0.62
0.62

0.030

0.61
Capital-to-Asset Ratio
(right-hand scale)

0.61

0.025

0.020

0.60
1993

1994

1995

Source: Japanese Bankers Association.

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 12: Market-to-Book Ratios of Japanese Banks, 1993-2000

3.00

Market-to-Book Ratio

2.50

2.00

1.50

1.00

0.50

0.00
1993

1994

1995

Source: Japanese Bankers Association.

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

Figure 13: Japanese Bank Dividend Payments For Stable Sample of Banks, 1993-2001
160,000

1.20

150,000

1.10

Dividends
(left-hand scale)

1.00

140,000

0.90
130,000
0.80
120,000
110,000

0.70
Dividend Payout Ratio
(right-hand scale)

0.60

100,000

0.50
1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1999

2000

2001

Source: Japanese Bankers Association.

Table 15: Japanese Bank Dividend Payments For Stable Sample of Banks, 1993-2001
Year
Dividends Payout Ratio
1993
135,617
0.74
1994
135,108
0.73
1995
134,981
0.74
1996
111,450
0.76
1997
128,939
0.86
1998
147,791
1.15
1999
106,206
0.53
2000
144,486
0.69
2001
156,532
na
Source: Japanese Bankers Association.

