NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EVOLVING DISCRETIONARY PRACTICES
OF U.S. ANTIDUMPING ACTIVITY
Bruce A. Blonigen
Working Paper 9625
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9625
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

Richard Boltuck, Alan Deardorff, Robert Feinberg, Tom Prusa, and participants of presentations at Utah State
University, the 2003 American Economic Association meetings, and the Spring ITI National Bureau of
Economic Research meetings provided excellent and useful comments. I also thank Walker Hanlon for his
research assistance. All remaining errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Bruce A. Blonigen. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Evolving Discretionary Practices of U.S. Antidumping Activity
Bruce A. Blonigen
NBER Working Paper No. 9625
April 2003
JEL No. F13
ABSTRACT
Previous literature has discussed the procedural biases that exist in U.S. Department of Commerce
(USDOC) dumping margin calculations. This paper examines the evolution of discretionary
practices and their role in the rapid increase in average USDOC dumping margins since 1980.
Statistical analysis finds that USDOC discretionary practices have played the major role in rising
dumping margins. Importantly, the evolving effect of discretionary practices is due not only to
increasing use of these practices over time, but apparent changes in implementation of these
practices that mean a higher increase in the dumping margin whenever they are applied. While legal
changes due to the Uruguay Round are estimated to have reduced the baseline U.S. dumping margin
by 20 percentage points, the increasingly punitive discretionary measures used by the USDOC
almost completely compensated for this decrease by 2000.

Bruce A. Blonigen
Department of Economics
University of Oregon
Eugene, OR 97403-1285
and NBER
bruceb@oregon.uoregon.edu

1. Introduction
Antidumping (AD) protection is intended to remedy situations where foreign firms sell
their product in the host market at a price that is below “fair” or “normal” value; i.e., dump their
product in the host market. When dumping occurs and the host country’s domestic industry is
“materially” injured by this dumping behavior (or threatened with material injury), the host
country may apply an AD duty equal to the dumping margin on the foreign firm’s product
according to World Trade Organization (WTO) agreements.
Even if one believes that such practices are harmful, a major problem with such policies
is implementation.1 How is “normal” value defined, much less calculated across a wide variety
of potential products? What constitutes “material” injury or the threat of such injury? Of course,
the WTO agreements provide a framework that outlines implementation of AD policies for
member countries. Countries with established AD laws, such as the U.S., have elaborate legal
statutes that go beyond these WTO agreements to address implementation in great detail. In
addition, country-level courts of appeal rulings and legislative amendments have further clarified
implementation procedures over time. However, as will be shown in this paper, there is also
much room for discretion by the government agencies charged with implementing AD protection
despite these detailed laws and ongoing legal rulings.
While a number of studies have documented the incidence of AD cases across users of
AD laws, as well as the recent proliferation of AD use across a growing and large body of
countries (see Miranda et al., 1998, and Prusa, 2001), there has been little examination of how
AD policies and implementation evolve over time within countries. Even a cursory look at the
data reveals patterns that have not received much attention in the literature. Figure 1 displays a
1

Most economists would only worry about such practices if the pricing behavior is predatory in nature, intended to
drive out domestic-market competitors. The definition of dumping is clearly much broader so that practices that

1

3-year moving average of the U.S. AD margins calculated by the U.S. Department of Commerce
(USDOC) over the period of 1980 through 2000.2,3 The upward movement in U.S. AD margin
magnitudes is pronounced and substantial. A simple regression on a constant and an annual
time trend indicates that the average AD margin rose approximately 2.5 percentage points a year,
from a starting point of 15.5% in the early 1980s to over 63% by 2000. However, it is clear that
the trend in the first decade of the sample is much steeper than the trend over the last 10 years of
the sample, though it continues to be significantly positive. Figure 2 shows a similar figure for a
3-year moving average in the percent of U.S. cases ruled affirmative for the injury determination
by the U.S. International Trade Commission (USITC). Here too, the trend is for a greater
likelihood that the USITC will find injury, rising from about a 45% rate in the early 1980s to a
60% rate by 2000. Combined, these figures indicate a rise in the average expected AD duty (AD
margin times the probability of affirmative injury determination) from approximately 5% to over
30% for any foreign firm that finds itself investigated in a U.S. AD action!
There are a number of possible explanations for such trends. First, legislative changes
may have substantially altered the legal mandate that the USDOC and USITC must follow in
making their decisions. Second, the composition of investigated firms and products may have
changed toward ones that would naturally receive higher AD margins and affirmative injury
decisions.4 A final alternative is that discretionary practices by the U.S. agencies have evolved
over time toward greater AD margins and affirmative injury determination probabilities.
economists think are not necessarily anti-competitive, such as price discrimination or pricing at a loss, are included
as “unfair” dumping behavior.
2
The calculated dumping margin by the USDOC becomes the applied AD duty if, and when, the U.S. International
Trade Commission also finds that imports caused material injury to the domestic industry.
3
Each yearly observation is the average of the current year and the previous two years. This presents a smoother
picture of AD activity than using yearly data. This seems appropriate as some years are based on a relatively small
(less than 40) number of AD margin calculations.
4
In a related manner, there may be a learning story in the patterns, with potential domestic petitioners gaining
experience over which products and countries can be more successfully targeted for U.S. AD actions. Thus, selfselection from learning drives composition of cases.
2

This paper examines data on U.S. AD margins calculated by the USDOC to unravel the
relative contributions of legal changes, case composition, and discretionary practices in the
evolving pattern of USDOC-calculated AD margins. A new database of the almost 1600 firmspecific AD dumping margin calculations by the USDOC since 1980 was gathered to enable
such an analysis. Regression analysis of the factors affecting the size of firm-specific dumping
margins yields coefficient estimates that can then be used to decompose the relative
contributions of these potential sources of rising dumping margins. The analysis finds that the
upward trend in U.S. dumping margins is primarily through evolving discretionary practices at
the USDOC, with little or no role for changing country composition of investigated cases or legal
changes. In particular, the USDOC’s use of “adverse facts available”, cost of production tests,
and cost data to construct normal value are estimated to be driving a lot of the increasingly
higher dumping margins. Importantly, this effect is due not only to increasing use of these
practices over time (the extensive use of these practices), but apparent changes in
implementation of these practices that mean a higher increase in the margin whenever these
discretionary practices are applied (the intensive use). While rule changes due to implementation
of 1995 Uruguay Round agreements is estimated to have reduced the U.S. baseline dumping
margin by 20 percentage points, greater extensive and intensive use of discretionary practices
had already compensated for these Uruguay Round effects by the end of the sample in year 2000.
While previous studies have hypothesized and shown that discretionary practices by the
USDOC lead to larger dumping margins, these results suggest that these practices are evolving
rapidly into more distorted practices over time. This is despite the availability of appeals courts

3

and dispute settlement procedures that are available to investigated parties.5 With such a large
role for discretion to distort dumping margins despite laws detailing implementation, the ability
of WTO AD agreements to establish a consistent framework that will limit member’s abilities to
distort the process to their own goals is highly questionable. If such a wide range of
discretionary actions can happen in a country with one of the most detailed AD laws and
transparent investigation procedures, such as the U.S., the problem is likely even greater in many
other member countries.6
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section gives a brief overview of how
the USDOC calculates dumping margins, highlighting observable discretionary practices that are
often employed and which can be examined in the empirical analysis. The following two
sections discuss ways in which implementation of dumping margin calculations in the U.S. may
be changing over time from changes in discretionary practices and new laws and court decisions.
Section 5 then presents the empirical analysis and section 6 concludes.

2. Calculations of U.S. dumping margins
The practice of determining whether foreign firms are selling their product in the U.S.
below normal value is fraught with a wide set of issues that must be addressed and procedures
necessarily varies by investigated products and firms. The basics of how the USDOC determines
dumping margins is the following. The USDOC first determines which firms are responsible for
the majority of the investigated imported product. These firms receive detailed questionnaires
about their pricing and costs that allow the USDOC to calculate a firm-specific dumping margin
5

One ray of hope is that WTO dispute settlement decisions on antidumping decisions became more frequent in the
late 1990s, with judgments that often found problems with the way in which countries, including the U.S., were
applying their antidumping laws. See Tarullo (2002) for more details.
6
Congressional Budget Office (2001) shows that average U.S. AD duties are about at the median across other
countries with active AD laws (Chapter 4, Figure 4), with many countries’ duties increasing during the 1990s.
4

for these firms with significant market share, with all other (small market share) firms facing a
trade-weighted average of the firm-specific margin calculations for the firms from their country.
The “preferred” method of determining a dumping margin for each firm is to compare the
ex factory U.S. prices to the ex factory prices charged by the foreign firm in its own market for
the exact same (or “like”) product. Thus, normal value in this case is defined as this latter ownmarket price charged by the foreign firm. Of course, ex factory prices (the implicit price of the
product immediately before it leaves the factory) are inherently unobserved. This leads to the
USDOC taking observed final consumer prices and backing out a myriad of “costs” that are
added to these prices before they reach the consumer. These include transportation and
associated costs, tariffs and other taxes, as well as markups by distributors. It is assumed
throughout these calculations that pass-through of such costs by the firm is perfect. Full passthrough is also assumed for exchange rate adjustments used to convert prices in the same
currency for comparison.
Once these adjustments have been made, the USDOC makes “price-to-price”
comparisons for sales transactions that occurred at a comparable point in time. However,
oftentimes the USDOC will calculate a weighted average of the foreign own-market prices to
define normal value. Then transaction-specific dumping margins are calculated by subtracting
individual U.S. ex factory prices from this measure of normal value. An overall firm-specific
dumping margin is then the weighted average of these transaction-specific margins, treating
transactions where the U.S. price is greater than normal value as “zero” dumping margins.7

7

This method of averaging the foreign own-market prices, but not the U.S. prices, and then “zeroing” the
transactions where the U.S. price is above the average foreign own-market price, can easily be shown to lead to AD
margins when there is no dumping occurring. As Baldwin and Moore (1991) point out: “This obviously leads to the
absurd result that, as long as prices vary over the sample period, a positive dumping margin can be found even if
prices in the two countries are identical on every day.” (p. 271)
5

When the investigated foreign firm does not have “sufficient” sales of the like product in
its own market, other measures of normal value must be used. The first option is to use sales by
the firm to another export market (i.e., a third country) and then make “price-to-price”
comparisons, after adjustments. Absent “sufficient” sales to a third market, the USDOC will
turn to calculating a “constructed value” of the normal value. For this calculation, the USDOC
uses the foreign firm’s detailed cost data to construct a measure of the firm’s average cost (plus a
profit margin) over the period being investigated.8 Calculations of average costs entail
apportioning fixed costs to per-unit cost during the window of investigation. The USDOC then
compares ex factory U.S. prices from individual transactions to this constructed value.
Even from this brief description of the general outline of procedures used by the USDOC,
it is clear that there is a wide room for discretion. Further, this discretion is often not connected
with economic principles that are typically used to identify anticompetitive or market-distorting
behavior. Profit maximizing firms in competitive environments may not fully pass-through costs
and exchange rates. Such firms may also price below average cost, since this is true any time a
firm makes a loss.
Boltuck and Litan (1991) provides a more detailed description of the administration of
U.S. unfair trade laws. Various chapters in Boltuck and Litan (1991), Lindsay (1999), and
Lindsay and Ikenson (2002) also analyze a number of observable discretionary practices
employed by the USDOC in determining AD duties, pointing out the widespread possibility of
bias inherent in such practices. In addition, to the discretionary practices already mentioned,
there are three other major practices that are often highlighted.
One of the most discussed USDOC practices is the use of “facts available,” known as
“best information available” before the Uruguay Round Agreements were implemented in 1995.
8

This period of investigation is typically the six months prior to the petition.
6

Given the detailed data requirements necessary to calculate dumping margins, the task becomes
very difficult when the foreign firm does not provide accurate usable data or does not respond
whatsoever to the USDOC’s requests.9 In these circumstances, the USDOC uses “facts
available,” which is invariably the information on dumping activity contained in the petition.
The USDOC may use “facts available” for small portions of a dumping margin calculation (such
as to ascertain freight charges in backing out ex factory prices) to using it as the sole information
for the dumping margin calculation. This wide variation has led to the USDOC to distinguish
between use of “facts available” for cooperating foreign firms versus non-cooperating or nonresponsive foreign firms. In the latter case, the USDOC employs “adverse facts available” which
is intended to use “facts available” in the most adverse manner as a punitive measure.
Another practice often discussed is the procedures used by the USDOC when faced with
calculating a dumping margin for a firm from a non-market economy, such as China, the
USSR/Russia, and eastern European and former Soviet bloc countries. Cost and price data for
such firms is nonexistent or meaningless from an economic/accounting perspective. As a result,
the USDOC calculates normal value through a “factors of production” analysis using information
from a “surrogate” country. More specifically, it gathers data from the foreign firm on the
quantities of inputs used for production of the investigated good and then values these inputs
using price information from a chosen market economy that is deemed comparable in economic
development. Adding adjustments for packaging costs, transportation costs, and profits, the
USDOC can construct normal value. With normal value in hand, the USDOC can then calculate
dumping margins in the usual fashion.

9

Moore (2001) provides a game theoretic analysis of foreign firms’ decisions to participate in an investigation,
showing that if the domestic authorities weight the domestic petitioners’ interests enough, it may be optimal for
foreign firms to not cooperate because of compliance costs.
7

A final practice that receives somewhat less attention is the cost-of-production test. This
practice occurs when normal value will be calculated using the investigated foreign firm’s ownmarket prices or third country prices. If alleged by petitioners, the USDOC will examine
whether the investigated foreign firm is selling below cost of production (or average cost) in its
own market or to third countries. If a significant number transactions in these markets (greater
than 10%) display prices below cost of production, the USDOC excludes these transactions for
determining normal value. As others have noted, this obviously leads to a higher normal value
and a greater dumping margin. If the USDOC finds the vast majority of these transactions
(greater than 90%) below cost of production, it will completely disregard such prices and base
normal value on the constructed value methodology.
A couple studies have examined what factors determine the magnitude of U.S. dumping
margins and examined the role of USDOC discretionary practices on such margins. Baldwin and
Moore (1991) examine U.S. dumping margin determinations in the 1980s. Their econometric
results find that most observable economic factors, such as changes in imports and domestic
production, have little explanatory power for understanding final USDOC dumping margin
determinations. However, after controlling for other factors, the USDOC’s use of “facts
available” leads to dumping margins that are 38 percentage points higher than the average 29%
margin. This is the only discretionary practice they examine.
Lindsay (1999) and Lindsay and Ikenson (2002) examine a wider variety of USDOC
discretionary practices than Baldwin and Moore. Lindsay’s (1999) descriptive analysis samples
all USDOC margin calculations from 1995 through 1998 and, similar to Baldwin and Moore,
finds that the average “facts available” dumping margin is much higher: 95.58% versus an
overall sample average of 44.68%. While it may not be surprising that these “facts available”
margins are higher, the magnitude in their difference from the average is astounding. Lindsay’s
8

(1999) data also show that dumping margins that primarily used the foreign firm’s own market
prices or third-country prices to construct normal value are much lower than when constructed
value, non-market economy methods, or “facts available” are used.
Lindsay and Ikenson (2002) extend Lindsay’s (1999) earlier work by analyzing
proprietary price and cost data used by the USDOC to calculate dumping margins for
investigated foreign firms in 18 U.S. AD cases.10 Such data allow them to directly examine the
effect of various discretionary practices on the dumping margins in these particular cases by
trying alternative dumping calculations. They find that many discretionary practices serve to
inflate dumping margins substantially in the cases they examine, including use of constructed
value, cost of production tests, zeroing, and even the way in which the USDOC determines
which products are comparable across the models sold in the U.S. and the foreign firm’s own
market.

3. The evolution of discretionary practices
As discussed, theory and evidence suggest that discretionary practices likely have a
substantial impact on the size of dumping margins calculated by the USDOC, with a consistent
bias toward yielding a higher dumping margin. Not addressed previously is the extent to which
these practices’ effect on dumping margins may evolve over time. For example, do cost of
production tests in 1990 lead to the same increase in the dumping margin as cost of production
tests in 1980? The rapid increase in dumping margins over time displayed in figure 1 makes this
an important question, as this may be an important source of the changes we observe. The
evolution of the effect of these discretionary practices may stem from an increase (or decrease)
in the use of such practices over time and/or staff-induced changes in how these practices are

9

implemented. I will call these potential effects the extensive and intensive use of these practices,
respectively.
Table 1 provides information on the change in the extensive use of these practices by
showing the frequency of various discretionary practices by the USDOC over time from 1980
through 2000. The data for these tables were collected by the author from reading preliminary
and final USDOC determinations in the Federal Register, as described more below. It should be
noted that the listed practices are not necessarily mutually exclusive, as the USDOC may employ
more than one discretionary practice in a particular case. In addition, use of a practice for only
part of a case (e.g., a subset of the investigated products) are included in Table 1’s numbers and
treated identically to cases where the practice was fully used. This will also be true of the
statistical analysis below.
For most practices, there is no discernible trend in the frequency of use over time. The
exception is that there has been a clear increase in all “facts available” cases over time (column 1
of table 1), with an ever larger share involving “adverse facts available” (column2). The average
percent of cases using “facts available in the first five years of the sample is 10.6%, whereas the
latter five years’ average is 39.6%, with the majority of these decisions using “adverse facts
available”. This means that by the early 1990s, about 40% of USDOC dumping margin
decisions were based on information supplied by the domestic petitioners!
Examination of how discretionary practices have evolved over time on their intensive use
(i.e., changes in how the USDOC applies these practices) is more difficult to uncover. There is
almost no discussion of this in the literature. One exception is Stewart (1991), which presents a
defense of U.S. antidumping law and practices in Boltuck and Litan (1991). One of the issues
addressed by Stewart is Palmeter’s (1991) assertion that informational requirements required of
10

These data were obviously obtained from the investigated foreign firms, not the USDOC!
10

foreign firms by the USDOC have become increasingly complex. In response, Stewart says that
“the core elements of the dumping calculus have remained largely unchanged since 1974” and
that “the burdens of the questionnaires have not increased dramatically.” (p. 300). This suggests
that USDOC implementation procedures have been largely unchanged.
However, this author’s reading of USDOC decision announcements found substantial
evidence of systematic changes in USDOC implementation of discretionary practices that were
not required by law. The most obvious changes involved use of “facts available”. The USDOC
seemed much more willing to work with foreign firms in cases in the early 1980s to assist them
in getting the USDOC information it required for the dumping calculations than in subsequent
years. In a representative 1979/80 case on countertop microwave ovens from Japan, the USDOC
was confronted with the situation where Toshiba did not supply all the necessary information and
stated the following as its response:
“Toshiba did not supply any information concerning the adjustments needed for differences in
domestic and export models. We have relied on descriptive literature and specification
information supplied by Toshiba … In making its final determination, the Department will
consider all information provided by Toshiba to the extent that such information can be verified
prior to that determination.” (Federal Register, Vol. 45, p. 47456, July 15, 1980)
Compare this to a representative passage for a 1987/88 case on digital readout systems from
Japan involving the Mitutoyo Corporation:
“…for those sales by Mitutoyo that involve further manufacturing in the United States, we used
best information available because Mitutoyo failed to respond to section D of our questionnaire
… it is our policy to assign the non-replying company … the highest margin indicated in the
petition …” (Federal Register, Vol. 53, p. 47844, November 28, 1988)
The difference in treatment is quite distinct. In the earlier case, the USDOC was willing
to consider information from the foreign firm during the latter stages of the investigation and was
also willing to use information supplied by the foreign firm as “facts available.” In contrast, by
the late 1980s the USDOC was applying “adverse facts available” even when firms failed to

11

respond to one portion of the questionnaire and was rejecting any information from the foreign
firms after the preliminary decision as untimely, and therefore did not use such information.
A key change in the use of “facts available” was a policy put in place by the USDOC in
the 1987/88 antifriction bearings cases against multiple countries. Appendix B of the USDOC’s
decision in the case outlined a two-tier method whereby cooperating firms may be assigned
lower dumping rates than those that do not cooperate. These latter non-cooperating firms receive
“adverse facts available”, which is the higher of 1) the margin alleged in the petition, or 2) the
highest calculate rate assigned to any foreign firm in the investigation. Such discrimination
could have led to more firms receiving a lower “facts available” rate because they are deemed to
be cooperating. Instead, it seems to go the other way over time, with the USDOC often ruling
firms to be “non-cooperating” for seemingly minor omissions.11
The USDOC decision announcements show evolution of behavior in the cost of
production test as well. In the late 1980s, decisions began to specify the “90-10 rule”, whereby
the USDOC disregards below-cost sales by the foreign firm in its own market (or to a thirdcountry) if such sales constitute more than 10% of all sales in those markets. If below-cost sales
are greater then 90% of sales in those markets, then the USDOC uses constructed value as a
measure of normal value. This rule is not mentioned in earlier cases, so it is not clear what
method is used, since such a rule is not specified in the U.S. AD law. In subsequent years, the
USDOC begins to extend this rule by applying it on a month-to-month basis for certain cases.12
Thus, some months of data during the period of investigation may get constructed value, whereas

11

Substantial changes in implementation of procedures seem to have been precipitated by USDOC staff facing
large, complicated cases, such as the ball bearings cases. Creating criteria that lead staff to turn to “facts available”
more often not only increases dumping margins, but also reduces workload.
12
Such a rule was first found in the final USDOC decision for the 1992/93 steel wire rope case against Korea. Such
rules were also apparently followed in 1994/95 furfuryl alcohol cases against Thailand and South Africa, and in the
1994/95 small diameter pipe case against Italy.
12

others may not. This obviously increases the probability that constructed value will be used for
at least part of the normal value calculation.13
While this anecdotal evidence is consistent with evolving implementation of
discretionary practices on how such practices are implemented (their intensive use), it obviously
relies on what the USDOC self-reports in its Federal Register notices of its determinations.
There may be many adjustments that are not reported. In addition, it is not clear whether these
adjustments have a significant impact on dumping margins in the final analysis. Thus, it is not
clear how much weight one can give such observations. As we will show below, however,
econometric techniques can be used to estimate whether these discretionary practices are
evolving over time and what the impact of such evolution is on dumping margins. Much of the
econometric evidence will be consistent with these observations from reading the USDOC
decisions.

4. The Effect of Legal Changes and Court Decisions
Before turning to a more formal empirical analysis, a discussion of the possible effects of
legal changes and court decisions on dumping margins is in order as well. There have been three
seemingly substantial U.S. legal changes regarding U.S. unfair trade laws since 1980. Baldwin
and Moore (1991) provide an assessment of the Trade and Tariff Act of 1984 and the Omnibus
Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988. The most significant change for dumping margin
calculations from the 1984 bill was to allow the USDOC to average U.S. prices, as well as the
foreign firm’s own market prices (or third-country prices) in determining a dumping margin. As
they note, “most dumping margins are still calculated in the old manner, despite statutory
13

Readings of the USDOC decisions suggest there is some evidence of changes in how the USDOC calculates fair
value for non-market economies as well, but less evidence that the constructed value and third-country price

13

change.” (p. 260).14 The 1988 bill made a number of substantial changes (e.g., allowing the
USDOC to apply AD duties to the parts of investigated products), but did not to lead to any
obvious changes affecting the USDOC calculation of dumping margins. Despite this general
assessment of these legal changes and their effect on USDOC margin calculations, I control for
the possibility of their effect in the empirical analysis below.
Finally, the Uruguay Round of the GATT, enacted by the U.S. Congress in 1995, led to a
substantial list of changes to the U.S. AD and CVD laws. The Congressional Budget Office
(1994) provides a summary of changes expected to affect implementation of U.S. AD and CVD
laws and points out three specific areas that had the potential to affect dumping margin
determinations significantly (pp. 66-67). First the Uruguay Round agreements stipulated that
when comparing export prices to the foreign firm’s home-market prices, the agency must use
only weighted averages for both sets of prices or individual prices for both. As mentioned
above, the USDOC’s method had been to compare U.S. individual prices to a weighted average
of the foreign firm’s own market (or third country) prices, which likely helps inflate the dumping
margin. Thus, this change should lower dumping margins. Second, the Uruguay Round
agreements require dumping margin calculations to use actual data to estimate administrative
selling costs and profits when constructing dumping margins. U.S. practice had been to assume
a minimum 10% for administrative costs and 8% for profit, unless data showed even higher
figures. These administrative selling costs and profits are subtracted from observed U.S. prices
to derive ex factory prices. Thus, eliminating these high minima levels should lead to lower
dumping margins. Finally, the Uruguay Round agreements specifically recognized the U.S.
practice of examining costs of production and eliminating “sales below cost” in constructing
methods have changed over time.

14

normal value. However, a number of changes were prescribed for implementation of this
practice that Congressional Budget Office (1994) judged were more stringent that previous U.S.
policy. In summary, the main changes involving dumping margin calculations were expected to
reduce the resulting U.S. dumping margins, and this will be tested in the empirical analysis
below.
Court rulings also have the potential to affect USDOC dumping margin calculations.
Parties involved in U.S. AD actions have the ability to appeal rulings with the U.S. Court of
International Trade (USCIT) and, ultimately, the U.S. Supreme Court. Many of these cases
involve issues connected with procedures used in dumping margin calculations by the USDOC.15
Importantly, the USCIT has allowed the USDOC broad discretion in how it administers the U.S.
AD law and only overturns decisions when a procedure is clearly not reasonable in its
consistency with the law. Most decisions involve very specific issues connected with the
dumping margin that are case-specific and do not have general applicability. It is rare to see the
USDOC announce general policy changes in procedure due to USCIT decisions and none seem
to be substantive in nature. I note that these are broad impressions from reading a number of
USCIT decisions, in addition to the USDOC decision announcements. Future work to more
consistently investigate effects of USCIT decisions would definitely be warranted, but will not
be the focus of this study.
Finally, dispute settlement processes connected with free trade agreements have the
potential to affect USDOC margin calculations. The Canadian-U.S. Free Trade Agreement
(CUSFTA) and North American Free Trade Agreements (NAFTA) provide for such a dispute
14

Hansen and Prusa (1996) show that changes in the law due to the 1984 Trade and Tariff Act did have a substantial
impact on USITC injury determinations, by allowing the USITC to cumulate import sources in their decision of
injury to the domestic industry.
15
Recent years have seen over 150 U.S. Court of International trade rulings, many which involve appeals related to
AD cases.
15

settlement process which has been used to some extent by member countries. Jones (2000)
highlights a handful of cases where such rulings led to significant changes in dumping margins
for particular cases and does a simple time-series analysis to show that U.S. AD activity against
Canada fell after the CUSFTA. However, Blonigen (2002) finds no such effects of declining AD
activity for member countries after either CUSFTA or NAFTA when controlling for other factors
in a panel data setting. Neither study formally examines the effect of these dispute settlement
activities on USDOC dumping margin calculations. Once again, reading of various NAFTA
dispute settlement panel decisions suggests that rulings are on issues that are quite case-specific
and do not have general implications for USDOC procedures. The GATT/WTO also has a
dispute settlement mechanism, but there have been relatively few rulings connected with U.S.
AD cases.

5. Empirical Analysis
5.1. Methodology and Data
To examine the factors underlying the changes in USDOC dumping margins over time,
this section presents a more formal statistical analysis using data on all firm-specific USDOC
dumping margins calculated for cases filed from 1980 through 1995. Specifically, I regress firmspecific dumping margins on controls for discretionary USDOC practices, legal changes, and
country composition. Using these estimates, I can then decompose the impact of each of these
channels on dumping margins over time to understand their relative contribution.
As mentioned, data on firm-specific dumping margins (the dependent variable) come
from USDOC decisions, announced in the Federal Register notices. I include dumping margin
calculations for any foreign firm named in the Federal Register notices as being investigated,
even if that firm ultimately received an all-other or country-wide AD margin. Also, I include
16

preliminary USDOC margin determinations when the case is withdrawn or terminated before a
final USDOC decision is made. Preliminary USDOC margins account for about 9% of the
sample, but the econometric results are qualitatively identical whether they are included in the
sample or not. The final sample comprises almost 1600 firm-specific dumping margins.
To control for USDOC discretionary practices, I begin by including separate indicator
variables for each of the USDOC discretionary practices listed in Table 1. In addition, I include
an indicator variable that takes the value of “1” when the firm is from a non-market economy
and “factors of production” are used to calculate normal value.16 To control for legal changes
that occurred from the trade acts in 1984 and 1988 and the implementation of the Uruguay
Round agreements, I include separate indicator variables for each that take the value of “1” for
years subsequent to the year of enactment and “0” otherwise. Finally, to control for country
composition effects, I include the following country/region variables that correspond to the
primary regions subject to U.S. AD actions: 1) Canada, 2) Mexico, 3) Other Latin America, 4)
European Union, 5) Japan, 6) Korea, 7) Taiwan, 8) China, 9) Other Asia, and 10)
USSR/Russia.17 The excluded category is “Rest of the World” and includes such countries and
regions as Israel, Egypt, South Africa, East European countries, Scandinavian countries, and
former Soviet republics. Table 2 provides descriptive statistics for the variables just described.

16

I did not include this discretionary practice in Table 1 because it is so closely tied to country composition. In the
econometric analysis, however, it will be possible to identify the USDOC practice used for non-market economies
from specific country effects to some extent.
17
“Other Latin America” is comprised of countries from the region (besides Mexico) that have been subject to U.S.
AD actions. These are Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador, Peru, Trinidad &
Tobago and Venezuela. In like fashion, “Other Asia” includes Australia, Bangladesh, Hong Kong, India, Indonesia,
Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand.

17

5.2. Econometric Analysis
Column 1 of table 3 presents econometric results from regressing USDOC dumping
margins on the indicator control variables discussed above. The overall fit of the equation is
good with an adjusted R2 of 0.35. The estimates suggest that “facts available”, “adverse facts
available”, and non-market economy procedures are the discretionary USDOC practices that
have a statistically significant impact on dumping margin calculations. The estimated effects of
these practices are large with “facts available” methods leading to a 30.7 percentage point
increase in the ad valorem dumping margin calculated by the USDOC, and the use of “adverse
facts available” leading to an additional 32.4 percentage point increase.18 In other words,
“adverse facts available” leads to a 63.1 percentage point increase in the dumping margin.
Foreign firms from non-market economies, where the USDOC uses third-country data to
estimate normal value leads to dumping margin that is 25.4% larger than average. The other
discretionary practices show no statistically significant effects on dumping margins.
With respect to other controls, the 1984 Trade Act is estimated to have a moderate
increasing effect on dumping margins, whereas Uruguay implementation is estimated to have led
to a 7 percentage point decrease in the baseline U.S. dumping margin. The 1988 Trade Act
shows no statistically significant effect. The country indicator variables are jointly statistically
significant at the 1% level. Korea, Taiwan, and USSR/Russia generally receive lower average
margins, while China averages dumping margins 25 percentage points greater than the excluded
“rest of the world” category, everything else equal.
Assuming these estimated effects are constant over the sample, I next use these
coefficient estimates to decompose the relative contribution of each channel (USDOC

18

discretionary practices, legal changes and country composition) on the general increase in
USDOC dumping margins over time. For example, if China is more often the target of petitions
in later years of the sample, and Taiwan and Korea are targets less often, such changes in country
composition may explain a significant portion of the general rise in dumping margins. Figure 3
shows this decomposition, using the estimates from column 1 of table 3. While a small part of
the rise is can perhaps be attributed to changes in country composition, the vast majority is due to
changes in the composition of discretionary practices over time; i.e., in the extensive use of these
practices. Given the coefficient estimates, this increase is almost exclusively due to the
increased use of facts available, adverse facts available, and non-market economy procedures.
The analysis to this point does not estimate the possibility of changes in the intensive use
of discretionary practices; i.e., changes in how these practices are implemented. The way in
which cost of production tests are conducted in 2000 may systematically differ from those
conducted in 1980. This may be an additional source of increasing USDOC dumping margins.
To explore this, I next interact the discretionary practices variables with a trend term.
Coefficients on these terms then indicate how changes in implementation of these practices may
affect dumping margins over time.
Column 2 of table 3 present estimates when I include these trend-interaction terms.
The interaction terms are jointly significant at the 1% significance level. Three of the six trendinteraction terms show statistically significant positive coefficients. This indicates that
implementation of these practices (adverse facts available, constructed value, and non-market
economy procedures) is changing in such a way that their application later in the sample leads to
a larger dumping margin than earlier in the sample. The use of facts available continues to have

18

Note that this interpretation of the coefficient estimates is due to the fact that “adverse facts available” is a subset
of “facts available”.
19

a significant direct effect on the dumping margin, but its effect does not significantly increase
over time.
The other control variables remain largely the same, with the exception of the Uruguay
Round implementation. This legal change is now estimated to have led to a 20 percentage point
lower baseline dumping margin for the latter half of the 1990s. However, given the overall
movement of dumping margins in figure 1, it is clear that other factors must have compensated
for this drop in the baseline. As we discuss next, changes in discretionary practices continued to
rise over the same time period to essentially compensate for the Uruguay Round effect in full by
the end of the sample.
Figure 4 decomposes the various channels of dumping margin effects with the estimates
in column 2 of table 3, which account for both change in the extensive use of discretionary
practices and the intensive use (captured by the trend-interaction terms). Accounting for changes
in the intensive use of discretionary practices clearly is important. The effect of discretionary
practices is now seen as the main force in understanding average dumping margins changes over
time (compare to figure 1), with a slight role for country composition changes and no (or even a
mitigating role) of legal changes. While the Uruguay Round implementation led to a 20
percentage point drop in the baseline dumping margin after 1995, evolving discretionary
practices led to almost an 18 percentage point increase from 1995 to 2000.
The results in table 3 are relatively insensitive to a number of alternative specifications.
Estimates with a general trend term included were hardly changed from those reported. The
trend term was positive and statistically significant in the column 1 estimates, but insignificant in
the column 2 estimates where the trend term is also interacted with the discretionary practices
variables. I also tried a specification where a trend is interacted with the country indicator
variables. This would pick up discretionary changes in how the USDOC treats firms from
20

particular countries over time. This did not affect the discretionary practices variables
significantly either.
One major concern with the above specifications is that there are no control variables for
case-specific factors that may affect calculation of firm-specific duties. A variety of market
structure features, from production technology to the types of distribution channels, may have
significant and systematic effects on the USDOC’s method of dumping margin calculations and
may even affect the implementation of discretionary practices. Omission of such variables may
bias the estimates in a number of ways. First, there are no controls for macroeconomic effects to
this point, such as exchange rates and general health of the U.S. economy, which may affect
dumping margin calculations. Second, as mentioned in the introduction, over time firms may
learn which products and industries are more likely to receive higher dumping margins and target
those more frequently in their petitions.
A simple, but powerful, way to control for such concerns is inclusion of case-specific
dummies. Since cases are product-, time- and country-specific, this is the equivalent of
including country-product-time fixed effects. Coefficient estimates are then identified only by
the variation in firm-specific margins within each AD case. Inclusion of such fixed effects
means that one can no longer include the country/region indicator variables or the trade act
variables due to (perfect) multicollinearity concerns. The non-market economy variable likewise
is perfectly collinear with these case-specific variables, since all firms from such a country are
subject to such a discretionary practice; i.e., there is no variation across firms in these cases with
respect to this practice.
Column 1 of table 4 provides results from regressing USDOC firm-specific margins on
the remaining control variables (the USDOC discretionary practices indicator variables) when

21

also including case-specific fixed effects.19 The adjusted R2 almost doubles from that of column
1 estimates in table 3 (from 0.35 to 0.76) and an F-test indicates that the case-specific fixed
effects are jointly significant at the 1 percent level. Column 2 of table 4 includes interactions of
the discretionary practices with a trend term. Once again there is strong evidence that increasing
extensive and intensive use of some of the discretionary practices have contributed substantially
to rising USDOC dumping margins. Consistent with table 3 specifications, “adverse facts
available” and constructed value methods contribute substantially toward explaining
(increasingly) higher dumping margins. Also consistent with table 3 results, “facts available”
has a significant direct effect on the dumping margin, but its effect does not significantly
increase over time. Unlike table 3, the cost of production test is also estimated to be significant
in increasing dumping margins over time once controlling for case-specific effects. On the other
hand, the estimates suggest that there is a downward trend in the effect of the application of
third-country price methods. However, as shown in table 1, there are very few cases using this
method by the end of the sample.
These case-specific fixed effects estimates are obviously preferred from an econometric
standpoint, but also are remarkably consistent with the anecdotal evidence of which practices
have evolved the most, as well as the results in table 3 when not controlling for such factors.
Because the country and legal change factors are subsumed into the case-specific effects,
however, we cannot provide a similar decomposition to figures 3 and 4 from these estimates.

19

The number of observations decreases because there are some cases where only one firm-specific dumping margin
is calculated in a case, which is then subsumed in the case-specific fixed effects.
22

6. Conclusion
A little-noticed trend in U.S. AD protection has been the rapid increase in average
dumping margins calculated by the USDOC. As a result, average U.S. AD duties have risen
from around 15% in the early 1980s to over 60% by 2000. With the percent of cases ruled
affirmative by the USITC also rising over this same time period (from 45% to 60%) and the
number of annual cases remaining high, this rise in calculated AD duties has meant a dramatic
rise in U.S. AD protectiveness. This paper finds that this increase is primarily through changing
discretionary practices at the USDOC versus country composition of investigated cases or legal
changes. This is due not only to increasing use of these practices over time (the extensive use),
but apparent changes in implementation of these practices that mean a higher increase in the
margin whenever they are applied (the intensive use).
Thus, while other studies have shown that agencies’ discretionary implementation of
legal AD statutes significantly affects the AD duties that foreign firms receive, this paper shows
that these discretionary practices can evolve substantially in a relatively short time period,
despite being subject to appeals court and settlement dispute decisions. Given the rapid increase
in U.S. AD duties shown in this paper, perhaps the term “devolution” is a better description than
“evolution.” As mentioned in the introduction, this calls into question the ability of WTO
agreements (or regional agreements) to truly provide a credible and transparent framework for
member countries’ administration of AD laws. The multitude of window-dressing legal changes
that have occurred to this point have had little effect. Indeed, the estimates show that USDOC
discretion compensated for a substantial Uruguay Round effect in just five years. Thus, the
evidence suggests more drastic actions are required if the WTO wants to seriously address AD
protection, which arguably is proliferating and increasing worldwide.

23

Many economists would argue that dumping concerns should be handled exactly as
national antitrust authorities approach any other market concern. For these authorities, the issue
is not about fairness, but about whether a certain practice makes markets anticompetitive and
decreases overall welfare, not just the welfare of a certain subset of firms in the industry. The
difficulty is taking these principles to an international stage, where countries will often have
competing interests. Devising an appropriate international body to handle these issues, within
the context of WTO or otherwise, is a major task with many political obstacles.
An alternative intermediate step would be to simply eliminate antidumping (and perhaps
countervailing duty policies) in favor of safeguard actions. Dumping calculations (and like
subsidy calculations) have little credibility, so why expend resources for such a process?
Safeguards still rely on injury determinations and the problem of discretion, of course, is not
limited to dumping calculations, but also to such injury determinations (see, e.g., Durling and
McCullough, 2002, and Irwin, 2002). The limited evidence within the U.S., however, is that this
process has not so quickly evolved towards more protection due to discretion. In addition,
safeguards have additional benefits. First, they are clearly temporary measures, which is not true
with AD and CVD actions despite adoption of common “sunset” provisions by member
countries.20 Second, safeguard actions are handled in a much more public way than AD and
CVD actions, and thus subject to more political scrutiny from both sides of the issue. This
certainly was seen in the recent steel safeguard actions pursued by the Bush administration in the
early 2000s.

20

The U.S. still has AD duties in place that began with investigations as early as the 1970s. Liebman (2001) and
Moore (2002) find that the vast majority of U.S. sunset cases led to continuation of AD and CVD duties.
24

References
Baldwin, Robert E. and Moore, Michael O. (1991). “Political Aspects of the Administration of
the Trade Remedy Laws,” in Richard Boltuck and Robert E. Litan (eds.), Down in the Dumps:
Administration of the Unfair Trade Laws. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, pp. 253280.
Blonigen, Bruce A. (2002). “The Effects of CUSFTA and NAFTA on Antidumping and
Countervailing Duty Activity,” Mimeo.
Boltuck, Richard and Robert E. Litan (Eds.). (1991). Down in the Dumps: Administration of the
Unfair Trade Laws. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution.
Congressional Budget Office. (2001). Antidumping Action in the United States and Around the
World: An Update. Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.
Congressional Budget Office. (1994). How the GATT Affects U.S. Antidumping and
Countervailing-Duty Policy. Washington, DC: Congressional Budget Office.
Durling, James P. and Matthew P. McCullough. (2002). “Teaching Old Laws New Tricks: The
Legal Obligation of Non-Attribution and the Need for Economic Rigor in Injury Analysis under
U.S. Trade Law,” Mimeo.
Hansen, Wendy L. and Thomas J. Prusa. (1996). “Cumulation and ITC Decision Making: The
Sum of the Parts is Greater than the Whole,” Economic Inquiry, Vol. 34(4): 746-769.
Irwin, Douglas A. (November 2002). “Causing Problems? The WTO Review of Causation and
Injury Attribution in U.S. Section 201 Cases,” Mimeo.
Jones, Kent. (April 2000). “Does NAFTA Chapter 19 Make a Difference? Dispute Settlement
and the Incentive Structure of U.S./Canada Unfair Trade Petitions,” Contemporary Economic
Policy, Vol. 18(2): 145-158.
Liebman, Benjamin H. (2001). “ITC Voting Behavior on Sunset Reviews,” Mimeo.
Lindsay, Brink. (1999). The U.S. Antidumping Law: Rhetoric versus Reality. Washington, DC:
Cato Institute.
Lindsay, Brink and Dan Ikenson. (2002). Antidumping 101: The Devilish Details of ‘Unfair
Trade’ Law. Washington, DC: Cato Institute.
Miranda, Jorge, Raul A. Torres, and Mario Ruiz. (1998). “The International Use of
Antidumping: 1987-1997,” Journal of World Trade, Vol. 32: 5-71.
Moore, Michael O. (2001). “‘Facts Available’ Dumping Allegations: When Will Foreign Firms
Cooperate in Antidumping Petitions?” Mimeo.

25

Moore, Michael O. (2002). “Commerce Department Antidumping Sunset Review: A Major
Disappointment,” Mimeo.
Palmeter, N. David. (1991). “The Antidumping Law: A Legal and Administrative Nontariff
Barrier,” in Richard Boltuck and Robert E. Litan (eds.), Down in the Dumps: Administration of
the Unfair Trade Laws. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, pp. 64-89.
Prusa, Thomas J. (August 2001). “On the Spread and Impact of Anti-dumping,” Canadian
Journal of Economics, Vol. 34(3): 591-611.
Stewart, Terence P. (1991). “Administration of the Antidumping Law: A Different Perspective,”
in Richard Boltuck and Robert E. Litan (eds.), Down in the Dumps: Administration of the Unfair
Trade Laws. Washington, DC: The Brookings Institution, pp. 288-330.
Tarullo, Daniel K. (August 2002). “The Hidden Costs of International Dispute Settlement: WTO
Review of Domestic Anti-dumping Decisions,” Mimeo.

26

TABLE 1:
Frequency of USDOC’s Use of Observable Discretionary Practices, 1980-2000.
Cost of
ThirdFacts
Adverse Facts Constructed
Production
Country
Year
Available
Available
Value
Test
Prices
1980
19.0
7.1
28.6
0.0
7.1
1981
8.1
0.0
29.7
10.8
5.4
1982
8.1
1.0
26.5
35.7
14.3
1983
4.8
1.9
41.7
49.5
11.7
1984
13.2
6.6
40.8
14.5
19.7
1985
21.9
7.3
37.5
41.7
8.3
1986
27.3
4.7
26.4
20.8
14.2
1987
35.1
13.5
16.2
35.1
2.7
1988
36.6
15.8
21.8
27.7
7.9
1989
41.7
16.7
20.8
18.8
20.8
1990
38.2
21.8
32.7
25.5
3.6
1991
25.4
20.3
20.3
20.3
15.3
1992
49.3
44.8
14.9
19.4
7.5
1993
49.6
34.3
32.3
39.4
4.0
1994
44.1
25.5
22.8
24.8
6.2
1995
29.7
27.0
35.1
27.0
0.0
1996
37.2
23.4
19.1
16.0
2.1
1997
35.9
35.9
59.0
59.0
10.3
1998
30.3
30.3
48.7
51.3
3.9
1999
45.1
45.1
15.4
20.9
0.0
2000
33.3
33.3
17.9
17.9
1.2
NOTES: Author’s calculations based on decision announcements by the USDOC in the Federal
Register. Numbers are annual percent of cases employing the listed discretionary practice.
Listed practices are not necessarily mutually exclusive as a case may employ more than one
discretionary practice. Use of a practice for only part of a case (e.g., a subset of the investigated
products) are included and treated identically to cases where the practice was fully used.
“Adverse Facts Available” numbers are a subset of “Facts Available” numbers.

27

TABLE 2:
Descriptive Statistics.
Variable

Mean

Standard
Deviation

Minimum

Maximum

USDOC Dumping Margin

41.86

54.46

0.00

454.00

Facts Available
Adverse Facts Available
Cost of Production Test
Constructed Value
Third Country Prices
Non-Market Economy

0.31
0.20
0.28
0.28
0.08
0.22

0.46
0.40
0.45
0.45
0.27
0.41

0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00
1.00

1984 Trade Act
1988 Trade Act
Uruguay Round

0.78
0.56
0.24

0.42
0.50
0.43

0.00
0.00
0.00

1.00
1.00
1.00

Canada
0.05
0.21
0.00
1.00
Mexico
0.02
0.14
0.00
1.00
Other Latin America
0.09
0.29
0.00
1.00
European Union
0.16
0.36
0.00
1.00
Japan
0.15
0.36
0.00
1.00
Korea
0.09
0.28
0.00
1.00
Taiwan
0.10
0.30
0.00
1.00
Other Asia
0.07
0.25
0.00
1.00
China
0.17
0.37
0.00
1.00
USSR/Russia
0.02
0.14
0.00
1.00
NOTES: Variables as defined in the text. Data were gathered from Federal Register notices on
USDOC preliminary and final dumping margin decisions. Statistics for each variable based on
1590 observations.

28

TABLE 3.
Effects of Discretionary Practices, Legal Changes, and Country Characteristics
on Size of U.S. AD Margins.
Regressors

(1)

(2)

Discretionary USDOC Practices
Facts Available

30.67***
(3.86)

31.08***
(9.02)

Adverse Facts Available

32.35***
(4.41)

9.29
(12.42)

Cost of Production Test

1.87
(3.38)

- 2.16
(6.34)

Constructed Value

- 1.09
(3.33)

- 11.77
(6.11)

Third Country Prices

- 0.87
(4.28)

- 12.77
(8.56)

Non-Market Economy

24.54***
(7.73)

- 8.93
(10.99)

Facts Available × Trend

0.02
(0.82)

Adverse Facts Available × Trend

2.03**
(1.00)

Cost of Production Test × Trend

0.40
(0.61)

Constructed Value × Trend

1.31**
(0.59)

Third Country Prices × Trend

1.29
(0.88)

Non-Market Economy × Trend

2.98***
(0.67)

Legal Changes
1984 Trade Act

8.59**
(3.46)

5.90*
(3.55)

1988 Trade Act

1.93
(3.33)

- 6.05
(3.97)

Uruguay Round

- 6.96**
(3.04)

- 20.03***
(4.20)

29

Country/Region Effects
Canada

- 9.23
(6.81)

- 10.14
(6.79)

Mexico

1.40
(8.84)

2.65
(8.80)

Other Latin America

- 0.34
(5.81)

- 1.74
(5.79)

European Union

- 5.56
(5.33)

- 5.68
(5.32)

Japan

5.42
(5.36)

5.74
(5.35)

Korea

- 15.21***
(5.92)

- 15.29***
(5.90)

Taiwan

- 19.77***
(5.70)

- 18.92***
(5.70)

Other Asia

- 2.78
(6.27)

- 2.80
(6.23)

China

15.40**
(6.84)

12.05*
(6.96)

USSR/Russia

Constant

Adjusted R-squared
F-Statistic

- 25.08**
(10.16)
16.36***
(5.16)
0.35
45.98***

- 32.14***
(10.24)
21.67***
(5.32)
0.36
36.41***

Number of Observations
1590
1590
NOTES: Standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *, denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels respectively.

30

TABLE 4.
Effects of Discretionary Practices, Legal Changes, and Country Characteristics
on Size of U.S. AD Margins – Controlling for Case-Specific Fixed Effects.
Regressors

(1)

(2)

Discretionary USDOC Practices
Facts Available

34.40***
(4.61)

20.58**
(9.98)

Adverse Facts Available

40.49***
(5.15)

1.78
(14.69)

Cost of Production Test

11.23**
(4.55)

- 9.36
(9.78)

Constructed Value

3.04
(3.91)

- 11.58
(7.08)

Third Country Prices

- 4.09
(4.70)

7.57
(9.27)

Facts Available × Trend

1.17
(1.05)

Adverse Facts Available × Trend

3.16**
(1.32)

Cost of Production Test × Trend

2.14**
(0.92)

Constructed Value × Trend

1.54**
(0.75)

Third Country Prices × Trend

Constant

Adjusted R-squared
F-Statistic

- 1.95*
(1.06)
19.56***
(2.44)
0.76
87.71***

16.03***
(2.50)
0.77
47.96***

Number of Observations
1452
1452
Note: Standard errors in parentheses. ***, **, and *, denote significance at the 1%, 5%,
and 10% levels respectively.

31

Figure 1:
3-Year Moving Average of U.S. AD Duties
Percent
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

Year

Figure 2:
3-Year Moving Average of the Percent of Affirmative Injury Decisions
Percent
100
90
80
70
60
50
40
30
20
10

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

Year

32

Figure 3:
Decomposition of U.S. AD Margin Changes

Percent
60

Discretionary Practices

50

40

30

Legal Changes

20

10

Country Composition

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

Year

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

0

33

Figure 4:
Decomposition of U.S. AD Margin Changes Allowing Trends
in Discretionary Practices

Percent
100
90

Discretionary Practices

80
70
60
50
40

Legal Changes

30
20

2000

1999

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

Year

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1982

1981

1980

0

1983

Country Composition

10

34

