                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




             DOES MEDICAID PAY TOO MUCH FOR PRESCRIPTION DRUGS?
                  A CASE STUDY OF ATYPICAL ANTI-PSYCHOTICS

                                            Mark G. Duggan

                                          Working Paper 9626
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9626


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




I am grateful to Alberto Abadie, Catalina Amuedo-Dorantes, David Autor, Gary Becker, Ernst Berndt, Hoyt
Bleakley, Jeanette Chung, David Cutler, Bill Evans, Richard Frank, Sherry Glied, Austan Goolsbee, Michael
Greenstone, Steven Levitt, Frank Lichtenberg, Will Manning, David Meltzer, Kevin Murphy, Fiona Scott-
Morton, and to seminar participants at Princeton, the University of British Columbia, the University of
Chicago, and the NBER Health Care meetings for helpful comments at various stages of this project. Thanks
also to Abby Alpert for outstanding research assistance, to the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation for financial
support, and to Jim Klein from the California Department of Health Services for assistance with the Medicaid
claims data. All errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Mark G. Duggan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Does Medicaid Pay Too Much for Prescription Drugs? A Case Study of Atypical Anti-
Psychotics
Mark G. Duggan
NBER Working Paper No. 9626
April 2003
JEL No. H51, H57, H72, I11, I18, D61

                                            ABSTRACT


During the last several years, government spending on drugs used to treat schizophrenia and other
psychotic illnesses has increased at more than 30% per year, with the $3 billion in 2001 Medicaid

expenditures exceeding spending in any other therapeutic category. This growth has been primarily
driven by a shift to atypical anti-psychotic drugs, which are several times more expensive than the
conventional anti-psychotics that preceded them and are purchased almost exclusively by state

governments through the Medicaid program. In this paper, I estimate the productivity of these new
drugs using a 5% sample of California Medicaid recipients eligible for the program in at least one
month between January of 1993 and December of 2001 and diagnosed with schizophrenia during
that period. My results indicate that the shift to atypical anti-psychotics has significantly increased

government spending, has not reduced the utilization of hospitals or long-term care facilities, and
has not improved observable measures of health among Medicaid recipients. The findings suggest
that the price of a prescription drug purchased differentially by consumers with Medicaid or other

public health insurance may be an inaccurate measure of it value to patients.

Mark G. Duggan
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street, Room 508
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
mduggan@midway.uchicago.edu
1. Introduction
       Approximately 44 million low-income individuals qualify for health insurance through
the federal-state Medicaid program during the course of a typical year. Individuals eligible for
the program receive coverage for hospital stays, physician visits, nursing home care, prescription
drugs, and most other health care services. Because Medicaid recipients bear no financial cost
for their medical care, standard moral hazard considerations imply that the benefits of some of
the services covered by this program may fall substantially below their costs. With Medicaid
spending currently at 2.5% of GDP, expenditures projected to grow significantly more rapidly
than GDP in the coming decade, and federal and state governments confronting large budget
deficits, policymakers may soon need to more carefully scrutinize whether the benefits of
government spending on medical care justify the costs.
       In this paper, I investigate the effect of on one category of treatments from the most
rapidly growing component of Medicaid spending – prescription drugs. From 1996 to 2001,
Medicaid spending on prescription drugs approximately doubled and now exceeds $25 billion
per year. This growth was driven primarily by a significant increase in the average price of a
prescription, which itself was caused by a shift to new drugs rather than an increase in the price
of existing drugs. The surge in spending was especially striking for drugs used to treat mental
disorders, with expenditures increasing from $2.0 billion in 1996 to $6.0 billion in 2001.1
       The 470 million prescriptions filled for Medicaid recipients in 2001 accounted for more
than 15% of the 3.1 billion prescriptions filled nationally. This “Medicaid market share” varies
substantially across therapeutic categories and has generally been increasing within these
categories over time. Because of the formula that the government uses to determine the prices
that it pays for Medicaid-insured prescriptions, it is likely that prices in the private market are
significantly higher than they otherwise would be. This is likely to be especially true for those
drugs consumed differentially by price-inelastic Medicaid consumers.
       In addition to influencing the price of particular drugs, Medicaid coverage will distort
recipients’ decisions about which drugs to purchase.       Because they bear no cost for their
treatments, Medicaid recipients will tend to pick (or their physicians will recommend) the drug

1
  Preliminary data suggest that spending on drugs for the treatment of mental disorders increased
to more than $7 billion in 2002. As a reference, spending on this one category of prescription
drugs therefore exceeds total spending by the federal government for job training programs,
which equaled $6.7 billion in that same year (U.S. Department of Labor, 2003).


                                                 3
that offers the highest expected health benefit, even if it costs much more than a drug that would
yield a similar increment to health. It is therefore ultimately an empirical question whether the
sharp increase in government spending on prescription drugs has led to improvements in health
or reductions in other health care utilization that justify the additional spending.
       To examine this issue, I consider the impact of a sharp increase in government spending
for anti-psychotic drugs - the therapeutic category with more Medicaid spending than any other –
for a large sample of Medicaid recipients diagnosed with schizophrenia. In 2001, nearly 80% of
anti-psychotic prescriptions were filled for Medicaid recipients, making it the therapeutic
category with the largest Medicaid market share.2 The average amount paid by Medicaid for an
anti-psychotic prescription increased by a factor of five from $36 in 1993 to $180 in 2001.3 This
increase was almost entirely driven by a shift to Zyprexa, Risperdal, and Seroquel, three new
drugs that were approved by the FDA for the treatment of schizophrenia during the mid-1990s
and are now first, second, and eighth, respectively, with respect to total Medicaid spending.
These three “atypical anti-psychotic” drugs are considered by some to have a more positive
impact on cognition and a better side effect profile than the conventional anti-psychotics that
preceded them, though this is controversial.4
       Estimating the impact of these drugs using observational data is challenging because the
treatments are not randomly assigned, and may therefore be correlated with an individual’s
(perhaps partially unobserved) health status. Thus the randomized clinical trials required for
FDA approval are in some respects superior to any study that uses observational data. However,
there are a number of limitations to these clinical trials. First, they do not investigate the effect
on health care costs, instead only considering certain dimensions of health and typically
comparing the drug only with a placebo rather than substitute drugs. Second, the clinical trials
typically consider just short-term outcomes, examining those taking atypical anti-psychotics for a
period of four to eight weeks. Third, the sample sizes used in the clinical trials of these drugs are
much smaller than the number that I have in my data, and thus I can obtain more precise
estimates of the effect of the drugs on outcome variables of interest (e.g. side effects that occur

2
  The next largest customer for this category of prescription drugs is the federal government,
which purchases drugs for individuals insured by the Veterans’ Health Administration. This
program also has no co-pay for prescription drugs.
3
  All dollar amounts are adjusted to 2001 dollars using the CPI-U series from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics.


                                                  4
infrequently). Fourth, the individuals who participate in these trials may be quite different from
the typical person who takes the drug following FDA approval. And finally, my data allow me
to exploit variation over time in the diffusion of the drug and at a point-in-time across providers
(e.g. psychiatrists) in the propensity to prescribe certain drugs, thus allowing me to estimate the
effect of the drug on the marginal patient (which may change over time as the drugs diffuse)
rather than simply the average treatment effect that is estimated in the trials.
       In this paper, I use an administrative data set with claims and eligibility information for a
5% sample of California’s Medicaid recipients and employ three strategies for estimating the
effect of the new anti-psychotic drugs on both health outcomes and on health care spending.5 I
begin by estimating individual fixed effects specifications that measure the change in spending
and health for schizophrenia patients who begin taking each drug shortly after its FDA approval.
This strategy exploits variation across Medicaid recipients both in the decision to take the drug
and in the time when the first prescription is taken. My findings demonstrate that the shift to
Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel was associated with a sharp and significant increase in
Medicaid spending but appeared to have little impact on health, as measured by the probability
of hospitalization, the amount of time spent in the hospital, or the incidence of adverse side
effects. If anything, the results suggest that health outcomes decline following the shift to the
new drugs, as the incidence of diabetes is significantly greater after schizophrenia patients shift
to Risperdal, Zyprexa, or Seroquel.
       One important limitation of this first estimation strategy is that the shift to atypical anti-
psychotic drugs may – for many Medicaid recipients - be caused by a change in health. If this is
the case, then the individual fixed effects analysis will confound the effect of the drugs with this
other factor. My finding that the probability of hospitalization is trending up in the months
leading up to Medicaid recipients’ first atypical anti-psychotic prescription suggests that the
individual fixed effects estimates are likely to be biased.
       In an effort to surmount this problem, in my second estimation strategy I use a cohort
analysis that compares the pre-post trajectory of outcome variables of interest for hospitalized

4
  For alternative viewpoints, see Meltzer, et al (1999) and Keefe, et al (1999).
5
  Related studies have examined the productivity of drugs used to treat depression (Berndt, et al
2002), the benefits of newer prescription drugs (Lichtenberg, 1996 and 2001), and the benefits of
new technologies or more intensive use of existing ones (e.g. McClellan, et al (1994), Cutler, et
al (1998), Wennberg and Cooper (1999), and Cutler and McClellan (2001)).


                                                  5
schizophrenia patients in 1994 with their observably similar counterparts from 2000. This
strategy essentially investigates whether the shift to Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel has
reduced the rate of hospitalization, the time spent in the hospital during the acute event, or the
time hospitalized in future periods. Despite a sharp increase in anti-psychotic drug spending
between 1994 and 2000, the pre-post trajectory of health care utilization for hospitalized
schizophrenia patients is quite similar during these two time periods, suggesting that the drugs
have not reduced the incidence or severity of hospitalizations nor increased the speed with which
Medicaid recipients recover.
       In addition to focusing on only those schizophrenia patients hospitalized during these two
time periods, I next examine the entire distribution of Medicaid spending and health outcomes
for schizophrenia patients in 1994 and 2001. My findings here demonstrate that a substantial
increase in spending on anti-psychotic drugs in all ten deciles of the distribution can explain
more than half of the 41% increase in Medicaid spending on this group. Additionally, there is
virtually no change in the overall hospitalization rate and the incidence of adverse side effects
increases in all ten deciles of the expenditure distribution, providing further evidence that the
drugs have not led to significant improvements in the health of Medicaid recipients.
       There are at least two potential limitations of this cohort-based approach. First, the
characteristics of individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia may be changing over time. Second,
there are no doubt other shifts in medical care technology and in treatment patterns occurring
over this time period. For both of these reasons, differences in means and/or distributions
between 1994 and 2001 will not be solely driven by the shift to atypical anti-psychotic drugs.
       Thus in my third estimation strategy, I investigate the impact of atypical anti-psychotic
drugs by comparing Medicaid-eligible schizophrenia patients who take the drug with observably
similar individuals in the same time period who do not take the drug. To do this, I use the
patient’s psychiatrist as an instrumental variable for the probability of taking the drug. Certain
psychiatrists are significantly more likely – conditional on their patients’ observable
characteristics – to prescribe atypical anti-psychotic drugs to their schizophrenia patients. To
obtain a sufficient number of patients for each psychiatrist, I use a 25% sample rather than a 5%
sample for this third strategy. And my empirical results here – though not as precisely estimated
as the previous two – are broadly consistent with the earlier results, though I am unable to rule




                                                6
out the possibility that unobservable health is driving the difference across psychiatrists rather
that pharmaceutical advertising or some other plausibly exogenous factor.
       While none of the strategies used in this paper is free from potential problems, the fact
that all three point in the same direction is reassuring. Taken together, my results suggest that
the 670% increase in government spending for anti-psychotic drugs during the 1993-2001 period
has not significantly improved the health of Medicaid recipients with psychotic illness, though it
is worth emphasizing that my measures of health are not as complete as the corresponding ones
for health care spending. Given that so few of the consumers of atypical anti-psychotic drugs
share in its price, it may not be surprising that the benefits of these treatments appear to be much
smaller than their costs to taxpayers. But this issue is likely to become more important in the
years ahead as the fraction of prescription drugs specifically and medical care generally paid for
by the government through Medicaid, Medicare, and other programs continues to increase.
       The outline of the paper is as follows. Section two presents an illustrative model that
examines the effect of Medicaid on the efficiency of prescription drug spending. Section three
describes the growth in the disability rolls that has been partly responsible for the increase in
Medicaid prescription drug spending, and then summarizes trends in spending on prescription
drugs and on anti-psychotic drugs specifically. In section four I describe the data used in this
study, which includes complete claims data for a 5% sample of Medicaid recipients from the
state of California for the 1993-2001 period. In section five I use individual fixed effects
specifications to investigate the effect of Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel on both Medicaid
spending and on health outcomes. Section six presents two alternative estimation strategies for
estimating these effects and section seven concludes.
2. Modeling the Effect of Medicaid on the Efficiency of Prescription Drug Spending
       For those Medicaid recipients not enrolled in a managed care plan, the government
directly reimburses hospitals, pharmacies, and other health care providers for any services that
are received by the recipient. The government must therefore choose prices for every covered
service and often relies on the prices that exist in the private sector. While this may help the
government to choose reimbursement rates for specialized treatments that are difficult to
evaluate, it may have a significant impact on equilibrium prices in the private market. This
effect will be especially large for drugs consumed differentially by Medicaid recipients.




                                                 7
       Consider, for example, a pharmaceutical firm’s optimization problem after acquiring
FDA approval for drug j. Assume for simplicity that the firm has a patent for the drug, that there
is just one period, that there is a constant marginal cost equal to c, and that demand for the drug
does not influence the demand for other products produced by this same firm. In the absence of
Medicaid, the firm will simply choose the price of the drug to satisfy the following equation:

                                                      Pj* − c       1
                                                (1)             =
                                                       Pj*          εj

with ε j equal to the demand elasticity at the optimal price. Thus the more elastic is the demand

for the drug the lower will be its equilibrium price.
       Now assume that a fraction α of potential customers are eligible for the Medicaid
program.6 If the demand function for this group is simply α times the total market demand,
then the optimal price will increase to satisfy the following equation:

                                     Pj* − c    1        αQ j (0)  
                                                                        
                               (2)             = * 1 + θ *
                                      Pj*       εj                 *  
                                                          (1 − α )Q j  
with θ equal to the fraction of the price that the government pays the pharmaceutical company,

αQ j (0) the number of units of the drug consumed by Medicaid recipients, and (1 − α )Q *j equal

to the number of units consumed by unsubsidized consumers at the price Pj* . The optimal price

will therefore be an increasing function of the ratio of Medicaid prescriptions to privately insured
                                                                                                 c
purchases and of the reimbursement rate θ (which is assumed to be greater than                       ).
                                                                                              Pj*

Intuitively, as the fraction of subsidized customers increases, the effective demand elasticity
declines, thus leading to an increase in the firm’s profit-maximizing price. In the case of a
simple linear demand curve Q j = N − µPj this optimal price will equal:


6
  The typical state government pays 90% of the average wholesale price to the pharmaceutical
firm for each prescription and then receives a rebate that is typically equal to 15% of the average
manufacturer’s price. See Scott-Morton (1998) for an examination of the effect of Medicaid
rebates on pharmaceutical pricing. Average wholesale price (AWP) is the drug’s list price,
whereas the average manufacturer’s price (AMP) is approximately equal to total revenues
divided by total prescriptions. Because AWP is greater than AMP, the price paid by Medicaid is
often close to the average private price, with this difference varying across drugs.


                                                          8
                                                N   c   αθN
                                    (3) Pj* =      + +
                                                2µ  2 2µ (1 − α )
and thus some privately paying customers who would purchase the drug in the absence of a
Medicaid program will no longer purchase if α > 0 . As the Medicaid market share increases, the
fraction of non-Medicaid patients that purchase the drug declines.7 Because some low valuation
Medicaid consumers end up purchasing the drug while relatively high valuation private
customers do not, the program reduces allocative efficiency in this market.
        In addition to increasing the prices of prescription drugs above those that would prevail in
the absence of this government intervention, the Medicaid program will lead to inefficient
treatment decisions by Medicaid recipients.                Consider, for example, the decision for an
unsubsidized individual j with an illness that has K possible drug treatments. For simplicity
assume that the person is alive for just one period and that he/she maximizes the utility function
Uj = α j H j + (1 − α j )C j , with Hj and Cj equal to health and consumption, respectively. One can

model the effect of the drugs on the individual’s health as follows:
                              (4) ∆H j = β1 j D1 j + β 2 j D2 j + ... + β Kj DKj

with the indicator variable Dkj equal to one if the person takes drug k and zero otherwise, and βkj
equal to the effect of the drug on health, which may vary across individuals. By taking the drug,
the person may reduce the need for other types of health care (e.g. physician visits, hospital
stays, etc.) and thus the resulting change in consumption may differ from the cost of the drug.
This change can be written as:
                               (5) ∆C j = µ1 j D1 j + µ 2 j D2 j + ... + µ Kj DKj

with µkj equal to the change in consumption that results if individual takes drug k. If person j
knows the parameters βkj and µkj, then he/she will maximize utility by choosing the drug k (if
any) that maximizes α j β kj − (1 − α j ) µ kj , which is equal to the change in utility that results when

an individual takes the drug.8 Individuals with similar illnesses will make different choices both
because of heterogeneous treatment effects and also because of variation across individuals in

7
  This could plausibly lead some private customers to try to qualify for Medicaid, thus
introducing a feedback effect that leads to further increases in the price.
8
  In practice individuals and their physicians are likely to be uncertain about βkj and µkj. Thus
after taking the drug they face a signal extraction problem – how much of the change in health
from one period to the next is due to the drug versus some other factor.


                                                       9
the weight placed on health versus consumption. Some would choose the most expensive drug,
but only if its health benefits were sufficiently large to justify the resulting loss in utility from
reduced consumption.
       The treatment decision would often be different if the individual did not share in the cost
of the drug because of full insurance from the Medicaid program. In this case, he/she would
simply choose the drug that yields the biggest increment to health βkj, thus potentially choosing a
drug with a benefit substantially lower than its cost to taxpayers. Adding uncertainty to the costs
and benefits of the drugs or taking account of agency issues that result when a person relies on
physician advice does not change the main insight – purchase decisions may be quite inefficient
when the co-pay is set to zero.
       Thus for at least two reasons, Medicaid spending on the more than 20,000 prescription
drugs currently covered by the program may not generate health benefits or reductions in other
health care utilization that justify the additional spending. First, the program’s reimbursement
rules will increase pharmaceutical prices above those that would prevail in the absence of
Medicaid, with this effect likely to be especially important for drugs consumed differentially by
beneficiaries of this program. Second, because Medicaid recipients do not share in the cost of
their prescription drugs, they will choose some with a benefit substantially lower than the cost to
taxpayers.9
       In the empirical work that follows, I investigate the effect of a new category of
prescription drugs purchased differentially by Medicaid recipients on both government spending
and health outcomes for a sample of individuals insured by this program. While I unfortunately
cannot measure the dollar value that each Medicaid recipient places on the drugs that he/she
takes, I can examine whether the sharp increase in spending for these drugs has on average
yielded similarly significant improvements in observable measures of health or reductions in the
utilization of other health care services.
3. Medicaid and the Market for Anti-Psychotic Drugs
A. The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Increase in Medicaid Enrollment
       From 1989 to 2001, the number of non-elderly individuals receiving disability benefits
from the federal government’s Supplemental Security Income (SSI program) more than doubled,

9
 One additional reason is that providers may have financial or other incentives to prescribe
certain drugs.


                                                 10
increasing from 2.28 million to 4.69 million, with most of the increase occurring during the first
four years of this twelve-year period. To qualify for SSI disability benefits, a person must have a
medically determinable impairment that prevents him or her from engaging in “substantial
gainful activity” (SSA, 2002). Additionally, the person’s income and assets must be quite low
because the program is means tested. An additional 2.00 million elderly individuals are currently
eligible for SSI and all 6.69 million SSI recipients obtain health insurance through the Medicaid
program. Total cash payments to this group in 2001 amounted to more than $34 billion. Despite
the fact that only one out of every six Medicaid recipients are on SSI, those eligible for SSI
benefits accounted for approximately 65% of the $221 billion in Medicaid expenditures during
the 2001 fiscal year. Thus health care payments on behalf of this group were more than four
times as large as the $34 billion in cash transfers to them.10
       The growth in SSI receipt since the 1980s has not been uniform across diagnosis groups.
The most striking change has been the increase in the fraction of program participants who
qualified because of a mental disorder. This number has increased by more than 135% since
1989, from 1.20 million to 2.82 million. The growth in eligibility among all other diagnosis
groups, while still a substantial 73% (from 1.09 million to 1.88 million), has been much less
marked. It therefore seems plausible that the impact of the Medicaid program on the market for
drugs used to treat mental disorders has increased over this time period.
B. Trends in Medicaid Prescription Drug Spending in the U.S.
       From 1996 to 2001, real Medicaid spending on prescription drugs approximately doubled
from $12.5 billion to $24.7 billion.11 Growth in this service category far outpaced all other
Medicaid spending, which increased by just 20% from $164.0 billion to $196.5 billion during
this same time period. Recent research suggests that the growth in pharmaceutical spending may
actually have lowered medical care outlays below what they otherwise would have been, as new




10
   Many SSI recipients are also eligible for disability or retiree benefits from social security.
These 2.39 million “dually eligible” individuals are therefore receiving cash transfers from SSI
and OASDI, and obtain health insurance from both Medicaid and Medicare. See Autor and
Duggan (2003) for an examination of the factors leading to growth in the disability rolls.
11
   Net spending on prescription drugs in these two years amounted to $10.3 and $19.7 billion,
respectively, as pharmaceutical firms paid rebates to state governments equal to approximately
20% of gross Medicaid revenues in each year.


                                                  11
prescription drugs may improve health and thus lower other spending for other types of health
care utilization (Lichtenberg, 1996 and 2001).12
       The Food and Drug Administration classifies each drug that it approves into one of
twenty major classes. Table 1 provides information on Medicaid spending for each of these
classes in 1996 and 2001. In both years, spending for drugs used to treat Central Nervous
System (CNS) disorders was greater than for any other therapeutic category. CNS drugs include
those used to combat most types of mental disorders, including anti-depressants, anti-psychotics,
and anti-anxiety medications. Not surprisingly given the growth in the SSI rolls described
above, the increase in spending in this therapeutic category has been more rapid than for all other
prescription drugs. In 1996, the Medicaid program disbursed $1.99 billion for CNS drugs and
this number more than tripled to $6.00 billion by 2001.
       Within the CNS class of drugs, there are several minor classes. The two largest with
respect to Medicaid spending are anti-depressants and anti-psychotics. This first group includes
drugs used to treat various forms of depression, while drugs used to treat schizophrenia,
dementia, and other psychotic illnesses are in the latter group. As Table 2A shows, these two
categories account for more than 80% of the $6 billion in Medicaid spending on CNS drugs.
From 1996 to 2001, real Medicaid expenditures on drugs used to treat psychotic illness and
depression increased by 266% and 145%, respectively. Interestingly, while the increase in the
latter category was driven primarily by a rise in the number of prescriptions, the surge in
spending for drugs used to treat schizophrenia is mainly explained by a 148% increase in the
average price for a prescription.
       Although the number of anti-depressant prescriptions filled for Medicaid recipients
exceeded the corresponding number of anti-psychotic prescriptions, Table 2B demonstrates that
the Medicaid market share is substantially greater for this latter category. In this table, I list the
top three selling (by expenditures) drugs for each of the two drug classes in 2001. Among anti-
depressants, Medicaid accounts for roughly 17 percent of all prescriptions, whereas beneficiaries
of this program received approximately 75 percent of those filled to treat psychotic illnesses.
This difference corresponds to a significant difference in the parameter α from the theoretical
section above. Consistent with the model’s main prediction, the drug class with a greater level of

12
  This study estimates the productivity of pharmaceutical spending generally, but does not
investigate the efficiency of Medicaid spending on prescription drugs nor on anti-psychotic drugs


                                                   12
(and presumably a greater increase in) the Medicaid market share during recent years has been
characterized by a much sharper increase in average prices.
C. The Shift to Atypical Anti-Psychotics
       Anti-psychotic drugs are used primarily for the treatment of schizophrenia. The FDA’s
approval of Clozaril in 1989 marked the start of a significant change in the treatment of this
illness. Prior to this approval, schizophrenia patients were typically treated with conventional
anti-psychotics known as neuroleptics. These drugs helped individuals to deal with delusions,
hallucinations, and other positive symptoms of this illness, but had a number of adverse side
effects including muscle spasms, tremors, and an increased risk of tardive dyskinesia. Clozaril
was the first in a line of atypical anti-psychotics that appeared to lower the incidence of these
extrapyramidal side effects while also treating both the positive and the negative symptoms (e.g.
withdrawal, lack of motivation, blunted emotions) of schizophrenia (Lamberg, 1998). During
the subsequent decade, the FDA approved several new atypical anti-psychotics, including
Risperdal in 1993, Zyprexa in 1996, and Seroquel in 1997, which were considered to have even
fewer side effects than Clozaril. These four drugs now account for 73% of all anti-psychotic
prescriptions filled in the U.S. and more than 91% of total spending on anti-psychotic drugs
(NIHCM, 2002).
       Table 2C demonstrates that the shift to Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel that occurred
from 1996 to 2001 is the main reason for the sharp increase in Medicaid prescription drug
spending and in average prices during this time period. These three atypical anti-psychotic drugs
entered the market in January of 1994 (Risperdal), October of 1996 (Zyprexa), and October of
1997 (Seroquel). The table also shows that the market share of Clozaril, the top-selling brand
drug during the 1990-1996 period, fell sharply from 1996 to 2001. 13 Additionally, the fraction
of prescriptions that were for generic drugs fell from 48% to 28%.
       For each one of these three drugs, there are multiple dosage amounts and/or route types.
Table 2D shows that there are currently ten separate versions of Zyprexa that are covered by the
Medicaid program. Medicaid payments for Zyprexa are greater than for any other drug, with




specifically.
13
   The decline in Clozaril’s market share was likely driven by studies suggesting that it led to an
increase in the incidence of agranulocytosis in patients.


                                                 13
Risperdal and Seroquel at numbers two and eight, respectively.14        This is quite striking given
that just 1% of Medicaid recipients have been diagnosed with schizophrenia, and reflects the fact
that atypical anti-psychotics are substantially more expensive than the average prescription drug.
       While dozens of studies have investigated whether these new drug treatments lead to
improvements in mental functioning (Meltzer, et al, 1999; Lamberg, 1998; Keefe, et al, 1999) or
to changes in the incidence of certain side effects (Gianfrancesco, et al, 2002; Leucht, et al, 1999;
Sernyak, et al, 2002), no study has examined the effect of the new drugs on both health outcomes
and on health care costs. One needs both when estimating the productivity of this important
category of prescription drugs that is purchased almost exclusively by the government for
beneficiaries of Medicaid and other government programs.
4. The Medicaid Sample and the Diffusion of Atypical Anti-Psychotic Drugs
       To estimate the change in productivity for the largest category of Medicaid prescription
drug spending, I use an administrative data set constructed by the California Department of
Health Services (DHS) that contains all Medicaid claims for a sample of California residents
with at least one month of Medicaid eligibility from January of 1993 to December of 2001.15
The claims data include all Medicaid payments made to hospitals, nursing homes, pharmacies,
physicians, and other health care providers for 5% of California’s Medicaid recipients. There are
729,562 individuals in the sample with at least one month of Medicaid eligibility, implying that
approximately 14.6 million Californians (more than 40% of the state’s residents) were eligible
for the program in one or more months during this nine year time period.
       Except those for prescription drugs, every Medicaid claim in the data has a primary
diagnosis code that identifies the main reason for the health care treatment. During the nine-year
sample period, there are 9646 individuals with one or more claims that have a primary diagnosis
of schizophrenia,16 implying that just 1.3% of individuals eligible for Medicaid were at some
point diagnosed with schizophrenia. For the empirical work that follows below, I pulled all

14
   Ranking drugs by total revenues in the U.S., Zyprexa and Risperdal are at numbers 12 and 20,
respectively. Among the top thirty drugs, Zyprexa has the highest price per prescription and
Risperdal is the third most expensive.
15
   See Duggan (2002) for a more detailed description of this data. There are clear disadvantages
to focusing on just one state. Unfortunately, because each state administers its own Medicaid
program and uses its own method for coding claims, it is not currently possible to assemble an
individual-level data set for a representative sample of Medicaid recipients in the U.S.
16
   A claim is coded as a schizophrenia claim if the first three digits of the diagnosis code are 295.


                                                 14
Medicaid claims and eligibility information for these 9646 individuals. I then drop all data for
the 302 individuals without a valid social security number (encrypted in my data) or with data
discrepancies across years (e.g. listed as born in 1926 in one year and in 1934 in another year).
Finally, I drop the 1240 individuals with one or more months of Medicaid eligibility in one of the
seven counties with a county organized health system (COHS) because the claims data will be
missing for most Medicaid recipients in these places. The final sample contains all Medicaid
claims and eligibility information for 8104 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia at some
point between January of 1993 and December of 2001 while eligible for Medicaid.
          Every Medicaid prescription drug claim has an eleven digit National Drug Code (NDC)
that allows me to uniquely identify the drug that was prescribed. There are currently more than
30,000 active NDCs, and this number changes from one period to the next as new drugs are
introduced, new dosage amounts and/or route types are approved for existing drugs, and old
drugs are discontinued. Using the NDC variable, I merge the Medicaid prescription drug claims
with files constructed by the Food and Drug Administration that have several variables including
the drug’s name, active ingredient, dosage, and drug class.17
          Table 3A lists spending on anti-psychotic drugs for the schizophrenia sample and for all
Medicaid recipients in the 5% sample. The 8104 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia
account for more than 60% of the $21 million spent on anti-psychotic drugs in the 5% sample,
with most of the remaining spending for individuals diagnosed with bipolar disorder or dementia
but never with schizophrenia. As the table shows, the average price for an anti-psychotic
prescription increased by a factor of five from 1993 to 2001, and total spending on anti-psychotic
drugs increased by 670% during this period.            By 2001, Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel
accounted for nearly 58% of all anti-psychotic prescriptions and for more than 85% of spending.
Table 3B demonstrates that these three drugs approved by the FDA during the mid-1990s are
significantly more expensive than the average anti-psychotic drug in 1993. For example, at $391
per prescription, Zyprexa is ten times more expensive than the average anti-psychotic
prescription was in 1993.
          Table 4 provides summary statistics for the individuals in the schizophrenia sample, with
snapshots in the first quarter of 1993, 1997, and 2001.           The first three columns include
information for individuals eligible for Medicaid who have a schizophrenia claim at any point

17
     The most current set of these files can be found at http://www.fda.gov/cder/ndc/.


                                                  15
between January of 1993 and December of 2001. The number of recipients differs across the
three time periods because of both entry and exit (either death or becoming ineligible for
Medicaid) and Appendix Table 1 lists this information for the 36 quarters from early 1993 to late
2001.18 The last three columns include summary statistics for individuals with one or more
schizophrenia claims in the first quarter of 1993, 1997, and 2001. In addition to demographic
information, the table provides average Medicaid spending, rates of health care utilization, and
information on the fraction of the sample with side effects that previous studies suggest may be
affected (either positively or negatively) by Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel.
       From 1993 to 2001, the number of Medicaid recipients diagnosed with schizophrenia one
or more times during the first three months of the year rose by just 7.2%, from 2329 to 2496.
This suggests that neither growth in the SSI rolls after 1993 nor a change in the definition of this
mental illness led to a significant change in the average characteristics of individuals in the
sample. The summary statistics reveal that there is a substantial shift in the age distribution of
Medicaid recipients with schizophrenia, with the fraction between 45 and 64 years old increasing
from 31% in 1993 to nearly 44% by 2001. This increase is not surprising given the aging of the
population, though it is worth bearing in mind when examining any trends in the distribution of
spending, utilization, or health during the nine-year period studied here.
       From 1993 to 2001, the fraction of individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia taking
Risperdal, Zyprexa, or Seroquel increased from 0 to more than 60%, with a resulting increase in
quarterly spending on anti-psychotic drugs of $153 to $809. This rise coincided with a sharp
increase in spending on other types of prescription drugs (from $172 to $402) and on all other
Medicaid services (from $2313 to $2612). The fraction admitted to a hospital or long-term care
facility remains fairly constant, increasing slightly from 19.7% to 20.6%, while there is a
similarly small increase in the fraction with extrapyramidal symptoms (EPS).19 Strikingly, there
is a significant increase in the fraction diagnosed with diabetes (73%) and with abnormal weight

18
   Just 42% of the 8104 individuals in the schizophrenia sample are eligible for Medicaid in all
36 quarters from early 1993 to late 2001, and thus the panel data set employed in the subsequent
empirical work is unbalanced. This occurs because 2235 of the individuals in the sample die or
are no longer eligible for Medicaid by December of 2001 and because 2451 of those in the
sample have their first month of eligibility after the first quarter of 1993.
19
   A person is coded as having EPS if they have any Medicaid claims with a primary diagnosis
ICD-9 code that begins with 332 (Parkinson’s disease) or 333 (other extrapyrmidal disease and
abnormal movement disorders). See Leucht, et al (1999) for a literature review.


                                                 16
gain (118%),20 and the fraction diagnosed with one or more of the five side effects most
commonly associated with anti-psychotic drugs rises from 6.8% to 10.3%.
       Thus while it is certainly true that the characteristics of those in the sample are changing
over this period, a preliminary examination of the trends in spending, utilization, and health
suggest that atypical anti-psychotic drugs have not dramatically lowered other Medicaid
spending nor improved health. It is worth emphasizing, however, that the health outcomes
measured here using the Medicaid claims data may not fully capture all of the effects of atypical
anti-psychotics on individual health and well being.21
       The following sections use three identification strategies to estimate the effect of one of
the most rapidly growing categories of Medicaid prescription drug spending on both health care
spending and on health outcomes.
5. The Impact of Atypical Anti-Psychotics on Medicaid Spending and Health Outcomes
       The first step in estimating the effect of any health care treatment is to determine the set
of individuals who are potential candidates for it.      The three drugs described above were
approved by the FDA during the mid-1990s for the treatment of schizophrenia but are now also
used to treat individuals with bipolar disorder, dementia, and other psychotic illnesses.22 In the
empirical work that follows, I focus on individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia because this
group accounts for the majority of atypical anti-psychotic prescriptions in the Medicaid sample


20
   The first of these two includes ICD-9 codes that begin with 7831 (abnormal weight gain) and
2720-2724 (hypercholesterolemia, hyperlipidemia, and related illnesses), while diabetes includes
ICD-9 codes beginning with 250 or 6480. See Zimmerman (2003) for a literature review
regarding the effect of atypical anti-psychotics on abnormal weight gain and related illnesses.
Gianfrancesco, et al (2002) investigate the effect of atypical anti-psychotics on the incidence of
type 2 diabetes.
21
   For example, Meltzer (1999) argues that atypical anti-psychotics are superior to conventional
anti-psychotic drugs with respect to improvements in cognitive functioning. This view is
controversial, however, with others arguing that the available evidence suffers from serious
methodological limitations, including non-random assignment to the treatment group, small
sample sizes, pre versus post designs with no control group, and few findings that have been
replicated (Carpenter and Gold, 2002) . In fact, some researchers have shown that conventional
drugs produce a similar effect to atypicals when the former are used in lower dosage amounts
(Green, 2002).
22
   In the year following their FDA approvals, approximately 90% of Risperdal, Zyprexa, and
Seroquel prescriptions were written for individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia. By 2001, this
fraction had declined to 52% for Risperdal, 62% for Zyprexa, and 61% for Seroquel, with the
remaining prescriptions filled primarily for those with bipolar disorder or dementia.


                                                17
and because it gives me a more homogeneous sample with which to evaluate the impact of the
new drugs.
       Table 5A provides information on the fraction of individuals in the sample who took
Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel in each quarter from early 1994 to late 2001. These three
drugs first entered the market in January of 1994, October of 1996, and October of 1997,
respectively. In all three cases, just a small fraction of the sample took the drug in the year
following its FDA approval but this share consistently increased in subsequent periods. By the
end of 2001, approximately 38% of the sample had filled at least one Risperdal prescription, with
the corresponding shares for Zyprexa and Seroquel equal to 39% and 14%, respectively. Most of
the individuals who took one of these drugs also had one or more prescriptions for the other two
(Table 5B). For example, of the 3060 individuals with at least one Risperdal prescription, more
than 62% also took either Zyprexa or Seroquel during the time period of interest.
A. Challenges in Identifying the Effect of Drug Treatments
       To estimate the effect of drug D on outcome variable Y for this sample of Medicaid
recipients, one could estimate the following cross-sectional equation:
                                    (6) Y j = α + β j D j + γX j + ε j

with Dj equal to one if individual j took the drug and zero otherwise, Xj equal to a set of
observable characteristics, and β representing the causal effect of the drug on Yj. This parameter
could vary across individuals and thus I index it by j. The problem with estimating this equation
is well known – the individuals who take the drug may differ in unobservable ways from those
who do not. Thus a cross-sectional regression like the one above would lead to a biased estimate
if this unobserved factor is correlated with the treatment variable D. One strategy for dealing
with this problem of omitted variables is to use panel data. If one assumes that the unobserved
factor does not vary over time then one can difference it out using individual fixed effects. This
assumption is unlikely to hold, however, as changes in treatment are likely to be at least partially
driven by changes in outcome variables (e.g. health).
       To lower the likelihood that any changes in treatment are caused by unobserved changes
in health, I focus on individuals who were diagnosed with schizophrenia before each drug was
approved, and compare outcomes for individuals shifted to the new drugs with their counterparts
who were not. I also exploit variation in the timing of the shift, as some schizophrenia patients
started to take a drug in the first quarter that it was marketed while others first took it much later.


                                                   18
By defining the sample in this way, I can calculate a baseline level of spending for individuals
already diagnosed with schizophrenia when the treatment of interest was not yet available. It
will of course still be possible that a change in the severity of an individual’s schizophrenia
coincided with the FDA approval date, and I will test for this below by estimating pre-existing
trends in the outcome variables of interest. It is plausible that this is less likely as the time of an
individual’s first prescription for a drug gets closer to its FDA approval date, and I therefore
contrast my estimated effects for early and late adopters of these three new health care
treatments.
       In addition to the date of the first prescription, the number of prescriptions filled for each
drug varies substantially across individuals who consume it. For example, as shown in Table 6,
more than 24% of the Medicaid recipients diagnosed with schizophrenia in 1993 who
subsequently take Risperdal have three or fewer prescriptions from 1994 to 2001. This is
approximately equal to the fraction with 35 or more Risperdal prescriptions in that same eight-
year period. This heterogeneity in treatment intensity makes the evaluation problem still more
difficult, as average outcomes for individuals who stop taking the drug are likely to differ from
the effect for individuals who continue to take it.
B. The Impact of Atypical Anti-Psychotic Drugs: Evidence from Fixed Effects Specifications
       I begin by examining the effect of Zyprexa – the drug with the highest Medicaid
expenditures in the U.S. - on both health care spending and health outcomes. For this analysis, I
restrict attention to the 3363 individuals who were diagnosed with schizophrenia at least once in
the year just before the approval of this drug. I define an indicator variable Zjt that is equal to
one in the first quarter that individual j takes Zyprexa and in every subsequent quarter that he/she
remains in the sample and is equal to zero otherwise. Thus even if person j fills a prescription
for Zyprexa in period τ but does not take this drug in any future quarter, the variable Zjt remains
equal to 1 for all t > τ. I then estimate specifications of the following type:
                                  (7) Y jt = βX jt + γZ jt + µ j + λt + ε jt

In this equation, Yjt is equal to the outcome variable of interest, Xjt a set of time-varying
individual characteristics, Zjt the Zyprexa indicator, and µ and λ a vector of individual and
year*quarter fixed effects, respectively.        To the extent that unobserved differences across
individuals do not vary over time, they will be picked up by the inclusion of the person fixed
effects µj. Common changes in the outcome variable from one period to the next will be


                                                     19
captured by the time effects λt. The main parameter of interest is γ, the average change in the
outcome variable Yjt following individual j’s first Zyprexa prescription.
        For at least two reasons, the coefficient estimate for γ is unlikely to represent the average
effect of taking the drug for those who ever take it. First, it is plausible that a change in health is
sometimes responsible for an individual’s first Zyprexa prescription. This would be represented
by a correlation between the error term εjt and the treatment variable Zjt in (7), and would lead to
a biased estimate of the effect of the drug on those who take it. If, for example, psychiatrists
tend to prescribe the drug when an individual’s health is deteriorating, then the estimate for γ
from (7) would be biased downwards, suggesting that the health benefit of the drug is smaller
than it actually is.23
        Second, there is substantial heterogeneity across individuals in treatment intensity.24
Some who take the drug in late 1996 are still taking it five years later, whereas others stop taking
the drug after their first prescription. Thus even if the unobserved εjt is uncorrelated with the
treatment variable Zjt, an OLS estimate for γ will be disproportionately affected by those who
take the drug for relatively many periods. Rather than capturing the average effect for those ever
treated with the drug, the coefficient estimate would instead represent a weighted average of the
individual γj values, with the weight depending on the number of quarters in which each recipient
took the drug. If the Medicaid recipients who take the drug for many periods are the ones who
derive the greatest benefit,25 then an estimate for γ will be biased upwards, suggesting for
example that the average health benefit is greater than it would have been if all recipients had
continued with the treatment. It is therefore more appropriate to think of the coefficient estimate
for γ from a specification similar to (7) as capturing the average change in the outcome variable
after taking Zyprexa for the first time rather than an average causal effect.

23
   The “true” effect of the drug for individual j in period t is equal to Yjt (Zjt=1) – Yjt (Zjt=0), but
this difference in potential outcomes is not what estimation of (7) captures if a change in εjt is
influencing the treatment decision.
24
   A related issue is the variation in dosage amount across individuals. The most common
dosage amounts are 10 and 5 milligrams (per pill).
25
   When estimating the benefit of Zyprexa after taking it for the first time, individuals and their
healthcare providers essentially face a signal extraction problem. A change in health from period
t to t+1 could be driven by the change in treatment or by a change in εjt. Individual j may adopt a
decision rule – only if ∆Yjt is above some threshold would they continue to take it, and this



                                                  20
       Table 7A provides results from specifications similar to (7) above with several different
outcome variables. In these regressions, the unit of observation is a person-quarter, with Yjt
equal to the value of outcome variable Y for person j in January through March, April through
June, July through September, or October through December of a particular year. I use a shorter
time period than a year to more accurately capture when a person’s health care treatment
changes. The time period studied extends from October of 1995 to December of 2001 – thus the
maximum number of observations for anyone in this regression is 25. I include the 3363
individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia at some point between October of 1995 and September
of 1996 before the launch of Zyprexa in October of 1996.26
       The dependent variable for the specifications summarized in the first two columns is an
indicator variable that equals one if the person has one or more Zyprexa prescriptions in the
quarter and zero otherwise. In these regressions and the subsequent ones I control for the
number of months that a person is eligible for Medicaid in the quarter and the fraction of those
months insured by Medicare,27 eligible for SSI disability benefits, and in a managed care plan.
The statistically significant coefficient estimate of 0.661 for the indicator variable in the first
column implies that Medicaid recipients who take Zyprexa for the first time in period τ have one
or more Zyprexa prescriptions in approximately 66% of all future periods (including τ). Given
that a large fraction of individuals stop taking this drug after just a few prescriptions, the fact that
this estimate is less than 1.00 is not surprising. Combined with the coefficient estimate of 1.850
for the number of prescriptions specification in column (3), this first set of results imply that the
average number of Zyprexa prescriptions in a quarter for Medicaid recipients with at least one is
2.80. This makes sense given that the typical prescription provides a one-month supply. The


decision rule is likely to vary across individuals and their healthcare providers. Complicating
things further, the effect of the drug for individual j is likely to vary from one period to the next.
26
   I begin with October of 1995 because it provides at least four quarters of pre-Zyprexa
spending and utilization information for all individuals in the sample. The results are quite
similar if I include all 36 quarters in these regressions. Of the 3363 individuals included in these
regressions, 2286 (68%) are observed in all 25 quarters.
27
   Medicaid covers just part of the health care expenses for those dually eligible for Medicare.
Medicare covers most of the costs of hospital stays and physician visits, with Medicaid paying
any co-pays or deductibles for these services and covering virtually all of the prescription drug
and nursing home expenses. Thus my spending data does not capture total government spending
on medical care for these dual eligibles. The results summarized below are qualitatively similar
if I exclude those ever eligible for Medicare or focus exclusively on this group.


                                                  21
coefficient estimate of $663 for the Zyprexa spending specification summarized in column (5)
implies that the average cost of a Zyprexa prescription for individuals in this sample is $358.
          If spending on Zyprexa led to a reduction in other health care spending and changes in
health (either current or expected) are not influencing the decision to take the drug, then one
would expect to find a negative relationship between first taking Zyprexa and all other Medicaid
spending. But the insignificantly positive estimate for the Zyprexa indicator variable presented
in column (7) casts doubt on this hypothesis, as other Medicaid spending does not decline
following the shift to this new drug. The results summarized in column (9) imply that total
Medicaid spending increases substantially after the shift to Zyprexa. The significant estimate of
$896 implies more than a 32% increase in health care spending (from an average of $2754) after
the first Zyprexa prescription and it suggests that Medicaid spending increases virtually one-for-
one with spending on this drug.
          Of course, if drug treatment decisions are to some extent influenced by changes in health
then this estimate will be misleading. This type of endogeneity might be less of a concern for
Medicaid recipients first taking Zyprexa shortly after it is approved. For many of these “early
adopters”, the first prescription would plausibly be driven by a change in its availability rather
than a change in health. I therefore differentiate between the 306 Medicaid recipients in the
sample who take Zyprexa in the first twelve months that it is marketed and the 1229 who first
take it in October of 1997 or later when estimating the average change in each outcome variable
of interest that follows the first prescription. In the even-numbered columns, I summarize
specifications in which EARLY ZYPREXA is equal to the ZYPREXA indicator for the early
adopters and LATE ZYPREXA is equal to ZYPREXA for the late adopters.
          The results for all other Medicaid spending in column (8) are quite interesting. For those
shifted to the drug shortly after its approval, the significantly negative estimate of –307 on the
EARLY ZYPREXA coefficient implies that spending on other types of medical care declined.
This is consistent with the hypothesis that Zyprexa reduced the need for other types of medical
care.28 The significantly positive estimate of 342 for LATE ZYPREXA in specification (8)
implies that other Medicaid spending was significantly higher for late switchers following their
first Zyprexa prescription. This suggests that a decline in health may have influenced the change
in treatment for the typical individual in this group. For both groups, Medicaid spending is

28
     This result appears to be driven by a decline in spending on other drugs – see Table 8.


                                                  22
significantly higher after the shift to Zyprexa, as the results summarized in column (10) show.
Thus even though Zyprexa may reduce the utilization of other types of medical care for the
“early adopters”, these savings appear not to be sufficiently large to offset the cost of Zyprexa.
       While measuring spending from the Medicaid claims data is straightforward, estimating
health from this same set of data is quite difficult because some dimensions of health may not be
observable. I begin with two admittedly imperfect measures of health status.29 The first one is a
dummy variable ANY IP/LTC that equals one if a person spends time in a hospital or a long-
term care facility in the current period and zero otherwise. The second variable IP/LTC LOS is
simply equal to the number of days that the Medicaid recipient spends in either type of
institution.30 The small and insignificantly positive coefficient estimates for EARLY ZYPREXA
in columns (12) and (14) suggest that – if changes in health were not correlated with taking
Zyprexa for the early adopters – then the drug had relatively little impact on the probability of
spending one or more nights in a health care facility. As before, the results are quite different for
those first taking Zyprexa in October of 1997 or later. For this group, the probability of being
institutionalized and the average number of days spent in a facility increases significantly
following the first Zyprexa prescription.
       The results presented in Tables 7B and 7C suggest a similar spending pattern for those
switched to Risperdal and Seroquel following their market entries in January of 1994 and
October of 1997, respectively. For both drugs, Medicaid expenditures increase significantly
following the first prescription, though the implied effect is smaller for those shifted soon after
the FDA approval than for individuals first taking the drug more than a year after it was
approved. The implied effects on these two measures of health are less favorable for these two
drugs than for Zyprexa, and in both cases the strong negative relationship between health and the
first prescription remains for those shifted long after FDA approval.



29
   One obvious measure of health to consider is mortality. I do not examine this health outcome
in this study because there is little evidence to suggest that these drugs could plausibly exert a
significant effect on the mortality rate. As is clear from Appendix Table 1, there is actually an
increase in the mortality rate during the time period studied, though this could largely be driven
by the change in the age distribution of the sample.
30
   Lichtenberg’s (2001) evidence suggests that – on average - the use of newer prescription drugs
reduces the number of days that individuals spend in the hospital, thus at least partially offsetting
the cost of the new drugs.


                                                 23
       In the specifications summarized in Table 8, I investigate the timing of the change in
Medicaid spending and individual health more carefully. The variable FIRST SCRIPT equals
one in the first quarter that the individual takes Zyprexa and zero otherwise. PRE t ZYPREXA is
set to one t quarters before the first Zyprexa prescription and zero otherwise, while POST t
ZYPREXA equals one t periods after the first treatment and zero otherwise. This table
summarizes specifications for seven different outcome variables and there are two sets of
coefficient estimates – one for early adopters and the other one for late adopters.
       The first two columns summarize the results from the ANY ZYPREXA specification.
The estimates of 0.822 and .727 on the POST1 coefficients imply that approximately 18% and
27%, respectively, of the early and late adopters who take the drug in quarter t have stopped
taking it within just a few months. Similarly, the estimates for POST4+ imply that just 61% and
54% of the two groups are still taking the drug in the average quarter four or more quarters later.
Thus it is clear that a large fraction of individuals try the drug but then choose to stop taking it,
perhaps switching to another anti-psychotic drug or taking no drug at all.
       The third specification investigates the relationship between taking Zyprexa and spending
on all other prescription drugs.     The statistically significant difference of more than $330
between the estimates for PRE1 and POST1 for the early adopters imply that quarterly Medicaid
spending on other drugs declined substantially after individuals first took Zyprexa.             An
examination of spending for Clozaril and Risperdal demonstrates that virtually all of the change
is caused by a decline in spending for these two potential substitute drugs. Thus the Zyprexa
treatment indicator is itself negatively related with the Clozaril and Risperdal treatment
variables, and the estimates imply that each additional dollar in spending on Zyprexa lowered
spending on other drugs by approximately forty cents. The decline in spending on other drugs is
just one-third as large for the late adopters, suggesting a decline of just fifteen cents for every
dollar spent on Zyprexa.
       To investigate whether a change in health appeared to – on average – precede or coincide
with the decision to take Zyprexa, I test in the fourth and fifth specifications whether Medicaid
spending on either inpatient or outpatient services was trending prior to Medicaid recipients’ first
prescription for Zyprexa. For both groups, Medicaid spending on both inpatient and outpatient
care was increasing even before the first prescription, casting doubt on the hypothesis that the
decision to treat is uncorrelated with a change in health for either group. Consistent with this,



                                                 24
the fraction of “early adopters” hospitalized or in a long term care facility increases by 10.3
percentage points in the nine months leading up to the first Zyprexa prescription, with an even
larger increase of 15.4 percentage points for late adopters.
       For both groups, total Medicaid spending is significantly higher one year after the first
Zyprexa prescription than it was just nine months before, with the difference of 714 in quarterly
spending for late adopters substantially greater than the corresponding difference of 522 for early
adopters. Similarly, neither group is less likely to be hospitalized. But given the significant
change in outcome variables that either preceded or coincided with the change in drug treatment,
it is not obvious how much of the change can be attributed to Zyprexa versus a change in health
or some other factor. Section 6 below probes further on this issue by comparing the evolution of
spending and utilization both before and after schizophrenia hospitalizations in 1994 (before the
three atypical anti-psychotics studied here had diffused widely) and 2000 and examining changes
in the distribution of health care spending and utilization during the study period.
C. The Incidence of Adverse Side Effects
       The number of days spent in a hospital is clearly an imperfect measure of health, and thus
in Table 9 I explore the effect of atypical anti-psychotic drugs on an additional set of outcome
measures. Perhaps the most widely cited benefit of atypical anti-psychotic drugs when compared
with the conventional anti-psychotics that preceded them is a reduction in the incidence of
tardive dyskinesia and other extrapyramidal side effects (EPS). To measure the incidence of this
side effect, I construct a variable that is equal to one if a Medicaid recipient has one or more
Medicaid claims in the current quarter with EPS as a primary diagnosis and is zero otherwise.
The summary statistics from Table 4 demonstrate that the prevalence of this adverse side effect
has increased during the nine-year study period despite a sharp increase in the fraction of
schizophrenia patients using atypical anti-psychotics. And consistent with this, the three sets of
coefficient estimates displayed in the first column of Table 9 strongly suggest that none of the
three major atypical anti-psychotic drugs has lowered the incidence of this adverse side effect.
       While atypical anti-psychotics are believed to lower the incidence of EPS, a number of
recent studies suggest that they may increase the risk of other adverse effects, including
abnormal weight gain and diabetes, which are associated with an increased risk of heart disease.
The next two sets of specifications examine the relationship between taking atypical anti-
psychotics and the incidence of these two adverse effects. While the results for abnormal weight



                                                 25
gain are mixed, the diabetes results are fairly consistent. For all three drugs, the probability that
late adopters are diagnosed with this condition (which could itself be caused by weight gain)
increases significantly after first taking the drug. Once again, this may not be surprising given
that the incidence of diabetes in the schizophrenia sample increased by 85% from 1993 to 2001
(from 3.1% to 5.8% - see Table 4). The next two columns of results explore the relationship of
the three drugs with two other side effects previously explored in the literature (any epileptic
symptoms and cognitive or motor impairment),31 and the last column lists estimates from three
separate specifications that investigate whether atypical anti-psychotics are significantly related
to the incidence of any of these five side effects. Given that all six of the estimates in this final
column are positive (with two significantly so), it appears that if anything the shift to atypical
anti-psychotics has been associated with an increase in the incidence of adverse side effects.
       Taken together, this first set of results suggests that Zyprexa, Risperdal, and Seroquel
have led to a sharp increase in health care spending but have not led to significant improvements
in the health of schizophrenia patients, as measured by the number of days spent in a health care
facility or the incidence of adverse side effects. This may not be surprising given that average
spending on anti-psychotic drugs in the schizophrenia sample increased by a factor of six and yet
there was no decline in the hospitalization rate and the incidence of adverse side effects rose
substantially (Table 4). But the fact that changes in health may coincide with the change in
treatment regimen suggests that the results should be interpreted with some caution. In the next
section, I propose two alternative strategies for estimating the effect of this new category of drug
treatments on government spending and health outcomes.
6. Two Alternative Strategies for Estimating the Effect of Drug Treatments
A. A Cohort Analysis –Spending and Outcomes for Schizophrenia Patients in 1994 and 2000
       The results from the previous section examined how outcome variables changed for
individuals after their first Zyprexa, Risperdal, or Seroquel prescriptions relative to their
counterparts who took the drug in a later period or never took the drug. One clear limitation of
the individual fixed effects analyses was that changes in health appeared to precede or coincide
with the shift to atypical treatments for many Medicaid recipients.             Thus any pre-post
comparison of spending, utilization, or health outcomes will inevitably confound the effect of the

31
  Epilepsy includes ICD-9 codes beginning with 345 while cognitive or motor impairment
includes 3154 (coordination disorder), 7810 (abnormal involuntary movements), 7813 (lack of


                                                 26
drug treatments with this other factor if the change in health that influenced the treatment
decision is at least to some extent persistent.
       One alternative strategy for estimating the impact of Zyprexa and other atypical anti-
psychotics is to compare the trajectory of outcome variables for a well-defined group when these
three new prescription drugs were available to a similar group before they had yet hit the market.
In this section, I do this by comparing pre-post patterns of Medicaid expenditures and health for
individuals hospitalized with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia in the third quarter of 1994
and the third quarter of 2000. I choose the third quarter of 1994 because the claims data for the
last quarter of 1993 appear to be incomplete (with 1-2 weeks of claims missing), and this allows
me to have two quarters of accurate pre-hospitalization data.          Unfortunately, Risperdal is
therefore available throughout the first period, but given that the drug had not diffused to a
significant extent at that point it should not be too problematic for the comparison.
       Before proceeding to this analysis, there are two important caveats. First, it is possible
that the Medicaid recipients hospitalized in the third quarter of 1994 are to some extent different
from those hospitalized with schizophrenia six years later (e.g. younger). Second, anti-psychotic
drugs are not the only medical care treatments that are changing during this time period, and thus
other factors may be partially responsible for any observed differences between the two groups.
       Table 10A provides summary statistics for the 196 individuals in the sample hospitalized
with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia during the third quarter of 1994. For this group, the
average number of days hospitalized increases by 9.6 from quarter two to three, and then falls by
9.3 from the third to fourth quarter. Spending one quarter after the hospitalization is $276 lower
than it was in the previous quarter. Both the number of hospital days and total Medicaid
spending continue to trend down in the subsequent two quarters, with the number of days
hospitalized falling by more than 50% from the fourth quarter of 1994 to the second quarter of
1995. Approximately 15% of individuals in this group are taking Risperdal in a typical quarter
both before and after the hospitalization, with none taking Zyprexa or Seroquel because the
drugs had not yet reached the market.
       Table 10B lists the corresponding summary statistics for the 235 individuals hospitalized
in the third quarter of 2000 with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia. The average number of
inpatient days just before, during, and immediately after the third quarter are quite similar to

coordination), 3140 (attention deficit disorder), and 3101 (organic personality syndrome).


                                                  27
those described above, with an increase of 10.5 from the second to third quarter and a decline of
10.0 from the third to fourth quarter. Similarly, average Medicaid spending is $167 lower one
quarter after the hospitalization than it was just one quarter earlier, which is slightly lower than
the corresponding decline for the 1994 group. Rather than continuing to trend down as they did
for the earlier cohort, Medicaid spending and the number of days hospitalized remains fairly
constant in the subsequent two quarters (2001 quarters 1 and 2). The fraction of this group
taking Risperdal, Zyprexa, or Seroquel is 4-5 times as large as it was just six years earlier, yet if
anything it appears that the time spent in the hospital for acute episodes of schizophrenia has
increased. Thus it seems unlikely that the sharp increase in anti-psychotic drug spending has
reduced the hospitalization rate below what it otherwise would have been.
       Because these two groups account for less than 7% of the more than 3000 Medicaid
recipients diagnosed with schizophrenia in each year, it is possible that focusing exclusively on
those who are hospitalized gives a very inaccurate picture of the changes in outcome variables of
interest during the time period of interest. Thus in Table 11, I examine distributions of outcomes
variables for all individuals with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia in 1994 and 2001. This
gives me a sample of 3083 Medicaid recipients in 1994 and 3469 seven years later. I assign each
Medicaid recipient to a decile based on his/her spending in the relevant year, and compare
changes in total Medicaid spending, anti-psychotic drug spending, the fraction with one or more
“RZS” prescriptions, the fraction hospitalized at least once, and the fraction diagnosed with one
or more of the five side effects described above.
       As shown in the first two columns of the table, the changes in Medicaid spending are
substantial for all deciles of the distribution. For example, total spending increases by 112% in
decile 2, by 107% in decile 5, by 55% in decile 8, and by 41% overall. More than 53% of the
increase in average annual spending is attributable to the 266% increase in spending on anti-
psychotic drugs, which rises from $782 in 1994 to $2863 by 2001. By 2001, nearly 7 out of
every 10 individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia consumes one or more Risperdal, Zyprexa, or
Serouqel prescriptions, compared with just 12.5% who took Risperdal seven years earlier.
       The next two columns compare hospitalization rates for the 1994 and 2001 groups.
Overall, the fraction of individuals hospitalized remains fairly constant, falling from 36.7% in
1994 to 36.0% in 2001. Interestingly, there are increases in all five of the low-spending deciles
and corresponding declines in the five high-spending deciles. This may largely reflect a change



                                                 28
in the price of hospital care relative to prescription drugs. In the earlier period, a hospitalization
almost guaranteed a position high in the spending distribution, but this is less true seven years
later when individuals spend substantially more on prescription drugs, and thus a larger fraction
of hospitalized individuals now fall into the low-spending deciles.
       The final two columns provide a quite striking set of results. Overall, the fraction of
Medicaid schizophrenia patients diagnosed with one of the five side effects described above
increases by 54% from 12.6% in 1994 to 19.4% in 2001, and this increase is statistically
significant in nine out of ten deciles. While it is certainly possible that health care providers
have become more likely to test for (and thus more likely to diagnose) these adverse side effects
in their patients, it seems implausible that this can explain all of the observed increase.
       Taken together, the results presented in this section strongly suggest that the sharp
increase in government spending for anti-psychotic drugs has not lowered the utilization of other
medical care services nor improved observed measures of health. If anything, it appears that the
drugs have led to an increase in the incidence of adverse side effects, with much of the increase
driven by a more than 90% increase in the fraction diagnosed with diabetes. But given that the
characteristics of schizophrenia patients and other medical care practice patterns may be
changing during this time period, this cohort analysis is not without its limitations.
B. IV Estimation: Exploiting Variation across Psychiatrists in the Probability of Drug Treatment
       My final strategy for estimating the effect of atypical anti-psychotic drugs on Medicaid
spending and health outcomes is to utilize instrumental variables that influence treatment
decisions but are unlikely to exert an independent effect on outcome variables. One candidate is
the Medicaid recipient’s psychiatrist,32 as some providers may be more likely than others to
prescribe a drug for the same patient. To explore whether the patient’s psychiatrist would
provide useful variation, I begin by estimating the probability of taking Zyprexa for all
individuals who visited a psychiatrist at least once in the year before this drug first hit the
market. If the Medicaid recipient visits more than one psychiatrist during this time, I pair him or
her with the psychiatrist whose appointment date is closest to October of 1996.               I assign
Medicaid recipients to their pre-Zyprexa release psychiatrist rather than to the ones they visited
after the release of Zyprexa because of a concern that individuals may switch psychiatrists

32
  See Hellerstein (1998) for an examination of the variation across physicians in prescribing
patterns.


                                                  29
because of a change in health or because they learn that certain psychiatrists are more willing to
prescribe this new drug.
       To increase the number of observations that I have for each psychiatrist, I use a 25%
sample of Medicaid recipients here rather than the 5% sample used above. In this larger sample,
there are 7144 individuals with one or more visits to a psychiatrist with a primary diagnosis of
schizophrenia in the year before the release of Zyprexa.33 I restrict attention to the Medicaid
recipients between the ages of 18 and 64 who never reside in a COHS county and are eligible for
Medicaid during all three months of the third quarter of 1996. Additionally, I consider only
those recipients who are paired with one of the 95 psychiatrists with 15 or more patients in my
data, and this leaves me with a sample of approximately 3000 Medicaid recipients.
       In the odd-numbered columns of Table 12, I summarize the results from three different
probit specifications. The dependent variables in this table are indicator variables that equal one
if the recipient had one or more Zyprexa prescriptions in a particular time period and zero
otherwise. The findings here demonstrate that individuals who visited the psychiatrist fairly
frequently in the year leading up to the release of Zyprexa or who were admitted to the hospital
one or more times with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia were more likely to take the drug in
the year or two after its release. These specifications also control for the age and the gender of
the Medicaid recipient and include ten diagnosis-specific fixed effects to control for potential
differences in the appropriateness of the drug for each type of schizophrenia.
       To estimate the importance of the psychiatrist in the treatment decision after controlling
for these observable measures of the patient’s health, I calculate the variable PSYCHIATRIST
DIFF as follows for each recipient (j) - psychiatrist (k) pair:
                                                       Nk

                                                       ∑ (Z
                                                       i =1
                                                              ik        ) (
                                                                   − Pˆik − Z jk − Pˆ jk   )
                    (8) PSYCHIATRIST DIFF jk =
                                                                      N k −1
with Zik equal to 1 if recipient i takes the drug in a particular time period and 0 otherwise,
P̂ik representing the predicted probability that patient i will take the drug treatment, and Nk equal
to the number of patients for this psychiatrist. This variable simply measures the difference

33
  Most of the individuals diagnosed with schizophrenia do not have an appointment with a
psychiatrist during the course of a year but instead obtain services from mental health clinics or
other outpatient facilities.


                                                  30
between the fraction of psychiatrist k’s patients who took the drug and the proportion one would
have expected using the probit results to predict each individual’s treatment probability. I
exclude person j from this calculation to avoid a mechanical relationship between j’s treatment
decision and the psychiatrist effect.
        I then re-estimate the probit equations including this psychiatrist-specific effect. The
coefficient estimates for PSYCHIATRIST DIFF in the even-numbered columns are significantly
positive in every case, suggesting that certain psychiatrists are much more likely than others to
prescribe this drug even after controlling for several observable measures of each Medicaid
recipient’s pre-treatment health. Whether this is due to differential advertising by pharmaceutical
firms or some other factor is not obvious from these results.
        I then use the three sets of psychiatrist fixed effects (estimated using the 1997, 1998, and
1997-98 specifications summarized in Table 12) to explore the effect of Zyprexa on Medicaid
spending in each of the three periods in Table 13. In the odd-numbered columns I instrument for
an indicator variable that equals one if the recipient takes Zyprexa in a certain year and zero
otherwise, while in the even-numbered columns I instrument instead for the number of Zyprexa
prescriptions in each time period. For all six regressions, I include the first stage estimate for the
PSYCHIATRIST DIFF variable and the corresponding OLS estimates for the dependent
variables of interest.
        In all six specifications, the coefficient estimate on taking Zyprexa or on the number of
Zyprexa prescriptions is positive, suggesting that this drug leads to a substantial increase in
Medicaid spending and does not lead to reductions in other health care utilization that more than
offset the additional spending. In four out of six specifications, the coefficients are not precisely
estimated.   This lack of precision may be due to the small number of patients for each
psychiatrist or because Medicaid recipients with schizophrenia frequently change psychiatrists.
        Adding this set of results to the ones using individual fixed effects and cohort
comparisons, it appears that the new and much more expensive anti-psychotic drugs used to treat
schizophrenia have not led to sharp improvements in health and reductions in the utilization of
other medical care that justify the additional spending.
6. Conclusion
        During the last eight years, government spending on anti-psychotic drugs has increased
by 670% and now exceeds spending in any other therapeutic category. This increase was caused



                                                 31
by a shift to a new category of drugs known as atypical anti-psychotics, which are substantially
more expensive than the conventional anti-psychotics that preceded them. The findings in this
paper suggest that the health benefits of these new drugs are not large, though it is worth noting
that there may be improvements in other dimensions of health that are not captured by the
several that I consider. If anything, my results suggest that schizophrenia patients have become
less healthy after taking the new drugs, with the incidence of diabetes increasing following the
shift to Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel.
       In the current study I do not examine the effect of atypical anti-psychotic drugs on labor
supply because I do not have earnings or labor force participation data for Medicaid recipients.34
While it is certainly possible that atypical anti-psychotic drugs improve cognition and increase
the ability of individuals with schizophrenia to work, any rise in pharmaceutical prices caused by
the Medicaid program may increase the value of public health insurance, thus discouraging
individuals from working. The fact that the number of individuals diagnosed with mental illness
who are receiving SSI (and thus Medicaid), which essentially requires labor force non-
participation, has increased by more than 135% during the last decade suggests that new drugs
have not on average increased labor supply among those with serious mental illnesses, though
this may reflect an effect of SSI incentives rather than an effect of Medicaid coverage.
Additionally, there is little evidence that the exit rate from my Medicaid sample increased
following the diffusion of the new drugs.
       As government purchasing of prescription drugs continues to increase, either because of a
Medicare prescription drug benefit or because of further growth in Medicaid and state subsidy
programs, pharmaceutical prices may become a much less accurate measure of the value of these
treatments to the patients who consume them. This will be especially true for treatments with
relatively few private customers like the anti-psychotic drugs studied here. Estimating the effect
of Medicaid and other government programs on pricing, product proliferation, and innovation in
the pharmaceutical industry clearly represents an important area for future work.




34
  See Berndt, et al (1998) and Finkelstein, et al (1996) for studies of the effect of anti-
depressants on work performance.


                                                  32
References

Autor, D.H. and Duggan, M.G. “The Rise in the Disability Rolls and the Decline in
Unemployment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 2003.

Berndt ER, Bir A, Busch SH, Frank RG, Normand S-LT. (2002) “ The Medical Treatment of
Depression, 1991-1996: productive inefficiency, expected outcome variations, and price
indexes.” Journal of Health Economics, 21(3): 373-396.

Berndt, E.R., Finkelstein, S.N., Greenberg, P.E., et. al. (1998). "Workplace Performance Effects
from Chronic Depression and Its Treatment." Journal of Health Economics, 17(5), 511-535.

Carpenter, W. and Gold, J. “Another View of Therapy for Cognition in Schizophrenia.”
Biological Psychiatry, 51, 969-971.

Cutler, D., McClellan, M.B., Newhouse, J.P., and Remler, D. (1998). "Are Medical Prices
Falling?" Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113(4), 991-1024.

Cutler, D. and McClellan, M.B. (2001). “Is Technological Change in Medicine Worth It?”
Health Affairs.

Duggan, M.G. (2002). “Does Contracting out Increase the Efficiency of Government Programs?
Evidence from Medicaid HMOs.” NBER Working Paper No. 9091.

Finkelstein, S. N., Berndt, E.R., Greenberg, P.E., et. al. (1996). "Improvement in Subjective
Work Performance after Treatment of Chronic Depression: Some Preliminary Results,"
Psychopharmacology Bulletin, 32(1), 33-40.

Gianfrancesco, F.D., Grogg, A.L., Mahmoud, R.A., et. al. (2002). “Differential Effects of
Risperidone, Olanzapine, Clozapine, and Conventional Antipsychotics on Type 2 Diabetes:
Findings from a Large Health Plan Database.” Journal of Clinical Psychiatry, 63(10), 920-930.

Hellerstein, J., (1998) “The Importance of the Physician in the Generic Versus Trade-Name
Prescription Decision,” RAND Journal of Economics.

Keefe R.S., Silva, S.G., Perkins, D.O., Lieberman, J.A. (1999). “The Effects of Atypical
Antipsychotic Drugs on Neurocognitive Impairment in Schizophrenia: A Review and Meta-
analysis.” Schizophrenia Bulletin, 25(2), 201-222.

Lamberg, L. (1998). “New Medications Aid Cognition in Schizophrenia,” Journal of the
American Medical Association, 280(11), 953-954.

Leucht, G. Pitschel-Walz, D., and W. Kissling (1999) “Efficacy and Extrapyramidal Side-Effects
of The New Anti-Psychotics Olanzapine, Quetiapine, Risperidone, and Sertindole Compared to
Conventional Anti-Psychotics and Placebo. A Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.”
Schizophrenia Research, 35(1), 51-68.



                                              33
Lichtenberg, F.R. (2001). “Are the Benefits of Newer Drugs Worth Their Cost? Evidence from
the 1996 MEPS.” Health Affairs, 20(5), 241-251.

Licthenberg, F.R. (1996). “Do More (and Better) Drugs Keep People Out of Hospitals?”
American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, 384-388.

McClellan, M.B., McNeil, B.J., and Newhouse, J.P. (1994). “Does More Intensive Treatment of
Acute Myocardial Infarction Reduce Mortality?” Journal of the American Medical Association,
272(11), 859-66.

Meltzer, H.Y., Park, S. and Kessler, R. (1999). “Cognition, Schizophrenia, and the Atypical
Antipsychotic Drugs.” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the USA, 96 (24),
13591–13593.

National Institute for Health Care Management Research and Educational Foundation,
"Prescription Drug Expenditures in 2001: Another Year of Escalating Costs," (May, 2002).

Scott-Morton, F. (1998). “The Strategic Response by Pharmaceutical Firms to the Medicaid
Most-Favored-Customer Rules.” RAND Journal of Economics, 28(2), 269-290.

Sernyak, M.J., Leslie, D.L., Alarcon, R.D., et. al. (2002). “Association of Diabetes Mellitus with
Use of Atypical Neuroleptics in the Treatment of Schizophrenia.” American Journal of
Psychiatry, 159(4), 561-566.

Social Security Administration. “Annual Statistical Supplement,” Social Security Bulletin,
various years.

Wennberg, J.E. and Cooper, M.M. (1999). “The Quality of Medical Care in the United States:
A Report on the Medicare Program.” The Dartmouth Atlas of Health Care in the United States,
American Health Association Press, Chicago.




                                                34
    Table 1: Medicaid Prescription Drug Spending by Therapeutic Category: 1996 and 2001
                                      Expenditures              Prescriptions
                                      (in millions)              (in millions)               Avg. Cost
                                   1996          2001         1996          2001          1996      2001
     Central Nervous System        1991          6000         44.9          73.4           $44       $82
        Cardiovascular-Renal       1622          2386         51.4          75.0          $32        $32
                 Antimicrobials    1534          2706         38.1          43.6          $40        $62
              Gastrointestinals    1369          1881         19.1          24.7           $72       $76
  Hormones / Hormonal Mech          869          2088         27.6          43.7          $31        $48
             Respiratory Tract      818          1840         29.9          45.9           $27       $40
                  Relief of Pain    762          2095         33.1          48.4           $23       $43
                   Neurologics      671          1567         18.4          29.7          $37        $53
        Metabolics / Nutrients      469          1289         13.4          25.6           $35       $50
                  Hematologics      350           802          6.1          10.3           $57       $78
   Skin / Mucous Membranes          280           334         10.4           9.9           $27       $34
                     Oncolytics     251           474          3.4           4.0           $73      $118
                 Immunologics       156           424          0.3           0.7          $457      $622
                   Ophthalmics      151           293          5.9           8.1           $25       $36
  Unclassified / Miscellaneous      99            464          1.5           2.1          $67       $221
                           Otics     97           140          6.0           7.0           $16       $20
                 Anti-Parasitics     39            53          1.9           2.2           $21       $24
                   Anesthetics       22            36          0.5           0.6           $43       $58
                      Antidotes      13            28          0.1           0.2          $132      $113
 Contrast Media / Radiopharm         0             2           0.0           0.0           $23       $45
                        Missing    1154           632         70.9          26.2           $16       $24

   Total (with double-counting)    12719       25534          382.9       481.4            $33        $53
    Total (no double-counting)     12296       24577          366.9       462.5            $34        $53

Dollars on spending and number of prescriptions by drug were obtained from the Center for Medicare and
Medicaid Services State Drug Utilization Data. The therapeutic category for each drug was obtained from the
FDA's National Drug Code directory. In some cases, a drug was not listed in the FDA files - these drugs are in
the "Missing" category. Dollar values are inflation-adjusted to 2001 dollars.
       Table 2A: Central Nervous System Drug Utilization by Medicaid: 1996 and 2001
                       Expenditures (millions) Prescriptions (millions)    Average Cost
                          1996        2001       1996         2001       1996        2001
Anti-Psychotic Drugs      $819       $3,007       13.3         19.9      $61         $151
 Anti-Depressants         $766       $1,879       15.8         29.2      $48         $64
     Anti-Anxiety         $202        $375        9.4          11.7      $21         $32
   All Other CNS          $269        $791        8.4          14.3      $32         $56
 Data were obtained from the Center for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) and the FDA.



         Table 2B: Medicaid Anti-Psychotic and Anti-Depressant Market Shares
       Drug             Number   Mkt Share             Drug               Number    Mkt Share
     Zyprexa             4.73       74%                Zoloft               4.62      18%
    Risperdal            5.67       78%                Paxil                4.54      18%
     Seroquel            1.99       63%               Prozac                2.87      17%
   Data were obtained from the CMS and the National Institute for Health Care Management.



                  Table 2C: Medicaid Spending for Anti-Psychotic Drugs
                        Total Paid (*1000)        Scripts (Millions)    Average Cost
        Drug             1996         2001       1996           2001  1996       2001
   Zyprexa (B)            $12        $1,330      0.06           4.73  $208       $281
  Risperdal (B)          $336         $890       2.10           5.67  $160       $157
   Seroquel (B)           $0          $335       0.00           1.99    -        $168
    Clozaril (B)         $248         $135       2.74           1.04   $90       $130
  All other brand        $86          $81        1.24           0.76   $69       $106
    All generic          $109         $218       5.64           5.60   $19       $39
        Total            $791        $2,990      11.78         19.78   $67       $151
                       Data were obtained from the CMS and the FDA.



     Table 2D: Medicaid Spending and Number of Prescriptions for Zyprexa in 2001
       NDC           Dosage Paid (*1000) # Scripts     Avg Paid     FDA        Enter
      24117           10 MG     $693,691     1900017      $365      9/96        9/96
      24115            5 MG     $271,162     1319155      $206      9/96        9/96
      24415           15 MG     $154,547     390768       $395      9/97        1/00
      24112           2.5 MG    $142,127     878931       $162      5/97        5/97
      24116           7.5 MG     $76,333     344362       $222      9/96        9/96
      24420           20 MG      $41,272      88101       $468      9/97       12/00
      24454           10 MG       $9,312      24805       $375      4/00        8/00
      24453            5 MG       $6,135      27206       $225      4/00        8/00
      24455           15 MG        $78         176        $440      4/00        9/01
      24456           20 MG        $64         117        $553      4/00        9/01
                             Data were obtained from CMS.
            Table 3A: Medicaid Spending on Anti-Psychotic Drugs in 5% CA Sample: 1993-2001
                            Schizophrenia Sample                                     All Medicaid Recipients
     Year     # Claims       % R,Z,S     Paid (*1000) Avg Paid        # Claims        % R,Z,S    Paid (*1000) Avg Paid
     1993       37741         0.0%         $1,855         $49           74741          0.0%           2731           $36
     1994       46739         4.8%         $2,771         $59           86086          3.4%           3855           $45
     1995       48809         7.1%         $3,266         $67           86337          5.1%           4379           $51
     1996       51652         9.0%         $3,671         $71           83543          7.0%           4610           $55
     1997       53436         16.5%        $4,834         $91           82390          14.1%          5989          $73
     1998       57571         31.8%        $7,648         $133          90240          30.8%         10113          $112
     1999       59990         40.5%        $9,820         $164          96216          41.1%         13645          $142
     2000       60652         47.6%        $11,182        $184         107608          50.2%         17333          $161
     2001       62291         53.3%        $12,612        $203         116907          57.8%         20952          $179
Data were obtained from the California Department of Health Services' 5% Medicaid claims sample. The first four columns
summarize information for the schizophrenia sample only, while the final four include information for all Medicaid recipients
in the 5% sample. % R,Z,S is equal to the percentage of anti-psychotic prescriptions for Risperdal, Zyprexa, or Seroquel.


     Table 3B: Medicaid Spending on Top Four Anti-Psychotics in Schizophrenia Sample: 1993-2001
                      Clozaril                   Risperdal                    Zyprexa                     Seroquel
   Year        # Claims     Avg Paid       # Claims     Avg Paid       # Claims     Avg Paid       # Claims     Avg Paid
   1993          7686          $102            0           -               0            -              0            -
   1994         10133          $101          2248        $233              0            -              0            -
   1995         11206          $100          3487        $261              0            -              0            -
   1996         13390          $96           4479        $261            147          $283             0            -
   1997         12536          $98           5374        $259            3397         $326            17          $208
   1998          9797          $111          7182        $251           10076         $344           1057         $194
   1999          8538          $120          9058        $251           12831         $370           2407         $221
   2000          6502          $126         10863        $247           14331         $381           3687         $243
   2001          6610          $131         12404        $246           15471         $391           5306         $254
                     Table 4: Summary Statistics for Schizophrenia Sample
                                            Full Sample             Those with Schz Clms > 0
               Variable               1993Q1   1997Q1   2001Q1      1993Q1   1997Q1   2001Q1
           Eligible Months              2.94     2.94     2.96        2.97     2.97     2.98
       Eligible Months on SSI           2.44     2.59     2.77        2.89     2.86     2.90
          Medicare Months               1.02     1.12     1.20        1.30     1.26     1.19
       Managed Care Months              0.09     0.17     0.25        0.03     0.06     0.15
           % Female 0-17               3.1%     1.9%     0.8%        0.2%     0.4%      0.4%
          % Female 18-44               25.1%    22.6%    18.7%       20.4%    18.3%    16.8%
          % Female 45-64               14.0%    16.3%    20.0%       16.8%    18.8%    19.8%
          % Female 65 plus             7.4%     7.4%     7.4%        7.8%     6.9%      5.3%
             % Male 0-17               4.7%     2.8%     1.3%        0.6%     0.5%      0.6%
            % Male 18-44               31.6%    29.7%    27.2%       37.8%    33.6%    30.3%
            % Male 45-64               11.6%    16.2%    21.2%       14.2%    18.9%    24.0%
           % Male 65 plus              2.5%     3.0%     3.4%        2.3%     2.6%      3.0%
     Number Medicaid Eligibles          5653     6180     5980        2329     2557     2496
     # that Die by End of Year           35       87       127          26       38      33
     # that Die by End of 2001           712      531      127         333      223      33
    # that Leave before 2001Q4           829      791      194         308      271      55


     SPENDING & UTILIZATION           1993Q1   1997Q1   2001Q1      1993Q1   1997Q1   2001Q1
        % with Inpatient Stay          9.4%     10.1%    10.6%       13.8%    14.7%    15.5%
     % with Long Term Care Stay        5.0%     6.1%     7.1%        7.0%     6.1%     6.7%
     % with Inpatient or LTC Stay      13.7%    15.3%    16.3%       19.7%    20.0%    20.6%
       Average Inpatient Days           1.11     1.24     1.34        1.75     2.03     2.45
   Average Long Term Care Days          4.60     7.33     5.90        6.34     7.34     5.29
       % with 1+ R,Z,S Scripts         0.0%     9.4%     42.3%        0.0%    15.9%    60.0%
Anti-Psychotic Medicaid RX Spending      79      167      505          153     315      809
 Anti-Psychotic Medicaid RX Claims      1.70     2.08     2.60        2.93     3.53     4.02
     Other Medicaid RX Spending         143      201      414          172     222      402
      Other Medicaid RX Claims          5.51     6.19     7.98        6.67     7.22     8.63
    Total FFS Medicaid Spending         1765     2113     2885        2500     2865     3823


         SIDE EFFECTS
  Any Extrapyramidal Symptoms         0.53%    1.18%    0.75%       0.77%    1.06%    0.80%
           Any Diabetes               3.11%    3.92%    5.77%       3.43%    4.11%    5.93%
    Any Abnormal Weight Gain          1.22%    1.70%    2.84%       1.42%    2.46%    3.09%
           Any Epilepsy               1.17%    1.29%    1.09%       0.86%    1.06%    0.72%
 Any Cognitive or Motor Impairment    0.78%    1.04%    0.50%       0.60%    0.82%    0.32%
         Any Side Effects             6.51%    8.77%    10.39%      6.78%    9.03%    10.30%
              Table 5A: Diffusion of Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel
                        Risperdal                    Zyprexa                 Seroquel
  Year    Quarter   (1)            (2)           (3)         (4)         (5)           (6)
 1994       1       38            0.6%             -          -            -            -
 1994       2       339           5.7%             -          -            -            -
 1994       3       220           3.7%             -          -            -            -
 1994       4       254           4.2%             -          -            -            -
 1995       1       284           4.7%             -          -            -            -
 1995       2       314           5.2%             -          -            -            -
 1995       3       328           5.4%             -          -            -            -
 1995       4       344           5.6%             -          -            -            -
 1996       1       363           5.9%             -          -            -            -
 1996       2       383           6.2%             -          -            -            -
 1996       3       409           6.6%             -          -            -            -
 1996       4       440           7.2%           81         1.3%           -            -
 1997       1       428           6.9%           163        2.6%           -            -
 1997       2       445           7.3%           229        3.7%           -            -
 1997       3       477           7.8%           292        4.7%           -            -
 1997       4       575           9.4%           605        9.9%          7           0.1%
 1998       1       615          10.1%           761       12.5%         21           0.3%
 1998       2       659          10.8%           893       14.7%         82           1.3%
 1998       3       682          11.1%           968       15.7%         115          1.9%
 1998       4       722          11.8%          1053       17.2%         146          2.4%
 1999       1       770          12.5%          1118       18.1%         173          2.8%
 1999       2       834          13.6%          1163       19.0%         191          3.1%
 1999       3       844          13.8%          1189       19.5%         214          3.5%
 1999       4       862          14.2%          1188       19.6%         248          4.0%
 2000       1       928          15.3%          1221       20.2%         281          4.6%
 2000       2       952          16.0%          1230       20.7%         321          5.2%
 2000       3      1010          16.9%          1306       21.8%         324          5.3%
 2000       4      1050          17.6%          1293       21.6%         353          5.8%
 2001       1      1072          17.9%          1361       22.8%         388          6.4%
 2001       2      1123          18.8%          1354       22.7%         437          7.4%
 2001       3      1100          18.5%          1355       22.8%         462          7.7%
 2001       4      1123          19.0%          1381       23.4%         510          8.5%
   One or more       3060 (37.8%)                 3173 (39.2%)            1155 (14.3%)
     Never           5044 (62.2%)                 4931 (60.8%)            6949 (85.7%)
Odd-numbered columns list # of individuals in the sample with one or more claims for the drug.
Even-numbered columns provide the % of the sample with one or more claims for the drug.

                 Table 5B: # with One or Multiple Drug Treatments
                                        Group              Number
                                       All Three            583
                                  Risperdal, Zyprexa        1128
                                  Risperdal, Seroquel       191
                                  Zyprexa, Seroquel         205
                                    Risperdal Only          1158
                                     Zyprexa Only           1257
                                     Seroquel Only          176
                                  None of the Three         3406
                                         Total              8104
      Table 6: Distribution of the Number of Risperdal, Zyprexa, and Seroquel Prescriptions Filled in the Medicaid Sample
                            Risperdal                              Zyprexa                                Seroquel
                  Schizoprhrenia Claim in:                         Schizoprhrenia Claim in:                        Schizoprhrenia Claim in:
   # Scripts     93Q1-93Q4       All Others          Total       95Q4-96Q3       All Others          Total        96Q4-97Q3      All Others    Total
        0            1928           3116             5044            1828           3103             4931            2963           3986       6949
        1             156            277              433            159             247              406             96             115        211
        2              85            162              247            106             143              249             60             69         129
        3              65            113              178             58             111              169             42             39         81
        4              61            109              170             57             91               148             39             41         80
        5              49            89               138             44             85               129             32             29          61
        6              32            75               107             42             62               104             28             35          63
        7              43            63               106             35             59                94             17             28          45
        8              32            50               82              51              51              102             25             18          43
        9              32            64               96              37              44               81             16             14          30
     10-14            122            194              316            164             175              339             60             59         119
     15-19            105            148              253            107             137              244             54             32         86
     20-29            139            160              299            186             186              372             58             45         103
     30-39            113            107              220            164             126              290             42             17         59
     40-49             65            66               131            148             72               220             12              7         19
     50-59             54            30               84              91             32               123             14              2         16
     60-69             45            22               67              51              7                58             2               2          4
     70-79             24            13               37              12              6                18             1               0          1
     80-89             29            15               44              12              0                12             2               1          3
     90-99             21             5               26               5               3                8              1              0           1
      100+             19             7               26               6               1                7              1              0           1
     # Obs           3219           4885             8104            3363           4741             8104            3565           4539       8104
First column for each drug gives distribution of # of prescriptions among Medicaid recipients diagnosed with schizophrenia in the year before each drug
hits the market, with the second column providing the distribution of the # of prescriptions for all others in the sample.
                                   Table 7A: The Impact of Zyprexa Use on Medicaid Spending and Hospital / LTC Stays
                            Any Zyprexa        Zyprexa Claims      Zyprexa Spending All Other Spending        Total Spending         Any IP / LTC         IP / LTC Days
                            (1)      (2)         (3)     (4)          (5)     (6)       (7)      (8)           (9)      (10)        (11)       (12)      (13)       (14)
       Zyprexa            0.661                1.850                 663               233                    896                  0.038                 1.00
                          (.009)               (.036)                (15)              (82)                   (83)                 (.006)                (.44)

    Early Zyprexa                    0.665                2.009                   795               -307                  489                0.004                 0.06
                                     (.020)               (.078)                  (38)              (176)                (183)               (.015)                (.86)

     Late Zyprexa                    0.660                1.817                   636               342                  979                 0.046                 1.19
                                     (.011)               (.041)                  (17)              (90)                 (91)                (.007)                (.50)

    Eligible Months       0.033      0.033     0.145      0.145       52           52     880       879        931       931       0.024     0.024       2.54      2.54
                          (.005)     (.005)    (.016)     (.016)      (7)          (7)    (86)      (86)       (87)      (87)      (.007)    (.007)      (.37)     (.37)

  Medicare Fraction       -0.006     -0.006    -0.001     0.001      -39          -37     -1052     -1058     -1091      -1095     -0.025    -0.025     -0.42      -0.43
                          (.016)     (.016)    (.060)     (.060)     (23)         (23)    (174)     (174)     (175)      (175)     (.013)    (.013)     (.81)      (.81)

Managed Care Fraction -0.026         -0.026    -0.085    -0.086      -46          -47     -1050     -1049     -1096      -1096     -0.053    -0.053     -1.48      -1.48
                      (.015)         (.015)    (.052)    (.052)      (20)         (20)    (150)     (150)     (152)      (152)     (.012)    (.012)     (.29)      (.29)

     Fraction SSI         0.004      0.004     -0.087    -0.077      -20          -12      -85      -118      -105       -129      -0.016    -0.018      0.10      0.04
                          (.018)     (.018)    (.053)    (.053)      (26)         (26)    (199)     (199)     (199)      (199)     (.016)    (.016)      (.78)     (.78)

  Mean of Dep. Var.            0.160                0.464                   177                2577                2754                 0.164                 8.03
    Number Obs            72727    72727       72727    72727       72727         72727   72727    72727      72727    72727       72727    72727       72727     72727
     R-squared            0.693     0.693      0.611     0.612      0.598         0.600   0.481    0.481      0.489    0.489       0.442     0.442      0.745      0.745

Sample includes all observations in the fourth quarter of 1995 or later for the 3363 individuals with one or more inpatient or outpatient Medicaid claims with a primary
diagnosis of schizophrenia between October of 1995 and September of 1996. Unit of observation is spending or utilization in one of the four quarters of each year.
Thus the maximum number of observations for a person is 25 (1995Q4-2001Q4). All specifications include year*quarter and individual fixed effects. Zyprexa is an
indicator variable equal to one if the person has one or more Zyprexa prescriptions in the current quarter or in any previous quarter and zero otherwise. Early Zyprexa
is equal to this variable for individuals with a first Zyprexa prescription in or before September of 1997 and Late Zyprexa is equal to the Zyprexa indicator for all other
individuals. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by individual to account for serial correlation in the error term. 2286 of the 3363 individuals are
                                Table 7B: The Impact of Risperdal Use on Medicaid Spending and Hospital / LTC Stays
                         Any Risperdal       Risperdal Claims Risperdal Spending All Other Spending          Total Spending         Any IP / LTC         IP / LTC Days
                          (1)      (2)         (3)       (4)      (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)             (9)      (10)        (11)       (12)      (13)       (14)
     Risperdal          0.548                1.509               372                351                      723                  0.040                 2.16
                        (.011)               (.037)              (11)               (99)                     (99)                 (.008)                (.61)
  Early Risperdal                 0.435                 1.290                 358                   24                   382                0.000                  -0.03
                                  (.019)                (.066)                (21)                (226)                 (228)               (.015)                (1.00)
   Late Risperdal                 0.574                 1.560                 375                  427                   802                0.049                 2.67
                                  (.012)                (.043)                (13)                (111)                 (110)               (.008)                (.72)
  Mean of Dep. Var.            0.108                 0.31                  83                   2464                2547                 0.167                 8.76
    Number Obs           95900       95900     95900      95900     95900     95900       95900     95900     95900      95900     95900      95900     95900      95900
      R-squared          0.601       0.603     0.524       0.525    0.542      0.542      0.439     0.439      0.444     0.445      0.447      0.447     0.723      0.723
Sample includes all observations for the 3219 individuals with one or more inpatient or outpatient Medicaid claims with a primary diagnosis of schizophrenia
between January and December of 1993. Unit of observation is spending or utilization in one of the four quarters of each year. Thus the maximum number of
observations for a person is 36 (1993Q1 - 2001Q4). All specifications include year*quarter and individual fixed effects. Risperdal is an indicator variable set equal
to one if the person has one or more Risperdal prescriptions in the current quarter or any previous quarter and zero otherwise. Early Risperdal is equal to this
variable for individuals with a first Risperdal prescription in 1994 and Late Risperdal is equal to the Risperdal indicator for all other individuals. Standard errors are
in parentheses and are cluster by individual to account for serial correlation in the error term. 1911 of the 3219 individuals are observed in all 36 quarters.


                                Table 7C: The Impact of Seroquel Use on Medicaid Spending and Hospital / LTC Stays
                          Any Seroquel       Seroquel Claims     Seroquel Spending All Other Spending        Total Spending         Any IP / LTC         IP / LTC Days
                          (1)      (2)         (3)      (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)      (8)           (9)      (10)        (11)       (12)      (13)       (14)
      Seroquel          0.580                1.695                 387                558                     945                 0.060                 2.51
                        (.015)               (.065)                (17)             (139)                    (139)                (.012)                (.83)
   Early Seroquel                 0.474                 1.619                 393                  493                   886                0.060                  3.47
                                  (.033)                (.144)                (39)                (277)                 (283)               (.029)                (2.10)
   Late Seroquel                  0.606                 1.714                 386                  574                   960                0.060                 2.27
                                  (.017)                (.073)                (20)                (158)                 (158)               (.013)                (.90)
  Mean of Dep. Var.          0.038                 0.117                  27                 2859                   2886                 0.168                8.40
     Number Obs         65915      65915      65915    65915     65915        65915    65915      65915       65915      65915     65915     65915      65915     65915
      R-squared         0.634      0.637      0.530     0.530     0.508       0.508     0.502     0.502       0.504      0.504      0.460     0.460     0.760      0.760
Sample includes all observations in the fourth quarter of 1996 or later for the 3565 individuals with one or more inpatient or outpatient Medicaid claims with a primary
diagnosis of schizophrenia between October of 1996 and September of 1997. Unit of observation is spending or utilization in one of the four quarters of each year.
Thus the maximum number of observations for a person is 21 (1996Q4 - 2001Q4). All specifications include year*quarter and individual fixed effects. Seroquel is
an indicator variable set equal to one if the person has one or more Seroquel prescriptions in the current quarter or any previous quarter and zero otherwise. Early
Seroquel is equal to this variable for individuals with a first Seroquel prescription in 1994 and Late Seroquel is equal to the Seroquel indicator for all other
individuals. Standard errors are in parentheses and are cluster by individual to account for serial correlation in the error term. 2532 of the 3565 individuals are
                  Table 8: The Impact of Zyprexa Use on Medicaid Spending and Hospital / LTC Stays - Early versus Late Adopters
                           (1)                  (2)                  (3)                (4)                (5)                         (6)                   (7)
                      Any Zyprexa        Zyprexa Spending     Other RX Spending Inpatient Spending Outpatient Spending           Total Spending         Any IP / LTC
                     Early     Late       Early     Late       Early     Late     Early     Late     Early      Late             Early     Late        Early      Late

 Pre 3 Zyprexa       0.012     0.005        21           2        62         35         67        65        151         87        301        189       0.005     0.007
                     (.007)    (.002)      (13)         (4)      (32)       (15)      (218)      (86)       (92)       (37)      (251)      (104)      (.023)    (.009)

 Pre 2 Zyprexa       0.013     0.005        23           2        85         33        187        33        226         61        520        128       0.029     0.015
                     (.008)    (.002)      (14)         (4)      (37)       (16)      (206)      (80)       (90)       (39)      (238)       (99)      (.024)    (.010)

 Pre 1 Zyprexa       0.013     0.005        23           3        43         47        438        412        396       152        900        613       0.074     0.054
                     (.008)    (.003)      (14)         (4)      (43)       (18)      (258)      (114)      (108)      (50)      (299)      (135)      (.026)    (.011)

  First Zyprexa      1.014     1.004       656        588        -138        11        375        877        511       392       1405       1868       0.108     0.161
                     (.008)    (.003)      (30)       (15)       (44)       (18)      (245)      (127)      (113)      (51)      (301)      (150)      (.026)    (.013)

 Post 1 Zyprexa      0.822     0.727       819        713        -290       -69         -5        230       155        189        679       1062       0.023     0.054
                     (.024)    (.014)      (42)       (21)       (45)       (20)      (227)      (101)      (97)       (48)      (271)      (125)      (.024)    (.012)

 Post 2 Zyprexa      0.713     0.655       817        684        -209       -32        -50        256       136        180        694       1087      -0.002     0.033
                     (.027)    (.015)      (46)       (23)       (54)       (26)      (245)      (105)      (93)       (53)      (294)      (133)     (.024)     (.011)

 Post 3 Zyprexa      0.702     0.611       819        663        -184       -57         10        267        147       131        792       1004       0.005     0.038
                     (.027)    (.016)      (49)       (23)       (55)       (22)      (242)      (115)      (105)      (54)      (293)      (135)      (.024)    (.012)

Post 4+ Zyprexa      0.606     0.540       819        623         -5        -10       -201       155         209       136        823        903       0.023     0.033
                     (.025)    (.014)      (46)       (21)       (59)       (27)      (177)      (93)       (105)      (52)      (232)      (120)      (.019)    (.009)

Mean of Dep. Var.          0.160                 177                   599                  1047                  931                  2754                 0.164
  Number Obs              72,727               72,727                72,727                72,727               72,727                72,727               72,727
   R-squared               0.453                0.601                 0.618                 0.453                0.551                 0.490                0.445

Sample includes all observations in the fourth quarter of 1995 or later for the 3363 individuals with one or more inpatient or outpatient Medicaid claims with a primary
diagnosis of schizophrenia between October of 1995 and September of 1996. Unit of observation is spending or utilization in one of the four quarters of each year.
Thus the maximum number of observations for a person is 25 (1995Q4-2001Q4). All specifications include year*quarter and individual fixed effects. First Zyprexa is
an indicator variable equal to one in the first quarter that a person takes Zyprexa and zero otherwise. Pre (Post) t Zyprexa is equal to one t quarters before (after) the
person's first Zyprexa prescription and zero otherwise. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by individual to account for serial correlation in the error
term. 2286 of the 3363 individuals are observed in all 25 quarters.
                            Table 9: Atypical Anti-Psychotics and the Incidence of Adverse Side Effects
                       Extrapyramidal           Diabetes           Weight Gain       Epileptic Symptoms Cog/Motor Impair.        Any Side Effect
                             (1A)                  (2A)               (3A)                   (4A)             (5A)                    (6A)
   Early Zyprexa           0.0073                0.0020             -0.0038                0.0011           -0.0017                  0.0034
                           (.0060)               (.0075)            (.0055)                (.0035)          (.0026)                 (.0113)
   Late Zyprexa            0.0010                0.0122               -0.0043              -0.0008              0.0003                0.0096
                           (.0025)               (.0043)              (.0031)              (.0018)              (.0015)               (.0058)
   R-squared                0.332                0.499                0.184                0.239                0.236                 0.385
Mean of Dep. Var.           0.0094               0.0471               0.0216               0.0074               0.0052                0.0858
 Number Obs.                72727                72727                72727                72727                72727                 72727


                             (1B)                 (2B)                  (3B)                 (4B)                 (5B)                  (6B)
  Early Risperdal          0.0064               -0.0006               0.0017               -0.0078              0.0089                0.0044
                           (.0061)              (.0052)               (.0045)              (.0046)              (.0036)               (.0104)
  Late Risperdal           0.0043                0.0089               0.0016               0.0025               0.0005                0.0168
                           (.0032)               (.0044)              (.0029)              (.0019)              (.0017)               (.0063)
   R-squared                0.317                0.485                0.143                0.202                0.166                 0.365
Mean of Dep. Var.           0.0106               0.0450               0.0177               0.0079               0.0046                0.0816
 Number Obs.                95900                95900                95900                95900                95900                 95900


                             (1C)                  (2C)                 (3C)                 (4C)                 (5C)                  (6C)
  Early Seroquel           0.0267                0.0050               -0.0003              -0.0026              -0.0186               0.0110
                           (.0154)               (.0136)              (.0119)              (.0089)              (.0111)               (.0250)
   Late Seroquel           -0.0002               0.0148               -0.0054              0.0054               -0.0039               0.0144
                           (.0031)               (.0069)              (.0042)              (.0037)              (.0028)               (.0090)
     R-squared               0.356                0.513                 0.176                 0.291               0.312                0.403
 Mean of Dep. Var.          0.0091                0.0481               0.0220                 0.0086              0.0055              0.0878
   Number Obs.               65915                65915                65915                  65915               65915                65915
This table summarizes the results for 18 different specifications (6 for each of the three drugs). Sample included for Zyprexa is the same as in
Table 7A, while the Risperdal and Seroquel samples correspond to those used in Tables 7B and 7C, respectively. All specifications include
year*quarter and individual fixed effects. Extrapyramidal is equal to one if an individual has one or more claims with a primary diagnosis of EPS in
the current quarter and zero otherwise. The other side effect variables are defined similarly. Standard errors are in parentheses and are
     Table 10A: Pre-Post Spending & Utilization for Those Hospitalized w/Schz in 1994Q3
                   Variable            1994Q1 1994Q2 1994Q3 1994Q4                 1995Q1 1995Q2
            Average Inpatient Days       4.65        7.22      16.84       7.59      4.75      3.67
              Inpatient Spending        $2,827      $3,039     $8,337     $2,985    $1,595    $1,283
          % with 1+ Risperdal Scripts    1.1%       17.0%      14.8%      12.6%     13.5%     16.7%
          % with 1+ Zyprexa Scripts      0.0%        0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
       % with 1+ More Seroquel Scripts 0.0%          0.0%       0.0%       0.0%      0.0%      0.0%
           % with 1+ R, Z, S Scripts     1.1%       17.0%      14.8%      12.6%     13.5%     16.7%
        Anti-Psychotic Drug Spending $134            $231       $230       $226      $278      $314
           Total Medicaid Spending      $4,416      $5,045 $10,757 $4,769           $3,555    $3,128
           Number of Observations         184         188        196        191       185       186
        Includes pre-post spending and utilization data for all 196 individuals    hospitalized with a
        primary diagnosis of schizophrenia in the t hird quarter of 1994.




     Table 10B: Pre-Post Spending & Utilization for Those Hospitalized w/Schz in 2000Q3
                   Variable            2000Q1 2000Q2 2000Q3 2000Q4                 2001Q1 2001Q2
            Average Inpatient Days       6.72        7.38      17.90       6.93      6.41      6.79
              Inpatient Spending        $2,130      $2,506     $4,707     $1,771    $1,605    $1,310
          % with 1+ Risperdal Scripts   18.6%       16.8%      23.0%      25.2%     26.6%     30.9%
          % with 1+ Zyprexa Scripts     34.8%       33.6%      43.0%      38.9%     41.1%     37.7%
       % with 1+ More Seroquel Scripts 12.2%        12.7%      16.6%      14.1%     15.3%     15.7%
           % with 1+ R, Z, S Scripts    55.7%       53.6%      66.0%      67.1%     69.4%     67.3%
        Anti-Psychotic Drug Spending $731            $677       $825       $904      $947      $944
           Total Medicaid Spending      $4,844      $5,224     $8,252     $5,057    $4,923    $4,829
           Number of Observations        221          220        235       234       229        223
        Includes pre-post spending and utilization data for all 235 individuals    hospitalized with a
        primary diagnosis of schizophrenia in the t hird quarter of 2000.




     Table 11: Distribution of Medicaid Spending for those w/1+ Schz Claims: 1994 & 2001
          Medicaid Spend Anti-Psych. Spend % w/1+ R,Z,S Script % w/1+ IP/LTC Stay Any Side Effects?
 Decile    1994        2001      1994      2001      1994       2001      1994      2001        1994       2001
    1      $434        $779       $70      $183      1.9%      24.3%      2.3%      6.4%        3.6%       3.8%
    2     $1,080      $2,293     $163      $604      4.9%      49.3%      5.2%     14.1%        5.5%      12.1%
    3     $1,728      $3,766     $270     $1,215     4.9%      62.8%     13.0%     17.6%        7.5%      16.1%
    4     $2,459      $5,274     $374     $1,899     8.4%      72.1%     13.6%     18.4%        8.7%      15.9%
    5     $3,491      $7,213     $507     $2,612    14.0%      76.1%     25.0%     26.8%       13.6%      19.0%
    6     $5,048      $9,580     $833     $3,811    19.8%      78.7%     35.7%     33.7%       14.6%      22.8%
    7     $7,305 $12,633 $1,127           $4,484    20.1%      82.4%     43.0%     35.7%       15.5%      22.5%
    8    $11,281 $17,426 $1,843           $5,107    15.6%      83.6%     56.8%     51.0%       16.6%      24.5%
    9    $19,829 $27,004 $1,588           $4,530    15.9%      83.0%     76.3%     67.4%       15.9%      26.2%
   10    $45,075 $51,471 $1,044           $4,178    19.4%      85.3%     95.5%     89.1%       24.6%      30.8%
  Mean $9,781 $13,748            $782     $2,863    12.5%      69.8%     36.7%     36.0%       12.6%      19.4%
Spending & utilization data for the 3083 Medicaid recipients with one or more schizophrenia claims in 1994 and
the 3469 in 2001. Individuals are grouped into deciles according to their Medicaid spending in 1994 or 2001.
Thus for example % w/1+ R,Z,S Scripts in 2001 for decile 7 gives the fraction of individuals in the 7th decile of
the expenditure distribution with one or more Risperdal, Zyprexa, or Seroquel prescriptions in that year.
          Table 12: The Effect of Psychiatrists on the Probability of Taking Zyprexa
                                Zyprexa in 1997        Zyprexa in 1998      Zyprexa in 97 or 98
                                 (1)         (2)        (3)         (4)       (5)         (6)
       Psychiatrist Diff                   1.994                  1.474                 1.563
                                           (.238)                 (.233)                (.195)
 # Psych. Visits 95Q4-96Q3        0.005       0.005      0.002       0.003       0.004       0.004
                                  (.002)      (.002)     (.002)      (.002)      (,002)      (.002)
 Any IP Schiz. Claims 96Q3        0.141       0.191      0.169       0.167       0.154       0.156
                                  (.083)      (.098)     (.077)      (.072)      (.076)      (.077)
   # IP Schiz. Claims 96Q3       -0.016      -0.017      -0.004      -0.003      -0.007      -0.007
                                 (.007)      (.008)      (.005)      (.005)      (.005)      (.005)
 Any OP Schiz Claims 96Q3         0.050       0.010      0.135       0.134       0.119       0.116
                                  (.077)      (.081)     (.068)      (.063)      (.067)      (.059)
  # OP Schiz Claims 96Q3          0.007       0.007      0.003       0.003       0.006       0.006
                                  (.002)      (.002)     (.002)      (.002)      (.002)      (.002)
          Medicare                0.262       0.253      0.113       0.113       0.145       0.145
                                  (.059)      (.059)     (.054)      (.052)      (.053)      (.054)
Elig. Months in 97,98,or 97-98    0.081       0.084      0.086       0.083       0.046       0.045
                                  (.033)      (.031)     (.019)      (.019)      (.011)      (.010)
       Number Obs                 3011        3011        2995        2995        3013       3013
   Type of Illness Effects?       Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes
    Age*Gender Effects?           Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes         Yes        Yes

Sample includes individuals between the ages of 18-64 who visited a psychiatrist with a primary
diagnosis of schizophrenia in the year before the release of Zyprexa. To be in the sample, individuals
must also have been eligible for Medicaid in all three months of the third quarter of 1996, have never
been eligible for Medicaid while residing in a COHS county, and be paired with a psychiatrist with at
15 patients in the sample. Dependent variable in each column is an indicator variable equal to one if
the Medicaid recipient has one or more Zyprexa prescriptions in the time period and zero otherwise.
Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by psychiatrist.
            Table 13: IV Estimates of the Effect of Zyprexa on Medicaid Spending
                                 1997 Medicaid $       1998 Medicaid $    1997-98 Medicaid $
                                  (1)        (2)        (3)       (4)       (5)       (6)
      Any Zyprexa 1997           4588
                                (5134)
     Zyprexa Claims 1997                         612
                                                (688)
      Any Zyprexa 1998                                       8521
                                                            (7021)
     Zyprexa Claims 1998                                                 778
                                                                        (541)
  Any Zyprexa 1997 or 1998                                                          16280
                                                                                    (9017)
Zyprexa Claims 1997 and 1998                                                                    1134
                                                                                                (536)
        Spending 96Q3               1.42            1.42    1.04            1.03    2.21            2.21
                                    (.17)           (.16)   (.15)           (.15)   (.27)           (.27)
Elig. Months in 97,98,or 97-98      896          897         933         911         478         450
                                   (197)        (200)       (188)       (185)       (193)       (195)
     First Stage Estimate          0.589            4.42    0.508           5.57    0.561        8.05
                                   (.070)           (.57)   (.073)          (.78)   (.070)      (1.06)

        Number Obs.                2964             2964    2946            2946    2964            2964
    Type of Illness Effects?       Yes              Yes     Yes             Yes     Yes             Yes
     Age*Gender Effects?           Yes              Yes     Yes             Yes     Yes             Yes
      Mean of Dep. Var.                     10694                   11645                   20701

   Corresponding OLS Est.          4113             414     5671            476     9005            496
                                   (635)            (79)    (620)           (57)    (842)           (65)

Sample includes individuals between the ages of 18-64 who visited a psychiatrist with a primary
diagnosis of schizophrenia in the year before the release of Zyprexa. To be in the sample,
individuals must also have been eligible for Medicaid in all three months of the third quarter of 1996,
have never been eligible for Medicaid while residing in a COHS county, and be paired with a
psychiatrist with at least 15 patients in the sample. Dependent variable in each column is total
Medicaid spending in one of three time periods. In every equation, I instrument for Any Zyprexa
(odd columns) or Zyprexa Claims (even columns) using the psychiatrist effects from Table12. First
stage estimates are included as are the corresponding OLS estimates for coefficients on Any
Zyprexa or Zyprexa claims. Standard errors are in parentheses and are clustered by psychiatrist.
Appendix Table 1: Entry and Exit Rates for the Schizophrenia Sample
                 In Sample    Enter      Die       Leave     For Good
1993 Quarter 1      5653      5653        11         90          8
1993 Quarter 2      5714       162        5          84         13
1993 Quarter 3      5790       148        8          89         16
1993 Quarter 4      5842       130        13         80         11
1994 Quarter 1      5900       115        15        106         22
1994 Quarter 2      5921       105        16        113         19
1994 Quarter 3      5971       127        18        117         23
1994 Quarter 4      5988        98        18        106         27
1995 Quarter 1      6032       103        15        116         19
1995 Quarter 2      6039        80        17        117         26
1995 Quarter 3      6094       122        14        108         29
1995 Quarter 4      6107        64        23        107         30
1996 Quarter 1      6169       123        28        103         26
1996 Quarter 2      6173        64        26        120         32
1996 Quarter 3      6163        65        19        118         42
1996 Quarter 4      6145        51        25         97         36
1997 Quarter 1      6180        77        23        127         49
1997 Quarter 2      6133        42        14        117         33
1997 Quarter 3      6148        72        22        131         53
1997 Quarter 4      6114        55        31        125         50
1998 Quarter 1      6107        69        28        114         44
1998 Quarter 2      6090        46        28         81         30
1998 Quarter 3      6156        73        22        115         49
1998 Quarter 4      6134        49        22         78         38
1999 Quarter 1      6167        55        31        113         57
1999 Quarter 2      6128        39        29        111         42
1999 Quarter 3      6110        42        27        117         56
1999 Quarter 4      6073        28        35        104         46
2000 Quarter 1      6051        34        33        152         82
2000 Quarter 2      5932        13        23        117         65
2000 Quarter 3      5990        49        33         96         51
2000 Quarter 4      5973        33        36         93         66
2001 Quarter 1      5980        39        38         69         52
2001 Quarter 2      5960        34        29         94         80
2001 Quarter 3      5946        35        27         76         76
2001 Quarter 4      5904        10        35          -          -
    Total           8104                 837                   1398
       Appendix Table 2: Eligibility Info and # Obs. for Medicaid Schizophrenia Samples
Elig. Info for Those w/Schiz. In Yr Prior to Release of:   # Obs. for Those w/Schiz. In Yr Prior to Release of:
Eligible in:     Risperdal     Zyprexa        Seroquel      # Obs.      Risperdal      Zyprexa        Seroquel
 1993Q1            3087          2734           2791          1             20             2             2
 1993Q2            3109          2776           2829          2             21             8             3
 1993Q3            3118          2815           2859          3             30             4             9
 1993Q4            3102          2853           2896          4             22            10             10
 1994Q1            3067          2898           2943          5             35             8             12
 1994Q2            3012          2914           2959          6             34             9             11
 1994Q3            2969          2966           3002          7             39             6             6
 1994Q4            2934          2995           3035          8             36            13             8
 1995Q1            2892          3037           3065          9             28            15             12
 1995Q2            2860          3072           3094          10            29            13             10
 1995Q3            2828          3143           3148          11            32            12             14
 1995Q4            2808          3196           3186          12            30            19             12
 1996Q1            2786          3248           3255          13            41            38             22
 1996Q2            2747          3259           3311          14            35            35             16
 1996Q3            2714          3245           3365          15            25            36             17
 1996Q4            2694          3189           3416          16            30            30             25
 1997Q1            2675          3140           3451          17            44            43             40
 1997Q2            2636          3088           3444          18            24            26             47
 1997Q3            2625          3052           3432          19            32            47             58
 1997Q4            2608          3008           3359          20            46            44             61
 1998Q1            2570          2967           3308          21            33            36             60
 1998Q2            2540          2935           3261          22            27            48             60
 1998Q3            2537          2927           3242          23            24            49             55
 1998Q4            2513          2890           3196          24            31            66             87
 1999Q1            2500          2865           3181          25            28            58             52
 1999Q2            2464          2831           3134          26            37            68             78
 1999Q3            2447          2809           3097          27            35            60             67
 1999Q4            2430          2771           3060          28            40            54             63
 2000Q1            2414          2755           3031          29            36            60             70
 2000Q2            2378          2719           2977          30            35            71             82
 2000Q3            2356          2702           2953          31            46            76             84
 2000Q4            2332          2677           2926          32            48            64             77
 2001Q1            2316          2650           2902          33            61            85             88
 2001Q2            2300          2629           2885          34            85           104            119
 2001Q3            2273          2592           2844          35           109           125            123
 2001Q4            2259          2583           2816          36          1911           1921           2005

   Total        95,900         104,930       111,653        Total          3219          3363          3565
