                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            DOES FAMILY STRUCTURE AFFECT
                          CHILDREN’S EDUCATIONAL OUTCOMES?

                                           Donna K. Ginther
                                           Robert A. Pollak

                                         Working Paper 9628
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9628


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




We thank Anne Case, Irwin Garfinkel, and James Heckman, all of whom discussed our paper at the AEA
meetings in Boston in January, 2000, for their helpful suggestions. We also thank Daniel Black, Paula
England, Nancy Folbre, Sara McLanahan, Gary Sandefur, Robert Willis, Finis Welch, and Madeline Zavodny
for helpful comments. We thank the Graduate School at Washington University for providing funding for this
research, and Mark Dollard for excellent research assistance. Pollak thanks the John Simon Guggenheim
Memorial Foundation and the John D. and Catherine T. MacArthur Foundation for financial support. Previous
versions of this paper were presented at the American Economic Association Annual Meeting, the MacArthur
Network on the Family, the Economy and the NICHD Family and Child Wellbeing Research Network
conference, "Conflict and Cooperation in Families," the Federal Reserve System Applied Microeconomics
conference, the European Society of Population Economics conference, the Society of Labor Economists
Conference, the University of Chicago, the University of Oregon, Oregon State University, Texas A&M
University, Southern Methodist University, the University of Kentucky, the University of Kansas, and the
Population Association of America Annual Meeting. Any errors are the authors’ responsibility. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.


©2003 by Donna K. Ginther and Robert A. Pollak. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
Does Family Structure Affect Children’s Educational Outcomes?
Donna K. Ginther and Robert A. Pollak
NBER Working Paper No. 9628
April 2003
JEL No. J1

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper makes two contributions. First, it adds to the growing literature describing correlations
between children's educational outcomes and family structure. Although popular discussions focus
on the distinction between two-parent families and single-parent families, McLanahan and Sandefur
[1994] show that outcomes for stepchildren are similar to outcomes for children in single-parent
families. McLanahan and Sandefur describe their results as showing that the crucial distinction is
between children who were reared by both biological parents and children who were not. This
description is misleading.
This paper shows that educational outcomes for both types of children in blended families --
stepchildren and their half-siblings who are the joint biological children of both parents -- are similar
to each other and substantially worse than outcomes for children reared in traditional nuclear
families. We conclude that, as a description of the data, the crucial distinction is between children
reared in traditional nuclear families (i.e., families in which all children are the joint biological
children of both parents) and children reared in other family structures (e.g., single-parent families
or blended families).
The paper's second contribution is to clarify the question, "What is the effect of family structure on
outcomes for children?" Interpreted literally, the question asks about the effect of one endogenous
variable on another. We argue for reformulating the family structure question by specifying some
explicit counterfactual, and express a preference for a policy-relevant counterfactual. As an example,
we suggest considering the effect of reducing the "marriage penalty" in the earned-income tax credit
(EITC) that makes the credit essentially unavailable to two-earner couples. The EITC marriage
penalty counterfactual, like any policy-relevant counterfactual, focuses attention on outcomes for
those children whose parent's behavior is affected by the incentives created by the policy change.
Robert A. Pollak                                        Donna K. Ginther
John M. Olin School of Business                         Department of Economics
Washington University                                   University of Kansas
Campus Box 1133                                         1300 Sunnyside Drive
1 Brookings Drive                                       Lawrence, KS 66045-7585
St Louis, MO 63130-4899                                 dginther@ku.edu
and NBER
pollak@olin.wustl.edu
Introduction

       What is the effect of family structure on educational outcomes for children? Everyone knows

that children from two biological parent families do better than children from single-parent families.

Journalists and politicians often assume that correlation implies causation. Economists know better.

       This paper makes two contributions. First, we add to the growing literature describing

correlations between children's educational outcomes and family structure.               Although popular

discussions focus on the distinction between two-parent families and single-parent families, McLanahan

and Sandefur [1994] show, and other researchers have confirmed, that outcomes for stepchildren are

similar to outcomes for children in single-parent families. McLanahan and Sandefur describe their

results as showing that the crucial distinction is between children who were reared by both biological

parents and children who were not. This description is misleading.

       We show that, as a description of the data, the crucial distinction is between children who grow

up in what the Census Bureau calls "traditional nuclear families" (i.e., families in which all children are

the joint biological children of both parents) and children who grow up in other family structures (i.e.,

single-parent families; blended families). We show that outcomes for both types of children in blended

families -- stepchildren and their half-siblings who are the joint biological children of both parents -- are

similar to each other and substantially worse than outcomes for children reared in traditional nuclear

families. Our blended family result adds to the stock of "stylized facts" -- simple empirical regularities

looking for explanations. Our results also illustrate the importance of classification schemes.

       Classification schemes often determine what we see. Nearly all previous research on family

structure has viewed the world through a "child-based" classification scheme, classifying a child's family

as a "stepfamily" or a "two-biological-parent family" on the basis of the child's relationship to the

parents. With a child-based classification, the same blended family is a stepfamily for one child and a




                                                     3
two biological parent family for another. Instead of a child-based classification of family structure, we

use one that is "family-based." With a family-based classification, stepchildren and joint biological

children who live together are said to belong to “blended families." Using a child-based classification,

previous researchers focused on differences between children reared with a stepparent and children

reared by both biological parents, a category that is dominated by children reared in traditional nuclear

families but which also includes the joint biological children in blended families. Using a family-based

scheme, we distinguish between children reared in traditional nuclear families and the joint biological

children in blended families. We investigate whether outcomes for the joint biological children in

blended families differ significantly or substantially from outcomes for children in traditional nuclear

families, outcomes for stepchildren, or outcomes for children in single parent families.

        The family structure literature has revealed more complicated patterns in the data than our

previous paragraphs suggest. One strand in the literature moves from simple stylized facts -- differences

in mean outcomes for children reared in various family structures -- to "descriptive regressions" that

control for the effects of other variables such as mother's education and family income. We find that

controlling for additional variables substantially reduces the correlation between children's educational

outcomes and living in a single-parent family, and that often the effect of living in a single-parent family

is no longer statistically significant.

        Those who favor policies that promote marriage often cite stylized facts – simple correlations

between family structure and children’s outcomes -- while those skeptical of such policies respond by

citing descriptive regressions that control for variables such as mother's education and family income.

Both sides brandish descriptive regressions that support their positions, but the regressions used in the

political debate are only summaries of correlations among endogenous variables. Honest policy debates

rest on beliefs about structural relationships, not on stylized facts or descriptive regressions.




                                                      4
       Our second contribution is to clarify the question, "What is the effect of family structure on

outcomes for children?" In economics most questions have default counterfactuals that are not spelled

out explicitly because they are generally understood. For example, the question, "What would be the

effect of a ten-cent increase in the gasoline tax?" implicitly compares the increase with leaving the

gasoline tax unchanged. Questions about the effect of family structure lack default counterfactuals.

Interpreted literally, the family structure question asks about the effect of one endogenous variable on

another. A major source of confusion in the family structure literature is that the question is ill-posed.

We argue for reformulating the family structure question by specifying an explicit counterfactual.

       Any explicit counterfactual will nail down the family structure question, but we find policy-

relevant counterfactuals most interesting. For example, consider the effect of eliminating the "marriage

penalty" in the earned- income tax credit (EITC), a penalty that makes the credit essentially unavailable

to two-earner couples. Advocates of incentives to induce individuals to enter marriage and stay married

often cite the fact that, on average, children from two-parent families have better outcomes than children

from single-parent families. Their implicit claim is that strengthening the incentives to marry (e.g.,

removing the marriage penalty) would increase the proportion of children who grow up in two-parent

families and that, as a result, children's educational outcomes would improve. Reformulating the

question as an explicit counterfactual, we focus attention on the effects of removing the EITC marriage

penalty on marital and nonmarital fertility, and on outcomes for the children whose parents' behavior is

altered by the change in incentives. Legislators' eyes may glaze over at the mention of treatment effects,

but the idea is crucial.   Stylized facts about mean differences in outcomes for children reared in

traditional nuclear families and single-parent families are not evidence that removing the marriage

penalty would improve outcomes for children.




                                                    5
        Our paper proceeds as follows. In section 1 we summarize briefly the empirical literature on

family structure and outcomes for children.            In section 2 we discuss our data and our estimation

procedures and in section 3 our empirical results. Section 4 discusses counterfactuals and section 5 is

our conclusion.


1. Conceptual Issues and a Review of the Literature

        What is the effect of family structure on children’s educational outcomes? Social scientists have

written extensively on the relationship between family structure and children’s socio-economic

outcomes, some making modest claims about correlations and others making less-modest claims about

causation. When estimating the determinants of education, economists often control for family

structure, along with exogenous variables such as race and gender. 1 Few researchers would claim that

family structure is exogenous, and it is difficult to rule out the possibility that some unobserved

variables or processes influence both family structure and educational outcomes. The threshold

difficulty of estimating the causal effect of family structure on children’s educational attainment is the

lack of a well-specified counterfactual.

        Perhaps the most influential work on the correlation between family structure and children’s

outcomes is McLanahan and Sandefur [1994]. They find that children who grow up in single-parent or

stepparent families have lower educational attainment than those who grow up with both biological

parents. The estimated correlations depend on the control variables used in the regression. After

controlling for mother’s employment and occupatio n, Biblarz and Raftery [1999] find that children

living with both biological parents or a single- mother have higher occupational status and educational


1
  Several economists, including Haveman and Wolfe [1994, 1995] and Manski, McLanahan, Sandefur, and Powers [1992],
Eckstein and Wolpin [1999], and Heckman, Hee, and Rubinstein [1999] include measures of family structure in estimates of
children’s educational outcomes. These estimates, however, are not linked to structural models of family structure and
investments in children.



                                                           6
attainment than children living with a stepparent or children living with a single father. Wojtkiewicz

[1993] and Boggess [1998] find a negative and significant correlation between living with a stepfather

and children’s educational attainment.

       To interpret these correlations as evidence of the causal effect of family structure on children’s

outcomes, researchers need to assume that family structure is exogenous. This assumption is false if

there are processes that jointly determine family structure and children’s outcomes. Researchers

attempting to control for the endogeneity of family structure have made various identifying assumptions.

Manski, Sandefur, McLanahan, and Powers [1992] evaluate the impact of alternative parametric and

identification assumptions on the estimated effect of family structure on high school graduation. They

demonstrate that the estimated effect depends on the identification assumptions imposed. They

conclude: “Any attempt to determine the family structure effect more tightly must bring to bear prior

information about the process generating family structure and children’s outcomes. As long as social

scientists are heterogeneous in their beliefs about this process, their estimates of family structure may

vary” (p. 36).

       Subsequent research that attempts to control for the endogeneity of family structure bears out

this conclusion. Fixed effects estimates allow one to control for the endogeneity of family structure

assuming there are unobserved family characteristics that are correlated with both child outcomes and

family structure. Using fixed effects estimators, Ermisch and Francesconi [2001], Case, Lin and

McLanahan [2001], and Evenhouse and Reilly [2001] find that family structure has a negative and

significant effect on educational outcomes, while Gennetian [2001] finds no significant effect of family

structure on children’s cognitive assessment outcomes. Parental death, some researchers have argued,

is a quasi- natural experiment that can be used to examine the effect of family structure on children’s

outcomes. Lang and Zagorsky [2001], Corak [2001], and Biblarz and Gottainer [2000] find that parent-




                                                     7
absence due to death has less of an impact on children’s outcomes than parent-absence due to divorce.

Finally, using longitudinal data researchers have compared children’s outcomes before and after divorce.

Cherlin et al. [1991] find that elementary school children whose parents eventually divorce performed

poorly in school prior to the change in family structure. Painter and Levine [1999], however, find no

prior poor performance when they examine educational outcomes for teenagers.

       The lack of a consensus about the effect of family structure on children’s outcomes is striking.

Research shows that living with a single-parent or a stepparent is correlated with poor outcomes for

children. Biblarz and Raftery [1999] show that the correlations between family structure and children’s

outcomes diminish substantially as more family background variables are added to the specification.

When researchers attempt to address the endogeneity of family structure, the estimated effect of family

structure depends on the identification assumptions employed. The most consistent set of results are

found when parental death is used as a quasi- natural experiment: the death of a parent appears to have a

less negative effect on child outcomes than divorce. With the exception of Biblarz and Raftery [1999],

few researchers have evaluated the robustness of the correlation between family structure and children’s

outcomes. In the next section we use three data sets to shed additional light on the correlation between

family structure and educational attainment.



2. Data and Estimation Strategy

       We use three data sets to investigate the association between family structure and children’s

educational outcomes: the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY), the Panel Study of Income

Dynamics (PSID), and the children of females from the National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY-

Child). The NLSY and PSID are used to examine the effect of family structure on four schooling

outcomes for young adults: years of schooling, high school graduation, college attendance, college




                                                    8
graduation. The NLSY-Child data are used to examine the effect of family structure on children’s

cognitive and behavioral outcomes: three Peabody Individual Achievement Tests (PIAT)--reading

recognition, reading comprehension, and math--and the Behavior Problems index which measures a

child’s anti-social behavior.

       The NLSY began in 1979 with a nationally representative sample of 12,686 young adults

between the ages of 14 and 21. Almost ha lf of the observations in the NLSY (5,863) come from

multiple sibling households. We work with an “NLSY sibling sample” which we define to include a

subset of individuals who have siblings or stepsiblings in the NLSY. To be included in our sibling

sample, individuals must have completed the 1988 Childhood Residence Calendar, have complete

measures of schooling in at least one year between the 1990 and 1994 survey waves, and have at least

one sibling meeting these criteria. We eliminate individuals who are adopted, or report zero years of

schooling, or report more than one change in family structure in a given year of childhood.

       The PSID began collecting data in 1968 on a nationally representative, longitudinal sample of

4,800 households. The PSID has followed individuals from their original families to new ones that form

as a result of births, marriages, divorces, and children leaving home. Our sample consists of individuals

born between 1960 and 1970 with educational outcomes observed between 1990 and 1993 and who

have at least one sibling meeting these criteria. In 1985 the PSID collected retrospective data providing

information on the pair-wise relationships of all individuals in a 1968 family. We use this information

from the 1968-85 Relationship file to derive our measures of family structure. We eliminate individuals

who are not included in the 1968-85 Relationship file, who do not have a biological parent in the PSID

sample, who have no reported years of schooling, or who have no siblings meeting these criteria.

       Beginning in 1986, the NLSY started collecting data biennially on all of the children born to the

female NLSY respondents (the NLSY-Child data). The 1994 wave of the NLSY-Child sample contains




                                                    9
information from 3,464 women with children. Because children under the age of 15 make up the

majority of this sample, we focus on cognitive and behavioral outcomes rather than schooling

attainment. The assessment instruments we use in this study are three Peabody Individual Achievement

Tests (PIAT) and the Behavior Problems index which measures a child’s anti-social behavior. For all

four assessments, we use the normalized percentile scores in our analysis. 2 Our sample from the NLSY-

Child data is limited to children with siblings in the sample, ages 5-15 for whom we have data on age,

the three PIAT assessments, and the Behavioral Problems index.

        Given our focus on the effect of family structure on children’s outcomes, the measurement of

family structure requires explicit consideration. Previo us studies have measured family structure as a

dichotomous variable (e.g., does a child live with one or with both biological parents?) Dichotomous

measures of family structure are unsatisfactory because family structure can change over the childhood

(e.g., as the result of divorce or remarriage). Family structure measured at a child’s particular age (age

14 in the NLSY) will not adequately reflect living arrangements that change during childhood. Wolfe,

Haveman, Ginther, and An [1996] examine the effect of using these ‘window’ variable measures,

conclude that one-year window variables serve as weak proxies for childhood circumstances and events,

and can result in unreliable estimates. Children in multiple-sibling households may experience different

family structures. For example, in blended families the youngest child may spend his or her entire

childhood with both biological parents while the eldest child in the same family may be reared first by

both biological parents, then by a single parent, and finally by one biological parent and a stepparent.

Children living in these blended families share an environment that may have a similar impact on

educational outcomes regardless of the child’s biological relationship to the parents. Whether it does is,

of course, an empirical question.


2
  Normalized percentile scores are derived on an age-specific basis. For the PIAT assessments, raw scores are normalized to
a national distribution. For the Behavioral Problems Index, raw scores are normalized based on the survey distribution.


                                                            10
         In our analysis we use family-based measures of family structure created from retrospective data

covering the entire childhood. 3 In the PSID and NLSY, family structure is characterized as the

proportion of childhood that a child lives with both biological parents and no half-siblings (traditional

nuclear family), with a single biological parent (single-parent), with a biological parent who is married

to a stepparent or with both biological parents and at least one half-sibling (blended families), and

alternative (other) family structures. 4 In the NLSY-Child survey, family structure is defined in each year

of the survey data as living with a single mother, living with both biological parents and no half-siblings,

or living in a blended family--defined as living with both biological parents and a half-sibling or living

with a mother who is married to a stepfather. 5 Even these definitions do not measure family structure

over the entire childhood and may be subject to the ‘window problem,’ but because this reflects living

arrangements over multiple survey years, they are presumably better than conventional, single- year

measures of family structure.

         We restrict our attention to outcomes for children from “stable blended families,” which we

define as those in which at least one sibling reports living with both biological parents for the entire

childhood while at least one other sibling reports living with a stepparent. 6 We impose this restriction to

obtain a blended family sample in which at least one child in each family spends his or her entire


3
  Using the data collected by the 1988 NLSY Childhood Residence Calendar Supplement, we construct age-specific changes
in family structure over an individual’s entire childhood, from ages zero to 16. Using data collected in the 1968-85 PSID
Family Relationship file, we construct age-specific changes in family structure over an individual’s childhood from ages one
to 16.
4
  We treat cohabiting biological parents as if they were married. Following the census definition, we say that a “blended”
family is one “that must include at least one stepparent, stepsibling and/or half-sibling. A stepparent is the spouse of a child’s
biological parent but is not the child’s biological parent. . . Half-siblings share only one biological parent.” [Census Bureau
P70-38, p.B-1]. The census defines the "traditional nuclear family" as consisting of a married couple and their biological
child(ren), with no others are present in the household. The proportion of childhood in a given family structure in the NLSY
is measured as the number of years in that family structure divided by 17. In most cases an individual’s childhood (ages 1-
16) is not entirely observed between 1968 and 1985 in the PSID sample. Thus, we define family structure as the number of
years a child between the ages of 1 and 16 is observed in the sample in a given family structure divided by the total number
of years the child is ages 1-16 between 1968 and 1985.
5
  Again we treat cohabiting biological parents as if they were married.
6
  Appendix A contains additional information on the identification of blended families in our sample and the definitions of
the variables used in this study.


                                                               11
childhood living with both biological parents. Our definition excludes “unstable” blended families that

end in divorce. 7

         Table 1 reports the means and standard deviations of the variables used in the

NLSY and PSID siblings sample along with the stable blended family subsamples. Almost 30 percent of

the siblings in the NLSY and 48 percent of siblings in the PSID report ever living in a non-traditional

family. 8 Three percent of the siblings in the NLSY (154 individuals) and eight percent in the PSID (111

individuals) lived in stable blended families. 9 Mean educational outcomes are lower in the stable

blended family subsamples than for all siblings.

         Table 2 reports the descriptive statistics for the NLSY-Child sample and our stable blended

family subsample. There are 4,320 siblings in the sample, of whom 418 individuals live in stable

blended families. Children in the NLSY-Child sample are repeatedly assessed, so we have over 10,000

child-year observations in this data set. Mean reading and math assessment scores are lower in stable

blended families than for all of the siblings in the NLSY-Child sample; mean behavioral problem scores

are higher.

         We use these data to estimate the correlation between family structure and children’s educational

attainment. We make no attempt to control for the endogeneity of family structure because, as our

literature review has demonstrated, the estimated results are highly sensitive to the modeling and

identification assumptions employed. Instead, we focus on the robustness of the correlation between

children’s educational outcomes and family structure, sometimes controlling for other variables.



7
  It also excludes families in which none of the children are the biological children of both parents (e.g., the “Brady Bunch”)
because we want to compare schooling outcomes of step-children in blended families with the outcomes of their half-siblings
who are the biological children of both parents .
8
  The percentage of siblings living in non-traditional families is greater in the PSID because of the oversampling of
disadvantaged families.
9
  Because our blended families are defined as families that remain together for the entire childhood of at least one child, these
percentages are not an estimate of the percentage of children in the population who spend some portion of their childhood in
a family that includes a husband, a wife, at least one stepchild, and at least one biological child of the couple.


                                                              12
         We begin by estimating the correlation between family structure and educational outcomes using

two models and the entire sample of siblings. We are motivated to take this approach by Biblarz and

Raftery [1999] who show that the effect of family structure is sensitive to which control variables are

included in the model. In addition to family structure, our first model includes the exogenous variables

of gender and race. We exclude variables that measure inputs and behaviors chosen jointly with family

structure, although several studies include such variables. 10 In order to examine the sensitivity of family

structure estimates to the inclusion of other control variables, we include variables such as sibship size

(number of siblings), birth order, family income, religion, and parental schooling in the second

specification.

         In our second approach, we compare outcomes for half-siblings within the same stable blended

family. We have defined our stable blended family samples in the NLSY and PSID to ensure that each

family includes at least one child reared by both biological parents until age 16. 11 If growing up with

both biological parents has a substantial impact on children’s educational outcomes, we would expect to

find evidence of this in our stable blended family samples. That is, we would expect to find that

children reared by both biological parents have better outcomes than their half- siblings who spent time

in single-parent families and as stepchildren in stable blended families.



3. Empirical Results

         A.    The Correlation Between Family Structure and Educational Outcomes

         We begin by estimating two cross-section models of the effect of family structure on schooling

outcomes. Model (A) regresses schooling outcomes on variables for gender, race, an indicator for being



10
   See for example, Biblarz and Raftery [1999], Manski et al. [1992], and Lang and Zagorsky [2001].
11
   Stable blended families in the NLSY-Child are defined as at least one sibling living with both biological parents and a half-
sibling in 1994.


                                                              13
in the disadvantaged subsample, and family structure. Model (B) adds measures for number of siblings,

birth order, family income, religion, and parental schooling to Model (A). Estimates using the NLSY

are presented in Table 3, and those using the PSID are presented in Table 4. All standard errors are

clustered by family and adjusted using the Huber-White method to account for the correlation between

observations from the same family. The models use family-based measures of family structure; all

models have measures for the proportion of childhood spent in a single-parent family, blended family, or

other family structure with proportion spent in a traditional nuclear family being the omitted category.

We can interpret the coefficient on proportion of childhood in a given family structure as the effect on

schooling of spending an additional fraction of childhood in that family structure and correspondingly

less in a traditional nuclear family.

         Like previous research, our OLS and probit cross-section estimates of Models (A) in both data

sets show that proportion spent with a single-parent family or blended family have negative and

significant effects on schooling outcomes. As additional variables are included in Model (B), we

observe results similar to those in Biblarz and Raftery [1999]. The estimated effect of growing up with

a single-parent attenuates and is not statistically significant in seven of the eight models estimated in

Tables 3 and 4. In estimates not reported here, we find that much of the attenuation in the effect of

single-parent families on educational outcomes results from the inclusion of family income in Model B.

Although the size of the coefficient on the blended family variable drops as we move from Model (A) to

(B), the coefficient remains negative and statistically significant in five of the eight models. Our results

suggest that the estimated effect of family structure is sensitive to the inclusion of other variables in the

regression. 12 After controlling for additional variables, blended families are more negatively correlated


12
  We have experimented with alternative specifications in Tables 3 and 4 and found our results to be robust. In appendix
tables B.1 and B.2 we use dummy variables for family structure instead of proportion living in a particular family structure.
The estimates presented in Tables 3 and 4 fit the data better than those using family structure dummies but tell the same
story.


                                                              14
       with lower educational attainment than single-parent families.

       We now turn to the effects of family structure on child assessment outcomes. Table 5 presents

four sets of estimates for each of four child assessment outcomes (reading recognition, reading

comprehension, math, and behavior problems).          In the first OLS specification, Model (A), the

normalized percentile assessment scores for each outcome is regressed on variables for age, gender,

race, and family structure. Model (B) adds number of siblings, religion, mother's schooling, family

income, and an indicator for low birth weight to Model (A). All standard errors are clustered by family

and adjusted using the Huber-White method. Family structure is measured as an indicator variable for

each year an individual is in the data set. The results for Model (A) indicate that living with a single

parent or a blended family significantly decreases reading and math scores, and significantly increases

behavior problems.     The estimated effect of family structure on assessment outcomes decreases

substantially in Model (B) when additional variables are included in the regression. The results in Table

5 indicate that living with a single-parent or a blended family is negative but no longer statistically

significant in all but the reading recognition and behavior problems regressions.




       B.    Blended Families Estimates

       We next consider educational outcomes in stable blended families. We begin with schooling

outcomes. Because our stable blended-family sample is small in each data set, we combine the blended

family subsamples from the PSID and NLSY for this analysis. Appendix Tables B.3 through B.6

contain separate analyses for the PSID and NLSY blended family subsamples. We begin with simple

tests of differences in mean schooling outcomes. The top panel of Table 6 tests the null hypothesis of no

difference in mean schooling outcomes between siblings in stable blended families and siblings from

traditional nuclear families in the combined PSID-NLSY sample. For all four schooling outcomes we


                                                    15
reject the null hypothesis of no difference in schooling outcomes. Mean schooling outcomes in the

stable blended- family sample are substantially and significantly lower than those for children from

traditional nuclear families.

        Next, we compare the mean educational outcomes for joint biological children in stable blended

families with the children in traditional nuclear families in the middle panel of Table 6. In three of the

four outcomes joint biological children from blended families have significantly lower educational

attainment. Finally, we evaluate whether schooling outcomes within the stable blended-family sample

differ for the stepchildren and the joint biological children. These results are presented in the bottom

panel of Table 6. For all four schooling outcomes the children growing up with both biological parents

in stable blended families do better than the step-children, but the differences in mean schooling

outcomes are small relative to the difference between their schooling outcomes and those of children in

traditional nuclear families.        Furthermore, the difference between the stepchildren and the joint

biological children in stable blended families is not statistically significant.

        In Table 7, we estimate two models of schooling using the stable blended- family sample. 13

Model (A) is a parsimonious model where family structure is measured as proportion of childhood in a

non- intact family. We use this variable because it captures the differences between the step and joint

biological children in the blended families.               Model (B) includes additional family background

characteristics. All standard errors are adjusted using the Huber-White method to account for the

correlation between observations from the same family. In both models, the proportion of childhood




13
  Only three of the four schooling outcomes are presented in Table 6 because only 14 individuals in the blended-family
sample graduated from college.


                                                            16
spent in a non- intact family has a negative and statistically insignificant effect on educational

attainment. 14

           Using family-based measures of family structure, estimates of the effect of living with a single

parent differ significantly depending on the variables included in the model.                       Regardless of the

specification employed, however, the effect of living in a blended family remains negative and

significant.      When we examine the stable blended families sample, the differences in educational

outcomes between the joint biological and stepchildren is small and both types of children in blended

families do poorly when compared with children in traditional nuclear families. The tests of mean

differences indicate that growing up in a stable blended family has a negative impact on schooling

outcomes for both the stepchildren and the joint biological children. In the stable blended family

regressions, the estimated effect of living without both biological parents is negative but no longer

significant.

           We now turn to the effect of family structure on the four child assessment outcomes. Table 8

reports results of tests of mean differences in the four assessment outcomes for children in the NLSY-

Child sample. The first panel in Table 8 shows statistically significant differences in mean outcomes

between the children in the stable blended family sample and children from traditional nuclear families

in the NLSY-Child sample. For all four outcomes, we reject the null hypothesis of no difference in

mean scores across the two groups. The second panel of Table 8 compares the mean outcomes for joint

biological children in stable blended families with children from traditional nuclear families. We again

see large differences: the children in traditional nuclear families have substantially better outcomes.




14
     This result holds when the models are estimated separately for the PSID and NLSY. See Appendix Tables B.5 and B.6.



                                                             17
       The bottom panel of Table 8 reports mean outcomes within the stable blended family sample,

comparing the stepchildren (“her children” ) with the joint biological children of both parents (“their

children”). We find that stepchildren have lower mean scores on reading and math assessments and

higher mean scores on behavioral problems. When we test the null hypothesis that there is no mean

differences in outcomes between “her children” and “their children,” we again fail to reject the null

hypothesis: we find no significant difference in mean outcomes of the step children and the joint

biological children in stable blended- families.

       Finally, in Table 9 we present regression estimates of the effect of family structure on children’s

assessments using the NLSY-Child stable blended- family sample. Results for Models (A) and (B) are

presented in the table for the four assessments. All standard errors are clustered by family and adjusted

using the Huber-White method to account for the correlation between observations from the same

family. We find that living in a single-parent or a blended family has a positive but insignificant effect

on most of the PIAT assessments. Only one of the family structure variables is statistically significant in

Table 9: living with a single parent has a positive and statistically significant effect on reading

comprehension, even after controlling for family background characteristics.

       Tables 8 and 9 indicate that stable blended family child assessment outcomes differ from the

sample of all remaining siblings. Comparing the effect of family structure using the stable blended-

family sample, we find that the estimated coefficients on the family structure variables often change

signs and generally become statistically insignificant.

       Our estimates using stable blended families show that outcomes for both types of children in

blended families, stepchildren and their half-siblings who are the joint biological children of both

parents, are substantially worse than for children reared in traditional nuclear families. Because these

estimated correlations are merely the result of regressing one endogenous variable on another, however,



                                                      18
they do not provide a basis for policy. In the next section we argue for reformulating the family

structure question by specifying an explicit, policy-relevant counterfactual.



4.      Counterfactuals

        Any precisely specified counterfactual will clarify the family structure question, but economists are

likely to favor policy-oriented counterfactuals, while marriage counselors and advice columnists are likely

to favor personal counterfactua ls. An example illustrates the distinction.

        Suppose your cousin Carol tells you she is thinking of divorcing her husband and asks: "What

would be the effect on my children?" To answer cousin Carol's question requires us to predict what would

happen to her children under each decision. If she divorces, would she get custody of the children? Would

she remarry? Would she increase her hours of work? Would she have additional children? We should

certainly condition our answer to cousin Carol's question on all of our information about her and her

children, including what we know about their personalities. We also need to predict outcomes for the

children if she decides to remain in the marriage. If we have information about the quality of the marriage,

we should clearly use it in predicting how the children would fare. Unlike the standard question -- "What is

the effect of family structure on outcomes for children?" -- Cousin Carol's question is well-posed. It is not,

however, policy relevant.

        As an example of a policy-relevant counterfactual, we propose the removal of the marriage penalty

that effectively prevents two-earner couples from using the earned- income tax credit (EITC). Other policy-

relevant counterfactuals include removal of the marriage penalty from the federal income tax, voluntary or

compulsory counseling for couples prior to marriage or for couples filing for divorce, and changes in the

legal rules governing marriage, divorce, and child support. To estimate the effects of any policy change, we

must specify it in detail. For example, in the case of the EITC marriage penalty, we must specify how its




                                                      19
removal is financed. The easiest assumption is that the government finances it by increasing taxes on

nonparents by enough to keep the removal of the marriage penalty revenue neutral.

         Gruber [2000] investigates the effects of changes in state divorce laws on outcomes for children.

The timing of the "divorce revolution" -- the transition from fault based divorce, to divorce by mutual

consent, to unilateral divorce -- varied from state to state. Using this state variation, Gruber estimates

the effect of unilateral divorce on outcomes for children. He finds that unilateral divorce has a negative

and significant effect on children's educational attainment.                    Gruber reviews the family structure

literature, which generally claims that divorce has adverse effects on outcomes for children. He criticizes

that literature for failing to recognize and deal with the endogeneity of family structure. Although

Gruber does not use the language of counterfactuals, unilateral divorce is clearly a policy relevant

counterfactual.

         The removal of the EITC marriage penalty encourages the formation and stability of married couple

families. Its family structure effects, as opposed to its resource effects, are limited to children whose parents

respond to the change in incentives. (A penalty on single parent families and cohabitating couples with

children would encourage the formation and stability of married couple families without allowing them to

experience resource effects.) Ignoring fertility effects, this means children who, without the policy change,

would live in cohabiting or single parent families but who, with the policy change, would live in married

couple families (i.e., traditional nuclear or blended families). Policy analysis begins with the effect of the

policy change on each of the four family structures. 15 Descriptive regressions suggest that outcomes for




15
   Gruber [2000] investigates the effect of divorce law changes on child outcomes. The transition from bilateral to unilateral
divorce has complicated effects on family structure because, as Gruber recognizes, divorce law changes affect not only
bargaining within marriage but also entry into marriage.


                                                              20
children in blended families are less favorable than outcomes for children in single parent families. If these

correlations reflect causal relationships, then the removal of the marriage penalty will benefit some children

and harm others.

        As Heckman, Lochner, and Taber [1998a, 1998b] emphasize, the general equilibrium effect of

policies that apply to the entire population cannot be inferred directly from their effects on individuals'

behavior. Observational data and data from experimental programs that apply to a sample population

provide a basis for estimating individuals' responses, but calculating general equilibrium effects requires

more elaborate theory. In the case of the EITC, the general equilibrium effects operate through labor

markets and marriage markets. If changes in incentives induce a substantial number of mothers and fathers

increase their work hours, we would expect a decrease in the wages at the lower end of the skill distribution.

If changes in incentives induce a substantial number of individuals who would not otherwise marry to enter

marriage, we would expect the average "quality" of those marriages to be lower than the average quality of

marriages before the change in incentives. The general equilibrium effects of removing the EITC marriage

penalty may differ substantially from the partial equilibrium effects. In their study of college tuition

subsidies, Heckman, Lochner and Taber find that the general equilibrium effects differ from the partial

equilibrium effects by an order of magnitude.

        Neither stylized facts nor descriptive regressions provide defensible estimates of even the partial

equilibrium effects of eliminating the marriage penalty. As the marriage penalty counterfactual illustrates,

designers of policy interventions need to know more about the determinants of outcomes for children than

they can learn from stylized facts and descriptive regressions.




                                                       21
5. Conclusion

        In this paper we make two contributions. First, we augment the stock of stylized facts and

descriptive regressions which summarize the correlations between family structure and children’s

educational outcomes. Second, we argue that stylized facts and descriptive regressions cannot support

either scientific conclusions or policy analysis, and that explicit counterfactuals are required.           An

explicit counterfactual clarifies the question, "What is the effect of family structure on outcomes for

children?"

        Our contribution to the stock of stylized facts concerns blended families. It is well-known that,

on average, children reared in traditional nuclear families have substantially better educational outcomes

than stepchildren from stable blended families. We find that children reared in traditional nuclear

families also have substantially better outcomes than the joint biological children from stable blended

families. We also find that, within stable blended families the difference between the joint biological

children and the stepchildren is neither substantial nor statistically significant.

        Controlling not only for family structure but also for variables such as mothers' education and

family income, descriptive regressions reveal a different pattern of family structure effects than the

stylized facts which control only for family structure. With additional controls, the effect of family

structure falls substantially and often loses statistical significance. In particular, the effect of living in a

single-parent family is no longer statistically significant.

        How can we understand these findings? Four explanations, separately or in combination, might

account for at least some of them. First, family structure may well be a proxy for other variables that

affect outcomes for children. To the extent that family structure is correlated with family resources devoted

to children or time devoted to children, if descriptive regressions do not control for these variables, then

family structure will pick up their effects. Because descriptive regressions do not correspond to either



                                                      22
structural or reduced form relationships, there is no principled way to argue about which variables ought to

be included and which excluded from a descriptive regression. 16

         The second explanation is stress. Although the Brady Bunch was preternaturally happy, the

presence of stepchildren is often described as a source of stress. The sociologist Andrew Cherlin [1978]

characterized remarriage as an "incomplete institution," arguing that roles in such families lack clear

definition; for example, there is no consensus about when it is appropriate for a stepfather to discipline a

stepchild. Most discussions of blended families focus on outcomes for stepchildren. Few researchers

have discussed the joint biological children in blended families, although Gennetian [2001] is an

important exception. 17 The stresses and strains of blended families -- the presence of stepchildren, not

necessarily the behavior of stepchildren -- might affect not only outcomes for the stepchildren but also

outcomes for the joint biological children. Stress might explain why children in blended families have

worse educational outcomes than children in other two-parent families.

         The third explanation hinges on the allocation of time and other resources within blended

families. If mothers allocate resources among children within blended families, and if all of the children

are hers, as they usually are, then she may use her ability to allocate resources to "compensate" for any

negative effects of family structure on stepchildren. This explanation highlights the fact that observed

educational outcomes are not "pure" family structure effects, whatever that might mean, but also reflect

the effects of any compensating or reinforcing family allocation decisions.



16
   The discussion of the effect of family resources on outcomes for children provides an example. The papers in Duncan and
Brooks-Gunn [1996] generally argue that increases in family resources have positive effects on child outcomes; Mayer [1997]
argues that most of the observed correlation between family resources and child outcomes reflects unobserved heterogeneity;
Blau [1999] provides a balanced summary of the discussion. The underlying difficulty is that the discussion of family resources
effects, like the discussion of family structure effects, requires a well-specified counterfactual (e.g., an increase in cash welfare
benefits; winning the lottery), but discussions of counterfactuals are conspicuously absent.
17
    Evolutionary psychology suggests that stepchildren will be treated differently than biological children in blended
families. Daly and Wilson [1999] and Popenoe [1994] draw on evolutionary psychology in their discussions of stepchildren.
Booth and Dunn [1994], the edited volume in which Popenoe [1994] appears, contains several papers critical of Popenoe.


                                                                 23
       The fourth explanation is heterogeneity. Observed heterogeneity draws our attention to the

control variables, and the way in which investigators choose which of the available variables to control

for. The descriptive regressions show that the correlations between family structure and outcomes for

children fall substantially and often lack statistical significance when we control for variables such as

mothers' education and family income. Unobserved heterogeneity draws our attention to differences in

unobserved behaviors that may influence outcomes for children but also to differences in preferences

and ability that influence the choice of family structure, education, and childbearing. Parents in blended

families and single-parent families that result from divorce or nonmarital fertility may differ from

parents in traditional nuclear families in unobserved as well as observed characteristics. Even if family

structure has no "direct" or "causal" effect on outcomes for children, unobserved heterogeneity and

selection could account for the association between outcomes for children and family structure

summarized in the stylized facts and descriptive regressions.

       Our second contribution is to argue the need to reformulate the family structure question using

an explicit counterfactual. As an example of a reformulation of the question "What is the effect of

family structure on outcomes for children?" we suggest a counterfactual based on eliminating the EITC

marriage penalty. Our analysis also demonstrates, if another demonstration were needed, that what we

see depends on the lens we look through -- the classification scheme we bring to the analysis.

Classification schemes illuminate some relationships and obscure others. Furthermore, as Bowker and

Star [1999] emphasize, classification schemes themselves often become visible only when alternatives

appear. Using a family-based rather than a child-based classification of family structure, we see the

children in blended families -- the step children and the joint biological children -- in a new light.

       Any explicit counterfactual clarifies the family structure question, which, interpreted literally,

asks about the effect of one endogenous variable on another. The elimination of the EITC marriage



                                                     24
penalty exemplifies the type of counterfactual we have in mind. Its elimination would presumably

provide incentives for individuals to enter marriage and remain married or, following divorce, to

remarry. The marriage penalty counterfactual draws attention to the parents whom the changes in

incentives would induce to marry or remain married, and to outcomes for their children.

       Our results imply cautions for policy. Policies intended to improve outcomes for children often

focus on family structure, which is easy to observe and, some believe, relatively easy to influence

through tax and welfare policy, couple counseling, or legal rules governing marriage, divorce, and child

support. If the stylized facts about the relationship between outcomes for children and family structure

reflect the influences of other variables, then policies that affect family structure may have little or no

effect on outcomes for children. Our blended family results and our descriptive regr essions results call

into question the causal interpretation of the stylized facts about the relationship between family

structure and outcomes for children.




                                                    25
References

Alm, James, Stacy Dickert-Conlin, and Leslie A. Whittington, “The Marriage Penalty,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 13, No. 3 (summer 1999), 193-204.

Antecol, Heather, Kelly Bedard, and Eric Helland, “Does Single Parenthood Increase the Probability of
Teenage Promiscuity, Drug Use, and Crime? Evidence from Divorce Law Changes,” mimeo,
Claremont McKenna College, (2001).

Angrist, Joshua D. “Lifetime Earnings and the Vietnam Era Draft Lottery: Evidence From Social
Security Administrative Records,” American Economic Review, Vol. 80, No. 3, (June 1990), 313-336.

Behrman, Jere R., Mark R. Rosenzweig, and Paul Taubman, “Endowments and the Allocation of
Schooling in the Family and the Marriage Market: The Twins Experiment,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 102, No. 6, (December 1994), 1131-1174.

Biblarz, Timothy J., and Adrian E. Raftery, “Family Structure, Educational Attainment, and
Socioeconomic Success: Rethinking the ‘Pathology of Matriarchy’” American Journal of Sociology,
Vol. 105, No. 2 (September 1999), 321-65.

Biblarz, Timothy J., and Greg Gottainer “Family Structure and Children’s Success: A Comparison of
Widowed and Divorced Single-Mother Families,’” Journal of Marriage and Family, Vol. 62, (May
2000).

Blau, David M. "The Effect of Income on Child Development," Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol.
81, No. 2 (May 1999), 261-276.

Boggess, Scott, “Family Structure, Economic Status, and Educational Attainment,” The Journal of
Population Economics, Vol. 11, No. 2, (May 1998), 205-222.

Bowker, Geoffrey C. and Susan Leigh Star, Sorting Things Out: Classification and its Consequences,
Cambridge: MIT Press, 1999.

Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin, and Sara McLanahan, “Household Resource Allocation in Stepfamilies: Darwin
Reflects on the Plight of Cinderella,” American Economic Review, Vol. 89, No. 2, (May 1999), 234-
238.

Case, Anne, I-Fen Lin, and Sara McLanahan, “Educational Attainment of Siblings in Stepfamilies,”
Evolution and Human Behavior. Vol. 22, No. 4, (September 2001), 269-289.

Cherlin, Andew, "Remarriage as an Incomplete Institution," American Journal of Sociology, Vol. 84,
No. 3, (November 1978), 634-650.

Cherlin, Andrew J., Frank F. Furstenberg, P. Lindsay Chase-Lansdale, Kathleen E. Kiernan, et al.,
“Longitudinal Studies of Effects of Divorce on Children in Great Britain and the United States,”
Science, Vol. 252 No. 5011, (1991), 1386-89.



                                                  26
Corak, Miles, “Death and Divorce: The Long-Term Consequences of Parental Loss on Adolescents,”
Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 19, No. 3, (July 2001), 682-715.

Current Population Reports P23-181, Households, Families, and Children: A 30-Year Perspective,
Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office (November 1992).

Daly, Martin and Margo Wilson, The Truth about Cinderella: A Darwinian View of Parental Love, New
Haven: Yale University Press, 1999.

Department of Health and Human Services, Trends in the Well- Being of America’s Children and Youth:
1996, Washington, D.C: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1996.

Duncan, Greg J. and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, editors, Consequences of Growing Up Poor, New York: Russell
Sage Foundation, 1996.

Eckstein, Zvi and Kenneth I. Wolpin, “Why Youths Drop Out of High School: The Impact of
Preferences, Opportunities, and Abilities,” Econometrica, Vol. 67, No. 6 (November 1999), 1295-1339.

Ermisch, John F. and Marco Francesconi, “Family Structure and Children’s Achievements,” Journal of
Population Economics, Vol. 14, No. 2 (2001), 249-270.

Evenhouse, Eirik, and Siobhan Reilly, “Selection Bias or Differential Treatment? Exploring
Stepchildren’s Poor Outcomes,” mimeo, Mills College, (2001).

Evenhouse, Eirik, and Siobhan Reilly, “Divorce Laws and Divorce Rates: Evidence from Panel Data,”
mimeo, Mills College, (1997).

Gennetian, Lisa, “One or Two Parents? Half or Step Siblings? The Effect of Family Composition on
Young Children.” MDRC, 2001.

Griliches, Zvi, “Sibling Models and Data in Economics: Beginning of a Survey,” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 87, No. 5 pt. 2. (October 1979), S37-S64.

Gruber, Jonathan, “Is Making Divorce Easier Bad for Children? The Long Run Implications of
Unilateral Divorce.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7968, (2000).

Haveman, Robert and Barbara Wolfe, Succeeding Generations: On the Effects of Investments in
Children, New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1994.

Haveman, Robert, and Barbara Wolfe. “The Determinants of Children’s Attainments: A Review of
Methods and Findings,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol. XXXIII, No. 4, (December 1995) 1829-
1878.

Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber, “Evaluation of Education and Training
Programs in a General Equilibrium Setting,” March 1998.



                                                  27
Heckman, James J., Lance Lochner, and Christopher Taber, “General Equilibrium Effects: A Study of
Tuition Policy,” American Economic Review, Vol. 88, No. 2 (May 1998), 293-297.

Heckman, James J.,Jingjing Hee, and Yona Rubinstein, “The GED is a Mixed Signal,” December 1999.

Hrdy, Sarah Blaffer, Mother Nature: A History of Mothers, Infants, and Natural Selection: New York,
Pantheon Books, 1999.

Lang, Kevin, and Jay L. Zagorsky, “Does Growing Up With a Parent Absent Really Hurt?" Journal of
Human Resources, Vol. 36, No. 2, (Spring 2001), 253-273.

McLanahan, Sara and Gary Sandefur, Growing Up with a Single Parent: What Hurts, What Helps,
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994.

Manski, Charles, Gary Sandefur, Sara McLanahan, and Daniel Powers, “Alternative Estimates of the
Effect of Family Structure During Adolescence on High School Graduation,” Journal of the American
Statistical Association, Vol. 87 No. 417, (March 1992), 25-37.

Mayer, Susan E., What Money Can't Buy: Family Income and Children's Life Chances, Cambridge:
Harvard University Press, 1997.

Neal, Derek “The Economics of Family Structure,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 8519, (2001).

NLSY79 User’s Guide Handbook, Columbus, Ohio: Center for Human Resource Research, The Ohio
State University, August 1997.

Painter, Gary and David I. Levine, “Family Structure and Youths’ Outcomes: Which Correlations Are
Causal?” Journal of Human Resources, Vol. 35, No. 3, (Summer 2000), 524-549.

Pollak, Robert A., “Conditional Demand Functions and Consumption Theory,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 83, No. l, (February 1969), 60-78.

Popenoe, David, “The Evolution of Marriage and the Problem of Stepfamilies: A Biosocial Perspective,” in
Booth and Dunn [1994], pp. 3-27.

Willis, Robert J., “A Theory of Out-of-Wedlock Childbearing,” Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 107,
No. 6, Part 2 (December 1999), S33-S64.

Wojtkiewicz, Roger A., “Simplicity and Complexity in the Effects of Parental Structure on High School
Graduation,” Demography, Vol. 30, No. 4 (November 1993), 701-717.

Wojtkiewicz, Roger A., “The Effects of Single and Stepparent Families on College Entry: Who Gets
Hurt the Most?,” mimeo, Louisiana State University (1998).




                                                   28
Wolfe, Barbara, Robert Haveman, Donna Ginther, and Chong Bum An, “The ‘Window Problem’ in
Studies of Children’s Attainments: A Methodological Exploration,” Journal of the American Statistical
Association, Vol. 91, No. 435 (September 1996), 970-982.




                                                  29
                                             Table 1
                     Descriptive Statistics NLSY and PSID Sibling Samples

                                                      NLSY                   PSID
Variable                                    All Siblings Half Sibs All Siblings Half Sibs
Years of Schooling                               12.919      12.318      12.782     12.523
                                                 (2.273)     (1.839)     (1.871)    (1.773)
High School Graduate = 1                           0.854       0.786       0.851      0.838
                                                 (0.353)     (0.412)     (0.356)    (0.370)
College Attendance = 1                             0.416       0.292       0.388      0.360
                                                 (0.493)     (0.456)     (0.488)    (0.482)
College Graduate = 1                               0.129       0.026       0.135      0.090
                                                 (0.335)     (0.160)     (0.342)    (0.288)
Proportion Lived in Traditional Family             0.819       0.160       0.570      0.053
                                                 (0.325)     (0.270)     (0.479)    (0.194)
Proportion Lived with Single Parent                0.114       0.129       0.238      0.081
                                                 (0.251)     (0.236)     (0.376)    (0.209)
Proportion Lived in Blended Family                 0.059       0.701       0.176      0.858
                                                 (0.194)     (0.363)     (0.335)    (0.294)
Proportion Lived in Other Family                   0.007       0.010       0.015      0.009
   Structure                                     (0.053)     (0.063)     (0.087)    (0.066)
Lived in Traditional Family                        0.698                   0.524
   Continuously = 1                              (0.459)                 (0.500)
Lived in Single Parent Family = 1                  0.164       0.071       0.181      0.045
                                                 (0.370)     (0.258)     (0.385)    (0.208)
Lived in Blended Family = 1                        0.107       0.896       0.254      0.937
                                                 (0.309)     (0.306)     (0.435)    (0.244)
Lived in Other Family Structure = 1                0.031       0.032       0.041      0.018
                                                 (0.173)     (0.178)     (0.199)    (0.134)
Female = 1                                         0.480       0.461       0.507      0.550
                                                 (0.500)     (0.500)     (0.500)    (0.500)
African American = 1                               0.292       0.571       0.473      0.441
                                                 (0.455)     (0.496)     (0.499)    (0.499)
Hispanic = 1                                       0.165       0.104       0.033
                                                 (0.371)     (0.306)     (0.180)
Birth Order                                        3.330       3.494       3.636       3.459
                                                 (2.221)     (2.124)     (2.480)     (2.396)
Number of Siblings                                 4.366       4.916       3.863       3.598
                                                 (2.653)     (2.190)     (1.655)     (1.290)
Practiced Religion = 1                             0.954       0.929       0.982       1.000
                                                 (0.210)     (0.258)     (0.134)     (0.000)
Family Income                                     17793       15922       34314       31427
                                                (13648)     (12897)     (22155)     (12340)
Note: Standard Deviations in Parentheses.




                                                  30
                                        Table 1
           Descriptive Statistics NLSY and PSID Sibling Samples (continued)

                                                NLSY                   PSID
Variable                              All Siblings Half Sibs All Siblings Half Sibs
Mother High School Graduate = 1               0.358       0.286      0.356      0.396
                                            (0.479)     (0.453)    (0.479)    (0.491)
Mother Some College = 1                       0.160       0.078      0.103
                                            (0.367)     (0.269)    (0.304)
Mother's Schooling Missing = 1                0.056       0.065      0.024      0.018
                                            (0.230)     (0.247)    (0.152)    (0.134)
Father High School Graduate = 1               0.277       0.227      0.211      0.216
                                            (0.447)     (0.420)    (0.408)    (0.414)
Father Some College = 1                       0.208       0.097      0.150      0.072
                                            (0.406)     (0.297)    (0.357)    (0.260)
Father's Schooling Missing = 1                0.130       0.240      0.150
                                            (0.336)     (0.429)    (0.357)
Sample Size                                   4764          154      1980        111




                                             31
                                          Table 2
                     Descriptive Statistics 1986-1994 NLSY Children

                                                                  Stable Blende d
                                                All Siblings         Families

                                             Number               Number
Variable                                     Of Obs.    Mean      of Obs.    Mean
PIAT- Reading Recognition Percentile            10803     52.990      1031     49.890
   Score                                                (27.931)             (27.522)
PIAT-Reading Comprehension Percentile            8799     50.839       822     47.658
   Score                                                (27.745)             (27.506)
PIAT-Math Percentile Score                      10803     45.141      1031     42.172
                                                        (26.335)             (25.967)
Behavioral Problems Index Percentile            10803     64.347      1031     68.117
   Score                                                (26.564)             (24.805)
Lived in Traditional Family                     10803       0.475     1031
                                                          (0.499)
Lived with Single Mother                        10803       0.377     1031      0.228
                                                          (0.485)             (0.420)
Lived in Blended Family                         10803       0.148     1031      0.772
                                                          (0.355)             (0.420)
Age                                             10803       9.064     1031      9.129
                                                          (2.626)             (2.681)
Real Family Income                               9165      31907       877     38391
                                                         (60310)             (78272)
Female = 1                                       4320       0.482      418      0.502
                                                          (0.500)             (0.501)
African American = 1                             4320       0.344      418      0.397
                                                          (0.475)             (0.490)
Hispanic = 1                                     4320       0.215      418      0.208
                                                          (0.411)             (0.406)
Number of Siblings                               4320       2.139      418      2.656
                                                          (1.169)             (1.396)
Practiced Religion = 1                           4320       0.406      418      0.385
                                                          (0.491)             (0.487)
Mother High School Graduate = 1                  4320       0.488      418      0.495
                                                          (0.500)             (0.501)
Mother Some College = 1                          4320       0.272      418      0.251
                                                          (0.445)             (0.434)
Low Birth Weight                                 4320       0.089      418      0.105
                                                          (0.285)             (0.307)
Note: Standard Deviations in Parentheses.




                                                 32
                                                  Table 3
              NLSY Sibling Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure on Schooling Outcomes

                                                    High School
                         Years of Schooling           Graduate         College Attendance      College Graduate
                           OLS        OLS        Probit     Probit      Probit     Probit      Probit      Probit
        Variable            (A)       (B)          (A)        (B)         (A)         (B)       (A)         (B)
Intercept                  13.269*     8.378*       1.219*    -1.874*    -0.085~      -2.499*   -0.964*     -3.013*
                            (0.074)   (0.562)      (0.047)    (0.412)     (0.039)     (0.380)   (0.045)     (0.482)
Disadvantaged               -0.914*   -0.333*      -0.485*   -0.198~      -0.403*    -0.137~    -0.295*      -0.054
    Oversample              (0.116)   (0.111)      (0.079)    (0.081)     (0.059)     (0.069)   (0.065)     (0.088)
Female                       0.417*    0.437*       0.244*     0.311*      0.223*      0.250*    0.165*      0.208*
                            (0.066)   (0.062)      (0.047)    (0.055)     (0.039)     (0.045)   (0.049)     (0.056)
African-American              0.101    0.672*       0.199~     0.468*       0.058      0.383*    -0.092       0.148
                            (0.120)   (0.112)      (0.088)    (0.092)     (0.065)     (0.075)   (0.068)     (0.086)
Hispanic                     -0.262    0.454*       -0.078     0.197~      -0.033      0.366*   -0.308*      -0.041
                            (0.149)   (0.141)      (0.090)    (0.097)     (0.077)     (0.090)   (0.096)     (0.116)
Birth Order                            0.050~                   0.029                   0.019                -0.006
                                      (0.024)                 (0.018)                 (0.017)               (0.024)
Number of Siblings                    -0.123*                 -0.067*                 -0.064*                -0.028
                                      (0.022)                 (0.016)                 (0.016)               (0.021)
Religion                               0.494*                  0.447*                   0.176                 0.050
                                      (0.188)                 (0.116)                 (0.115)               (0.151)
Family Income 1979                     0.352*                  0.240*                  0.176*                0.162*
                                      (0.052)                 (0.040)                 (0.036)               (0.046)
Mother High School                     0.551*                  0.282*                  0.289*                0.191~
    Graduate                          (0.094)                 (0.086)                 (0.064)               (0.082)
Mother Some College                    1.266*                  0.405*                  0.778*                0.396*
                                      (0.131)                 (0.129)                 (0.087)               (0.099)
Mother's Schooling                     -0.163                  -0.174                  -0.050                -0.067
  Missing                             (0.145)                 (0.111)                 (0.108)               (0.170)
Father High School                     0.397*                  0.411*                  0.198*                 0.122
    Graduate                          (0.096)                 (0.083)                 (0.066)               (0.081)
Father Some College                    1.545*                  0.851*                  0.833*                0.515*
                                      (0.124)                 (0.143)                 (0.080)               (0.090)
Father's Schooling                      0.080                   0.091                   0.021                -0.136
   Missing                            (0.114)                 (0.086)                 (0.083)               (0.125)
Proportion with Single      -0.674*    -0.235      -0.417*   -0.253~      -0.356*      -0.122   -0.374*      -0.194
    Parent                  (0.159)   (0.157)      (0.106)    (0.119)     (0.092)     (0.107)   (0.122)     (0.144)
Proportion in Blended       -0.894*   -0.517*     -0.259~      -0.152     -0.562*    -0.322~    -0.965*     -0.884*
    Family                  (0.169)   (0.161)      (0.130)    (0.140)     (0.120)     (0.135)   (0.217)     (0.247)
Proportion without         -1.459~     -0.641       -0.678     -0.460      -0.884      -0.494    -0.310       0.290
    Parents                 (0.587)   (0.615)      (0.369)    (0.451)     (0.461)     (0.515)   (0.520)     (0.589)
Sample Size                    4674      3817         4674       3817        4674        3817      4674        3817
R-Squared                     0.074     0.288        0.047      0.162       0.036       0.162     0.044       0.115
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared. Sample size drops between models (A) and (B) because of missing family income
data for some observations.




                                                      33
                                                    Table 4
               PSID Sibling Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure on Schooling Outcomes

                                                    High School
                         Years of Schooling           Graduate         College Attendance      College Graduate
                           OLS        OLS        Probit     Probit      Probit     Probit      Probit      Probit
        Variable            (A)       (B)          (A)        (B)         (A)        (B)        (A)          (B)
Intercept                  13.330*     5.691*       1.432*   -2.551~       -0.110    -6.414*    -0.686*      -5.819*
                            (0.106)   (1.364)      (0.088)    (1.216)     (0.068)    (1.054)    (0.078)      (1.417)
Disadvantaged               -0.605*    -0.071     -0.294~      -0.031     -0.310*      0.043    -0.379*       -0.042
    Oversample              (0.151)   (0.131)      (0.119)    (0.121)     (0.096)    (0.097)    (0.119)      (0.123)
Female                       0.282*    0.311*        0.066      0.100      0.297*     0.356*      0.130        0.133
                            (0.083)   (0.076)      (0.078)    (0.080)     (0.060)    (0.064)    (0.072)      (0.078)
African-American             -0.190    0.459*        0.024     0.420*      -0.099     0.363*    -0.358*        0.051
                            (0.153)   (0.141)      (0.123)    (0.129)     (0.100)    (0.104)    (0.124)      (0.135)
Hispanic                     -0.182     0.466       -0.207      0.178       0.095     0.544*     -0.204        0.101
                            (0.368)   (0.329)      (0.249)    (0.265)     (0.195)    (0.195)    (0.317)      (0.322)
Birth Order                            -0.020                  -0.030                 -0.015                   0.001
                                      (0.021)                 (0.020)                (0.019)                 (0.026)
Number of Siblings                    -0.152*                -0.084~                 -0.113*                 -0.143*
                                      (0.035)                 (0.035)                (0.031)                 (0.040)
Religion                               -0.466                  -0.404                 -0.327                  -0.527
                                      (0.485)                 (0.348)                (0.320)                 (0.394)
Family Income 1979                     0.725*                  0.406*                 0.602*                  0.525*
                                      (0.121)                 (0.112)                (0.095)                 (0.127)
Mother High School                     0.337*                  0.357*                  0.157                   0.047
    Graduate                          (0.106)                 (0.106)                (0.085)                 (0.111)
Mother Some College                    1.196*                  0.949*                 0.805*                  0.484*
                                      (0.180)                 (0.248)                (0.134)                 (0.163)
Mother's Schooling                      0.007                   0.054                  0.000                   0.148
  Missing                             (0.280)                 (0.281)                (0.279)                 (0.275)
Father High School                     0.321~                   0.223                 0.282*                   0.150
    Graduate                          (0.124)                 (0.127)                (0.096)                 (0.126)
Father Some College                    0.908*                   0.326                 0.630*                  0.545*
                                      (0.176)                 (0.209)                (0.119)                 (0.149)
Father's Schooling                      0.180                   0.051                  0.144                   0.106
   Missing                            (0.186)                 (0.160)                (0.152)                 (0.244)
Proportion with Single      -0.556*    -0.054      -0.532*     -0.294     -0.323*      0.059    -0.454*       -0.165
    Parent                  (0.145)   (0.193)      (0.129)    (0.165)     (0.108)    (0.151)    (0.150)      (0.219)
Proportion in Blended       -0.483*    -0.234      -0.341*   -0.308~       -0.145      0.034    -0.423*     -0.284~
    Family                  (0.160)   (0.140)      (0.128)    (0.128)     (0.104)    (0.103)    (0.132)      (0.134)
Proportion without         -1.355~     -0.409     -1.152~      -0.706      -0.598      0.119     -1.235       -0.699
    Parents                 (0.565)   (0.488)      (0.499)    (0.485)     (0.457)    (0.445)    (0.905)      (0.861)
Sample Size                    1980      1980         1980       1980        1980       1980       1980         1980
Adjusted R-Squared            0.084     0.252        0.049      0.125       0.041      0.159      0.094        0.199
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared.




                                                       34
                                                      .Table 5
              NLSY-Child Sibling Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure on Assessment Outcomes

                                                       Reading                                      Behavioral
                         Reading Recognition       Comprehension         Math Test Scores        Problems Index
                           OLS       OLS           OLS       OLS          OLS        OLS         OLS        OLS
  Variable                  (A)       (B)           (A)       (B)          (A)       (B)          (A)       (B)
  Intercept                65.551*   21.234*       90.458*    49.054*     56.728*   13.991~      57.020*    99.394*
                            (1.281)   (5.817)       (1.296)    (6.753)     (1.139)    (5.549)     (1.317)    (6.629)
  Age                       -0.798*   -0.801*       -3.430*   -3.244*     -0.244~      -0.183      0.707*     0.677*
                            (0.124)   (0.126)       (0.122)    (0.131)     (0.106)    (0.113)     (0.113)    (0.121)
  Female                     6.340*    6.342*        3.708*     3.551*       0.793      0.627     -5.085*   -4.558*
                            (0.786)   (0.771)       (0.761)    (0.732)     (0.706)    (0.703)     (0.725)    (0.753)
  African-American          -8.026*   -6.288*       -9.098*   -7.256*    -12.752*   -11.431*        0.747     -0.655
                            (1.215)   (1.187)       (1.158)    (1.142)     (1.083)    (1.090)     (1.206)    (1.279)
  Hispanic                  -9.083*   -6.162*       -7.845*   -4.916*    -11.938*    -9.642*       -0.303     -1.824
                            (1.400)   (1.284)       (1.330)    (1.221)     (1.243)    (1.171)     (1.374)    (1.441)
  Number of Siblings                  -2.403*                 -2.198*                -1.423*                   0.057
                                      (0.491)                  (0.451)                (0.427)                (0.485)
  Religion                             2.147~                  1.719~                   0.572                  0.226
                                      (0.840)                  (0.818)                (0.762)                (0.853)
  Family Income                        3.776*                   3.288*                 3.611*               -3.705*
                                      (0.560)                  (0.657)                (0.529)                (0.640)
  Mother High School                   7.033*                   7.670*                 6.132*               -3.910*
    Graduate                          (1.294)                  (1.287)                (1.103)                (1.445)
  Mother Some College                14.599*                  13.825*                12.108*                -4.392*
                                      (1.483)                  (1.480)                (1.338)                (1.647)
  Low Birth Weight                    -4.570*                 -4.371*                -3.470*                   2.277
                                      (1.604)                  (1.544)                (1.251)                (1.432)
  Lives in Blended          -4.360*  -3.099~       -2.872~      -1.970    -2.541~      -1.786      5.276*     4.012*
     Family                 (1.422)   (1.410)       (1.383)    (1.343)     (1.251)    (1.238)     (1.270)    (1.356)
  Lives with Single         -7.772*    -1.665       -7.028*     -1.842     -5.917*     -0.740      6.430*      2.138
     Mother                 (1.087)   (1.138)       (1.058)    (1.178)     (0.978)    (1.026)     (1.104)    (1.327)
  Sample Size                10803       9109         8799        7424      10803        9109      10803        9109
  R-Squared                   0.071     0.148         0.155      0.220       0.082      0.141       0.030      0.046

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared. Estimates use all observations without missing data.




                                                    - 35 -
                                         Table 6
               Tests of Mean Differences in PSID and NLSY Sibling Sample

           Test: Mean Outcome Half-Siblings in Stable Blended Families
                        v. Siblings in Traditional Families
                                  Mean          Mean
                                   Half-      Traditional
Outcome                          Siblings      Families Test Statistic P-value
Years of Schooling                   12.403        13.131       6.256      0.000
High School Graduate                   0.807         0.887      3.202      0.002
College Attendance                     0.321         0.456      4.542      0.000
College Graduation                     0.053         0.161      7.255      0.000
Sample Size                              265         4301

                   Test: Mean Outcome in Traditional families v.
                  Joint Biological in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                     Mean         Mean
Outcome                              Joint     Traditional Test Statistic                     P-value
                                 Biological
Years of Schooling                     12.508       13.131         4.234                            0.000
High School Graduate                     0.855        0.887        0.994                            0.322
College Attendance                       0.339        0.456        2.699                            0.008
College Graduation                       0.040        0.161        6.470                            0.000
Sample Size                                124        4301

                     Test: Mean Outcome Joint Biological v.
                    Stepchild in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                   Mean        Mean
Outcome                            Joint     Stepchild Test Statistic                         P-value
                                Biological
Years of Schooling                   12.312       12.508        0.891                               0.374
High School Graduate                   0.766       0.855        1.858                               0.064
College Attendance                     0.305       0.339        0.584                               0.560
College Graduation                     0.064       0.040      -0.8633                               0.389
Sample Size                              141         124
Notes: Traditional defined as observed in the survey as always living with both biological parents. Stepchild
defined as ever living with a stepparent. Numbers in Bold are statistically significant.




                                                     - 36 -
                                         Table 7
                   PSID and NLSY Blended Family Sample Estimates
              of the Effect of Family Structure on Educational Outcomes

                                                  High School
                        Years of Schooling          Graduate        College Attendance
                         OLS        OLS         Probit    Probit     Probit     Probit
       Variable            (A)       (B)         (A)        (B)        (A)       (B)
Intercept                 12.036*   10.743*       0.895*      0.145   -0.897*    -1.226*
                           (0.311)   (0.648)     (0.250)    (0.540)    (0.230)   (0.365)
PSID = 1                     0.259     0.240       0.250      0.044      0.161     0.208
                           (0.304)   (0.342)     (0.255)    (0.292)    (0.206)   (0.237)
Disadvantaged                0.137     0.131      -0.151     -0.143      0.255     0.293
   Oversample              (0.279)   (0.276)     (0.257)    (0.253)    (0.216)   (0.211)
Female                       0.331     0.293       0.056      0.040     0.442*    0.464*
                           (0.221)   (0.224)     (0.172)    (0.185)    (0.165)   (0.174)
African-American             0.270     0.403       0.266      0.389      0.052     0.148
                           (0.323)   (0.325)     (0.284)    (0.282)    (0.223)   (0.231)
Hispanic                     0.181     0.236      -0.324     -0.421     -0.006     0.023
                           (0.692)   (0.748)     (0.442)    (0.476)    (0.476)   (0.492)
Birth Order                            0.067                  0.063                0.034
                                     (0.075)                (0.065)              (0.047)
Number of Siblings                    -0.067                 -0.027               -0.036
                                     (0.078)                (0.067)              (0.065)
Religion                             0.947~                   0.512
                                     (0.464)                (0.459)
Mother High School                     0.213                  0.395                  0.09
  Graduate                           (0.281)                (0.260)              (0.203)
Mother Some College                    1.061                  0.161               1.138*
                                     (0.549)                (0.428)              (0.419)
Mother's Schooling                     0.220                  0.088                0.630
  Missing                            (0.605)                (0.489)              (0.434)
Father High School                   0.658~                   0.324               0.436~
   Graduate                          (0.304)                (0.278)              (0.198)
Father Some                            0.836                  0.415                0.529
    College                          (0.493)                (0.580)              (0.347)
Father's Schooling                     0.092                 -0.348               -0.027
  Missing                            (0.373)                (0.306)              (0.342)
Proportion in               -0.330    -0.231      -0.381     -0.279     -0.130    -0.081
   Non-intact Family       (0.274)   (0.292)     (0.200)    (0.213)    (0.195)   (0.222)
Sample Size                    265       265         265        265        265        265
Adjusted R-Squared           0.028     0.103       0.034      0.089      0.037     0.083

Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared




                                                    - 37 -
                                          Table 8
                   Tests of Mean Differences NLSY-Child Sibling Sample

           Test: Mean Outcome Half-Siblings in Stable Blended Families
                         v. Siblings in Traditional Families
                                   Mean           Mean
                                    Half-       Traditional    Test
Outcome                           Siblings       Families    Statistic  P-value
PIAT-Reading Recognition              49.369          57.896      6.364     0.000
PIAT-Reading Comprehension            46.838          56.696      6.945     0.000
PIAT-Math                             41.627          50.333      6.830     0.000
Behavioral Problems Index             67.232          58.959      6.167     0.000
Sample Size                               418           1861

                  Test: Mean Outcome in Traditional families v.
                 Joint Biological in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                    Mean
Outcome                             Joint        Mean         Test
                                Biological     Traditional  Statistic                           P-value
PIAT-Reading Recognition              49.615         57.896      4.485                              0.000
PIAT-Reading Comprehension            49.645         56.696      3.333                              0.001
PIAT-Math                             42.025         50.333      4.702                              0.000
Behavioral Problems Index             65.559         58.958      3.519                              0.000
Sample Size                               199          1861

 Test: Mean Outcome Joint Biological v. Stepchildren in Stable Blended Families
                             Mean Joint      Mean            Test
Outcome                      Biological Stepchildren       Statistic   P-value
PIAT-Reading Recognition          49.615         49.145         0.191      0.848
PIAT-Reading Comprehension        49.645         44.994         1.715      0.087
PIAT-Math                         42.025         41.264         0.334      0.738
Behavioral Problems Index         65.559         68.753         1.413      0.159
Sample Size                          199            219


Notes: Tests performed on average assessment scores. Traditional defined as observed in the survey as
always living with both biological parents. Stepchild defined as ever living with a stepparent. Numbers in Bold are
statistically significant.




                                                      - 38 -
                                                 Table 9
      NLSY-Child Blended Family Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure on Assessment Outcomes

                                                     Reading                                       Behavioral
                       Reading Recognition       Comprehension          Math Test Scores        Problems Index
                         OLS       OLS           OLS       OLS           OLS       OLS          OLS        OLS
Variable                  (A)      (B)            (A)       (B)          (A)        (B)          (A)       (B)

Intercept                  62.531*     22.869     87.854*       26.162    53.486*       2.933   65.419* 104.838*
                            (3.757)  (18.321)      (3.855)   (17.111)      (3.240)  (15.943)     (3.331)   (17.025)
Age                         -1.380*   -1.403*      -3.957*     -3.817*      -0.417     -0.406     0.985*      0.786~
                            (0.485)   (0.516)      (0.417)     (0.443)     (0.323)    (0.369)    (0.306)     (0.355)
Female                       5.300~    6.140~        3.385       3.906       0.171     -0.535   -6.395*      -6.666*
                            (2.421)   (2.572)      (2.306)     (2.330)     (2.058)    (2.085)    (1.987)     (2.017)
African-American             -6.574    -6.245     -7.827~     -7.285~    -12.757*   -13.249*      -4.441      -4.006
                            (4.053)   (3.980)      (3.753)     (3.569)     (3.403)    (3.327)    (3.052)     (4.015)
Hispanic                   -9.375~     -6.098     -8.939~       -4.708 -11.253*      -8.563~      -4.992      -6.063
                            (4.107)   (3.923)      (3.592)     (3.187)     (3.578)    (3.492)    (3.576)     (4.047)
Number of Siblings                    -3.705*                 -2.853~                  -1.127                  0.368
                                      (1.384)                  (1.396)                (0.965)                (1.399)
Religion                                2.743                    1.332                  1.326                  3.604
                                      (3.257)                  (3.079)                (2.788)                (2.708)
Family Income                          4.297~                   6.135*                 4.682*               -3.862~
                                      (1.901)                  (1.593)                (1.581)                (1.701)
Mother High School                      1.300                    0.616                  4.057                 -1.321
    Graduate                          (3.943)                  (3.904)                (3.195)                (3.799)
Mother Some College                     9.881                   10.191              12.074~                    0.728
                                      (5.649)                  (5.550)                (4.714)                (4.742)
Low Birth Weight                       -3.623                   -6.267                 -4.484                  1.549
                                      (4.895)                  (5.021)                (3.090)                (3.742)
Lives with Stepfather        4.406      2.514        4.533       3.610       1.438     -0.209     -1.914      -2.097
                           (3.254)    (3.413)      (3.191)     (3.374)     (2.557)    (2.528)    (2.161)     (2.448)
Lives with Single            1.581      8.032        1.277      8.380~      -1.736      3.947      2.718      -0.712
    Mother                 (3.767)    (4.598)      (3.891)     (4.206)     (2.992)    (3.432)    (2.789)     (3.032)
Sample Size                  1031         866          822         696        1031        866       1031         866
R-Squared                    0.045      0.136        0.146       0.243       0.060      0.128      0.036       0.050
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared. Estimates use all observations without missing data.




                                                     - 39 -
              APPENDIX A: DATA CONSTRUCTION AND VARIABLE DEFINITIONS


                       Appendix A: Data construction and variable definitions


A.     Identifying Blended Families

       In order to facilitate comparisons of outcomes for half-siblings in blended families we need to

identify these households. Although the NLSY contains information on multiple sibling households, the

data do not explicitly report whether a pair of siblings are half or full. The PSID does identify half-

siblings in the Family Relatio nship file. However, to facilitate comparisons across the data sets, we use

the same identification approach for each. To identify half-siblings in the data, we compare measures of

family structure in a household.

       We use a similar approach to identify stable blended families in the NLSY-Child data. We

identify half-siblings within a household using the following criteria: A) one sibling reports living with

a father and the other reports not living with a father; or B) both siblings report not living with a father

but report fathers living at different distances from the child; or C) one child reports the father is dead

while the other does not. To make our NLSY-Child stable blended- family sample more nearly

comparable to the NLSY stable blended- family sample, we impose the additional restriction that at least

one child in the household reports having lived with both biological parents from birth until the time of

the survey.

       Table A.1 contains the definitions of the variables used in this analysis.




                                                    - 40 -
                                       Table A.1
     Outcome and Family Structure Variable Definitions: PSID, NLSY, and NLSY-Child

            Outcome Variables:                                     Definitions:
PSID and NLSY
Years of Schooling                             NLSY: Maximum years of schooling observed
                                               1985-1994
                                               PSID: Maximum years of schooling observed
                                               1985-1997
High School Graduate = 1                       Indicator: Completed high school by 1994 in NLSY
                                                   by 1997 in PSID
College Attendance = 1                         Indicator: Attended college by 1994 in NLSY
                                                   by 1997 in PSID
College Graduate = 1                           Indicator: Completed college by 1994 in NLSY
                                                   by 1997 in PSID
NLSY-Child
Peabody Individual Achievement Tests           Nationally-normed percentile scores
   Reading Recognition
   Reading Comprehension
   Math Percentile Scores
Behavioral Problems Index Percentile Score     Survey-normed percentile score of behavioral
                                               problems.

NLSY and PSID Family Structure Variables:                          Definitions:
   NLSY Proportion defined as:               Years living in a given family structure(child ages 0-
                                             16) divided by 17
   PSID Proportion defined as:               Years observed between 1968-85 (child ages 1-16)
                                             in a given family structure, divided by total years
                                             observed between 1968-85 (child ages 1-16)
Proportion Lived in Traditional Family       Living with both biological parents and biological
                                             siblings only
Proportion Lived with Single Parent          Living with either single mother or single father and
                                             no stepparent
Proportion Lived in a Blended Family         Living with stepparent and biological parent who
                                             are married; or living with both biological parents
                                             and at least one half-sibling
Proportion Lived in Other Family Structure   Living without a biological parent and with other
                                             relatives, foster care, etc.
Lived in Traditional Family Continuously = 1 Indicator variable where proportion lived with both
                                               biological parents =1
Lived in Single Parent Family = 1            Indicator variable where ever lived with a single
                                             parent and never lived with a stepparent
Lived in Blended Family = 1                  Indicator variable where ever lived in a blended
                                             family
Lived in Other Family Structure = 1          Indicator variable where ever lived without both
                                             biological parents




                                                     - 41 -
                                       Table A.1
     Outcome and Family Structure Variable Definitions: PSID, NLSY, and NLSY-Child


  NLSY-Child Family Structure Variables:                          Definitions

Note: All Children in the NLSY-Child Sample
live with their biological mother.
Lived in Traditional Family                   Indicator for 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992, and 1994
Lived with Single Mother                      Indicator for 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992, and 1994
Lived in Blended Family                       Indicator for 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992, and 1994

Other Independent Variables:
Female = 1                                    Indicator: Female = 1
African American = 1                          Indicator: African-American=1
Hispanic = 1                                  Indicator: Hispanic=1
Birth Order                                   NLSY and PSID: Number of older siblings + 1
Number of Siblings                            NLSY: Average of number of siblings reported in
                                              1979 and 1993
                                              PSID: Average number of siblings 1968-1985
                                              NLSY-Child: Total number of siblings 1994
Practiced Religion = 1                        Indicator: child practiced religion=1
Family Income                                 NLSY: Log of Family Income 1979
                                              PSID: Log of Average Family Income 1968-1985
                                              NLSY-Child: Log of Family Income in 1986, 1988,
                                              1990, 1992, 1994 deflated by PCE deflator
                                              (1992=100)
Mother High School Graduate = 1               Indicator: Biological Mother is high school
                                              graduate
Mother Some College = 1                       Indicator: Biological Mother has more than 12
                                              years of schooling
Mother's Schooling Missing = 1                Mother's education information missing
Father High School Graduate = 1               Indicator: Biological Father is high school graduate
Father Some College = 1                       Indicator: Biological Father has more than 12
                                              years of schooling
Father's Schooling Missing = 1                Father's education information missing
Age                                           NLSY-Child: Age in 1986, 1988, 1990, 1992, 1994
Low Birth Weight                              Indicator for birth weight below 5.5 pounds




                                                    - 42 -
                             APPENDIX B: SUPPLEMENTARY TABLES
                                                 Table B.1
              NLSY Sibling Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure on Schooling Outcomes
                    Alternative Specification with Family Structure Indicator Variables

                                                    High School
                         Years of Schooling           Graduate         College Attendance      College Graduate
                           OLS        OLS        Probit     Probit      Probit     Probit      Probit      Probit
        Variable           (A)         (B)         (A)        (B)         (A)         (B)       (A)         (B)
Intercept                  13.300*      8.439*      1.252*    -1.755*      -0.072     -2.496*   -0.957*     -3.073*
                            (0.076)    (0.568)     (0.048)    (0.420)     (0.040)     (0.384)   (0.046)     (0.484)
Disadvantaged              -0.907*     -0.328*     -0.473*   -0.192~      -0.402*    -0.136~    -0.301*      -0.058
    Oversample              (0.116)    (0.111)     (0.079)    (0.081)     (0.059)     (0.069)   (0.065)     (0.088)
Female                       0.419*     0.436*      0.246*     0.312*      0.224*      0.249*    0.167*      0.210*
                            (0.066)    (0.062)     (0.047)    (0.055)     (0.039)     (0.045)   (0.049)     (0.056)
African-American              0.042     0.644*       0.166     0.445*       0.028      0.367*    -0.122       0.130
                            (0.118)    (0.111)     (0.086)    (0.090)     (0.064)     (0.074)   (0.068)     (0.086)
Hispanic                     -0.272     0.448*      -0.090      0.188      -0.038      0.364*   -0.311*      -0.045
                            (0.149)    (0.141)     (0.090)    (0.097)     (0.077)     (0.089)   (0.096)     (0.116)
Birth Order                             0.047~                  0.026                   0.018                -0.008
                                       (0.024)                (0.018)                 (0.017)               (0.024)
Number of Siblings                     -0.120*                -0.065*                 -0.062*                -0.026
                                       (0.022)                (0.016)                 (0.016)               (0.021)
Religion                                0.500*                 0.451*                   0.179                 0.052
                                       (0.188)                (0.116)                 (0.115)               (0.151)
Family Income 1979                      0.346*                 0.230*                  0.176*                0.168*
                                       (0.052)                (0.040)                 (0.036)               (0.046)
Mother High School                      0.558*                 0.288*                  0.293*                0.193~
    Graduate                           (0.094)                (0.085)                 (0.064)               (0.081)
Mother Some College                     1.279*                 0.419*                  0.786*                0.403*
                                       (0.130)                (0.129)                 (0.087)               (0.099)
Mother's Schooling                      -0.138                 -0.152                  -0.034                -0.054
  Missing                              (0.145)                (0.111)                 (0.108)               (0.171)
Father High School                      0.398*                 0.417*                  0.197*                 0.116
    Graduate                           (0.096)                (0.083)                 (0.066)               (0.082)
Father Some College                     1.543*                 0.853*                  0.831*                0.511*
                                       (0.124)                (0.143)                 (0.080)               (0.091)
Father's Schooling                       0.067                  0.089                   0.010                -0.157
   Missing                             (0.113)                (0.085)                 (0.083)               (0.125)
Single Parent = 1          -0.314*      -0.110     -0.266*   -0.187~     -0.159~       -0.037    -0.137      -0.054
                            (0.110)    (0.109)     (0.074)    (0.086)     (0.062)     (0.074)   (0.079)     (0.093)
Blended Family = 1         -0.676*     -0.342*     -0.242*     -0.139     -0.394*    -0.203~    -0.645*     -0.530*
                            (0.115)    (0.113)     (0.086)    (0.098)     (0.074)     (0.083)   (0.113)     (0.128)
No Parents = 1             -1.023*    -0.552~      -0.668*    -0.567*     -0.490*      -0.295    -0.143       0.110
                            (0.235)    (0.237)     (0.123)    (0.146)     (0.146)     (0.170)   (0.168)     (0.197)
Sample Size                    4674       3817        4674       3817        4674        3817      4674        3817
R-Squared                     0.075      0.289       0.052      0.166       0.036       0.162     0.044       0.115
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared.




                                                    - 43 -
                                                  Table B.2
               PSID Sibling Estimates of the Effect of Family Structure on Schooling Outcomes
                     Alternative Specification with Family Structure Indicator Variables

                                                    High School
                         Years of Schooling           Graduate         College Attendance      College Graduate
                           OLS        OLS        Probit     Probit      Probit     Probit      Probit      Probit
        Variable           (A)         (B)         (A)        (B)         (A)         (B)        (A)         (B)
Intercept                  13.358*      6.619*      1.469*     -1.891      -0.093     -5.845*    -0.666*     -5.222*
                            (0.108)    (1.340)     (0.087)    (1.193)     (0.070)     (1.037)    (0.079)     (1.409)
Disadvantaged              -0.605*      -0.053    -0.296~      -0.014     -0.314*       0.057    -0.387*      -0.041
    Oversample              (0.148)    (0.129)     (0.117)    (0.119)     (0.095)     (0.097)    (0.118)     (0.122)
Female                       0.282*     0.311*       0.069      0.104      0.299*      0.357*      0.131       0.138
                            (0.083)    (0.075)     (0.078)    (0.080)     (0.060)     (0.064)    (0.072)     (0.078)
African-American             -0.171     0.460*       0.027     0.419*      -0.086      0.369*    -0.352*       0.058
                            (0.151)    (0.140)     (0.123)    (0.129)     (0.099)     (0.104)    (0.122)     (0.133)
Hispanic                     -0.217      0.444      -0.247      0.143       0.076      0.533*     -0.224       0.093
                            (0.367)    (0.328)     (0.249)    (0.266)     (0.195)     (0.195)    (0.317)     (0.318)
Birth Order                             -0.016                 -0.027                  -0.012                  0.003
                                       (0.021)                (0.020)                 (0.019)                (0.026)
Number of Siblings                     -0.163*                -0.092*                 -0.122*                -0.152*
                                       (0.034)                (0.034)                 (0.030)                (0.040)
Religion                                -0.551                 -0.488                  -0.368                 -0.588
                                       (0.470)                (0.319)                 (0.312)                (0.385)
Family Income 1979                      0.649*                 0.355*                  0.555*                 0.477*
                                       (0.119)                (0.110)                 (0.094)                (0.127)
Mother High School                      0.322*                 0.353*                   0.143                  0.036
    Graduate                           (0.105)                (0.105)                 (0.085)                (0.111)
Mother Some College                     1.217*                 0.967*                  0.814*                 0.500*
                                       (0.180)                (0.252)                 (0.135)                (0.163)
Mother's Schooling                       0.057                  0.097                   0.036                  0.171
  Missing                              (0.270)                (0.278)                 (0.281)                (0.274)
Father High School                      0.352*                 0.251~                  0.301*                  0.174
    Graduate                           (0.124)                (0.127)                 (0.095)                (0.126)
Father Some College                     0.952*                  0.359                  0.660*                 0.578*
                                       (0.176)                (0.210)                 (0.120)                (0.150)
Father's Schooling                      0.498*                  0.193                  0.401*                  0.323
   Missing                             (0.173)                (0.165)                 (0.150)                (0.229)
Single Parent = 1          -0.673*     -0.511*     -0.588*    -0.529*     -0.406*    -0.311~     -0.539*     -0.492*
                            (0.144)    (0.166)     (0.132)    (0.168)     (0.109)     (0.138)    (0.152)     (0.187)
Blended Family = 1         -0.426*      -0.186     -0.353*    -0.326*      -0.160       0.017    -0.372*    -0.238~
                            (0.128)    (0.114)     (0.108)    (0.109)     (0.085)     (0.087)    (0.108)     (0.112)
No Parents = 1             -1.063*    -0.577~      -0.918*    -0.720*     -0.495*      -0.142   -0.794~       -0.579
                            (0.255)    (0.243)     (0.215)    (0.223)     (0.178)     (0.192)    (0.324)     (0.345)
Sample Size                    1980       1980        1980       1980        1980        1980       1980        1980
Adjusted R-Squared            0.091      0.256       0.058      0.133       0.045       0.162      0.098       0.203
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared.




                                                     - 44 -
                                      Table B.3
                  Tests of Mean Differences in NLSY Sibling Sample

           Test: Mean Outcome Half-Siblings in Stable Blended Families
                        v. Siblings in Traditional Families
                                  Mean          Mean
                                   Half-      Traditional
Outcome                          Siblings      Families Test Statistic P-value
Years of Schooling                   12.318        13.125       5.255      0.000
High School Graduate                   0.786         0.879      2.779      0.006
College Attendance                     0.292         0.456      4.327      0.000
College Graduation                     0.026         0.150      8.645      0.000
Sample Size                              154         3263

                   Test: Mean Outcome in Traditional families v.
                  Joint Biological in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                     Mean         Mean
Outcome                              Joint     Traditional Test Statistic       P-value
                                 Biological
Years of Schooling                     12.479       13.125         3.225             0.002
High School Graduate                     0.822        0.879        1.262             0.211
College Attendance                       0.315        0.456        2.537             0.013
College Graduation                       0.041        0.150        4.479             0.000
Sample Size                                 73        3263

                     Test: Mean Outcome Joint Biological v.
                    Stepchild in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                   Mean        Mean
Outcome                            Joint     Stepchild Test Statistic           P-value
                                Biological
Years of Schooling                   12.479       12.173       1.042                 0.299
High School Graduate                   0.822       0.753       1.043                 0.299
College Attendance                     0.315       0.272       0.588                 0.558
College Graduation                     0.041       0.012       1.087                 0.280
Sample Size                               73          81

Notes: Traditional defined as observed in the survey as always living with both biological
parents. Stepchild defined as ever livi ng with a stepparent. Numbers in Bold are statistically
significant.




                                             - 45 -
                                         Table B.4
                     Tests of Mean Differences in PSID Sibling Sample

           Test: Mean Outcome Half-Siblings in Stable Blended Families
                        v. Siblings in Traditional Families
                                  Mean          Mean
                                   Half-      Traditional
Outcome                          Siblings      Families Test Statistic P-value
Years of Schooling                   12.522        13.150       3.513      0.001
High School Graduate                   0.838         0.910      2.002      0.048
College Attendance                     0.360         0.456      1.973      0.051
College Graduation                     0.090         0.196      3.522      0.001
Sample Size                              111         1038

                   Test: Mean Outcome in Traditional families v.
                  Joint Biological in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                     Mean         Mean
Outcome                              Joint     Traditional Test Statistic                     P-value
                                 Biological
Years of Schooling                     12.549       13.150         2.773                            0.007
High School Graduate                     0.902        0.910        0.197                            0.845
College Attendance                       0.373        0.456        1.186                            0.241
College Graduation                       0.039        0.196        5.197                            0.000
Sample Size                                 51        1038

                     Test: Mean Outcome Joint Biological v.
                    Stepchild in Stable Blended Family Sample
                                   Mean        Mean
Outcome                            Joint     Stepchild Test Statistic                         P-value
                                Biological
Years of Schooling                   12.549       12.500       0.148                                0.883
High School Graduate                   0.902       0.783       1.741                                0.085
College Attendance                     0.373       0.350       0.244                                0.808
College Graduation                     0.039       0.133      -1.807                                0.074
Sample Size                               60          51


Notes: Traditional defined as observed in the survey as always living with both biological parents. Stepchild
defined as ever living with a stepparent. Numbers in Bold are statistically significant.




                                                     - 46 -
                                       Table B.5
                        NLSY Blended Family Sample Estimates
              of the Effect of Family Structure on Educational Outcomes

                                                  High School
                          Years of Schooling        Graduate         College Attendance
                            OLS        OLS      Probit     Probit      Probit     Probit
        Variable             (A)        (B)      (A)         (B)        (A)        (B)
Intercept                   11.918*    10.704*    0.793*       0.074    -0.910*    -1.314*
                             (0.378)    (0.758)  (0.294)     (0.597)    (0.283)    (0.444)
Disadvantaged                  0.119      0.095   -0.023       0.038      0.130      0.122
    Oversample               (0.344)    (0.353)  (0.351)     (0.321)    (0.320)    (0.331)
Female                         0.423      0.331    0.167       0.090     0.488~     0.561~
                             (0.285)    (0.296)  (0.206)     (0.243)    (0.221)    (0.238)
African-American               0.593      0.681    0.262       0.450      0.247      0.379
                             (0.424)    (0.372)  (0.392)     (0.387)    (0.353)    (0.374)
Hispanic                       0.403      0.445   -0.375      -0.431      0.169      0.258
                             (0.717)    (0.733)  (0.489)     (0.485)    (0.519)    (0.533)
Birth Order                               0.138                0.180                 0.076
                                        (0.106)              (0.098)               (0.073)
Number of Siblings                       -0.057               -0.061                -0.046
                                        (0.084)              (0.080)               (0.075)
Religion                                  0.738                0.309
                                        (0.528)              (0.477)
Mother High School                       -0.160               -0.071                 0.019
    Graduate                            (0.390)              (0.315)               (0.325)
Mother Some College                       0.941                0.141                1.230*
                                        (0.561)              (0.448)               (0.426)
Mother's Schooling                       -0.089               -0.364                 0.625
  Missing                               (0.792)              (0.637)               (0.563)
Father High School                        0.594                0.366                 0.266
    Graduate                            (0.389)              (0.360)               (0.285)
Father Some                             1.348~                                       0.803
    College                             (0.563)                                    (0.416)
Father's Schooling                        0.069               -0.326                -0.026
   Missing                              (0.388)              (0.336)               (0.370)
Proportion in                 -0.665     -0.602   -0.406      -0.350     -0.325     -0.377
    Non-intact Family        (0.364)    (0.386)  (0.231)     (0.272)    (0.261)    (0.306)
Sample Size                      154        154      154         139        154        143
Adjusted R-Squared              0.06      0.165    0.037       0.111      0.045      0.123
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared. Some variables and observations are omitted from Model (B) because their
inclusion predicts the outcome perfectly.




                                                    - 47 -
                                       Table B.6
                        PSID Blended Family Sample Estimates
              of the Effect of Family Structure on Educational Outcomes

                                                  High School
                        Years of Schooling          Graduate        College Attendance
                         OLS        OLS         Probit    Probit     Probit     Probit
       Variable            (A)       (B)         (A)        (B)        (A)        (B)
Intercept                 12.371*   12.278*       1.419*    1.213~    -0.809*    -1.059~
                           (0.391)   (0.661)     (0.389)    (0.592)    (0.304)    (0.541)
Disadvantaged                0.024     0.203      -0.396     -0.258      0.332      0.470
   Oversample              (0.459)   (0.409)     (0.397)    (0.403)    (0.290)    (0.263)
Female                       0.296     0.362      -0.142     -0.051      0.443      0.456
                           (0.379)   (0.389)     (0.315)    (0.302)    (0.277)    (0.282)
African-American            -0.015     0.216       0.293      0.259     -0.073     -0.009
                           (0.491)   (0.549)     (0.400)    (0.428)    (0.292)    (0.321)
Hispanic

Birth Order                             0.066                  0.011                 0.037
                                      (0.114)                (0.085)               (0.065)
Number of Siblings                     -0.242                 -0.066                -0.081
                                      (0.199)                (0.148)               (0.125)
Religion

Mother High School                    0.477~                 0.671~                  0.147
  Graduate                            (0.378)                (0.342)               (0.280)
Mother Some College

Mother's Schooling                        0.910                                       0.610
   Missing                              (0.689)                                     (0.441)
Father High School                        0.815                0.269                 0.669*
    Graduate                            (0.430)              (0.414)                (0.239)
Father Some                               0.341               -0.354                  0.243
    College                             (1.001)              (0.715)                (0.683)
Father's Schooling
   Missing
Proportion in                -0.041       0.117    -0.405     -0.353       0.032      0.122
    Non-intact Family       (0.419)     (0.492)   (0.333)    (0.398)     (0.301)    (0.348)
Sample Size                     111         111       111        109         111        111
Adjusted R-Squared            0.007       0.089     0.034      0.092       0.027      0.068
Notes: Robust standard errors clustered by family in parentheses. p< .05 = ~ and p< .01 = *. R-Squared for
probit is a pseudo-R-squared. Some variables and observations are omitted from Model (B) because their
inclusion predicts the outcome perfectly.




                                                    - 48 -
