                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       COLLECTIVE INVESTMENT DECISION MAKING
                        WITH HETEROGENEOUS TIME PREFERENCES

                                           Christian Gollier
                                          Richard Zeckhauser

                                          Working Paper 9629
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9629


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


©2003 by Christian Gollier and Richard Zeckhauser. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.
Collective Investment Decision Making with Heterogeneous Time Preferences
Christian Gollier and Richard Zeckhauser
NBER Working Paper No. 9629
April 2003
JEL No. H43, E43, E21, E40

                                            ABSTRACT


We examine the investment decision problem of a group whose members have heterogeneous time
preferences. In particular, they have different discount factors for utility, possibly not exponential.

We characterize the properties of efficient allocations of resources and of shadow prices that would
decentralize such allocations. We show in particular that the term structure of interest rates is
decreasing when all members have DARA preferences. Heterogeneous groups should not use

exponential discounting for their collective investment decisions even if all agents discount
exponentially. We also exhibit conditions that lead the representative agent to have a rate of
impatience that decreases with GDP per capita.



Christian Gollier                              Richard Zeckhauser
University of Toulouse                         John F. Kennedy School of Government
golllier@cict.fr                               Harvard University
                                               79 JFK Street
                                               Cambridge, MA 02138
                                               and NBER
                                               richard_zeckhauser@harvard.edu
1    Introduction
Saving and investment decisions are among the most important choices of
economic agents. They strongly aﬀect the lifetime welfares of individuals
and the prosperity of nations. Such decisions reflect time preferences. Most
people prefer an immediate utility reward to the same reward experienced
later. This pure preference for the present, or impatience, has long been
recognized by economists and psychologists. The classical model introduced
by Samuelson (1937) takes this into account by assuming that consumers
maximize the discounted value of the flow of their utility, utilizing an expo-
nentially decreasing discount factor, i.e., with a constant rate of impatience.
However, the intensity of impatience is a subject that is little understood
and intensely debated.
    Frederick, Loewenstein and O’Donoghue (2002) survey several attempts
to estimate individuals’ discount rates. Two noteworthy findings emerge.
First, high discount rates predominate. For example, Warner and Pleeter
(2001) study actual financial decisions made by U.S. military servicemen, and
find an estimated mean discount rate of 17.5% per year. Second, and more
important, there is a spectacular variation across studies and within studies
across individuals, with no convergence toward an agreed-upon or unique
rate of impatience. In their study, Warner and Pleeter (2001) found that
individual discount rates vary between 0% and 70% per year. Barsky, Juster,
Kimball and Shapiro (1997) estimated a negative mean rate of impatience by
using survey responses in the Health and Retirement Study. In the literature
more generally, rates range from −6% to 55700%.
    These variations could stem in part from diﬀerences in the time horizon
considered in the various experiments and field studies. There is no rea-
son to believe that consumers use the same discount rate per period when
discounting utility over diﬀerent time horizons. Strotz (1956) was the first
economist to discuss horizon-dependent discount rates. Empirical evidence
suggests that agents discount future happiness at a rate that declines with
the time at which the happiness will be experienced. Most typically, peo-
ple use ”hyperbolic discounting”, i.e., declining discount rate with respect
to time-horizon, rather than exponential discounting. This leads to a time
inconsistency problem that emerged recently as a ”hot” topic in our profes-




                                      2
sion.1
    This paper follows another path to explain the wide range of estimates
for individual discount rates. There is no reason to believe that diﬀerent
consumers have identical time preferences for utility streams. Let us assume
that sizeable disparities in discount rates arise because individuals strongly
diﬀer in their attitude towards time. Day-to-day evidence, say in pursuing
education or bad habits, is compatible with heterogeneous time preferences.
Such heterogeneity raises several questions that we explore in this paper.
    When individuals use diﬀerent rates of impatience to discount their fu-
ture utility, it is not clear a priori which discount rate should be used, for
example, for public investments. This raises the more general question of the
aggregation of preferences in a group. We consider a general model where
each agent maximizes a time additive lifetime utility. The discount rate is
heterogenous in the population and it may depend upon either the time of re-
ceipt (hyperbolic discounting) or on current consumption. Agents may also
have diﬀerent instantaneous utility functions. We assume that the group
is able to allocate consumption within the group in a Pareto-eﬃcient way.
We first show that the behaviour of the group towards time can be dupli-
cated by a representative agent whose lifetime utility functional is also time
additive. Time additivity is essential to define a concept of impatience. Ru-
binstein (1974) also examined the question of aggregating heterogenous rates
of impatience, but he derives a solution only for exponential and logarithmic
utility function in a two-period model.
    One of the key findings of this paper is that if individuals have hetero-
geneous constant rates of impatience, the representative agent will not in
general use a constant rate to discount the future. More precisely, we show
that if individuals have decreasing absolute risk aversion (DARA), as would
seem reasonable, then the representative agent has a declining discount rate.
In short, heterogeneous individual exponential discounting yields collective
hyperbolic discounting. Under some realistic calibrations of the economy,
the collective discount factor duplicates either the one discussed by Loewen-
stein and Prelec (1992), or its simplified ”quasi-hyperbolic” version (Laibson
(1997)).
    To get to this result, we need to examine how agents should share re-
sources intertemporally in an exchange economy with no investment oppor-
  1
    See for example Laibson (1997), Carrillo and Mariotti (2000), Benabou and Tirole
(2000) and O’Donoghue and Rabin (2001).


                                         3
tunities, what might be labeled the multiple-cakes problem. Obviously, it is
Pareto-eﬃcient for the most impatient members to receive a larger share of
the period’s cake early in life; that share will be decreasing with time. This
allocation is a best compromise between individual relative impatience and
the agents’ willingness to smooth consumption over time. This trait of indi-
vidual preferences is measured by the concavity of their utility function. As
shown by Wilson (1968), it is best to use the notion of (absolute) tolerance
to consumption fluctuations over time. If u(.) denotes the utility function of
an agent, her tolerance to fluctuations is measured by T (.) = −u0 (.)/u00 (.). It
is Pareto-eﬃcient to request that more tolerant agents bear a larger share of
fluctuations of aggregate incomes. Extending a well-known result by Wilson,
we show that the group’s tolerance to fluctuations in the per-capita income
is the unweighted mean of its members’ tolerance.
    Turning to pure time preferences, we show that the rate of impatience
of the representative agent equals a weighted mean of individual rates of
impatience. These weights are proportional to the individual tolerances to
consumption fluctuations. Intuitively, agents with a very low tolerance want
to smooth their consumption independent of their degree of impatience. The
group will therefore not take account of these agents when determining their
collective degree of impatience. Except for exponential utility functions, the
weights in computing the weighted mean of individual discount rates will
fluctuate over time. When T increases with wealth (DARA), those members
with a smaller discount rate will see their weight increasing in tandem with
time in parallel to their level of consumption. Therefore, we obtain that the
rate of impatience of the representative agent decreases with time .
    The fact that the representative agent uses hyperbolic discount factors
in no way implies that the group faces a time consistency problem. Suppose
that each individual in the group discounts future utility in an exponential
way. As is well-known, such individuals will not want to modify their port-
folio of future credit/saving contracts as time moves forward. In short, the
allocation of future consumption will still be Pareto-eﬃcient tomorrow. This
future allocation will correspond to another set of Pareto weights. A time in-
consistency problem arises only if some members in the group are themselves
time inconsistent.
    In the classical model of intertemporal choices, it is assumed that the rate
of impatience is independent of wealth. We show by contrast that, even if
individual rates of impatience are independent of consumption, the rate of
impatience that should be used by the social planner is generally not indepen-

                                        4
dent of the group’s per capita consumption. We provide a suﬃcient condition
that guarantees that more developed economies should use a smaller rate of
impatience.
    As might be expected, the eﬃcient allocations of resources over time can
be acheived through a price mechanism. Thus we examine the characteristics
of competitive prices that decentralize such Pareto-eﬃcient allocations of re-
sources. For the intertemporal choices, they are given by the term structure
of interest rates. Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985a,b) were the first to examine
this question using a consumption-based approach. Whether we should use
a decreasing rate to discount cash-flows occurring in the far distant future
received intense debate. Significant long-term risks, such as global warming,
are a new ingredient in the discussion, and beyond the scope of this anal-
ysis. In a risk free economy with no growth, the competitive interest rate
equals the rate of impatience of the representative agent. Thus, our results
sustain the recommendation to use a decreasing rate of interest to discount
cash-flows occurring in a more distant future. The theoretical basis for this
recommendation strongly diﬀers from those developed earlier by Weitzman
(2001) and Gollier (2002a,b).


2       Assumptions on individual preferences
We consider an economy or a group of heterogeneous agents indexed by θ in
a type set Θ.2 Types are distributed according to cumulative distribution
function H : Θ → [0, 1]. We assume that the lifetime utility U(θ) of consumer
θ is time-additive.3 This excludes habit formation and anticipatory feelings.
The lifetime utility of agent θ is evaluated at date 0 by
                                   Z ∞
                           U(θ) =       u(c(t), t, θ)dt,                  (1)
                                             0
    2
     The duration of an agent’s lifetime may be finite or infinite. If it is finite, u0 is uniformly
equal to zero after dead.
   3
     Following Koopmans (1960), time additivity can be derived from the independence
axiom stating that if two intertemporal prospects share a common outcome at a given
date, then preference between them is determined solely by the remaining outcomes that
diﬀer.




                                                 5
where c(.) is the consumption plan of the agent, and u(c, t, θ) is the discounted
felicity extracted by agent of type θ consuming c at time t. We assume that
                                         ∂u
                              u0 (c, t, θ) =(c, t, θ)
                                         ∂c
is continuously diﬀerentiable in (c, t), and is nonincreasing in c. If u0 is
decreasing in t, consumers are impatient, i.e., at any given consumption
level they value future marginal utility less than current marginal utility.
We hereafter redefine the two well-known indexes of sensitivity of marginal
utility either with respect to t and with respect to c.
    The instantaneous rate of pure time preference of agent θ consuming c at
time t equals
                                                       ∂u  0
                                 ∂ ln u0 (c, t, θ)         (c, t, θ)
                  δ(c, t, θ) = −                   = − ∂t0           .        (2)
                                       ∂t              u (c, t, θ)
It measures the rate at which marginal utility decreases with time with con-
sumption held constant. This definition can be rewritten as
                                                " Z 0              #
                                                    t
               u0 (c, t0 , θ) = u0 (c, t, θ) exp −    δ(c, τ , θ)dτ .
                                                    t

Impatient people have a positive δ. In the special case of a multiplicatively
separable felicity function u(c, t, θ) = β(t, θ)u(c, θ), δ is independent of c. If
we add the assumption of exponential discounting (β(t, θ) = exp(−δ(θ)t)), δ
is also independent of t. In the case of hyperbolic discounting, δ is indepen-
dent of c, but is decreasing in t. In the face of the consistency problem that
a non constant δ raises, we assume at this stage that agents can commit on
their future consumption plan at date t = 0.
    In a parallel way, one can define the absolute aversion to consumption
fluctuations over time through the following equation:
                                   ∂ ln u0 (c, t, θ)   u00 (c, t, θ)
                  A(c, t, θ) = −                     =− 0            .        (3)
                                         ∂c            u (c, t, θ)
Thus A measures the rate at which marginal utility decreases with consump-
tion at a given time. In the risk context, it corresponds to the Arrow-Pratt
index of the concavity of u with respect to c. As stated by Pratt (1964), in
a static framework it satisfies:
                                                " Z 0             #
                                                    c
               u0 (c0 , t, θ) = u0 (c, t, θ) exp −    A(y, t, θ)dy .
                                                    c


                                           6
Under our assumptions, A is nonnegative. Again, under the condition of a
multiplicatively separable felicity function, A would be independent of t. If
we assume as well exponential felicity (u(c, θ) = − exp(−a(θ)c)), A would
also be independent of c. But it is usually assumed that A is decreasing in
c, i.e., DARA applies.
     A and δ are two psychological traits of consumers that are essential to
understand their saving and investment behavior. Suppose that agent θ has
the opportunity to invest in various projects indexed by j ∈ J. Project j
yields a per-capita flow of incomes ζ j (.) : R+ → R. The decision problem of
the agent θ is to select the project that maximizes her lifetime utility:
                              Z ∞
                       max         u(c(t) + ζ j (t), t, θ)dt,             (4)
                           j∈J      0

Consider in particular a marginal investment project that costs dx at time t
and that yields a benefit erdt dx at time t + dt.4 Parameter r is the return of
this investment project. Assuming that the consumption path is continuously
diﬀerentiable, the lifetime utility is unaﬀected by this investment if
                                                                   h                    0
                                                                                               i
−u0 (c(t), t, θ)+erdt u0 (c(t)+c0 (t)dt, t+dt, θ) = u0 (c(t), t, θ) −1 + erdt e−δdt e−Ac (t)dt

is zero. This is equivalent to r being equal to
                                                                ∂c
                         r(c, t, θ) = δ(c, t, θ) + A(c, t, θ)      .                    (5)
                                                                ∂t
We say that r(c, ., θ) is the term structure of (forward) interest rates that
sustains the consumption profile c(.) of agent θ. If all agents are identical, r
characterizes the competitive forward interest rates, where c(t) is consump-
tion per capita at time t. Reversing the argument, we can write that
                            ∂c
                               = T (c, t, θ) [r − δ(c, t, θ)] ,                         (6)
                            ∂t
where function T denotes the absolute tolerance to consumption fluctuations,
which is the inverse of the absolute aversion to these fluctuations: T (c, t, θ) =
[A(c, t, θ)]−1 = −u0 (c, t, θ)/u00 (c, t, θ). We see that if r is the equilibrium risk
   4
     Obviously, these flows occur over a period of time of measure 0, with no eﬀect on U.
In reality, costs and benefits are incurred during respectively period [t, t + ε] and period
[t + dt, t + dt + ε].

                                             7
free rate, an agent consuming c at time t should have a locally increasing
consumption profile if δ(c, t, θ) is less than r, and vice versa. This is the
Keynes-Ramsey rule extended to non-separable felcity functions.
    Condition (5) usefully extends the well-known property of optimal con-
sumption when preferences exhibit exponential discounting. It shows the
relationship between the psychological discount factor δ and the financial
discount rate r appropriately employed to discount monetary cash flows.
The shadow price of time, ρ, is the sum of two terms. The first one is δ, the
rate of impatience of the agent. The second term comes from the preference
for consumption smoothing exprssed by the concavity of u with respect to c.
When large consumption growth is expected, a large interest rate is required
to induce agents to save. Otherwise, they would want to borrow money to-
day to smooth the expected increase in their future incomes. Function A
measures the intensity of preference for consumption smoothing. For a given
growth rate of consumption, the larger is A, the larger the interest rate re-
quired to sustain this growth rate, i.e., to fight the propensity to consume
immediately.


3    Eﬃcient cake sharing with heterogeneous
     preferences
Characterizing the optimal investment decision of a group of heterogeneous
agents requires understanding how the group will share the cash flows gener-
ated by any such investment, namely how it divides the multiple cakes that
become available, one per period. Suppose that agents of type θ are endowed
with a flow z(., θ) : R+ → R of the single consumption good. We assume
that endowments are risk free. An allocation is characterized by a set of
consumption profiles C(., .) : R+ × Θ → R, where c(t, θ) is the consumption
of agent θ at time t. Such an allocation is feasible if at each instant of time
average consumption equals average income:

                          θ) = z(t) =def Ez(t, e
                    EC(t, e                    θ)      ∀t,                 (7)
                 R
where Ef (e θ) = Θ f (θ)dH(θ) is the mean of f (e
                                                θ) with respect to the type
distribution H.
    The only restriction that we impose on the group’s sharing of the cakes
is that it be Pareto-eﬃcient. An allocation C(., .) is Pareto-eﬃcient if it is

                                      8
feasible and there is no other feasible allocation that raises the lifetime utility
of at least one type without reducing the lifetime utility of the other types.
To any such eﬃcient allocation, there exists a weight function λ(.) : Θ → R+
such that it is the solution of the following social planner’s program:
                               ·      Z ∞                     ¸
         SW F (λ) = max E λ(θ)     e              e      e
                                           u(C(t, θ), t, θ)dt   s.t. (7).       (8)
                         C(.,.)            0

In his classic analysis of the static syndicate problem, Wilson (1968) con-
sidered a decision problem that is similar to (8). He examined a decision
under uncertainty for expected-utility (EU) maximizers with heterogeneous
utility functions, but homogeneous beliefs. Except for this restriction, the ad-
ditivity property made in the EU model under static uncertainty and in the
time-additive model (1) under dynamic certainty makes these two problems
equivalent. Wilson (1968) proved that the optimal collective decision policy
is isomorphic to the optimal decision policy of a representative agent who
also maximizes the expected value of a function of consumption per capita in
the group. The EU functional of the representative agent is additively sep-
arable with respect to the states of nature. Wilson’s result can be extended
to a dynamic framework, Constantinides (1982) has shown. The existence of
a representative agent with such simple aggregative properties has become
a cornerstone of the theories of finance and macroeconomics. In Wilson’s
model, the probability weights that are used to measure individual expected
utilities are the same for all individuals given that beliefs are homogeneous.5
The parallel assumption for intertemporal choices under certainty is that
agents use the same discounting function to measure their lifetime utility.
    The following Proposition shows that the existence of a representative
agent with a time separable lifetime utility does not require any restriction
on time preference beyond the time separability of U(θ) for all θ.
Proposition 1 (Representative Agent) To any positive weight function λ(.),
there exists a representative
                  R∞          agent with a time-additive felicity function v such
that SW F (λ) = 0 v(z(t), t)dt. Function v is defined by
                          h                        i
        v(z, t) = max E λ(e   θ)u(c(z, t, e
                                          θ), t, e
                                                 θ)  s.t. Ec(z, t, e
                                                                   θ) = z.    (9)
                    c(z,t,.)

The associated eﬃcient allocation is characterized by C(t, θ) = c(z(t), t, θ)
for all t and θ.
  5
      Leland (1980) reconsidered Wilson’s model when agents have heterogeneous beliefs.

                                               9
   Proof: This is a direct consequence of the additivity of SW F (λ) with
respect to types and time, which implies that
        ·     Z ∞                   ¸ Z ∞ h                      i
      E λ(θ)e            e      e
                  u(C(t, θ), t, θ)dt =     E λ(e
                                               θ)u(C(t, e
                                                        θ), t, e
                                                               θ) dt.¥
                  0                          0

    By this Proposition, we decompose the multiperiod maximization pro-
gram (8) into a sequence of static maximization programs (9). By imposing
at each time t the feasible allocation of cake z(t) that maximizes the weighted
sum of instananeous felicities, the social planner obtains an ex ante allocation
plan that maximizes the weighted sum of the members’ lifetime utilities. The
time additivity of individual preference functionals is, of course, essential to
get this result.
    Proposition 1 disentangles the two impacts that time has on the eﬃcient
sharing of the cake and on the felicity of the representative agent. First,
it has a direct eﬀect coming from the dependence of individual members’
felicities on time. Second, it plays a role because income per capita, z(t),
is a function of time. It is useful to separate these two eﬀects by defining
C(t, θ) = c(z(t), t, θ). In the following, we examine the properties of functions
v(., .) and c(., ., θ).
    Because of the concavity of u with respect to its first argument, the
solution to program (9) is unique. Its first-order condition is written as
                        λ(θ)u0 (c(z, t, θ), t, θ) = ψ(z, t),                (10)
for all (z, t) and θ, where ψ is the Lagrange multiplier of the feasibility con-
straint associated with time t and average endowment z. By the envelope
theorem, the marginal value of wealth at time t is the Lagrange multiplier
associated with time t. Thus we have that
                                ∂v
                                   (z, t) = ψ(z, t),                        (11)
                                ∂z
for all (z, t).


4      The group’s tolerance to aggregate fluctu-
       ations
We now characterize the group’s tolerance to aggregate fluctuations in earn-
ings. To do so, we need to determine how these fluctuations will be allocated

                                        10
among the diﬀerent agents in the group. Consider a marginal increase in
the per capita income z. At time t with average consumption z, agent θ0 s
                                                              ∂c
sensitivity of consumption to such an increase is given by ∂z    (z, t, θ). This is
referred to the marginal propensity to consume (MPC). It tells us how fluc-
tuations in z get transferred to fluctuations in individual consumption levels.
Given the feasibility constraint Ec(z, t, e
                                          θ) = z, it must be that, for all (z, t),
                                     ∂c
                                 E      (z, t, e
                                               θ) = 1.                        (12)
                                     ∂z
The fluctuation of average consumption must equal the fluctuation of average
earnings in the group. The following Proposition characterizes the MPC.

Proposition 2 (Cake-Sharing) The marginal propensity to consume of agent
θ at time t when the average endowment is z, is proportional to this agent’s
tolerance to consumption fluctuations evaluated at c(z, t, θ) :

                        ∂c             T (c(z, t, θ), t, θ)
                           (z, t, θ) =                       .                (13)
                        ∂z             ET (c(z, t, e
                                                   θ), t, e
                                                          θ)

    Proof: Fully diﬀerentiating first-order condition (10) with respect to z
yields
                                           ∂c           ∂ψ
                 λ(θ)u00 (c(z, t, θ), t, θ) (z, t, θ) =    (z, t).
                                           ∂z           ∂z
Eliminating λ(θ) by using (10) again, we rewrite the above condition as
                                     ∂ψ
                    ∂c                  (z, t)
                       (z, t, θ) = − ∂z        T (c(z, t, θ), t, θ).          (14)
                    ∂z               ψ(z, t)
Moreover, combining this result with condition (12) implies that
                          ∂ψ
                             (z, t)
                        − ∂z        ET (c(z, t, e
                                                θ), t, e
                                                       θ) = 1.                (15)
                          ψ(z, t)
Eliminating the ratio in (14) and (15) yields the result.¥
    The cake-sharing Proposition states that more tolerant agents have larger
marginal propensities to consume. It is intuitively appealing that people who
are more tolerant to consumption fluctuations should be allocated a larger
share of aggregate fluctuations. By contrast, agents who strongly dislike
fluctuations, i.e., those with a small T , enjoy an eﬃcient consumption plan

                                          11
that is relatively insensitive to aggregate fluctuations. Proposition 2 also
shows that all agents have a nonnegative marginal propensity to consume
out of aggregate incomes. All consumption levels are procyclical, but some
are more procyclical than others.
    Knowing how the group allocates fluctuations in aggregate earnings to
diﬀerent individuals determines the group’s attitude towards fluctuations in
the size of the cake. The group’s tolerance to fluctuations in average earnings
is given by
                                              ∂v
                                                 (z, t)
                            Tv (z, t) =def − ∂∂z
                                               2v        .                 (16)
                                             ∂z 2
                                                  (z, t)
When the per capita endowment z(.) is increasing in t, an increase in Tv
will increase the group’s propensity to invest in a normal project, i.e., a
project that yields an increasing cash-flow over time. Equation (15) yields
the following result.

Proposition 3 (Tolerance to Consumption Fluctuations) The group’s ab-
solute tolerance to consumption fluctuations is the mean of its members’
tolerances:
                                          c, t, e
                          Tv (z, t) = ET (e     θ).                 (17)

    The group’s tolerance to fluctuations of per capita earnings equals the
mean of its members’ tolerances to consumption fluctuations. This observa-
tion has several consequences. For example, because this equation implies
that
                                                h                          i
                     ·                       ¸ E T 0 (e
                                                      c, t, e
                                                            θ)T   (e
                                                                   c, t, e
                                                                         θ)
       ∂Tv                         ∂c
           (z, t) = E T 0 (e     θ) (z, t, e
                           c, t, e         θ) =                              ,
        ∂z                         ∂z                ET (e  c, t, e
                                                                  θ)

we conclude that DARA is inherited by v from u. In other words, if all
members have a tolerance that increases in c, then the group has a tolerance
that increases with z. This extends a result obtained by Carroll and Kimball
(1996) to the group context. Notice that v being DARA implies that the
group as a whole is ready to pay more to smooth consumption when it is
poor than when it is wealthy.




                                      12
5    The group’s rate of impatience and the yield
     curve
In the classic case with homogenous exponential discount factors, individuals’
consumption levels vary only with fluctuations in the aggregate endowment
z(.). When discount rates are heterogenous, time enters as an additional
factor. We examine the partial derivative of individual consumption levels
with respect to time: ∂c/∂t. When the average income z remains constant
over time, it is intuitive that impatient people will trade later consumption
for earlier consumption with those who are more patient. The impatient ones
will have a decreasing consumption path, and vice versa.
    Again, given the feasibility constraint, it must be the case that
                                      ∂c
                                  E      (z, t, e
                                                θ) = 0.                  (18)
                                      ∂t
When the average income remains constant over time, increases in consump-
tion by some members of the group must be compensated by equivalent
reductions in consumption by others. Fully diﬀerentiating the first-order
condition (10) yields

                          ∂u0                              ∂c ∂ψ
                   λ(θ)       (c, t, θ) + λ(θ)u00 (c, t, θ) =    .
                          ∂t                               ∂t ∂t
Using (2), (3) and (10) again to eliminate the Lagrange multiplier λ, we can
rewrite the above equality as
                                                           ∂ψ
                                                      ∂c
                          −δ(c, t, θ) − A(c, t, θ)       = ∂t ,
                                                      ∂t   ψ
or equivalently,                            "                   #
                                                ∂ψ
                      ∂c                        ∂t
                         = −T (c, t, θ)              + δ(c, t, θ) .      (19)
                      ∂t                        ψ
Replacing ∂c/∂t in (18) by its expression from (19) yields
                                 h                       i
                       ∂ψ      E δ(ec, t, e
                                          θ)T (e c, t, e
                                                       θ)
                       ∂t            h              i
                          =−                               ,             (20)
                       ψ           E T (e  c, t, e
                                                 θ)


                                           13
where ec = c(z, t, e
                   θ). The next proposition characterizes the time profile of
individual consumption plans when people have heterogenous discount rates.
It flows from properties (19) and (20).

Proposition 4 (Individual Consumption Path) The increase in consump-
tion through time of agent θ is decreasing in the agent’s discount rate δ(θ):

            ∂c
               (z, t, θ) = T (c(z, t, θ), t, θ) [r(z, t) − δ(c(z, t, θ), t, θ)] ,   (21)
            ∂t
with                                   h                     i
                                      E δ(e     e
                                          c, t, θ)T (e     e
                                                     c, t, θ)
                          r(z, t) =                              .                  (22)
                                                 c, t, e
                                             ET (e     θ)

    This result determines when more patient people should substitute cur-
rent consumption for future consumption. In technical terms, it requires
that ∂c/∂t be increasing in δ(θ) when agents have the same tolerance to con-
sumption fluctuations. The following Corollary exhibits the weaker property
of single-crossing.

Corollary 1 Suppose that agents have the same tolerance to consumption
fluctuations: ∂T (c, t, θ)/∂θ ≡ 0. Then, individual consumption profiles sat-
isfy the single-crossing property: ∀(θ, θ0 ) ∈ Θ2 : δ(c, t, θ) > δ(c, t, θ0 ) ∀(c, t)
implies that
                                               ∂c            ∂c
               c(z, t, θ) = c(z, t, θ0 ) =⇒       (z, t, θ) · (z, t, θ0 ).
                                               ∂t            ∂t
    Proof: This is a direct consequence of equation (21).¥
    Equation (21) is reminiscent of property (6) of individual consumption
profiles when the competitive interest rate is r(z, t). In fact, r defined by
equation (22) would define the price of time that would decentralize the
Pareto-eﬃcient allocation c(., ., .) when there is no growth. A term structure
of interest rates satisfying (22) would induce agents to select consumption
profiles that are compatible with the absence of growth. This shadow price
of time is a weighted mean of the individual discount rates. Notice that the
consumption path of agent θ increases locally in t if and only if her rate
of impatience is smaller than the market-determined shadow price of time.
More patient members postpone their consumption to the future in exchange

                                            14
for a positive return on their savings. Because both δ and r are a function
of z and t, eﬃcient consumption profiles need not to be monotone.
    We can now turn to the central aim of this paper, which is to characterize
the aggregation of individual discount rates. Impatience comes from the fact
that, seen from t = 0, the marginal value of an increase in consumption
decreases with the time at which it takes place. One can make impatience
more explicit in the definition of the group’s preferences by defining the
group’s instantaneous rate of impatience as
                                                      2            ∂ψ
                                 ∂ ln ∂v
                                      ∂z
                                         (z, t)     ∂ v
                                                   ∂z∂t
                                                        (z, t)        (z, t)
             δ v (z, t) =def   −                = − ∂v         = − ∂t        .       (23)
                                      ∂t            ∂z
                                                       (z, t)      ψ(z, t)

Combining conditions (23) and (20) yields the following result.

Proposition 5 (Collective Impatience) The instantaneous rate of pure pref-
erence for the present of the representative agent defined by (23) is a weighted
mean of individual members’ instantaneous rates:
                                     h                       i
                                    E δ(e     e
                                        c, t, θ)T (e       e
                                                     c, t, θ)
                       δ v (z, t) =      h              i      .            (24)
                                       E T (e  c, t, e
                                                     θ)

    Not surprisingly, the shadow price of time when there is no growth equals
the psychological discount rate of the representative agent: r(z, t) = δ v (z, t).
In such an environment, a marginal investment incurring a cost at t and
yielding a benefit at t + ∆t would be socially desirable if and only if its net
return would exceed δ v (z(t), t). More generally, when there are aggregate
fluctuations with earning profile z(t), one can reinterpret equation (5) for
the representative agent to determine that such an investment is socially
desirable if its return exceeds
                                                       z 0 (t)
                           ρ(t) = δ v (z(t), t) +                .                   (25)
                                                    Tv (z(t), t)

Function ρ(.) characterizes the term structure of interest rates in such an
economy. The important property (25) extends classical formulas from the
literature on the term structure of interest rates6 to allow for heterogenous
   6
    See for example Cochrane (2001) for a recent evaluation. Earlier analyses can be found
in Hansen and Singleton (1983), and Cox, Ingersoll and Ross (1985a, 1985b).

                                             15
rates of impatience among agents in the economy. As in (5), it decomposes
the interest rate into its two components. The first one is the group’s pure
preference for the present δv , whereas the second comes from the group’s
preference for consumption smoothing as measured by Tv . The next two
sections focus on the first component. That is to say they examine the term
structure of interest rates in a stationary state, when there is no economic
growth.


6     The term structure of the group’s rate of
      impatience
The group’s rate of impatience can be rewritten as
                                      bz,t δ(c(z, t, e
                         δ v (z, t) = E              θ), t, e
                                                            θ),

      bz,t is a ”risk-neutral” expectation operator defined as
where E
                                R
                    bz,t f (e     f (θ)T (c(z, t, θ), t, θ)dH(θ)
                   E        θ) = R                               .            (26)
                                     T (c(z, t, θ), t, θ)dH(θ)

The mean of individual rates of impatience is weighted by the corresponding
individual tolerances to consumption fluctuations. This weighting of the
mean of δ is intuitive. Patient agents will be willing to save strongly early
in life only if they are suﬃciently tolerant to the consumption fluctuations
they will face. To illustrate, consider a group with two agents. Agent 1 has a
high discount rate δ h and is somewhat tolerant to consumption fluctuations.
Agent 2, by contrast, has a lower discount rate δ l , but has a zero tolerance to
consumption fluctuation. Despite his patience, agent 2 will prefer to smooth
his consumption completely . Therefore, agent 1 will bear the entire burden
of aggregate fluctuations. The group’s attitude towards time is therefore
determined entirely by agent 1’s preferences. In particular, the group’s degree
of impatience will be the larger δ h .
    As a direct consequence of the fact that δ v is a weighted mean, it is
bounded below and above by the smallest and largest individual rates of
impatience:

            min δ(c(z, t, θ), t, θ) · δ v (z, t) · max δ(c(z, t, θ), t, θ).
             θ∈Θ                                    θ∈Θ


                                          16
It is important to notice that the weighting function T is a function of both
z and t. This is made explicit in the notation by indexing the expectation
operator Eb by (z, t). Thus, even if δ is independent of z and t, it is generally
not true that δ v is independent of these variables. We now examine the term
structure of the group’s rate of impatience.
    Fully diﬀerentiating condition (24) with respect to t and using condition
(21) yields

           ∂δ v            b 0 )(Eδ)
                                  b − Eδ b 2 T 0 − (Eδ)
                                                    b 2 (ET
                                                          b 0)
                (z, t) = 2(EδT                                                    (27)
           ∂t
                         +Eb ∂δ + E                  b 1 ∂T (δ v − δ),
                                  b ∂δ T (δ v − δ) − E
                             ∂t     ∂c                 T ∂t

where T , δ and their derivatives are evaluated at (c(z, t, e    θ), t, e
                                                                        θ). To simplify
                                                  b
notation, we dropped the index to operator Ez,t . To examine this property,
let us first focus on the traditional model of a group whose members are ex-
ponential discounters. In this benchmark case, individual felicity functions
are multiplicatively separable: u0 (c, t, θ) = β(t, θ)ν 0 (c, θ). This means that δ
is independent of c, and that T is independent of t. The fact that individ-
ual members have exponential discount functions implies furthermore that
β(t, θ) = exp(−d(θ)t), or that δ is also independent of t. This is a situation
where the second line in property (27) vanishes.
    The problem here is to determine whether the group as a whole should use
exponential discounting when all of its members use exponential discounting.
It trivially should when all members have the same discount rate. A more
interesting case arises when individual preferences satisfy the ISHARA prop-
erty. A felicity function has an Harmonic Absolute Risk Aversion (HARA) if
its absolute risk tolerance is linear in consumption. Quadratic, exponential,
power and logarithmic functions are HARA. A set of felicity functions satifies
the Identically Sloped HARA (ISHARA) property if its members’ absolute
risk tolerances are linear in consumption with the same slope: T 0 (c, θ) = 1/γ.
The set of felicity functions that satisfies this diﬀerential equation are as fol-
lows:                                          µ            ¶1−γ
                                                 c − a(θ)
                    u(c, t, θ) = k exp(−δ(θ)t)                    .               (28)
                                                     γ
    These utility functions are defined over the consumption domain such that
γ −1 ( c − a(θ)) > 0. When γ > 0, parameter a(θ) is often referred to as the
minimum level of subsistence. This preference set includes preferences with

                                          17
heterogeneous exponential utility functions u(c, t, θ) = −β(t, θ) exp(−A(θ)c)
when γ tends to +∞, and a(θ)/γ tends to −1/A(θ). Taking a(θ) = 0 for all
θ, it also includes the set of power (and logarithmic) utility functions with
the same relative concavity index γ for all θ. Under this set of conditions,
equation (27) simplifies to

                        ∂δ v              h            i
                                            b 2 − (Eδ)
                             (z, t) = −T 0 Eδ      b 2 .
                        ∂t
Using Jensen’s inequality, we conclude that the term structure of the social
discount rate is decreasing if T 0 is a positive constant, and that it is increas-
ing when T 0 is a negative constant. T 0 positive is a standard assumption
in economics; it corresponds to decreasing absolute risk aversion (DARA)
in the context of uncertainty. DARA means that agents have a tolerance
to consumption fluctuations that increases with their wealth. In the next
Proposition, we show that the constancy of T 0 can be relaxed at no addi-
tional cost.

Proposition 6 (Hyperbolic Collective Impatience) Suppose that agents have
multiplicatively separable felicity functions with exponential discount: u(c, t, θ)
= kν(c, θ) exp(−δ(θ)t). The term structure of the social rate of impatience
δv is decreasing (increasing) if all felicity functions v(., θ), θ ∈ Θ, exhibit
decreasing (increasing) absolute risk aversion.

   Proof: We consider the case of DARA (T 0 positive). Dividing equation
        b 0 , the discount rate δ v is decreasing with respect to time if
(27) by ET
                  ³     ´³    ´ ³     ´2
                 2 Eδ(θ) Eδ(e
                    b e           b e
                            θ) · Eδ(θ) + E(δ(e
                                             θ))2 ,                           (29)
                R
where Eδ(e
         θ) =       δ(θ)dF (θ), and

                               T (c(θ), θ)T 0 (c(θ), θ)
                      dF (θ) =                           dH(θ).
                               ET (c(e
                                     θ), e
                                         θ)T 0 (c(e
                                                  θ), e
                                                      θ)

Because T 0 is uniformly positive, F can be interpreted as a cumulative prob-
ability function. Observe that
                  ³      ´³        ´ ³        ´2 ³         ´2
                    b  e        e        b  e
                2 Eδ(θ) Eδ(θ) · Eδ(θ) + Eδ(θ) .          e               (30)


                                        18
Moreover, we know that
                             ³     ´2
                              Eδ(θ) · E(δ(e
                                 e        θ))2 .                               (31)

Obviously, combining (30) and (31) yields (29), which concludes the proof.¥
    Notice that we don’t restrict T to be linear, nor assume any correlation
between rates of impatience and degrees of tolerance to fluctuations. The
monotonicity of these degrees of tolerance is the only thing that matters
for the slope of the term structure of δ v . Simple intuition supports this
important result. From equation (21), we know that more patient consumers
have an increasing consumption profile. Under DARA, their tolerance to
consumption fluctuation increases through time. This implies that when
time goes forward, consumers with a low δ see their weight growing in the
                  bz,t δ(e
mean δ v (z, t) = E      θ). This implies that the social rate of impatience
decreases with time.

Example 1 Let us illustrate this result with a simple example. There are two
groups of agents, respectively with constant rates of impatience δ l and δ h > δ l .
All agents have the same felicity function ν(c, θ) = min(b(c−a), d(c−a)), with
0 < d < b. This function is piecewise linear with a kink at c = a. We consider
the case where b tends to infinity, which means that the left branch of the curve
becomes vertical. Parameter a is the minimum level of subsistence. On the
relevant domain [a, +∞[ of this limit function, agents have a nondecreasing
tolerance (DARA), with a zero tolerance at c = a, and an infinite tolerance
for all c > a. In this economy, any Pareto-eﬃcient sharing of the cake
produces a flip-flop consumption pattern. Prior to some identified date τ , the
patient group functions at subsistence, and the impatient group consumes any
surplus. After time τ , the impatient group falls to subsistence, and the patient
group enjoys any surplus. As a consequence, the social rate of impatience
δv (z, t) equals δ h prior to τ , and δ l thereafter. The term structure is a simple
downward step function in this case. Rates of impatience that are decreasing
with time horizon are often refered to ”hyperbolic” discounting. Phelps and
Pollak (1968), then followed by Laibson (1997) and many others afterwards,
introduced this stepwise functional form to describe observed psychological
discount rates. This special case is often refered to the ”beta-delta” model.

Example 2 This discounting functional would emerge as the socially eﬃ-
cient rule for less extreme examples. Let us just replace the piecewise linear

                                        19
               δv
            0.2

           0.18

           0.16

           0.14

           0.12

                                                                                               t
                                 5                   10                        15         20
           0.08

           0.06




Figure 1: The discount rate as a function of time horizon for two-agent group
with δ h = 20% and δ l = 5%, when ν(c, θ) = c0.9 .

felicity function by a power felicity function. The two equally weighted groups
have the same constant relative risk aversion γ. Under this "fair" eﬃcient
allocation of resources, the group’s discount rate as a whole can be written as
                                              1+γ        δl t       1+γ        δh t
                                             δ l γ e−     γ     + δ h γ e−      γ
                              δ v (z, t) =       1       δl t       1       δh t
                                                                                      .
                                               δ lγ e−    γ     + δ hγ e−    γ



When γ tends to zero, this function of t can be approximated by a downward
step function with step levels at δ h and δ l .7 In Figure 1, we draw this function
for δ h = 20%, δ l = 5% and γ = 0.1.


Example 3 Suppose that ν(c, θ) = c1−γ /(1 − γ) and that δ(θ) = θ. Suppose
moreover that discount rates θ are distributed following a negative exponential
law e
    θ ∼ f (θ) = e−θ/µ /µ on Θ ≡ [0, +∞[, with a mean Ee    θ = µ. We consider
the Pareto-eﬃcient allocation that corresponds to the weighting function λ
  7
      The step occurs at time horizon t = (ln δ h − ln δ l )/(δ h − δ l ).



                                                     20
such that λ(θ) = θη for some scalar η.8 In this illustration, it can be checked
that
                                          η+γ
                             δ v (z, t) =        ,                         (32)
                                          t + µγ
which is independent of z. When relative risk aversion γ tends to infinity, δv
tends to µ uniformly for all t. When γ tends to zero, δ(z, t) tends uniformly
to η/t. In Figure 2, we draw the maximum discount rate δ v as a function of
time when γ = 2 (relative risk aversion) and µ = 5% (mean discount rate).
As seen in (32), the socially eﬃcient discount rate δ v declines with time t as
1/(t + µγ ). The discount factor β(t) can be written as
                          · Z t              ¸ ·       ¸−(η+γ)
                                                    µt
                β(t) = exp −    δ v (z, τ )dτ = 1 +            .                      (33)
                             0                      γ

This is the functional form suggested by Loewenstein and Prelec (1992), who
generalized earlier proposals made by Herrnstein (1981) and Mazur (1987).
    It is useful to examine how consumption is allocated in this economy. The
set of first-order conditions (10) combined with the feasibility constraints can
be solved analytically to yield
                                               µ           ¶ γ+η
                                        µz         t   1      γ            δt
                    c(z, t, δ) =       ³   ´         +             δη/γ e− γ ,        (34)
                                   Γ    γ+η        γ µ
                                         γ

                R
where Γ(x) = 0 δ x−1 e−δ dδ is the Gamma function. In Figure 3, we draw the
eﬃcient consumption plan for a few types when the average earnings in the
population remain constant over time and are normalized to unity. We see
again what drives the declining term structure of δ v : At t = 0, individual con-
sumption levels and individual degrees of tolerance are positively related to the
individual rates of impatience. This weighting leads to a social rate of impa-
tience that is greater than µ. As time goes forward, most resources go to those
with low discount rates, and the social rate of impatience falls below µ. Notice
that, following condition (21) with r ≡ δ v ,the consumption profile of agent
θ is locally increasing as long as δ(θ) is less than δ v (z, t). Because δv is de-
creasing in t, consumption profiles of all agents with a rate of impatience δ(θ)
   8
     One conception of fairness when all agents have the same utility function would set
η = 1. This implies that the mean R ∞ weight of individuals’ felicity over their (infinite)
lifetime is the same for everyone: 0 λ(θ)e−θt dt = 1 for all θ.


                                               21
                  ¯
                  δ



           0.07


           0.06



           0.05


           0.04


           0.03


                                                                                 t
                          20          40           60          80          100




       Figure 2: The social rate of impatience δ v as a function of time.

less than δ v (z, 0) ' 7.5% are hump-shaped, whereas those agents with a rate
of impatience larger than 7.5% have decreasing consumption throughout. In
general, eﬃcient consumption profiles are either decreasing or hump-shaped
under the assumptions of Proposition 6.9

    It follows immediately from equation (27) that one can relax the assump-
tion that members of the group use exponential discounting. If ∂δ/∂t is
nonpositive for all θ ∈ Θ, that will just reinforce the negativity of the right-
hand side of this equation.

Corollary 2 Suppose that agents have multiplicatively separable felicity func-
tions with hyperbolic discounting: u(c, t, θ) = k exp(−δ(t, θ)t)ν(c, θ) and ∂δ/∂t ·
0. The term structure of the social rate of impatience δ v is decreasing if all
felicity functions v(., θ) exhibit decreasing absolute risk aversion.


   9
    The figure does not extend far enough to show the consumption for the individual
with δ = 1 to begin to fall. The limit case is the agent with δ = 0; she is the only one to
have a steadily increasing consumption plan.




                                            22
               c

           2


                                                         δ=1%
         1.5
                                                         δ=3%



           1
                                                         δ=5%



         0.5
                                                         δ=8%


                                                         δ=15%
                                                                            t
                           20         40        60        80          100




Figure 3: Eﬃcient consumption path for agents with diﬀerent discount rates
δ.

7    A wealth eﬀect on social impatience
In the standard model of consumption, saving and growth, rates of impa-
tience are assumed to be independent of consumption levels: ∂δ/∂c ≡ 0.
However, it is often observed that wealthier economies are more patient. In
our notation, this would mean that δv is decreasing in z. In this section, we
examine whether these two assumptions can be compatible.
    Observe that we found that δ v is independent of z in our three examples.
This illustrates the following Proposition.

Proposition 7 If the members of the group have ISHARA preferences (28),
the social rate of impatience is independent of the consumption per capita z.

   Proof: Fully diﬀerentiating equation (24) with respect to z and using
property (13) yields
                           ∂δ v                 b ET
                                         b 0 − (Eδ)(        b ∂δ T,
                                                     b 0) + E
                   (ET )        (z, t) = EδT                                    (35)
                           ∂z                                 ∂c
where T, δ and their derivative are evaluated at (c(z, t, e
                                                          θ), t, e
                                                                 θ), and where
b
E is the ”risk-neutral” expectation operator defined by (26). For ISHARA

                                           23
preferences, δ is independent of c and T 0 is a constant. It implies that the
right-hand side of the above equality is zero. The driving force behind this
result is that δ and T 0 are independent for ISHARA preferences. ¥
    Rubinstein (1974) obtained the same wealth irrelevancy property in the
special case of exponential and logarithmic utility functions. In the following
Proposition, by contrast, we assume that more patient people have a tol-
erance to fluctuations that is more sensitive to changes in consumption. In
such a situation, the social rate of impatience will be decreasing with the
consumption per capita in the economy, despite the fact that consumers’
impatience does not depend on consumption.

Proposition 8 Suppose that the members of the group have a rate of im-
patience that is independent of their consumption: ∂δ/∂c ≡ 0. Suppose also
that their tolerance to fluctuations is linear with respect to their consumption:
∂T 0 /∂c ≡ 0. The social rate of impatience at t will be decreasing with the
consumption level per capita if δ and T 0 evaluated at t are anti-comonotone:
∀(θ, θ0 ) ∈ Θ2 : [δ(c, t, θ) − δ(c, t, θ0 )] [T 0 (c, t, θ) − T 0 (c, t, θ0 )] · 0.

   Proof: Under these assumptions, we have that

                                   b ∂δ T = 0
                                   E
                                     ∂c
and
                              b 0 · (Eδ)(
                              EδT    b ET b 0 ).
From (35), it implies that δ v is decreasing in z at t.¥
    A simple intuition supports this result. It comes from the fact that the
social rate of impatience is a weighted mean of individual rates of impatience.
When δ and T 0 are anti-comonotone, an increase in wealth diﬀerentially in-
creases the weights associated with the lower rates of impatience. An increase
in z then pushes δ v downwards.
    In the special case of felicity functions exhibiting constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA), viz. u0 (c, t, θ) = β(t, θ)c−γ(θ) , there is a negative relation-
ship between relative risk aversion γ(θ) and T 0 (c, t, θ) = 1/γ(θ). Thus, the
above Proposition applied to the case of CRRA felicity function implies that
the rate of impatience is a decreasing function of societal wealth if more pa-
tient people are also less risk-averse. The following example illustrates this
point.


                                        24
    δv
 0.2


0.18

0.16
                       z=0.5

0.14


0.12

                                                                                t
                  20            40            60             80           100
0.08             z=1

          z=2
0.06




Figure 4: The term struture of the social rate of impatience when u0 (c, t, θl ) =
e−0.05t c−1 and u0 (c, t, θh ) = e−0.2t c−10 .

Example 4 Consider an economy with two groups of equal size. Rates of
impatience are constant, hence independent of time and consumption levels.
The first group has low impatience rate δ l and a logarithmic felicity function
(γ l = 1). The second group has a larger rate of impatience δ h > δl and a
larger constant relative risk aversion γ h > 1. We derived numerically the
Pareto-eﬃcient allocation correponding to equal Pareto weights λl = λh , in
the case of γ h = 10, δ l = 0.05 and δ h = 0.20. Figure 4 shows the term
structure of the social rate of impatience when the consumption per capita
z equals 0.5, 1 and 2. We see that a larger per capita consumption yields a
smaller rate of impatience for all time horizons, as proved by Proposition 8.



8      Interest rates and economic growth
We now go back to the analysis of the term structure that sustains an eﬃcient
allocation of consumption. When there are no aggregate fluctuations, socially

                                       25
eﬃcient interest rates just equal the social discount rates whose structure
was examined in the previous two sections. When aggregate fluctuations
prevail, the eﬃcient interest rates are characterized by equation (25).When
the economic growth rate z 0 /z is not zero, the second term in the right-hand
side of (25) comes into play. In this section, we examine the properties of
this consumption smoothing eﬀect.
    We first consider the direct eﬀect of time on the consumption-smoothing
term z 0 /Tv . Because by definition we have that

                             ∂Tv          ∂δ v
                                 (z, t) =      (z, t)                      (36)
                              ∂t          ∂c
for all (z, t), the previous section gives us some information on this prob-
lem. Consider for example the case where agents have ISHARA preferences.
Proposition 7 combined with property (36) tells us that Tv is independent
of t. It implies that the interest rate formula (37) is time invariant in this
case. Consider alternatively the assumptions contained in Proposition 8, in
particular the assumption that the discount rate δ and the derivative of abso-
lute risk tolerance are negatively related. Using property (36), Proposition 8
states that, under these conditions, the absolute tolerance of the representa-
tive agent is decreasing with t. When the growth of the economy is positive,
this is compatible with an upward sloping curve. Notice that this eﬀect goes
opposite to the impatience eﬀect presented in Proposition 8.
    We now turn to the role of growth on the consumption smoothing term
of the interest rate. Suppose that the growth rate z 0 /z is constant over time.
Observe that the asset pricing formula (25) can be rewritten as

                                                           z 0 (t)
                     ρ(t) = δ v (z(t), t) + Rv (z(t), t)           ,       (37)
                                                           z(t)
where Rv (z, t) = z/Tv (z, t) is the relative aversion to fluctuations of the
representative agent. The benchmark case has agents with identical CRRA
preferences. As is well-known, this implies that Rv (z, t) is a constant. In
the following proposition, we consider the alternative case where agents have
heterogenous CRRA preferences. In a static context with uncertainty, Hara
and Kuzmics (2002) show that this implies that the representative agent has
an Rv which is decreasing with respect to z. We now provide a shorter proof
of this important result. As shown by Gollier (2002a), it implies that the
yield curve is decreasing under the standard assumptions.


                                        26
Proposition 9 Suppose that agents have constant, identical rates of impa-
tience, and that consumption per capita is growing at a constant rate. Then
if agents have heterogenous but constant rates of relative risk aversion , the
yield curve will be nonincreasing.

   Proof: Because we assume that agents have homogenous rates of im-
patience, the first term in the right-hand side of (37) is independent of t.
Moreover, we know that it also implies that ∂Rv /∂t vanishes. We are done if
∂Rv /∂z is nonpositive. Diﬀerentiating Rv (z, t) = z/Tv (z, t) with respect to
z implies that this is the case if

                                      ET 0 (c(e
                                              θ), t, e
                                                     θ)T (c(eθ), t, e
                                                                    θ)
                  ET (c(e
                        θ), t, e
                               θ) · z                                  ,
                                             ET (c(e θ), t, e
                                                            θ)

or equivalently, since T (c, t, θ) = c/γ(θ), if
                           "         #2
                              c(e
                                θ)                    c(e
                                                        θ)
                            E             · Ec(e
                                               θ)E           .
                              γ(e
                                θ)                   (γ(e
                                                        θ))2

By the Cauchy-Schwarz inequality, this is always true.¥


9     Conclusion
This paper shows that when agents have diﬀerent rates of impatience, using
a constant rate to discount cash-flow occurring at diﬀerent dates – as is
done in most cost-benefit analyses – is both inappropriate and ineﬃcient.
More specifically, under the widely accepted assumption of decreasing abso-
lute risk aversion, employing a constant collective discount rate would tilt too
much toward short- as opposed to long-term investments. The recognition
of the existence of important diﬀerences in rates of impatience in the popu-
lation should induce public decision makers to focus more on the long-term
costs and benefits of public actions. The eﬀect of heterogeneous time prefer-
ences should be taken seriously. In a simple calibration exercise in which we
assumed that individual discount rates are distributed in the population ac-
cording to a negative exponential law with a mean of 5% per year, we showed
that the socially eﬃcient discount rate should be around 7.5% per year for
the short term, but that it should converge to 0% for long term cash-flows.


                                           27
Using the first number would accord with government practice. Using the
second would elevate eyebrows.
    We also showed that when there is a positive correlation between rates of
impatience and relative risk aversion in the population, wealthier economies
will be more patient.




                                     28
References
Barsky, R.B., F.T. Juster, M.S. Kimball and M. Shapiro, (1997),
   Preference parameters and behavioral heterogeneity: An ex-
   perimental approach in the health and retirement study, Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 537-79.
Benabou, R., and J. Tirole, (2000), Self-confidence: Intertempo-
   ral strategies, Princeton University discussion paper 209.
Carrillo, J.D., and T. Mariotti, (2000), Strategic ignorance as
   a self-disciplining device, Review of Economic Studies, 67:3,
   529-544.
Caroll, C.D. and M. Kimball, (1996), On the concavity of the
   consumption function, Econometrica, 64, 981-92.
Cass, D. and J. Stiglitz, (1970), The structure of investor prefer-
   ences and asset returns, and separability in portfolio alloca-
   tion, Journal of Economic Theory, 2, 122-60.
Cochrane, J., (2001), Asset Pricing, Princeton University Press.
Constantinides, G.M., (1982), Intertemporal asset pricing with
   heterogeneous consumers and without demand aggregation,
   Journal of Business, 55, 253-67.
Cox, J., J. Ingersoll and S. Ross, (1985a), A theory of the term
   structure of interest rates, Econometrica, 53, 385-403.
Cox, J., J. Ingersoll and S. Ross, (1985b), An intertemporal gen-
   eral equilibrium model of asset prices, Econometrica, 53, 363-
   384.
Frederick, S., G. Loewenstein and T. O’Donoghue, (2002), Time
   discounting and time preference: A critical review, Journal of
   Economic Literature, 40, 351-401.
Gollier, C., (2002a), Discounting an uncertain future, Journal of
   Public Economics, 85, 149-166.
Gollier, C., (2002b), Time horizon and the discount rate, Jouranl
   of Economic Theory, forthcoming.
Hansen, L. and K. Singleton, (1983), Stochastic consumption,
  risk aversion and the temporal behavior of assets returns,
  Journal of Political Economy, 91, 249-268.

                                29
Hara, C., and C. Kuzmics, (2001), Representative consumer’s risk
   aversion and eﬃcient risk-sharing rules, mimeo, Cambridge
   University.
Herrnstein, R., (1981), Self-control as response strength, in Quan-
   tification of steady-state operant behavior, C.M. Bradshaw, E.
   Szabadi and C.F. Lowe Eds, Elsevier/North Holland.
Koopmans, T.C., (1960), Stationary ordinal utility and impa-
  tience, Econometrica 28, 287-309.
Laibson, D.I., (1997), Golden eggs and hyperbolic discounting,
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 62, 443-479.
Leland, H.E., (1980), Who Should Buy Portfolio Insurance?, Jour-
   nal of Finance, 35, 581-596.
Loewenstein, G., and D. Prelec, (1991), Negative time preference,
   American Economic Review, 81, 347-352.
Mazur, J.E., (1987), An adjustment procedure for studying de-
  layed reinforcement, in The eﬀect of delay and intervening
  events on reinforcement value, M.L. Commons, J.E. Mazur,
  J.A. Nevin and H. Rachlin Eds, Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.
O’Donoghue, T., and M. Rabin, (2001), Choice and procrastina-
   tion, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 116:1, 121-160.
Phelps, E.S., and R. Pollack, (1968), On second-best national sav-
   ing and game equilibrium growth, Review of Economic Stud-
   ies, 35, 185-199.
Samuelson, P.A., (1937), A note on the measurement of utility,
   Review of Economic Studies, 4, 155-161.
Strotz, R.H., (1956), Myopia and inconsistency in dynamic utility
   maximization, Review of Economic Studies, 23:3, 165-180.
Warner, J.T., and S. Pleeter, (2001), The personal discount rate:
  Evidence from military downsizing programs, American Eco-
  nomic Review, 95:4, 547-580.
Weitzman, M.L., (2001), Gamma discounting, American Eco-
  nomic Review, 91, 260-271.
Wilson, R. (1968). “The theory of syndicates”, Econometrica 36,
   113-132.

                                30
