                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          THE FLATTENING FIRM:
EVIDENCE FROM PANEL DATA ON THE CHANGING NATURE OF CORPORATE HIERARCHIES

                                             Raghuram Rajan
                                               Julie Wulf

                                            Working Paper 9633
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9633


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         April 2003




   We are grateful to Katie Donohue at Hewitt Associates, K. Subramanium, and Talha Noor
   Muhammed for assistance in data collection. We would like to thank seminar participants at
   Wharton, the University of Chicago, Columbia University, the NBER Organizational Economics
   Conference, and the Harvard Business School Strategy Conference and especially George Baker,
   Peter Cappelli, Brian Hall, Brigitte Madrian, Kevin Murphy, and Joel Podolny. Wulf
   acknowledges research support from the Reginald H. Jones Center for Management Policy,
   Strategy and Organization at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, Rajan thanks
   the Center for Research on Securities Prices, the Center for the Study of the State and the
   Economy as well as the National Science Foundation for research support. The views expressed
   herein are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of
   Economic Research.

   NBER working papers are circulated for discussion and comment purposes. They have not been peer-
   reviewed or been subject to the review by the NBER Board of Directors that accompanies official
   NBER publications.

   © 2003 by Raghuram Rajan and Julie Wulf. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
   two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
   is given to the source.
The Flattening Firm: Evidence from Panel Data on the Changing Nature of Corporate Hierarchies
Raghuram Rajan and Julie Wulf
NBER Working Paper No. 9633
April 2003, Revised June 2020
JEL No. D21,D23

                                          ABSTRACT

Using a detailed database of managerial job descriptions, reporting relationships, and
compensation structures in over 300 large U.S. firms, we find that firm hierarchies are becoming
flatter. The number of positions reporting directly to the CEO has gone up significantly over time
while the number of levels between the lowest managers with profit center responsibility (division
heads) and the CEO has decreased. More of these managers now report directly to the CEO and
more are being appointed officers of the firm, reflecting a delegation of authority. Moreover,
division managers who move closer to the CEO receive higher pay and greater long term
incentives, suggesting that all this is not simply a change in organizational charts with no real
consequences. We discuss several possible explanations that may account for some of these
changes.


Raghuram Rajan
Booth School of Business
University of Chicago
5807 South Woodlawn Avenue
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
raghuram.rajan@ChicagoBooth.edu

Julie Wulf
760 West End Ave #PH
New York, NY 10025
julie@jmwulf.com
       Economic theorists have long advocated a move away from seeing the firm as a

black box and instead, focusing on its internal organization. For example, as Williamson

(1981) argues, viewing the firm and its organization as a “governance” structure rather

than simply as a production function would help us understand better the boundaries

between the firm and the market.

       Work in the 1960s through the early 1980s (see, for example, Williamson (1967),

Calvo and Wellisz (1978, 1979) and Rosen (1982)) followed this approach by seeking to

explain the size of firms as a consequence of the limitations on governance that can be

exerted by corporate hierarchies. Broadly speaking, hierarchies emanate from the need to

supervise workers. Any manager has limited time to supervise employees, so his span of

supervision will be limited (Calvo and Wellisz (1979), Rosen (1982)) while the number

of layers in the organization will also be limited by the loss of control across levels

(Williamson (1967), Calvo and Wellisz (1978)). As a bonus, this work also explains why

more talented employees will occupy higher positions in the hierarchy -- because their

effort affects more employees (see Calvo and Wellisz (1979) and Rosen (1982)). Thus at

once, two stylized facts about corporations are explained – that larger firms pay managers

more and that wages go up as one moves up the hierarchy.

       Since this early work, there has been much more theoretical work trying to

explain other aspects of firm hierarchies. Yet we don’t have very many more stylized

facts to discipline the theory, despite the fact that corporations in the United States have

been changing tremendously. Peripheral businesses have been divested as corporations

focus more on core areas, and peripheral activities have been outsourced (see, for

example, the account in Powell (2001)). At the same time, large corporations have been




                                                                                               1
merging at a historically unprecedented rate (see Pryor (2000)). Even while corporate

boundaries are being redrawn, there is some suggestion that the very nature of

employment relationships is changing (see, for example, Osterman (1996), Holmstrom

and Kaplan (2001), Rajan and Zingales (2000)).

        General Electric’s recent organizational changes illustrate the type of facts that

might be of interest to organizational theorists. The former chairman of GE Capital, who

reported directly to the CEO, resigned from his position and the four business unit heads

started reporting directly to the CEO. Jeffrey Immelt, the CEO of GE, explained the

decision thus: “The reason for doing this is simple—I want more contact with the

financial services teams….With this simplified structure, the leaders of these four

businesses will interact directly with me, enabling faster decision making and

execution.” 1 In this example, GE’s organization became flatter: the CEO’s span of

control (or the number of positions reporting directly to the CEO) increased by 3 (the loss

of the Chairman of GE Capital and the gain of 4 unit heads: Consumer Finance,

Commercial Finance, Equipment Management, and Insurance) and the average number

of reporting levels between the unit heads and the CEO in GE declined (see figure 1

below).




1
 General Electric press release titled “GE Announces Reorganization of Financial Services; GE Capital to
Become Four Separate Businesses”, July, 26, 2002.


                                                                                                           2
       Is this pattern of change special to GE or is it more systematic? Perhaps a careful

documentation of what fundamentally, if anything, has changed in corporate hierarchies

will give us a new set of facts to explain, and hopefully a better way to understand the

boundaries between the firm and the market. Certainly, we have learnt a lot by trying to

explain stylized facts about static differences between firms, and even past changes (for

example, Williamson’s (1975, 1985) work on the movement from the U-form to the M-

form of organization). It is time to add more facts to the theoretical mill, and to offer

preliminary explanations for them.

       We examine how corporate hierarchies have changed in the recent past. We use a

detailed database of job descriptions of top managers, reporting relationships, and

compensation structures in over 300 large U.S. firms tracked over a period of up to 13

years. We focus on the senior-most levels of the hierarchy: after all, it is the CEO and


                                                                                             3
other members of senior management who make resource allocation decisions that

ultimately determine the firm’s performance (and most obviously represent the

“managers” in the theories).

         We document that the flattening of the senior management hierarchy reported in

the General Electric example is widespread in the United States among leading firms in

their sectors. 2 Our first finding is that the number of managers reporting to the CEO has

increased steadily over time, from an average (median) of 4.4 (4) in 1986 to 8.2 (7) in

1998. 3 We consider several simple explanations for the increase in CEO span of control

including firm growth, addition of new positions (e.g. Chief Information Officer), and

mergers. Taken together, these explanations account for only part of the trend.

         Our second finding is that the depth, which is the number of positions between the

CEO and the lowest managers with profit center responsibility (division heads), has

decreased by more than 25% over the period. 4 Moreover, the number of division heads

reporting directly to the CEO has tripled. One possible explanation of all this is that the

organizational hierarchy is becoming flatter.

         Another possible explanation, however, is that fewer but larger units are being

given profit center responsibility. In other words, it may be that firms have regrouped

units into larger divisions so that division heads have become important enough to report

2
  Based on a variety of statistical tests, we conclude that our sample is representative of Fortune 500 firms.
We discuss this in detail in Section 1.2.
3
  Others have found using smaller datasets, and focusing on particular industries, that the manager’s span of
control seems to be increasing (see, for example, Scott, O’ Shaughnessy and Cappelli (1996)), but these
studies typically use an indirect measure of span (the number of managers at one level divided by the
number of managers in the next level) and focus at levels below the CEO. Our measure of CEO span is
potentially more precise because we know who reports to the CEO.
4
  Baker, Gibbs & Holmstrom (1994) find that the number of levels is constant over time for the single firm
in their study. Using detailed personnel records they infer the number of levels from information about
moves between job titles and consider all levels within the firm. By contrast, we focus only on the levels
between senior management positions, but have a potentially more accurate measure because of
information on reporting levels.


                                                                                                            4
to the CEO. But when we focus only on divisional manager positions that report over

multiple years (and thus are unlikely to be created or even greatly affected by

organizational restructuring), we find that despite little change in division size, these

positions have a higher probability of reporting to the CEO, as well as a shorter distance

from the CEO on average, over time. Moreover, more of these positions are getting

increased authority by being nominated “officers” of the firm. So, hierarchies do seem to

be getting flatter, even while authority is being delegated down the organization.

       One way organizations can become flatter is by eliminating intermediary

positions between the CEO and division heads as in the GE case. We find evidence of

this. For instance, the Chief Operating Officer (COO), who typically stood between the

CEO and the rest of the firm, is increasingly rare. The number of firms with COOs has

decreased by approximately 20% over the period.

       There is always a possibility that organizational structure simply is a way of

conveying status and is otherwise meaningless. For example, some sociologists argue that

informal networks play a much more important role than formal titles and reporting

relationships in determining information flows and decision-making. To see whether the

change in organizational form has effects outside the minds of managers, we examine

how pay changes with organizational structure. We find both salary plus bonus and long

term incentives for a divisional manager position increase as it gets nearer the top, even

after correcting for other determinants of pay like the number of employees under the

position’s supervision.

       In sum, the CEO seems to be reducing the organizational distance between him

and operational managers such as division heads. Yet it does not appear he is completely




                                                                                             5
taking over the decision making power or the supervisory power of the eliminated

intermediate layers of management. Closer divisional managers are getting more

authority by being appointed officers, a fact further corroborated by their higher pay.

Moreover, their greater long term incentives suggest that their decisions are being guided

by stronger incentive pay rather than close monitoring. While the CEO may be in closer

contact with operational managers than before, he is simply not trying to substitute

himself for the eliminated layers.

        Taken together, these findings suggest that corporate hierarchies are becoming

flatter. It is not easy to ascribe the label “centralization” or “decentralization” to this. On

the one hand, the CEO is getting directly connected deeper down in the organization, a

form of centralization. On the other hand, decision-making authority and incentives are

also being pushed further down, a form of decentralization or using the jargon,

“empowerment”.

        What could explain the findings? Three possible classes of explanations are (i) an

increase in the competitiveness of the external environment forcing the need for a more

streamlined organization (ii) an improvement in corporate governance forcing CEOs to

eliminate excessive layers of managers built up during past empire building (iii) advances

in information technology that expand the effective span of control of top managers.

While we will lay out the rationale for each class of explanations, as well as possible

ways to test them, detailed testing is beyond the scopr of this paper.

        We are, of course, not the first to point out that organizations might be becoming

flatter. This certainly is conventional wisdom in the business press, and a number of

academic papers have also alluded to it (see, for example, Powell (1990), Osterman




                                                                                                  6
(1996), Scott, O’Shaughnessy & Cappelli (1996) and Useem (1996)). However, there is

no research we are aware of that systematically quantifies these changes, correlates them

with compensation, and discusses possible explanations of the observed patterns.

         The remainder of the paper is outlined as follows. In section 1, we describe the

data, in section 2 we establish the facts, and in section 3 we discuss possible explanations.

We conclude in section 4.



                                       1. Data Description

1.1. The Sample

    Empirical work on the organizational structure of firms is relatively limited. This is

primarily due to the lack of detailed information on structures and the difficulty in finding

measures that allow comparisons across firms. As a result, previous research relies on

either detailed datasets of a single firm (e.g. personnel records in Baker, Gibbs &

Holmstrom, 1994) or less detailed data on a smaller sample of firms (e.g. compensation

survey data of 11 insurance firms in Scott, O’Shaughnessy & Cappelli, 1996). 5 These

studies typically infer the number of levels in the hierarchy from promotions between

positions or measure the span of control in terms of ratios of the number of employees at

different organizational levels. By contrast, the primary dataset used in this study

includes a panel of more than 300 publicly traded U.S. firms over the years 1986-1998,

spanning a number of industries. We use detailed information on job descriptions, titles,

reporting relationships, and reporting levels, of senior and middle management positions




5
 There are several early empirical papers on organizational structure using cross-sectional techniques (e.g.
Child (1973) and Pugh, Hickson, Macdonald, Turner, Turner and Lupton (1968)).


                                                                                                           7
that allow us to characterize organizational structures of firms in a potentially more

accurate way than previous research.

    The primary data used in this study are collected from a confidential compensation

survey conducted by Hewitt Associates, a leading human resources consulting firm

specializing in executive compensation and benefits. 6 The survey is the largest private

compensation survey (as measured by the number of participating firms) and is

comprehensive in that it collects data on more than 50 senior and middle management

positions including both operational positions (e.g. Chief Operations Officer and

Divisional CEO) and staff positions (e.g. Chief Financial Officer and Head of Human

Resources). 7 The survey typically covers all the positions at the top of the hierarchy and

a sample of positions lower down. An observation in the dataset is a managerial position

within a firm in a year. The data for each position include all components of

compensation including salary, bonus, restricted stock, stock options, and other forms of

long-term incentives (e.g. performance units). To ensure consistency in matching these

positions across firms, the survey provides benchmark position descriptions and collects

additional data for each position including job title, number of employees under the

position’s jurisdiction, the title of the position that the job reports to (i.e. the position’s

boss), and the number of reporting levels between the position and the board of directors.

    We believe the survey data are accurate for several reasons. First, Hewitt personnel

are knowledgeable about survey participants because they are typically assigned to

specific participants for several years. Furthermore, while the participating firms initially

match their positions to the benchmark positions in the survey, Hewitt personnel follow

6
 We discuss below (subsection 1.2) some possible selection issues associated with this sample.
7
 In this study we use a subset of the survey’s benchmark positions: position descriptions are listed in the
Appendix.


                                                                                                              8
up to verify accuracy and spend an additional 8-10 hours on each questionnaire

evaluating the consistency of responses with public data (e.g. proxy statements) and

across years. 8 Participants use the survey results to set pay levels and design

management compensation programs, an indication that they believe others treat the

survey seriously. 9

    In Table 1, we present descriptive statistics for the firms in the sample. While the

dataset includes more than 300 firms, the exact number varies over the period, as firms

enter and exit as survey participants. We report statistics on both the whole sample

(unbalanced) and the subset of 51 firms that are included in the sample for the entire 13-

year period (balanced). The firms in the sample are large, U.S publicly-traded firms that

are well-established and profitable with average size of approximately 47,500 employees,

age of 85 years since founding, and return on sales of 19% (see Table 1a). The typical

firm in the sample is thus a large mature stable firm, not one whose organizational

structure is likely to be in flux. The sample firms span many industrial sectors of the

economy, with some concentration in the food, paper, chemical, machinery, electrical,

transportation equipment, instrumentation, communications and utilities industries (Table

1b).

1.2 Sample Representativeness


8
  For example, a first-time participating firm reads the position descriptions and is shown examples like the
one in figure 2 in order to match their positions to those covered in the survey.
9
  There may be incentives for survey participants to misreport pay data in their survey responses for
positions other than those reported in proxy statements. However, several facts offset the likelihood of this
practice. First, for Hewitt clients, pay comparisons between the client and survey averages (excluding the
client data) are provided to the board of directors making it less likely that clients would misreport their
own pay. Second, these surveys are completed by the firm’s compensation analyst and it would require a
significant amount of internal coordination among several managers to intentionally misreport. Finally, the
most important measures in this paper, i.e. proxies for span and depth of the hierarchy, aren’t reported to
survey participants and are only used by Hewitt to improve accuracy in benchmarking positions across
firms.


                                                                                                            9
     Clearly, an important issue in datasets such as this one is the question of sample

selection and whether the firms in the dataset are distinctive from, or representative of,

employers of similar size in their industry. The survey participants are typically the

leaders in their sectors and, in fact, more than 75% percent of the firms in the dataset are

listed as Fortune 500 firms in at least one year and more than 85% are listed as Fortune

1000 firms. These firms represent a significant fraction of the activity of publicly-traded

firms in the U.S. Based on all firms covered in Standard and Poor’s Compustat database

over the period of study, the survey participants represent approximately 33% of

employees, 30% of sales, 20% of assets, and 40% of market value. If we limit the

analysis to manufacturing firms, the Hewitt firms represent 42% of employees, 38% of

sales, 39% of assets, and 52% of market value.

     In general, Hewitt survey participants also participate in other compensation

consulting firm surveys (e.g. Hay Associates, Mercer, Towers Perrin, to name a few) and

do so primarily to receive information about pay practices to use as a competitive

benchmark in evaluating their own compensation programs. 10 It is important to note that

the sample includes many more firms than Hewitt’s consulting client base with at least

50% of the firms as survey participants with no client relationship to Hewitt. 11

     We evaluate the representativeness of our sample by comparing key financial

measures of our survey participants to a matched sample from Compustat. We begin by


10
   The value of a compensation survey to a participating firm depends on how representative it is of firms
that the participant competes with in the executive labor market.
11
   One concern about sample selection bias is that firms participating in compensation surveys (Hewitt’s or
any others) may be inclined to adopt more modern compensation practices (i.e. greater incentive pay). This
is certainly possible. However, it is highly unlikely that survey participants flatten their organizational
structure in response to survey data. As mentioned in an earlier footnote, the information on reporting
levels in the survey is collected to ensure proper benchmarking of positions across firms and no
information about CEO span of control or organizational levels of divisional managers is provided to firms
in return for participating.


                                                                                                        10
matching each firm in the Hewitt dataset to the Compustat firm that is closest in sales

within its two-digit SIC industry in the year the firm joins the sample. We then perform

Wilcoxon signed rank tests to compare the Hewitt firms with the matched firms. While

the firms in the Hewitt dataset are, on average, slightly larger in sales than the matched

sample, we found no statistically significant difference in employment and profitability

(return on sales). 12 We also found no statistically significant difference in sales growth,

employment growth, or annual changes in profitability for all sample years. In sum,

while the Hewitt firms are larger (measured by sales) on average than the matched

sample, there is little additional evidence that these firms are not representative of the

population of industrial firms that are leaders in their sectors. 13 To sum up, the survey

sample is probably most representative of Fortune 500 firms.

1.3. Measures of Organizational Structure

    Our study focuses on two measures of organizational structure: the breadth and depth

of the hierarchy. Breadth is represented by the Chief Executive Officer’s span of control

(CEO Span) and is defined as the number of positions reporting to the CEO. Since we

know the title of the position that each position reports to (i.e. the position’s boss), we

can determine the positions that report directly to the CEO. 14 Our other measure, depth,



12
   The Hewitt firms are larger in sales than the matched sample of firms because in a number of the cases,
the Hewitt firm is the largest firm in the industry thus forcing us to select a matched firm smaller in size.
13
   We also calculate financial measures for the sample of Compustat firms with 10,000 employees or greater
over the period from 1986 to 1998 (excluding firms operating in financial services). We find that, on
average, survey participants are more profitable, but growing at a slower rate relative to the sample of large
Compustat firms. Specifically, the sample average return on sales for survey participants is 17.8% versus
15.7% for the sample of large Compustat firms and the average sales growth is 5.7% vs. 7.4%. This is
consistent with our observation that the firms in our sample are likely to be industry leaders (hence slightly
more profitable) and also large (hence the slightly slower growth). There is no reason why this should
dramatically skew the inferences from the sample.
14
   Since the survey is based on benchmark jobs, it is possible that non-standard positions are excluded from
the survey or added over time. Companies may differ systematically as to the percentage of management
positions that are benchmark jobs and this might bias our measure of span. However, since the positions


                                                                                                           11
represents a vertical dimension of the hierarchy and is defined as the number of positions

between the CEO and the divisional CEO. In the survey, a division is defined as “the

lowest level of profit center responsibility for a business unit that engineers,

manufactures and sells its own products.”

    We focus on the divisional CEO position (hereafter referred to as divisional manager)

for two reasons: (i) it is the position furthest down the hierarchy that is most consistently

defined across firms; and (ii) it is informative about the extent to which responsibility is

delegated in the firm. Figure 2 (at the end of the paper) displays an (edited) example

from the survey that demonstrates to participants how to determine the number of

reporting levels for each position. The management reporting relationships are clearly

illustrated with the line of authority starting with the CEO as the most senior position,

moving down to the Chief Operating Officer, Group CEO, Divisional CEO and finally

the Plant Manager as the most junior management position. In this example, our measure

of depth equals 2 — there are two positions between the CEO and the divisional

manager.

    Other positions that might be informative about the depth of the hierarchy are Group

CEOs (managers with multiple profit center responsibility) and Plant Managers

(managers with budget or cost center responsibility), but there are limitations to using

either. Group CEOs are defined on the basis of their position in the hierarchy (proximity

to CEO or COO). Hence it is harder to infer facts about depth or responsibility from their

position. By contrast, divisional managers are defined on the basis of their responsibility,

and hence we can infer more about hierarchies from where they are placed.


reporting to the CEO are the most senior positions and the primary focus of the survey over the period, we
expect the bias to be minimal.


                                                                                                        12
Unfortunately, though, the definition of plant managers is not consistent across industries,

especially when one moves from manufacturing to service firms. 15

      The survey data are supplemented with information from several other datasets

(Compustat for financial and segment information, Securities Data Company for mergers,

Spectrum for institutional shareholdings, Gompers, Ishii and Metrick (2002) index based

on IRRC data, and Directory of Corporate Affiliations for year of founding). While the

survey is conducted in April of each year and the organizational data describe the firm in

the year of survey completion, some statistics (e.g. number of employees in a division)

represent the end of the most recent fiscal year. To maintain consistency, we match the

supplemental datasets using the year prior to the year of the survey. Finally, not all

variables are available for all positions, firms and years, and due to limitations in

matching with the supplemental datasets, our samples are smaller for some parts of the

analysis.



                                              2. The Facts

2.1. Increasing Span

         Having described the data and their sources, let us now examine how firm

hierarchies are changing over time. In Table 2, we describe how the number of positions

reporting directly to the CEO (that is, CEO span) moves over the period. The number of

positions reporting has gone up from a mean (median) of 4.46 (4) in 1986 to 6.79 (6) in



15
  The classic distinction between organizations that are organized by function vs. by divisions with profit-
center authority is less relevant in this sample of firms. In fact, in this large sample of firms, pure
functional organizations appear to be uncommon. Using the reporting of divisional and subsidiary data
from the Directory of Corporate Affiliations, we were able to categorize the structure of just over half of
the sample firms. Only one firm could be classified as a pure functional organization. In general,
information about organizational form did not add explanatory power to our analysis.


                                                                                                          13
1998, an increase of about 50 percent. One might worry that some of the change is

induced by changes in the firms that are in our sample over time. If we restrict ourselves

to the 51 firms that appear throughout the 13 years of our panel, the change is even more

dramatic. From a mean (median) of 4.39 (4) it goes up to 8.16 (7), an increase of 86

percent. Alternatively, in the last three columns in Table 2 we report the average annual

change in span for the firms that appear for two consecutive years in the dataset.

Cumulating that annual average change in span, we get a total of 2.42 over the 13-year

period.

          Is this simply “hardwired”? Could increasing CEO span reflect the natural growth

of firms? No, because firms could accommodate growth by adding layers to the hierarchy

rather than increasing span of control and because firms have not grown significantly

over this period. In fact, the average size of the 51 firms appearing throughout, as

measured by the number of employees, has fallen from 86000 in 1986 to 74000 in 1998

(see Table 1 a). In the unbalanced panel, the size of firms is roughly constant over time –

approximately 48000 in both 1986 and 1998. When we sort firms into quartiles based on

the growth in the number of their employees over the sample, we do not find any clear

pattern in span across the quartiles (not reported in Table). An obvious question is

whether the growth in CEO reports is a result of mergers – are firms simply stitched

together at the seams under a common CEO and would the merger wave account for our

findings? To address this we drop from the balanced sample all firms that undertook a

significant acquisition(s) (amounting to more than 20% percent of assets in any year) in

the previous 3 years. CEO reports still increase from 4.4 in 1986 to 8.2 in 1998. We also




                                                                                         14
drop from the sample all firms that undertook significant acquisitions at any time during

the period covered. Again, CEO reports increase from 4.4 in 1986 to 8.2 in 1998.

         Another obvious question is whether the growth in CEO reports is due to

increases in diversification. In fact, the average number of segments reported by

Compustat (one measure of diversification) for the balanced sample increases from 3.3 in

1986 to 3.9 in 1998 (Table 1a). However, in a firm fixed effects regression of the number

of CEO reports on (the logarithm of) the number of employees, the number of segments

and a trend variable, the coefficient on the number of segments is insignificant suggesting

that the increase in span is not primarily related to increases in diversification. 16

         As an aside, in what follows we have the option of reporting data for the balanced

panel of firms reporting throughout or also reporting data for the unbalanced panel. The

balanced panel has the virtue of allowing comparisons to be made for the same firms over

time. It has the demerit of focusing only on survivors and therefore introducing potential

biases. Fortunately, the patterns from the balanced panel look qualitatively like those in

the unbalanced panel.

         Could the increased span be a result of the creation of new positions such as Chief

Information Officer (CIO) or the increasing importance of existing positions such as

Head of Human Resources (HHR), who now join more traditional positions such as Chief

Financial Officer in reporting directly to the CEO? The data do not support this



16
   One might even argue the reverse: the CEO plays a coordinating role, so one would expect more reports
to the CEO when there is more of a need for coordination between various business segments, that is, when
the firm’s segments or divisions are more related. This conjecture too is not borne out in the data. Using
data on a division’s industry and the share of employees in a two-digit industry within the firm, we
calculate a Herfindahl index (HHI) for the firm’s presence in different industries as a more refined measure
of relatedness. In a firm fixed effects regression of the number of CEO reports on (the logarithm of) the
number of employees, the HHI measure and a trend variable, the coefficient on HHI is insignificant
suggesting that the increase in span cannot be explained by a greater need for coordination.


                                                                                                         15
explanation. 17 In Table 3, we report for the balanced panel the average number of direct

reports to the CEO of a particular position. Each CEO had, on average, 0.02 CIOs and

0.37 HHRs reporting in 1986. By 1998, each CEO had 0.18 CIOs and 0.65 HHRs

reporting to them. Thus these two positions account for only about 0.45 of the increased

reports to the CEO. Where do the rest of the reports (equal approximately to 8.16-4.39-

0.45=3.32) come from?

         The answer seems to be that they come from traditionally more junior positions.

The average number of group managers reporting directly to the CEO went up from 1.03

in 1986 to 1.73 in 1998 (see Table 3). The number of division managers reporting

directly to the CEO went up from 0.21 in 1986 to 0.95 in 1998. Thus the increase in

direct reports from positions traditionally lower down in the organization accounts for

approximately 45% of what is unaccounted for (0.70+0.74=1.44 of 3.32). 18

         The number of divisional manager positions reported by survey participants has

increased over time. So perhaps as important as knowing the average number of group or

divisional managers who report to the CEO is knowing what fraction of the group or

divisional managers covered by the survey report to the CEO. Call this the probability of

reporting to the CEO. For group managers this probability increased slightly over the

period, from 0.43 in 1986 to 0.61 in 1998 (see Table 3). The probability that a divisional




17
   Chief Information Officer (CIO or position #8 in the appendix) is defined as the highest level of
operating management over the combined functions of programming, data processing, machine operation,
and systems work related to data processing. Head of Human Resources (HHR or position #7 in the
appendix) is defined as the head of all human resources with responsibility for establishing and
implementing corporate-wide policies.
18
   Some functions have increased considerably in importance. Only 0.2 public relations officers reported to
the CEO in 1986, and it increased to 0.57 in 1998. Corporate Research and Development and
Manufacturing positions account for approximately 0.20 of the remaining increase in the number of CEO
reports.


                                                                                                         16
manager reports to the CEO consistently trended upwards over the period from 0.05 in

1986 to 0.31 in 1998.

         Parenthetically, some traditionally senior positions have also become closer to the

CEO. While 67 percent of CFOs reported to the CEO in 1986, 90 percent report in 1998.

A similar pattern is seen for the General Counsel. Law and Finance seem to have become

more important!

2.2. Decreasing Depth and Increasing “Empowerment”

         Even though only some division managers report directly to the CEO, the trend

for them to be closer to the CEO is more general. Table 4 b column (ii) (balanced sample)

suggests that the average depth at which the division manager is located below the CEO

(the number of managers between the CEO and the division manager) has fallen, from

1.58 in 1986 to 1.18 in 1998, approximately 25 percent. 19 Interestingly, the correlation

between CEO Span and Depth is significantly negative (correlation = -0.27 for the whole

sample). Wider organizations are also less tall, or put in a time series context,

organizations are becoming flatter. In what follows, we will focus on CEO Span as a

measure of organizational structure (because we believe it is more comprehensively

reported), though we will use Depth wherever appropriate.

         Perhaps then the increasing number of reports to the CEO reflects increasing

centralization: Perhaps profit center responsibility has been taken away from smaller

units, and they are now part of a larger, more important, unit whose manager is, not

surprisingly, closer to the CEO and now may even report directly to him. Again, this


19
  In the last column in Table 4 we report the average annual change in depth for the set of firms that appear
for two consecutive years in the dataset. Cumulating that average change in depth for this set of firms we
get -0.03 over the 13-year period.



                                                                                                          17
hypothesis does not seem consistent with the data. The average size of a division (the

lowest level of profit center responsibility) has decreased from approximately 6000

employees in 1986 to 4700 employees in 1998 (see Table 4 b, column (iii)).

        Of course, there may be a simpler explanation for our findings. The survey is not

exhaustive, except at the highest levels in the organization. Perhaps as the survey

expanded over time it picked up lower, more obscure, divisional manager positions.

This would explain why divisions are getting smaller (but not why their depth is

decreasing). Nevertheless, even the premise is incorrect: the survey has expanded in

terms of the number of divisional manager positions reported but not in terms of the

fraction of the firm covered. For the constant sample, we calculate the ratio of total

number of employees under divisional manager positions sampled by the survey to the

total number of employees in the firm. As Table 4 b indicates, this ratio was 0.42 in 1986

and 0.4 in 1998. The coverage of the survey has not changed significantly. 20

        As yet, we cannot be sure whether the existing divisional manager positions

became closer to the CEO or whether organizational change resulted in new divisional

manager positions that were closer to the CEO. For example, if large firms started

outsourcing more of their activities, new divisional managers might have been put in

charge of units that were not large as measured by personnel, but were only the tip of a

vast outsourced operation. It would not be surprising then that these important managers

would be closer to the CEO.

        One way to get at this is to follow the same divisional manager position over time.

From the annual surveys, we identified which divisional manager positions were reported


20
  A similar conclusion is reached if one examines the coverage of group positions reported (results
available on request from the authors).


                                                                                                      18
multiple times over the years. Focusing only on these positions, we regress attributes of

the position (what its depth is, whether it reports to the CEO) against the size of the firm,

the size of the division, year indicators, and an indicator for the position. These

regressions, should be viewed as attempts to establish partial correlations rather than as

implied causal relationships. Significant coefficient estimates on the year indicators

would only suggest that keeping the other attributes of a position relatively constant, its

place in the organizational hierarchy did change over time.

         The regression estimates are reported in Table 5. The standard errors for the

reported estimates are clustered at the firm level addressing the concern that division

observations may not be independent across divisions within a firm. 21 In column (i), the

dependent variable is the depth of the specific position (DDEPTH). We find negative

coefficients on all year indicators with a trend of increasingly negative coefficients over

time. That is, division depth is decreasing and divisional manager positions are getting

closer to the top. In column (ii), the dependent variable is 1 if the position reports to the

CEO directly and zero otherwise. We find that the probability of reporting to the CEO

increases over time as the year indicators become larger over the period. Also, the

number of employees under a particular divisional manager position trends downwards

slowly (about 1 percent every year). This suggests that even though the structure of the

division has not changed drastically over time, its head has moved nearer the top. The

organizational hierarchy is indeed becoming flatter. Xxx since we have an earlier


21
   Clustering standard errors at the firm level instead of the division level addresses the possibility that
firms have certain rules (or standards) by which they place all of their managers. In this case, the different
positions in a firm are not independent. Clustering by firm is a more conservative test and particularly
important if there is a lot of covariance between the positions of managers in the same firm. In addition to
clustering by firm, we estimate regressions that adjust standard errors for serial correlation (AR1) across
time and heteroskedasticity across division manager observations. Since statistical significance of
coefficients are similar for both approaches, we choose to report standard errors clustered at the firm level.


                                                                                                            19
footnote on div sales instead of div employees, let us refer to it only when we a result

does not hold up.

         Finally, a direct measure of responsibility is whether the holder of a position is

designated an officer of the corporation: officers of the corporation are determined by

both the individual’s authority and the nature and extent of the individual’s duties. 22 In

column (iii) of Table 5, the dependent variable is whether the divisional manager is

designated an officer. The year coefficients exhibit a broadly increasing trend over the

entire sample, with the year coefficients averaging 0.014 in the first third of the sample

(1987-90) years, and 0.053 in the last third (1995-98). While only one of the year

coefficients in the last third is significantly different from zero, collectively they are

greater than zero at the xx% level. By contrast, the year coefficients in the intial third of

the sample are not statistically different from zero. (xxx Julie, is this true –

alternatively, can we check they are different from each other) The incumbent in the

divisional manager position has become more likely to be designated an officer over

time. Authority and responsibility are indeed moving further down.

2.3. “Delayering”

         That the CEO is getting more directly connected – increasing span, reduced

distance from managers -- is consistent with anecdotal evidence that organizations have

been getting rid of entire layers of middle management. In general, it is hard to find direct

evidence of this without the level of detail our data set offers on reporting relationships –




22
   The term “officer” is defined by the Securities and Exchange Commission in Section 240.16 (rules
governing insider trading) as “an issuer’s president, principal financial officer, principal accounting officer
(or, if there is no such accounting officer, the controller), any vice-president of the issuer in charge of a
principal business unit, division or function (such as sales, administration, or finance), any other officer
who performs a policy-making function.”


                                                                                                             20
simply because positions disappear does not mean that reporting has become more direct,

for other positions could place themselves in the middle. 23

         Not only do our data suggest that reporting has become more direct (for instance,

that more division managers now report directly to the CEO), but they also suggest that

the CEO is becoming more directly connected precisely because of the elimination of

intermediate positions: Consider the position of Chief Operating Officer (COO), who has

historically served as an intermediary between the CEO and the rest of the organization.

As Table 3 indicates, the average number of COO reports to the CEO per firm has fallen

from 0.55 to 0.45 over the same period. The position of Chief Administrative Officer

(CAO) also seems to exhibit a similar decline. The decline in COO and CAO positions

that report to the CEO is primarily because these intermediate positions are being

eliminated, and not necessarily because these officers have less access to the CEO.

Conditional on a firm having a COO, the percentage of COOs that reported to the CEO

didn’t change over the period (very close to 100%). This suggests that the decline in

COO reports to the CEO is due to the position being eliminated in the sample firms.

         In Table 6 column (i), we return to the unbalanced sample and regress CEO Span

against a constant, firm size (the log of the number of employees in the firm), firm and

year indicators. The trend in the coefficient estimates on the year indicators is

significantly positive. CEO Span increases, on average, by about 0.16 every year. In

column (ii), we also include an indicator for whether the firm has a COO and another

indicator if it has a CAO. The coefficients on the year indicators fall slightly.


23
  Earlier work has inferred reporting relationships from organizational positions (managers in lower layers
are assumed to report to managers in the immediate higher layer). In this case, the elimination of some, but
not all, positions in intermediate layers would not allow us to conclude that there is a change in reporting
relationships.


                                                                                                         21
Interestingly, the coefficient on the presence of a COO is negative, statistically

significant, and large (-0.96). Assuming the COO always reports to the CEO, this

coefficient suggests his presence reduces the number of CEO reports because an average

of 1.96 managers who would otherwise report to the CEO now report to him. In other

words, the COO is truly an intermediary. 24

        In column (iii) we regress Depth on firm size, and firm and year indicators and

find that the coefficients on the year indicators become increasingly negative over the

period. Column (iv) suggests the presence of intermediaries like the COO and the CAO

increase the average depth at which division managers are positioned. If the COO stood

between the CEO and all managers, the coefficient on the COO indicator would be 1.

That it is lower suggests some divisional managers do not report via the COO.

Parenthetically, note that the coefficient on firm size is positive suggesting that growing

firms seem to have greater depth.

        While the coefficients on the year indicators fall when we include indicators for

the presence of these positions, they do not become insignificant. Thus the elimination of

the COO and CAO positions accounts for part, but not all, of the trend. The flattening of

organizations is more than the elimination of just a few key intermediate positions.

2.4. The Correlation with Wages

        Are increasing span and decreasing depth simply changes on paper with no “real”

consequences whatsoever? Does the ostensible proximity to the CEO simply reflect a

greater desire on the part of managers for status, with no greater increase in real access?

Evidence that more division managers are becoming officers suggests that organizations

24
  By contrast, the presence of a CAO increases CEO reports, but by less than 1. Since the CAO also
typically reports directly to the CEO, the coefficient estimate of 0.344 suggests that the CAO also
intermediates between lower positions and the CEO, but typically fewer than the COO.


                                                                                                      22
are changing in meaningful ways. But one strong piece of evidence suggests that these

changes are not all form without any function: they seem to be accompanied by

systematic changes in pay.

        The data set we have has extensive data on compensation. We would like to see if

the flattening of the hierarchy we have described has any correlation with pay patterns.

To understand this, we examine the pay of divisional managers, who could be positioned

anywhere from just below the CEO to far away.

        In Table 7, we report how various attributes of the pay structure for firms vary as

depth decreases. The first aspect of pay we consider is the divisional manager’s salary

and bonus. We regress logarithm of this measure against the number of firm employees,

the number of employees in the division, the depth at which the division manager is

placed, and year indicators. The OLS estimate for the coefficient of depth (Table 7

column (i)) is negative and significant suggesting that for each additional layer between

the CEO and the divisional manager, the log of the latter’s salary and bonus falls by 0.14,

which is 29.4 % of its standard deviation. The coefficient continues to be negative when

we include fixed effects for the position (Table 7 column (ii)), suggesting that specific

divisional manager positions that are moving closer to the CEO over time get paid more.

        We find similar results when the dependent variable is the ratio of the division

manager’s long term incentive pay to the value of salary and bonus (typically stock and

stock options). 25 The OLS estimate (Table 7, column (iii)) suggests long-term incentive



25
   The value of long-term incentive pay is computed by Hewitt. Stock options are valued using a modified
version of Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting and termination provisions in addition to the
standard variables of interest rates, stock price volatility, and dividends. As is standard practice among
compensation consulting firms, the other components of long-term incentives are valued using an economic
valuation similar to Black-Scholes that takes into account vesting, term provisions, and the probability of
achieving performance goals.


                                                                                                        23
pay for divisional managers goes down from a mean of 43.4% of salary and bonus to

37.1% for an additional layer between the CEO and the divisional manager. Including

division fixed effects does not change the estimate significantly. 26

        All this suggests that pay and incentives are adjusting to the change in

organizational structure. Even controlling for the size of the division and the firm,

division managers are paid more as they move closer to the CEO. This is therefore not

the traditional Calvo and Wellisz (1979) or Rosen (1982) effect – it is not that these

managers are becoming more important at the margin because they control larger

operations.

        Instead, it may well be that they are becoming more important because their

decision making is being less subject to close oversight by intermediaries (though to

more direct oversight by the CEO). In fact, as Aghion and Tirole (1997) argue, greater

span may be a way for the CEO to commit to light monitoring and increased delegation

of authority, as he does not have enough time for detailed scrutiny of all his subordinates.

That authority is being delegated could also explain why long term incentive pay is

increasing for those who are moving closer to the top.

           3    Possible Explanations for the Flattening of Firms

        Having established the facts, let us turn to explanations. What could explain the

flattening?

3.1. Increased competition in product markets.

        One set of explanations may have to do with the more competitive environment

in product markets. Deregulation and increased trade has enhanced product market


26
 See Wulf (2005) for additional analysis of the relationship between divisional manager annual bonuses
and organizational structure.


                                                                                                         24
competition over the last few decades. Not only has the required speed of response for

firms increased, it has put a premium on employee competence and creativity. The tall

hierarchies of the past may no longer be as effective.

       One reason may simply be because decisions need to be taken more quickly to

avail of fleeting opportunities in the marketplace – this is suggested by GE CEO, Jeffrey

Immelt’s, desire in the example cited in the introduction for “faster decision making and

execution”. It takes time for each managerial layer to give approval to a decision. As the

speed increases with which a final decision is needed to avail of opportunities, either a

number of opportunities are foregone with the attendant loss of value, or final decisions

are delegated further down a hierarchy, with attendant loss of top management control.

Ceteris paribus, Williamson (1967) or Calvo and Wellisz (1978) would suggest

organizations would tend to become flatter in this environment.

       Also, greater competition may increase the complexity of the decisions that have

to be made as well as the variety of data that impinge on the decision. Tall hierarchies

with intermediate managers micromanaging the work of operational managers may stifle

initiative (see, for example, Aghion and Tirole (1997)). Also, information may be hard to

convey up a hierarchy with the necessary detail and color, thus reducing managers’

incentive to collect it (Stein (19xx)). Thus tall hierarchies may become dysfunctional,

with top managers not having the information to make the right decisions and operational

managers not having the incentive to make them.

       Finally, as the development of financial markets has increased access to physical

capital, and as human capital becomes more important to a firm’s comparative advantage

(see, for example, Dessein (2002), Rajan and Zingales (2000), Roberts and Van den




                                                                                            25
Steen (2000)), tall hierarchies may lead to top management losing the residual rights of

control. In Grossman and Hart (1986), subordinate managers are controlled by virtue of

top management’s ownership (actual or delegated) of physical assets. If physical assets

become relatively unimportant, ownership becomes less effective as a means of

organizational control. Tall hierarchies become less viable. Instead, as Rajan and

Zingales (2001) argue in their development of the Grossman Hart framework, top

management has to build up control. It does this by establishing direct contact with lower

level managers (i.e., flattening the firm) and getting them to make human-capital specific

investments vis a vis top management. 27 Thus the human-capital-intensive-firm is held

together by a web of human-capital-specific investments, which are made possible by the

flatter hierarchy. In addition, employees get the promise of substantial ownership rights,

especially at the top, giving them an incentive to stay with the firm despite having many

competitors for the top positions.

         Tests of the broad hypothesis could be developed. For instance, using measures of

the timing and extent of deregulation of different industries, we can check whether

deregulation led to flattening. Of course, it would be important to check that the

deregulation was not anticipated. Given space constraints, we have to leave the

development of such tests to future work.

3.2. Improvements in Corporate Governance




27
  The entire organization becomes flatter in Rajan and Zingales (2001) – senior managers cannot risk
giving lower managers too many subordinates, else they become too independent. Hierarchies become
wider, middle managers are eliminated, and the firm bifurcates into: top management who are
owners/partners and can be trusted with command over many subordinates; and worker/managers who
cannot be trusted till they have served time in the firm (see Rebitzer and Taylor (1997) for an early study of
the structure of law firms suggesting this pattern).


                                                                                                           26
           An important class of explanations has to do with agency costs. In particular, a

number of theorists have hypothesized that management, left to itself, might want to

expand its turf and sense of worth (see, for example, Jensen (1986), Jackall (1988),

Osterman (1996), Parkinson (1958), and Useem (1996)) by hiring legions of useless

middle managers. This may have been possible in the past when management was

inadequately monitored. Equivalently, if the external governance of the firm is poor,

firms may not fire incompetent managers but simply hire new ones to do their job.

           If firms developed tall, overstaffed, hierarchies because of empire building, then

improvements in corporate governance could explain the trend towards flatter

organizations. Governance benefited in the 1980s from the wave of hostile takeovers,

which stepped up pressure on the large firms that constitute our sample. The corporate

raider, Carl Icahn, described his goal as eliminating “layers of bureaucrats reporting to

bureaucrats”. 28 In the 1990s, large institutional investors replaced the hostile takeover as

the source of governance (see, for example, Kaplan (1996)). Useem (1996) suggests that

the growing dominance of institutional investors in the stock market has forced structural

change in corporations: the elimination of layers of middle management and the

restructuring of firms into more autonomous business units.

           However, when we regress the Depth of a firm’s organizational structure on crude

proxies for the extent of governance pressure on the firm, such as the extent of

institutional shareholding in that firm (lagged one year) or a measure of the strength of

outside governance compiled by Gompers, Ishii, and Metrick (2002), we find little

systematic relationship (estimates available from authors). Moreover, if greater depth

were a symptom of empire building, it should hurt the firm’s value, and we should see a

28
     Quoted in Osterman (1996, p17).


                                                                                              27
negative correlation between Depth and the market to book ratio. In a regression of a

firm’s market to book on firm size, number of segments (diversified firms typically have

a lower market to book ratio), Depth, year dummies, and fixed effects for the firm, we

find no relationship between the market to book ratio and Depth.

       Of course, one explanation of these findings is that the market for corporate

control worked perfectly. Some firms made timely changes in their organizational

structure, while those that did not swiftly attracted external governance pressure which

forced them to change. As a result, we might find no relationship between organizational

structure and measures of governance. Similarly, because all firms adjusted in a timely

fashion to the optimal extent, whether voluntarily or not, there might be no relationship

between depth and firm value. From all this, we can only conclude that more work is

needed to establish that better corporate governance has lead to flatter hierarchies.

3.3. Information technology.

       Another quite plausible explanation for the flattening of hierarchies is changes in

information technology. In a classic article, Leavitt and Whisler (1958) predicted that the

introduction of information technology into organizations would reduce the number of

middle managers because their information gathering and coordinating role would be

eliminated. While there is some evidence that the introduction of information technology

leads to smaller firms (see, for example, Brynjolfsson, Malone, Gurbaxani, and Kambil

(1994)), others have argued that the introduction of information technology increases the

richness of data to be analyzed and acted upon, and therefore creates more of a role for

middle managers (for an excellent discussion, see Pinsonneault and Kraemer (1997)).




                                                                                            28
         As recent models suggest, theoretical predictions of the effect of improvements in

information technology on organizational change depend on whether information

technology reduces the cost of communication or whether it increases the capability of

lower managers to access information to make decisions (see Garicano (2000)).

According to his theory, increases in the use of information technology increase the span

of control for managers, but the effect on the depth of hierarchies is more ambiguous

(predictions depend on whether the technology primarily eases communication or access

to information). Thus a careful test of information based theories requires much more

detailed knowledge of the kind of work done in a position. When combined with the

difficulty of obtaining good proxies on the extent of use of information technology, we

think tests are again best left for future work. 29

                                             4. Conclusion

         In conclusion, we have unearthed a new set of facts about the changing nature of

corporate hierarchies: firms are becoming flatter, intermediate managers are being

dispensed with, and divisional managers are getting more authority, higher pay, and

greater incentive pay as they come closer to the CEO. We have offered a set of

explanations for these facts. Testing these and other explanations offers ample scope for

future work.




29
  For an illustration of the difficulty in disentangling the complex relationship between IT and work
practice, see Bresnahan, Brynjolfson, and Hitt (2002) .


                                                                                                        29
       In sum then, this paper unearths interesting patterns of change in firm hierarchies

and provides some evidence that this has to do with changes in the nature of activities

being governed. This supports a central theme in the literature stemming from Coase

(1937) and Williamson (1975, 1985) and suggests that developments in that literature can

offer valuable tools to understand organizational structures.




                                                                                          30
References

Aghion, Philippe and Jean Tirole , 1997, “Formal and Real Authority in Organizations”, Journal
of Political Economy, CV (1997), 1-27.

Baker, G., Gibbs, M. and Holmstrom, B. 1994.“The Internal Economics of the Firm: Evidence
from Personnel Data” The Quarterly Journal of Economics. Vol. 109 (4). pp. 881-919.

Bresnahan, Timothy F; Brynjolfsson, Erik; Hitt, Lorin M. Information Technology, Workplace
Organization, and the Demand for Skilled Labor: Firm-Level Evidence. The Quarterly Journal of
Economics. Vol. 117 (1). p 339-76. February 2002.

Brynjolfsson, Erik, Malone, Thomas W., Gurbaxani, Vijay, and Kambil, Ajit. 1994. “Does
Information Technology Lead to Smaller Firms?” Management Science,Vol. 40, Iss. 12. pp.
1628, 17 pgs.

Calvo, G. and S. Wellisz. 1978. “Supervision, Loss of Control, and the Optimal Size of the Firm”
Journal of Political Economy (87), pp. 943-952

____________________. 1979. “Hierarchy, Ability, and Income Distribution.” Journal of
Political Economy. Vol. 87 (5). p 991-1010. Part 1, Oct. 1979.

____________________. 1980. “Technology, Entrepreneurs, and Firm Size.” The Quarterly
Journal of Economics. Vol. 95 (4). p 663-77. Dec. 1980.

Caroli, Eve and Van Reenen, John. 2001. “Skill biased organisational change? Evidence from
British and French establishments” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI, No. 4, 1449-
1492

Child, J. 1973. “Predicting and Understanding Organization Structure” Administrative Science
Quarterly (18), pp. 168-185.

Dessein, Wouter (2002) “Authority and Communication in Organizations”, Review of Economic
Studies, Vol 69 (4), 811-838.

Garicano, Luis. 2000. “Hierarchies and the Organization of Knowledge in Production” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 108(5). p 874-904.

Gompers, Paul A., Ishii, Joy L. and Metrick, Andew, 2002, “Corporate Governance and Equity
Prices,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Feb. 2003.

Grossman, Sanford J and Hart, Oliver D. 1986. “The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A Theory
of Vertical and Lateral Integration” Journal of Political Economy. Vol. 94 (4). p 691-719.

Hart, Oliver and Moore, John. 1990. “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm” Journal of
Political Economy, Vol. 98(6). pp. 1119-58.

Holmstrom, B. and Kaplan, S. N. 2001. “Corporate Governance and Merger Activity in the
United States: Making Sense of the 1980s and 1990s” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol.
15(2). pp. 121-44.



                                                                                               31
Huson, M., Parrino, R. and Starks, L., 2001, “Internal Monitoring Mechanisms and CEO
Turnover: A Long Term Perspective.” Journal of Finance, Vol. 56, 2265-2297.

Jensen, Michael C., 1986, Agency costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers,
American Economic Review 76, 323-329.

Kaplan, S., “Are We All Becoming Henry Kravis Now? The Evolution of US Corporate
Governance”, 1996, University of Chicago Working Paper.

Leavitt, H.H., and T.I. Whisler, "Management in the 1980s", Harvard Business Review, Nov-Dec
1958, 41-48.

Murphy, K. J., and Zabojnik, J., 2003. “Managerial Capital and the Market for CEOs.” Working
paper.

Osterman, P. 1996. Broken ladders: Managerial careers in the new economy. New York: Oxford
University Press.

Parkinson, C. Northcote, 1958, Parkinson’s Law or the Pursuit of Progress, J. Murray: London.

Pinsonneault, Alain and Kraemer, Kenneth L. 1997. “Middle Management Downsizing: An
Empirical Investigation of the Impact of Information Technology” Management Science, Vol 43
(5). pp. 659-679.

Powell, Walter, 1990, “Neither Market Nor Hierarchy: Network Forms of Organization.” In
Research in Organizational Behavior, edited by Barry Straw and Lawrence Cummings, 295-336.
Greenwich, Conn: JAI Press.

Powell, Walter, 2001, “The Capitalist Firm in the Twenty-First Century: Emerging Patterns in
Western Enterprise”, pp33-68 in Paul Di Maggio ed. The Twenty-First Century Firm, Princeton
University Press, Princeton NJ.

Pryor, Frederic L. 2000. “The Economics of the Good Society: The Variety of Economic
Arrangements” Journal of Economic Literature,Vol. 38, Iss. 3. pp. 681-683.

Pugh, D.S., D.J. Hickson, C.R. Macdonald, K.M. Turner, C. Turner and T. Lupton. 1968.
“Dimensions of Organization Structure” Administrative Science Quarterly (13), pp. 65-105.

Rajan, R.G and Zingales, L. 1998. “Power in a Theory of the Firm” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 113(2). pp. 387-432.

Rajan, R.G and Zingales, L. 2000. “The Governance of the New Enterprise”, pp 201-227 in
Corporate Governance, Theoretical and Empirical Perspectives, Xavier Vives ed., Cambridge
University Press, 2000.

Rajan, R.G and Zingales, L. 2001. “The Firm as a Dedicated Hierarchy: A Theory of the Origins
and Growth of Firms” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 116 (3). pp. 805-51.

Rebitzer, John B., and L.J. Taylor, 1997, ``When Knowledge is an Asset: Explaining the
Organizational Structure of Large Law Firms," MIT Working Paper.



                                                                                              32
Roberts, John and Eric Van den Steen, 2000, “Shareholder Interests, Human Capital Investment
and Corporate Governance, Working paper, Stanford GSB.

Rosen, Sherwin, 1982, “Authority, Control, and the Distribution of Earnings”, The Bell Journal
of Economics, Vol. 13 (2). p 311-23. Autumn.

Scott, Elizabeth D, O'Shaughnessy, K C, and Cappelli, Peter. 1996. “Management Jobs in the
Insurance Industry: Organizational Deskilling and Rising Pay Inequity” Broken ladders:
Managerial careers in the new economy. Osterman, Paul, ed., New York and Oxford: Oxford
University Press. p 126-54.

Useem, M. 1996. “Corporate Restructuring and the Restructured World of Senior Management”
Broken ladders: Managerial careers in the new economy. Osterman, Paul, ed., New York and
Oxford: Oxford University Press. p 23-54.

Williamson, Oliver E. 1967, “Hierarchical Control and Optimum Firm Size.” Journal of Political
Economy, Vol. 75, No. 2.

___________1975, Markets and Hierarchies: Analysis and Antitrust Implications. New York:
Free Press.

___________1981, “The Modern Corporation: Origins, Evolution, Attributes.” Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 19, No. 4, December.

___________1985, The Economic Institutions of Capitalism. New York, NY: The Free Press.

Wulf, Julie, 2005, “Authority, Risk, and Performance Incentives: Evidence from Divisional
Manager Positions Inside Firms,” University of Pennsylvania, working paper.




                                                                                             33
                               Table 1: Descriptive Statistics—Whole Sample (Unbalanced) and Balanced Sample

                                  Panel A: Firm and Business Unit (Division) Manager Characteristics of Sample

                                   Whole Sample (Unbalanced)                                          Balanced Sample (N=51)
                                 Mean            STD              N                       Mean                  STD               N
 Variable                   1986      1998       1998         (firm or            1986           1998           1998          (firm or
                                                          division-years)                                                 division-years)

 Size (000’s Emp.)         47.45        49.49        92.27         3270            85.86        73.81            106.52            645
 Profitability             0.167        0.189        0.098         3292            0.162        0.201             0.093            640
 Age (Years)                 --          84.8        40.81         3292              --         105.3             33.47            640
 Number of Segments        2.99          3.21         1.85         2519             3.29         3.91             1.86             609
 Inst. Shareholders (%)    51.6         61.7          15.9         2393             51.2         60.9             11.2             510
                                                Panel B: Industry Characteristics of Firms in Sample

                               Distribution of Sample by 2-digit SIC Code                                 Distribution of Sample by 2-digit SIC Code
                               Whole Sample               Balanced Sample                                   Whole Sample            Balanced Sample
 Industry                     N           % of           N            % of     Industry                     N           % of         N           % of
 (2-digit SIC)            (firm-yrs)     Sample      (firm-yrs)      Sample    (2-digit SIC)            (firm-yrs) Sample (firm-yrs)            Sample

 Food (20)                  202          6.0            78           12.0      Transp. Equip. (37)         232         6.9         78           12.0
 Paper (26)                 129          3.9            26           4.0       Instrumentation (38)        133         4.0         26            4.0
 Chemical (28)              467          13.9          169           26.0      Communications (48)         161         4.8         13            2.0
 Machinery (35)             340          10.1           26           4.0       Utilities (49)              399        11.9         13            2.0
 Electrical (36)            153          4.6            26           4.0       Other                      1134        33.9        195           30.0


Notes: Whole sample includes all firms in the sample. Balanced sample includes firms that appear in the sample over the 13-year
period. Panel A: Profitability is defined as EBITDA/Sales. Age is defined as number of years since founding as listed in the
Directory of Corporate Affiliations. Number of segments is that reported in the Business Segment file of Compustat. Institutional
shareholders represents the % of shares held by institutions as reported by Spectrum.




                                                                                                                                                    34
              Table 2: Organizational Span (SPAN): Number of Positions Reporting to the Chief Executive Officer

                                   Whole Sample (Unbalanced)                Balanced Sample (N=51)           Sample with 2 Consecutive
                                                                                                                      Years
             Year          Mean        Median      STD            N       Mean      Median       STD       Changes Changes          N
                                                               (firms)                                      Mean       STD       (firms)

             1986           4.46         4         2.05         210       4.39         4          1.89
             1987           4.61         4         2.12         231       4.65         5          1.97       0.21        1.62        188
             1988           4.75         4         2.67         236       4.65         4          2.09       0.11        1.72        203
             1989           5.07         5         2.53         228       4.71         5          1.95       0.14        1.99        200
             1990           4.91         5         2.60         276       4.98         5          1.74       0.03        1.88        210
             1991           4.81         4         2.96         289       5.25         5          2.08       -0.05       2.17        249
             1992           4.89         5         2.50         290       4.96         5          2.12       0.02        1.73        260
             1993           5.01         5         2.24         304       5.53         5          2.10       0.10        1.93        261
             1994           5.38         5         2.45         298       5.82         5          2.15       0.33        1.82        256
             1995           5.65         5         2.54         288       6.47         6          2.64       0.39        2.08        250
             1996           5.46         5         2.56         280       6.31         6          2.32       -0.19       2.07        243
             1997           6.10         6         2.94         248       7.08         6          2.75       0.58        2.37        223
             1998           6.79         6         3.90         213       8.16         7          4.02       0.75        3.39        183


           Average          5.21         5         2.70         261       5.61         5          2.58       0.19        2.10        222
          N (firm-yr)                                          3391                                                                  2733

Notes: Whole sample includes all firms in the sample. Balanced sample includes firms that appear in the sample over the 13-year period. Sample with
2 consecutive years includes all the firms in the sample for the year and the year prior. Changes is the change in span between year t and year t-1.




                                                                                                                                                       35
           Table 3: Organizational Span: Reports to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) by Position (Balanced Sample; N=51)

                               Corporate Staff Positions                                    Intermediaries                             Unit Heads


            Chief        Human         Chief      General    Strategic    Public       Chief          Chief
Year     Information    Resources    Financial    Counsel    Planning    Relations    Operating    Administrative        Group Manager            Division Manager
           Officer                    Officer                                          Officer       Officer

                                     Average Number                                        Average Number              Avg.      Probability     Avg.      Probability
                                                                                                                       No.                       No.

1986        0.020         0.373        0.667       0.667       0.275       0.196        0.549           0.392          1.026        0.434        0.205        0.052
1987        0.078         0.451        0.686       0.667       0.255       0.235        0.529           0.353          0.897        0.432        0.340        0.097
1988        0.039         0.490        0.686       0.686       0.255       0.294        0.549           0.392          0.789        0.417        0.213        0.063
1989        0.020         0.490        0.706       0.725       0.255       0.333        0.510           0.314          0.947        0.407        0.205        0.073
1990        0.039         0.510        0.667       0.725       0.294       0.431        0.588           0.333          0.970        0.419        0.229        0.084
1991        0.039         0.549        0.706       0.745       0.314       0.451        0.529           0.392          1.143        0.490        0.255        0.108
1992        0.020         0.471        0.745       0.667       0.255       0.294        0.549           0.412          1.029        0.431        0.298        0.121
1993        0.039         0.529        0.863       0.784       0.255       0.275        0.412           0.314          1.353        0.545        0.609        0.215
1994        0.039         0.549        0.882       0.784       0.255       0.275        0.392           0.353          1.472        0.583        0.783        0.213
1995        0.039         0.627        0.902       0.784       0.275       0.353        0.392           0.353          1.737        0.619        0.860        0.213
1996        0.039         0.667        0.961       0.843       0.235       0.314        0.412           0.275          1.721        0.556        0.581        0.179
1997        0.078         0.706        0.941       0.902       0.235       0.412        0.431           0.275          2.051        0.670        0.535        0.159
1998        0.176         0.647        0.902       0.961       0.392       0.569        0.451           0.294          1.733        0.606        0.953        0.314



Notes: Balanced sample includes firms that appear in the sample over the 13-year period. Positions are described in the Appendix. For the group and divisional
manager positions, the averages and probabilities are calculated for the subset of firms reporting these positions. Probability is the fraction of group or divisional
manager positions reported by the survey that report to the CEO.




                                                                                                                                                                   36
                         Table 4: Descriptive Statistics-Firm and Business Unit (Division) Characteristics (Mean and Changes)

                           Panel A: Whole Sample (Unbalanced)                            Panel B: Balanced Sample (N=51)                 Sample with 2
                                                                                                                                        Consecutive Years
    Year         Firm          Depth       Division       Division         N         Firm        Depth       Division      Division           Depth
                 Size                       Size          Coverage      (firms)      Size                      Size        Coverage          Changes
                 (000s                   (000s emp.)                                 (000s                  (000s emp.)                      (mean)
                 emp.)                                                               emp.)

    1986         47.5           1.49          3.8            0.53         210        85.9         1.58          6.0           0.42
    1987         43.4           1.39          3.5            0.68         231        82.8         1.45          5.9           0.38              -0.06
    1988         42.0           1.43          3.4            0.46         236        84.3         1.51          5.2           0.38               0.00
    1989         46.2           1.34          3.3            0.44         228        86.8         1.46          5.2           0.36              -0.09
    1990         44.7           1.28          3.1            0.39         276        86.2         1.36          5.1           0.33              -0.05
    1991         42.1           1.26          3.1            0.40         289        86.9         1.33          4.2           0.35              -0.05
    1992         41.3           1.29          3.1            0.37         290        83.2         1.35          4.4           0.33               0.03
    1993         38.9           1.19          2.8            0.37         304        81.6         1.20          4.6           0.33              -0.04
    1994         41.1           1.08          3.1            0.42         298        81.8         1.19          5.1           0.37              -0.05
    1995         39.3           1.09          3.4            0.41         288        81.5         1.25          4.8           0.33              -0.01
    1996         42.6           1.14          3.6            0.43         280        79.6         1.30          5.5           0.37               0.01
    1997         45.2           1.18          3.3            0.38         248        75.4         1.41          2.8           0.34              -0.02
    1998         49.5           1.14          3.7            0.39         213        73.8         1.18          4.7           0.40              -0.06

  Average        43.1           1.26          3.3            0.43         261        82.7         1.36          4.9           0.36              -0.03

Notes: Whole sample includes all firms in the sample. Balanced sample includes firms that appear in the sample over the 13-year period. Sample
with 2 consecutive years includes all the firms in the sample for the year and the year prior. Firm (division) size is the number of employees in the
firm (division) in thousands. Depth is defined as the number of positions between the CEO and the Divisional Manager (see figure 2 for an example).
Division coverage is defined as the ratio of the number of employees under divisional manager positions sampled by the survey to the total number of
employees in the firm. Sample with 2 consecutive years includes all the firms in the sample for the year and the year prior. Depth Changes is defined
as the depth in year t minus depth in year t-1.




                                                                                                                                                            37
                 Table 5: Measures of “Empowerment”—Division Fixed Effects Regressions

            Dependent variables are DDEPTH (number of positions between CEO and Divisional Manager),
                            CEORPT (Divisional Manager position reports to CEO), and
                     OFFICER (Incumbent in Divisional Manager position is corporate officer)

                                           DDEPTH                       CEORPT                       OFFICER
 Independent Variables                       (i)                          (ii)                         (iii)

 Log (Division Employees)                   -0.074***                     0.019**                     0.034***
                                              (0.020)                     (0.008)                      (0.011)
 1987                                          -0.052                       0.014                       0.015
                                              (0.040)                     (0.015)                      (0.012)
 1988                                          -0.034                       0.012                       0.018
                                              (0.058)                     (0.020)                      (0.016)
 1989                                          -0.082                       0.020                       0.006
                                              (0.061)                     (0.020)                      (0.017)
 1990                                        -0.152**                      0.040*                       0.017
                                              (0.060)                     (0.024)                      (0.020)
 1991                                       -0.167***                     0.049**                       0.030
                                              (0.060)                     (0.025)                      (0.020)
 1992                                         -0.132*                      0.047*                       0.027
                                              (0.070)                     (0.024)                      (0.020)
 1993                                       -0.195***                     0.067**                       0.033
                                              (0.069)                     (0.027)                      (0.024)
 1994                                       -0.254***                    0.095***                       0.041
                                              (0.074)                     (0.029)                      (0.026)
 1995                                       -0.236***                    0.095***                      0.060*
                                              (0.076)                     (0.033)                      (0.034)
 1996                                       -0.270***                    0.088***                       0.053
                                              (0.077)                     (0.032)                      (0.035)
 1997                                       -0.285***                    0.098***                       0.052
                                              (0.081)                     (0.038)                      (0.041)
 1998                                       -0.302***                      0.071*                       0.045
                                              (0.088)                     (0.038)                      (0.036)
 Constant                                    2.077***                      -0.066                       -0.036
                                              (0.143)                     (0.057)                      (0.077)

 Observations                                 10393                       10428                        10428
 Number of Divisions                           2360                       2370                          2370
 R-squared                                     0.73                        0.58                         0.77

Notes: Includes all divisions in the sample that appear for at least two years. All specifications include division fixed
effects. All variables have been winsorized at the 99th percentile. DDEPTH is defined as the number of positions
between the CEO and the specific Divisional Manager position. CEORPT is a dummy variable equal to one if the
Divisional Manager position reports directly to the CEO and zero otherwise. OFFICER is a dummy variable equal to
one if the incumbent in the Divisional Manager Position is a corporate officer and zero otherwise. Log (Division
Employees) is defined as the log of the number of employees in the division. All specifications report robust standard
errors by clustering at the firm level. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                                 38
               Table 6: Organizational Span and Depth-- Firm Fixed Effects Regressions

           Dependent variables are SPAN (number of positions reporting to CEO) and
      DEPTH (firm average number of positions between the CEO and the Divisional Manager)

                                                     SPAN                                 DEPTH
   Independent Variables                     (i)               (ii)              (iii)               (iv)

   Log (Employees)                          -0.172             -0.163         0.307***           0.294***
                                           (0.234)            (0.237)          (0.081)             (0.072)
   COO                                                      -0.964***                            0.457***
                                                              (0.148)                              (0.039)
   CAO                                                        0.344**                                0.038
                                                              (0.169)                              (0.043)
   1987                                    0.291**            0.264**          -0.092**           -0.085**
                                           (0.138)            (0.133)           (0.043)            (0.039)
   1988                                     0.320*             0.216             -0.053             -0.011
                                           (0.170)            (0.164)           (0.053)            (0.048)
   1989                                   0.569***           0.462***          -0.143**            -0.102*
                                           (0.172)            (0.164)           (0.058)            (0.054)
   1990                                   0.544***            0.432**         -0.183***           -0.141**
                                           (0.178)            (0.170)           (0.063)            (0.058)
   1991                                    0.462**             0.326*         -0.215***          -0.152***
                                           (0.188)            (0.178)           (0.062)            (0.057)
   1992                                   0.562***            0.463**          -0.139**            -0.101*
                                           (0.194)            (0.185)           (0.065)            (0.057)
   1993                                   0.661***           0.530***          -0.167**             -0.098
                                           (0.190)            (0.182)           (0.066)            (0.060)
   1994                                   1.077***           0.917***         -0.219***           -0.142**
                                           (0.207)            (0.200)           (0.067)            (0.061)
   1995                                   1.407***           1.242***         -0.231***           -0.146**
                                           (0.213)            (0.207)           (0.071)            (0.066)
   1996                                   1.303***           1.154***         -0.283***          -0.208***
                                           (0.223)            (0.220)           (0.069)            (0.065)
   1997                                   1.776***           1.644***         -0.270***          -0.193***
                                           (0.244)            (0.240)           (0.070)            (0.065)
   1998                                   2.349***           2.183***         -0.345***          -0.251***
                                           (0.272)            (0.269)           (0.079)            (0.073)
   Constant                               4.816***           5.244***           0.498*               0.266
                                           (0.695)            (0.702)           (0.253)            (0.222)
   Observations                              3264               3264              2381               2381
   Number of Firms                            369                369               323                323
   R-squared                                 0.49               0.52              0.65                0.71

Notes: Includes all firms in the sample that appear for at least two years. All specifications include firm fixed
effects. All variables have been winsorized at the 99th percentile. Log (Employees) is defined as the log of the
number of employees in the firm. COO and CAO are dummy variables equal to one if the firm reports a Chief
Operating Officer (COO) and Chief Administrative Officer (CAO), respectively. All specifications report
robust standard errors by clustering at the firm level. ***/**/* represent significance at the 1%/5%/10% level.




                                                                                                             39
           Table 7: Divisional Manager Pay and Depth: OLS and Division Fixed Effects Regressions

                        Dependent Variables are (log) Divisional Manager Salary plus Bonus &
            Divisional Manager LT Incentives (ratio of value of long-term incentive pay to salary plus bonus)

                                       Divisional Manager Salary +            Divisional Manager LT Incentives
                                                  Bonus
                                        OLS            Division Fixed             OLS               Division Fixed
                                                          Effects                                      Effects
                                         (i)                 (ii)                 (iii)                  (iv)

            Log (Employees)           0.059***            0.060*                0.046***               0.084*
                                       (0.023)            (0.032)                (0.015)               (0.047)
        Log (Division Employees)      0.128***           0.083***               0.042***              0.038***
                                       (0.013)            (0.011)                (0.008)               (0.008)
               DDEPTH                -0.141***          -0.065***              -0.059***             -0.053***
                                       (0.026)            (0.012)                (0.015)               (0.012)
                 1987                 0.080***           0.078***                 0.035*                0.022
                                       (0.016)            (0.015)                (0.019)               (0.023)
                 1988                 0.162***           0.139***                 0.046                 0.016
                                       (0.023)            (0.020)                (0.029)               (0.028)
                 1989                 0.182***           0.175***                0.058**               0.052*
                                       (0.024)            (0.018)                (0.028)               (0.030)
                 1990                 0.205***           0.202***               0.118***              0.115***
                                       (0.027)            (0.022)                (0.030)               (0.030)
                 1991                 0.213***           0.216***               0.098***              0.105***
                                       (0.026)            (0.021)                (0.027)               (0.029)
                 1992                 0.279***           0.281***               0.104***              0.108***
                                       (0.027)            (0.022)                (0.030)               (0.031)
                 1993                 0.291***           0.314***               0.092***              0.102***
                                       (0.029)            (0.025)                (0.026)               (0.031)
                 1994                 0.414***           0.402***               0.166***              0.160***
                                       (0.035)            (0.026)                (0.033)               (0.039)
                 1995                 0.431***           0.458***               0.222***              0.223***
                                       (0.039)            (0.029)                (0.037)               (0.042)
                 1996                 0.429***           0.464***               0.266***              0.304***
                                       (0.043)            (0.033)                (0.038)               (0.044)
                 1997                 0.526***           0.545***               0.382***              0.373***
                                       (0.048)            (0.035)                (0.045)               (0.050)
                 1998                 0.531***           0.539***               0.362***              0.351***
                                       (0.039)            (0.037)                (0.045)               (0.056)
                Constant             11.236***          11.427***                 -0.061                -0.164
                                       (0.087)            (0.124)                (0.061)               (0.150)

              Observations              9915               9915                   9915                  9915
               R-squared                0.43               0.86                   0.17                  0.66

Notes: Includes all divisions in the sample that appear for at least two years. All variables have been winsorized at the
99th percentile. Divisional manager long-term incentives is defined as the ratio of the value of long-term incentive pay for
divisional managers to the sum of the salary and bonus. Long-term incentive pay includes restricted stock, stock options
and other forms of long-term incentives (e.g. performance units, performance share plans, and phantom stock). Refer to
the footnote in the text that describes the consulting firm’s valuation of long-term incentives. DDEPTH is defined as the
number of positions between the CEO and the specific Divisional Manager position. Log (Employees) is the log of the
number of employees in the firm. Log (Division Employees) is the log of the number of employees in the division. All
specifications report robust standard errors by clustering at the firm level. ***/**/* represent significance at the
1%/5%/10% level.


                                                                                                                 40
Figure 2: Example of Reporting Levels, Depth, Span and Descriptions of Types of
Organizational Units



       Management Position                        Reporting            Depth        Span
                                                  Level


       Chief Executive Officer (CEO)                   1


       Chief Operating Officer (COO)                   2


       Group CEO                                       3                  2          1


       Divisional CEO                                  4


       Plant Manager                                   5



    Descriptions of Types of Organizational Units


•   A Corporate unit is the highest management organization level of the parent
    company, responsible for its overall direction.

•   A Group is the highest level of multiple profit center linking the Corporate Chief
    Executive Officer or Chief Operating Officer directly to two or more single profit
    center units (divisions).

•   A Division is the lowest level of profit center responsibility for a business unit that
    engineers, manufactures, and sells its own products.

•   A Plant is a budget or cost center whose general manager supervises manufacturing,
    as well as service functions, such as accounting, personnel, purchasing, and product
    engineering, but usually no R&D engineering. More important, the manager of a
    plant never has sales responsibility.




                                                                                              41
                                   Appendix: Position Descriptions

1. Chief Executive Officer (CEO). The highest executive authority in the corporation. Reports
   to the Board of Directors. May also be Chairman or President.

2. Chief Operating Officer (COO). The corporation's second in command, provided the person's
   span of responsibility is as broad or almost as broad as the Chief Executive's, and provided he
   or she has line rather than staff or advisory responsibility. This person may be the President if
   the Chief Executive Officer is the Chairman of the Board.

3. Chief Administrative Officer (CAO). Functional head responsible for the administration of
   two or more major, nonrelated corporate staff functions such as finance, human resources,
   law, purchasing, data processing, public relations, and long-range planning and business
   development.

4. Chief Financial Officer (CFO). Functional head responsible for all financial operations of the
   corporation. Has responsibility for both the treasury and accounting functions. Indicate
   whether responsibilities also include data processing, investor relations, internal audit, and
   tax.

5. Long-Range Planning & Business Development. Functional head responsible for developing
   and obtaining agreement on overall corporate strategy to enhance sales and profits.
   Recommends the allocation of resources to existing businesses, acquisitions of new
   businesses, and disposition of existing businesses.

6. General Counsel. The head of all legal affairs of the company. Responsible for, or may be,
   Corporate Secretary; supervises outside legal counsel.

7. Human Resources. Head of all human resources with responsibility for establishing and
   implementing corporate-wide policies.

8. Chief Information Officer (CIO). The highest level of operating management over the
   combined functions of programming, data processing, machine operation, and systems work
   related to data processing.

9. Public Relations. Functional head responsible for the development and dissemination of
   favorable persuasive material in order to promote goodwill, develop credibility, and create a
   favorable public image for the company.

10. Group Chief Executive (or Group Manager). The highest authority in the group. A Group is
    the highest level of multiple profit center linking the Corporate Chief Executive Officer or
    Chief Operating Officer directly to two or more single profit center units (divisions).

11. Division Chief Executive (or Divisional Manager). The highest authority in the division. A
    Division is the lowest level of profit center responsibility for a business unit that engineers,
    manufactures, and sells its own products.




                                                                                                       42
