                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       CONTINUING DANGERS OF DISINFORMATION
                         IN CORPORATE ACCOUNTING REPORTS

                                           Edward J. Kane

                                         Working Paper 9634
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9634


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.


©2003 by Edward J. Kane. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Continuing Dangers of Disinformation in Corporate Accounting Reports
Edward J. Kane
NBER Working Paper No. 9634
April 2003
JEL No. G14, M4, K2

                                            ABSTRACT


Insiders can artificially deflect the market prices of financial instruments from their full-information
or ‘inside value’ by issuing deceptive accounting reports. Incentive support for disinformational

activity comes through forms of compensation that allow corporate insiders to profit extravagantly
from temporary boosts in a firm’s accounting condition or performance. In principle, outside
auditing firms and other watchdog institutions help outside investors to identify and ignore

disinformation. In practice, accountants can and do earn substantial profits from credentialling
loophole-ridden measurement principles that conceal adverse developments from outside
stakeholders. Although the Sarbanes-Oxley Act now requires top corporate officials to affirm the
essential economic accuracy of any data their firms publish, officials of outside auditing firms are

not obliged to express reservations they may have about the fundamental accuracy of the reports
they audit. This asymmetry in obligations permits auditing firms to continue to be compensated for
knowingly and willfully certifying valuation and itemization rules that generate misleading reports

without fully exposing themselves to penalties their clients face for hiding adverse information. It
is ironic that what are called accounting ‘ethics’ fail to embrace the profession’s common-law duty
of assuring the economic meaningfulness of the statements that clients pay it to endorse.



Edward J. Kane
Department of Finance
Boston College
330A Fulton Hall
Chestnut Hill, MA 02167
and NBER
edward.kane@bc.edu
          CONTINUING DANGERS OF DISINFORMATION IN CORPORATE
                        ACCOUNTING REPORTS∗
                             Edward J. Kane
                              April 7, 2003



        Children are repeatedly assured that honesty is the best policy. Reinforcing this

hopeful judgment, economists build models of market equilibrium in which honest firms

find ways to separate themselves from dishonest ones, helping customers and investors to

impose a “lemons discount” on the products and securities of opportunistic firms.

However, recurrent financial scandals and crises constitute strong evidence against the

applicability of the lemons model. Managers can and do increase their firm’s perceived

profitability by concealing unfavorable information, and watchdog information agents are

often fooled or persuaded to cooperate in the concealment.

        An unremitting flood of accounting scams, Ponzi schemes, and corporate scandals

leads each new Congress to consider stronger controls on corporate wrongdoing.

Congress becomes involved because, when managers or watchdog information

professionals shirk their duties or act dishonestly, consequences accrue not only to

corporate stakeholders, but also to society at large.

        This paper traces a major part of the problem to the flawed ethics of the

accounting profession. By designing and certifying reporting options that help troubled

firms and rogue managers to conceal adverse information from outside stakeholders, the

highly concentrated accounting industry manages to insulate from serious sanctions the

returns it can earn from cleverly abetting deceitful behavior.



∗
 The author is Cleary Professor in Finance at Boston College. He is indebted to Richard C. Aspinwall, Bill
Bergman, Robert Eisenbeis, James Moser, and James Thomson for valuable comments on an earlier draft.


                                                                                                        1
       Our analysis stresses the weakness of social controls on interactions between the

governance systems that prevail within corporations and the ethical codes of accountants

and other external watchdog institutions. Although parties to acts of negligent

misrepresentation and fraud are subject to civil and criminal penalties, difficulties in

identifying, preventing, and punishing corrupt exchanges of value between managers and

accountants make it distressingly easy for these parties to conspire against trustful outside

stakeholders.

       The more effectively the ethical norms, accounting standards, and corporate laws

of a given country control misrepresentation and questionable side payments, the more

reliable its financial information promises to be. Despite the passage of the Sarbanes-

Oxley Act of 2002, U.S. accounting rules remain riddled with safe-harbor loopholes.

These rules require auditors to confirm only that specified procedures are being followed

without having to express an opinion about the accuracy of the information being

transmitted. Standard-setting agents value safe-harbor loopholes as ways to limit

accountants’ professional obligations and their resulting exposure to civil and criminal

penalties. Corporate fraud, bribery, and illegal-gratuity statutes limit this exposure even

further by setting hard-to-prove standards for punishing deceitful reporting. Prosecutors

must establish a motivational link between the benefits managers and accountants may

exchange and the particular actions or decisions that generated them. Because clever

lawyers can always invent innocent rationalizations for accepting and delivering favors,

the burden of proof is inordinately heavy. To establish a corrupt motive requires either

that the accused stupidly fail to destroy highly incriminating records that investigators




                                                                                              2
capture by subpoena or for a third-party whistleblower to step up with irrefutable

evidence of the illegal nature of the transaction.

        The survival of safe-harbor loopholes and the difficulty of proving auditor

malfeasance testify to the effectiveness of the accounting lobby and the strength of the

incentive conflicts it transmits to members of the Security and Exchange Commission

(SEC). Sooner or later, the practical ethics of the accounting profession must make its

members embrace their common-law duty of assuring the economic meaningfulness of

the income and net-worth figures their clients publish.

I.      Role of Watchdog Institutions in Corporate Governance

        Systems of corporate governance reinforce and make explicit common-law duties

of loyalty, competence, and care that a firm’s board and top managers implicitly owe to

other parties.1 Financial contracting theory divides these other parties into differently

informed inside and outside stakeholders in the firm and recognizes that their interests

frequently collide. This theory portrays top managers as responsible explicitly or

implicitly to all stakeholders, but feeling little compunction to treat all interests equally.2

        No matter what products or services constitute a firm’s principal output, every

corporation is in the information business as well. This is because the efficiency of its

funding and support activities depends on its ability to collect, verify, analyze, store, and

transmit relevant information. According to SEC Chairman William Donaldson, auditor

testing of corporate information systems and board oversight of that process is “the

bedrock upon which corporate governance has to be built.” Nevertheless, at the margin,


1
  Becht, Bolton, and Röell (2002) provide a comprehensive survey of the literature on corporate
governance.
2
  For example, Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2002) argue that executives routinely use their power over the
appointment and reappointment of corporate directors to extract rents from other stakeholders.


                                                                                                        3
outside investors have difficulty extracting from inside agents adverse information about

a firm’s performance and potential loss exposures that they need to price securities

accurately. Under the cover provided by information asymmetries and option-based

compensation, informed insiders are tempted to exploit less-informed stakeholders. The

strength of this temptation varies with internal and external controls which determine the

costs and expected durability of efforts to distort information flows.

       A firm’s internal incentive system can be termed “evenhanded” or “impartial” if it

minimizes temptations for its employees (including so-called independent directors) to

engage in inefficient, dishonest, or exploitive behavior. Agency theory transforms this

ethical criterion into an efficiency condition based on the proposition that “counterparties

have incentives to reduce or control conflicts of interest so as to reduce the losses these

conflicts engender [and]…then share the gains” (Jensen, 1994). Costs of principal-agent

relationships (“agency costs”) are minimized when corporate-governance systems

harmonize the marginal benefits and costs that managerial strategies and tactics confer on

different stakeholders.

       Within the corporate sector, incentive compatibility would be achieved if

information flows and the web of implicit and explicit contracts that implement the goals

of different enterprises leave individual participants in financial processes unable to gain

an advantage from other stakeholders by acting opportunistically. To fashion an

explicitly ethical perspective, it is convenient to characterize an enterprise whose

incentive system offers selected employees an opportunity to pursue personal benefits or

short-run advantages at the expense of unwilling or uninformed others as

“institutionalizing a temptation to do wrong.”




                                                                                              4
       To mitigate insiders’ informational advantage, voluntary contracts lean on

accounting standards and corporate controls to flag irregularities, while outside

stakeholders rely on watchdog institutions and the market for corporate control to

investigate and correct them. Watchdogs exist to lower coordination costs by designing

and enforcing disclosure requirements and by monitoring managerial behavior.

Watchdogs are both internal and external. Internally, a firm’s board of directors and

auditing team are supposed to impose sound and comprehensive reporting safeguards and

detect deviations from them. Externally, watchdogs include outside auditors, stock

analysts, credit-rating agencies, standard-setting professional organizations, regulators,

government examiners, law-enforcement personnel, and information media (the “press”).

In turn, watchdogs face incentive conflicts that are only partially mitigated by

reputational concerns and ethical codes that frown on dishonesty.

II.    Discouraging and Overcoming Disinformation

       Financial information may be deemed true and timely only if it conforms to all of

the facts knowable at a given time. Markets whose prices reflect all true information and

ignore disinformation show what economists call strong-form informational efficiency.

Financial disinformation (D) consists of statements whose spurious elements or false

implications are shaped for the express purpose of preventing less-informed

counterparties from grasping the full-information or “inside” value (Fi) of a particular

contract i. This means that disinformation is designed to be negatively correlated with

the unfavorable information that insiders withhold from outsiders. Such inside

information comprises adverse elements of strictly private information known only to the

disinformers.




                                                                                             5
       Disinformation can account for empirical evidence (summarized by Dimson and

Mussavian, 1998) that security returns show weak positive correlation over weekly and

monthly horizons and slight negative serial correlation over longer horizons. Abstracting

from the refutational efforts of watchdog institutions, the market value Vi of any

instrument or portfolio i differs from its full-information value by a hard-to-sustain

wedge of “outside” value [wi(D)] which insiders to contract i manage to create by their

disinformational efforts:

                                       Vi = Fi + wi (D) .                              (1)

When disinformation is building up or decaying, short-horizon returns would correlate

positively. However, disinformational effects would be reversed over longer periods.

       Watchdog institutions are supposed to help outside investors to filter

disinformation out of their information sets. Individuals can counter the effects of

disinformation in three ways: by directly acquiring incremental information for

themselves through reading and research, by relying on professional information

specialists for incremental intelligence, and by reaching out for help from law-

enforcement officials and legislators when evidence of fraud surfaces.. Whenever a

contract is initiated or renewed, every party to which the contract assigns an

informational risk has an incentive to sort through and correct the information flowing

from incentive-conflicted sources. The strength of this incentive can be measured by the

difference between the marginal benefits of challenging potential disinformation and the

marginal costs of the ex ante and ex post effort it takes to mount this challenge.

       We assume that the marginal cost of acquiring inside information declines as it

ages. Unfavorable information on any party k that is uncovered by any one of its




                                                                                             6
counterparties leaks out after a lag to other interested parties. As more parties acquire the

information, the number of routes through which it can be obtained rises. The juicier the

information is, the quicker it spreads as rumor on the gossip mill. Recent rumors are

captured, investigated, and (if verified) disseminated at a cost by the professional

information industry. Eventually, verified information becomes common knowledge that

almost anyone can verify at virtually zero cost. This diffusion process implies that, in

any country, the value of disinformation to the disinformer tends to decay over time and

may be subject to sudden, discrete drops. The value of disinformation to insiders will

decay at a faster rate, the more cheaply and more reliably timely information is collected

and distributed by information specialists.

       Incentive support for disinformational activity comes from forms of compensation

– such as short-dated stock options – that allow insiders to profit disproportionately from

artificially boosting measures of short-term performance. Such front-loaded contracts

tempt insiders to believe that they can realize gains while wi(D) is high and plan either to

exit the firm before the truth emerges or to set aside a portion of their ill-gotten proceeds

to employ high-powered legal assistance to trivialize whatever penalties they may

ultimately have to suffer.

       It would be naive to presume that in all circumstances information specialists seek

only to curtail the effects of insider disinformation. Incentive conflicts exist in the

information industry, too. Disinformers often put political or economic pressure on

information specialists to enlist their help in concealing or misrepresenting unfavorable

information. Users of information must always allow for the possibility that a particular




                                                                                                7
specialist may be innocently, negligently, or even corruptly making disinformation more

credible.

        It is convenient to model the direct effects on contract valuation of external

private and governmental information production as multiplying wi(D) by a nonnegative

factor bi that is produced at social cost ci. If disinformation could be easily refuted, bi and

ci would be near zero. The degree of transparency Ti that the particular contract i can

offer its users increases the lower is bi, the more cheaply counterinformation can be

produced, and the larger the present value of the pain Pi that legal and reputational

penalties can visit upon insiders who misrepresent the contract’s value. Transparency
                                                                                  (− )   (− )   (+)
can be defined as a function of the three variables just mentioned: Ti = Ti ( b i , c i ; P i ) .

This suggests that empirical researchers could proxy unobservable differences in

transparency either across time or across countries by observable measures or potential

correlates of these three determinants.

        The more transparency an information system displays, the more successfully

outside monitoring and penalties for issuing false and inadequate disclosures can mitigate

the potential harm that disinformational activity might introduce. If bi=0, the information

industry renders disinformation about the particular contract i perfectly ineffective. As bi

approaches 1 from below, the financial counterinformation industry becomes

progressively less helpful to outside stakeholders. If bi exceeds 1, on balance the

information industry produces more disinformation about contract i than it dispels.

        To allow for countervailing economic information that accumulates freely with

the mere passage of time, we introduce a time subscript (t) and define freely available

economic counter-information on contract i (Eti) as follows:



                                                                                                      8
                                                t
                                       Eti =   ∑e
                                               j =0
                                                      ji   ,                            (2)


where eji equals the incremental amount of publicly available counterinformation on

contract i that surfaces at date j. Using definition (2) and introducing time and the

present value of the expected pain a disinformer faces for admitting error or perverting

the truth, (1) becomes:

                              Vti=bti(cti)wi[Dti(bti;Pti)-Eti]+Fti.                     (1a)

       Issuers of securities have incentives to release favorable inside information

promptly, but to conceal or distort the meaning of adverse events as they occur. This

asymmetry implies [as Bakshi and Madan (1998) find for U.S. equities] that the

frequency of sudden large downward movements in asset prices is somewhat greater than

the frequency of sudden large asset price increases. The asymmetry and the benefits to

successor managers of coming clean imply that the deep lefthand tail of the frequency

distribution of asset price movements is thicker and longer than the deep righthand tail.

       The gross social value (St) of the professional information industry lies in

moderating information asymmetries and their unpleasant consequences by discouraging

and refuting disinformation. Incentive support for transparency comes principally from

the size and uncertain incidence of penalties imposed ex post by market forces and by the

legal system if and when deceptive and false statements are found out. The force of this

effect may be enhanced, as in 2002, by increases in the budgets of governmental

watchdogs or scandal-driven decreases in the credibility coefficient bti. Such events

reduce the marginal benefit of disinformational activity. The complementary effects are

                              ∂Dti     ∂Dti
measured by the derivatives        and      . For a given amount of disinformation, the
                              ∂Pti     ∂bti



                                                                                               9
term         [1-b(cti )] is an index of StiR the direct refutational value of

counterinformation:
                                  R
                                Sti =[1-bti(cti)]wi[Dti(bti; Pti) -Eti].               (3)

       Society may reasonably prefer that refutational checks on disinformational

activity be produced by overlapping private and governmental entities. In part, this is

because both government and private suppliers are bound to be offered inducements to

underproduce informational discipline. At the same time, efforts to strengthen truth-

telling incentives benefit parties that cannot easily be made to pay information suppliers

for producing them. Producers of external benefits can seldom collect fair compensation

without invoking the enforcement and dispute-resolution powers of the state. The

existence of uncompensated externalities in watchdog activities makes it easier for

corporate insiders to influence information agents and suggests that neither governmental

nor private cooperative entities should dominate the process of developing and enforcing

disclosure standards. In the U.S., joint public-private regulation is in fact the norm for

financial firms. Federal and state agencies importantly supplement private accounting

and credit-rating watchdogs in formulating and enforcing disclosure standards. These

agencies seek to cover the costs of their activities through fees, taxes, fines, and civil

lawsuits.

       The social value of information flows St may be expressed as the sum of

informational benefits produced in the private sector (SPt) and in government (SGt):

                                        St=SPt+SGt .                                   (4)

The net value of information flows to society (StN ) is less than this sum by the cost of the

resources the two production processes absorb:



                                                                                             10
                                        N     N     N
                                       St = SPt + SGt .                                (5)

       If conflicts of interest and externalities did not exist in the financial information

industry, market forces would produce the socially optimal amount of information.

Information suppliers would maximize enterprise profits and social welfare by driving

the net marginal value of undisclosed information to zero in their sector.

       A weaker benchmark for optimality may be developed by assuming that conflicts

of interest between bureaucrats and taxpayers could be reduced to negligible proportions

by the intermediation of a diligent and free press if we could establish perfect

accountability for decisions made in the government sector. In this case, citizens might

search more energetically for effective ways to motivate public servants to direct their

informational interventions to finding and correcting deficiencies in private-sector

information production. Successful interventions would seek to lessen the incentive

conflicts facing accountants, credit-rating agencies, and other private watchdogs, thereby

curtailing management opportunities to hide material adverse information and to engage

in prolonged campaigns of deceit.



III.   Ethical Standards of Information Production

       Good decisionmaking requires hard-to-gather information. So does responsible

oversight of whatever decisions are made. The fundamental dilemma of corporate and

public governance is that, at the margin and over short periods, it often pays to hide

adverse information. The result is that an ethician could say that outside stakeholders

deserve more complete accountability than can be fashioned from the ethical standards

that insiders set and the gaps in the information flows outsiders receive.



                                                                                               11
       In the U.S. today, to determine that a private or government enterprise is not run

honestly, outside stakeholders need accurate and timely information both about the

adverse effects of the tactics and strategies that those in authority adopt and about their

motives for adopting these procedures. For both legitimate and illegitimate reasons,

managers cultivate opportunities to conceal important aspects of what they are doing and

to misrepresent why they are doing them and the effects they have on other parties.

Similarly, for both legitimate and illegitimate reasons, watchdog institutions may assist in

this process.

       Gaps in reporting and governance standards imply that, without being

immediately found out, managers can harm any of the following stakeholders:

                         stockholders
                         depositors and other creditors qua creditors
                         customers generally
                         guarantors
                         taxpayers
                         employees
                         the economy.

Moreover, Securities and Exchange Commission, National Association of Securities

Dealers, and Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation investigations regularly determine

that corporate managers, securities professionals, and bankers do in fact harm some of

these others.

       A business, government, or accounting practice may be labelled unethical (and

perhaps immoral) if it violates shared norms to which a society, profession, or firm has

firmly committed itself. Such norms express communal preferences and generate explicit

and implicit ethical standards that constrain and redirect individual behavior.

       Individuals develop their character and commit to personal values in overlapping




                                                                                              12
cultural contexts. One of these contexts is the ethical subculture established by their

profession, industry, or firm. While societywide processes of standard-setting typically

promote altruistic values –such as compassion, truth-telling, promise-keeping, and fair

play—that condemn opportunistic behaviors, subculture norms often countenance self-

interested conduct that can undermine the goals of society as a whole. In the nexus

between investment banking and equity research, for example, dishonest people

frequently exploit trust and market liquidity built up by the efforts of honest others. In

ethically well-ordered cultures, actions by managers and watchdogs that greatly damage

unknowing others bring personal “shame” and external disrepute onto those who perform

them. Although such societies reinforce their norms by subjecting particularly offensive

behaviors to explicit and implicit governmental and commercial sanctions, when

preserving one’s honor and reputation is a major goal, most individuals prefer to operate

well away from bright-line legal boundaries of right and wrong.

       Experience teaches two lessons about workplace ethical standards. They are

vague and self-serving, and, along with explicit legal obligations, they vary both across

cultures and –within cultures— over time. Both features illustrate the fact that the

particular institutions that generate and promulgate ethical standards adapt to changes

that relevant subcultures undergo over time. Around the world, parents, schools,

churches, professional societies, news media, entertainment industries, and justice

systems send distressingly mixed messages about what particular ethical limits the

conscience of a business or governmental policymaker should respect.

       Hard-to-resolve conflicts exist between limits set by principled and practical

standards of behavior. These conflicts allow a corporate manager or information agent to




                                                                                             13
define its duties self-interestedly by drawing opportunistically from conflicting systems

of business and governmental ethical standards (Jacobs, 1992). It is convenient to label

the duties implied by abstract or principled standards as ethics one and the often-looser

obligations imposed by practical standards that hold sway in subcultures as ethics two.

Ethics one are hypothetical rules and values that --in a given society-- you and I would

prefer that others would accept as governing right and wrong when they are faced with a

given conflict in interest. Ethics two are the rules and values that we would accept as

constraining ourselves if we would actually be presented with the same situation. This

distinction may also be framed as “rules for others” and “rules for ourselves.” The

Judaeo-Christian Golden Rule acknowledges this duality and advises us to do unto others

as we would have them do unto us. The rule defines a right conscience as one that would

make managers’ “ethics two” rules identical with those of their “ethics one.”

        As a guide to forming a right conscience in working life, the reciprocity criterion

dictated by the Golden Rule tells individuals how they can clean up incentive conflict.3

The Golden Rule offers a way to make principled choices of behaviors from diverse

ethical guidelines. Although the standard for determining a clean conscience is permitted

to be idiosyncratic, the Rule’s adherents have no reason to fear informational

transparency. This is because individuals are led to behave as if every action they might

be able to cover up and every motive they might be able to misrepresent will eventually

be seen through and exposed to everyone they harm. The Rule requires individuals to

admit mistakes quickly, to compensate individuals for the harm caused, and to make a

firm purpose of amendment. However, it is only a counsel of perfection. To gather


3
 Formally, the Rule inserts the welfare of counterparties on an equal basis into each individual’s own
objective function.


                                                                                                         14
incentive force, it must be supplemented by a substantial fear of private dishonor, public

shame, or divine retribution. Where none of these fears is substantial, civil and criminal

penalties carry an inevitably more selective burden of enforcement.

IV.    Dialectics of the Sarbanes-Oxley Act

       The U.S. Congress may be conceived as an arena in which lobbyists for diverse

interests battle endlessly with one another. The outcome of every important battle is a

temporary and loophole-ridden peace treaty. To understand the latest treaty and why it

must eventually break down, one must understand the weaknesses in the treaty it

replaces. One must also understand the objectives and relative strength of the different

lobbies.

       It is no accident that, in the modern U.S., incentive conflict in information

production is controlled imperfectly. A strong lobby prefers loophole-ridden codes of

ethics and easily evaded structural checks and balances. Opposing lobbies have pressed

for societywide disclosure standards, which today are formulated and enforced by three

layers of external watchdog institutions. The first layer of external watchdogs consists of

professional information specialists: auditors, credit and investment analysts, and

government officials charged with enforcing existing standards for reporting and

disclosure. An intermediate layer consists of the entities that set the accounting standards

that the first layer of institutions enforces. A third layer consists of information media

whose employees -- besides paraphrasing accounting reports – occasionally investigate

the work of the first layer of watchdogs. In combination with academia and investigative

arms of government, information media generate feedback to the standard-setters. They




                                                                                             15
publicize detects in accounting standards and provide a forum within which to discuss

ways of closing or narrowing loopholes that are deemed to violate cultural standards.

         When sizeable weaknesses in the nation’s system for vetting corporate

disinformation have been concealed for a long while, their sudden revelation is bound to

shake the confidence that investors and the press have in the reliability of financial

reports and ethical codes. This decline in confidence raises the compensation that

investors demand for bearing valuation and performance risk and embarrasses standard-

setting institutions. In this way, a series of outsized accounting and ethical scandals can –

as indeed they did in the wake of the Enron, WorldCom, et. al. scandals of 2002 – kick

off an urgent dialectical process of accounting and regulatory adjustment.

         The Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 strikes at the determinants of corporate

incentives to block or delay the release of adverse information identified in Section II.4

Although a few of its provisions became effective immediately, many were routed

through the Security and Exchange Commission (SEC) for followup team-building and

rulemaking consistent with the purposes of the Act.

         Accountants and managers who valued pre-existing gaps in reporting and

governance controls labored behind the scene to exert political and economic

counterpressure on the followup standard-setting process. Their counterpressure sought

to sidetrack genuine reform by limiting the effectiveness of the standards, penalties, and

enforcement procedures the SEC finally installed on such matters as auditor

independence, attorney conduct, and off-balance-sheet transactions. Besides persuading

standard-setters to transform rather than eliminate the reporting loopholes and incentive


4
 Detailed analyses of the Act’s many provisions are available on the internet. (See e.g., Fried, Frank, et al.
(2003) and Scott, Sanders, and Dempsey (2003).


                                                                                                           16
conflicts whose final shapes were still in play, lobbyists also worked at culling proposed

appointments to the newly created Public Company Accounting Oversight Board

(PCAOB).

       To understand how the Act does and does not promise to help outside

stakeholders, we must identify the particular links in the chain of disinformation

production and refutation that the Act addresses and ascertain how firmly it recasts these

links. Although preferential loans and insider trading are subjected to tougher restrictions,

at its core the Act may be conceived as a trident. It is a weapon that, if used expertly,

would puncture the pipeline of disinformation in three places. The first prong (which

took effect almost immediately) serves to increase what section II parameterized as P: the

exposure to reputational and legal penalties that top managers, outside lawyers, directors,

and auditors face if they are ultimately shown to have condoned or engaged willfully,

knowingly, or carelessly in deceptive accounting. The second prong serves to make it

easier for directors and external auditors to recognize the truths and untruths contained in

tricky or aggressive accounting claims: i.e., to lower the costs of refutation c. The third

prong attacks parameter b by shifting formal control of disclosure and auditing standards

for publicly trading companies from self-regulatory bodies in the accounting industry to

an SEC-appointed oversight board. Given the phenomenon of Regulatory Capture, this

prong seems dangerously fragile.

       The first and second prongs focus on the initial procreators of financial

disinformation and install important Golden Rule obligations on corporate insiders. The

first prong obliges public companies to disclose material changes in financial condition or

operations in “real time” (section 409). In addition, a public company’s principal




                                                                                              17
executive and financial officers must certify the material accuracy of the periodic

financial reports their corporations issue. Senior officials guilty of knowing or willful

miscertification would face large fines and a substantial prison sentence. The second

prong requires corporations to describe their internal controls and to disclose whether

they promulgate a code of ethics for senior officers. It also introduces a series of

structural checks and balances designed to increase the effective independence and

financial competence of corporate boards of directors and their information-handling

subcommittees.

       The third prong calls for writing new auditing and disclosure standards and

delegates the task to the PCAOB. The politics of selecting and influencing PCAOB

members recalls Groucho Marx’s acid characterization of politics as the “art of looking

for trouble, finding it, misdiagnosing it, and then misapplying the wrong remedies.”

Lobbyists are bound to pressure the PCAOB to adopt as much as possible of the codes of

Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP) and Generally Accepted Auditing

Standards (GAAS) previously established by accounting industry. Moreover, it will

seem expedient to do this, even though safe-harbor loopholes inherent in GAAP and

GAAS lie at the root of the most-outrageous corporate scandals of recent history.

       These principles and standards undermine practicing accountants’ moral duty to

promote transparency. Requiring auditors to certify only that a corporation’s reports

conform with GAAP circumvents the Golden Rule issue of investigating and certifying

whether the reports truly and fairly reflect economic reality. Until and unless the

PCAOB refocuses the auditing process on certifying the economic meaningfulness of

income and net-worth calculations, the shallowness of this prong will reduce the




                                                                                            18
penetrating power of the other two.

V.      Asymmetric Ethical Treatment of the Accounting Industry

       Corporate officials, incumbent regulators, and accounting professionals have

notably softened the edges of the reform process. Despite evidence of favoritism toward

the accounting industry strong enough to force his resignation, former SEC chairman

Harvey Pitt managed to stay in office as a lame duck long enough to oversee the

precedent-setting first stages of the Act’s followup process. As a result, the legislative

response to investor dissatisfaction with inherited accounting standards and disclosure

incentives was rechanneled back through the same incentive-conflicted professionals who

had served society so badly in the first place. To strengthen surviving weak links in the

chain of corporate governance and information control, aggrieved parties must continue

to rely on an all-too-partisan SEC.

       This demonstrates the strength of the accounting lobby. Its ability to exert

political pressure testifies ultimately to the size of the rents that this highly concentrated

industry can obtain by preserving its options to help troubled firms and rogue managers

to conceal adverse information from outside stakeholders. Measuring lobbying strength

by the dues revenue that can be redistributed each year by different trade associations,

Table 1 indicates that accountants’ warchest makes the banking, securities, and insurance

industries look poorly armed.




                                                                                             19
                                                                  Table 1
Financial Strength of Financial Lobbies as Measured by Trade Groups' 2000 Revenues
                                                                             2002 Revenues   % of Revenues from Derived Members Dues

American Institute of Certified Public Accountants                           $130.8M                         48%
American Bankers Association                                                 $55.9M                          35%
Credit Union National Association                                            $44.3M                          34%
Investment Company Institute                                                 $43.9M                          80%
Securities Industry Association                                              $40.6M                          58%
American Council of Life Insurers                                            $38.0M                          90%
American Insurance Association                                               $20.9M                          87%

Independent Community Bankers of America                                     $17.5M                          38%
America’s Community Bankers                                                  $15.4M                          46%

Independent Insurance Agents and Bankers of America                          $14.3M                          45%
Financial Services Roundtable                                                $9.3M                           91%
Consumer Bankers Association                                                 $5.6M                           41%
Source: 8-2-02 American Banker, Compiled from Internal Revenue Service 990
Forms




                     In his 1820 essay “On Government,” James Mill opined: “All of the difficult

           questions of government relate to the means of restraining those, in whose hands are

           lodged the powers necessary for the protection of all, from making bad use of it.” A

           principal protective mission of the SEC is to safeguard investors and the integrity of U.S.

           securities markets from corporate disinformation. The Sarbanes-Oxley Act empowers

           the SEC to make it harder and more dangerous for managers to overstate revenues,

           understate expenses, and make deceptive use of reserve accounts. How fully the SEC

           proceeds to use its enhanced power is a matter of politics. And so is how well or poorly

           the SEC has regulated accounting standards in the past.

                     In 2002, lobbyists’ successes and failures in their first and second bites at the

           ethical apple can be benchmarked by comparing the SEC’s adjustments of governance

           and disclosure standards under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act with movements that would be

           consistent with the Golden Rule. One place to look for Golden Rule improvements is to



                                                                                                                    20
identify actions taken by state officials and managers who, without waiting for federal

standards to be reformulated, conscientiously make reporting and corporate-governance

repairs on their own. Individual firms often commit voluntarily to improvements in

reporting and ethical standards that go markedly beyond mandates they might rationally

expect to emerge from multilateral negotiations. Such commitments include the

expensing of options and the provision of strong whistleblower protections. By

Samuelson’s Principle of Revealed Preference, where they are adopted, Golden Rule

ethical constraints may be presumed to reduce agency costs. For example, an

organization that was determined to root out unethical behavior could require its

managers to avoid even the appearance of incentive conflict. To outsiders, this standard

would offer informational transparency and ease of enforcement. However, in fashioning

any test, one has to worry about balancing Type I and Type II error. An Appearances test

would generate many false positives. For this reason, even nonopportunistic insiders may

be expected to resist the career turbulence and unwelcome loss of privilege this standard

would bring. That few firms enforce so transparent and unyielding an ethical standard

suggests -- but does not prove -- that it may be overly scrupulous.

       Across the chain of information production, SEC rulemaking has imposed vastly

stronger Golden Rule obligations on investment analysts and corporate insiders than on

the accounting profession. Top corporate officials are now obliged to report material

events promptly and fully. Management must provide information that it believes is

necessary for an understanding of its off-balance-sheet arrangements and quantitatively

reconcile presentations of so-called “pro forma” information with comparable measures

prepared according to GAAP. Attorneys representing public companies must report




                                                                                          21
evidence of material violations of laws or duties to a firm’s CEO, chief legal officer, or

board. Mutual-fund managers must publicly disclose how they vote their proxies.

Investment analysts must certify that opinions expressed in research reports accurately

reflect their personal views and explain any specific payments that may have influenced

their research. Because the informational benefits and costs of these provisions were not

specifically estimated and weighed quantitatively by the SEC, one must expect these

issues to be revisited by spokespersons for the obliged parties as data on their compliance

burdens accumulate.

         In the absence of data on the costs and benefits of Sarbanes-Oxley obligations

impose on particular information agents, it is illogical for SEC commissioners to distrust

the ethics of corporate insiders, outside financial analysts, and mutual-fund managers so

severely while continuing to rely heavily on professional accountants to behave

conscientiously. Making the top officers of auditing firms responsible for reviewing the

overall economic accuracy of the numbers their firms certify and for explaining how

specific payments might have influenced their opinions would impose enforceable

obligations parallel to those placed on other parties in the information chain.

                                                     Table 2
 What the Top 25 Banks Paid Their Accountants in 2001
                                                   Other                                  Audit    Other
                        Firm       Audit Fees      Fees                         Firm      Fees     Fees
 Citigroup             KPMG         $26.1M        $24.6M       Wachovia         E&Y       $2.1M    $1.1M
 J.P. Morgan Chase      PWC         $21.3M       $84.2M+       First Union     KPMG       $7.3M   $24.9M+
 Bank of America        PWC         $13.2M       $36.3M+       Golden State    KPMG       $1.9M    $1.0M
                                      not
 Wells Fargo           KPMG        available                   BB&T**         Andersen    $0.7M    $0.9M

 Bank One              KPMG         $4.4M         $2.5M        SouthTrust**   Andersen    $0.5M    $1.7M
 Washington Mutual     Deloitte     $2.9M         $7.5M        Regions          E&Y       $0.7M    $3.0M
 FleetBoston            PWC         $8.6M        $33.0M+       Golden West     Deloitte   $0.5M    $0.2M

 SunTrust*            Andersen      $1.5M         $4.1M        Comerica         E&Y       $0.5M    $1.7M
 KeyCorp                E&Y         $1.8M         $8.1M        Fifth Third     Deloitte   $0.7M   $2.7M+
 National City          E&Y         $1.9M         $3.0M        AmSouth          E&Y       $0.9M    $4.0M




                                                                                                  22
                                          not
 U.S. Bankcorp             E&Y         available                       MBNA                E&Y         $1.1M            $2.6M
 Bank of New York          E&Y          $1.3M          $4.1M           State Street        E&Y         $0.7M            $7.1M+
                                          not
 PNC                       E&Y         available                       Charter One       Deloitte      $0.4M            $3.1M+
 From most recent proxy filings. Figures are rounded. *SunTrust said in February it would replace Andersen as auditor
 **BB&T and SouthTrust still planned to keep Andersen. +Includes information systems consulting
                        Source: 3-13-02 American Banker based on Figures in Bowman's Accounting Report, Atlanta




         Table 2 reproduces a table from the American Banker that breaks down

expenditures the top 25 banking organizations paid their auditing firm for audit and

nonaudit services in 2001. In several cases, the auditor’s nonaudit income dwarfs

revenues from audit fees. Congress understood the need to prevent accounting firms

from making so much money selling nonaudit services to audit clients that they could be

persuaded to certify a series of disinformational reports. For this reason, the Act

expressly prohibits accounting firms from performing particular types of services for

their audit clients. Rather than identifying and narrowing the loopholes inherent in this

list, the SEC widened them. It authorized outside auditors to perform tax and other

nonaudit services not expressly forbidden by the Act on the basis of Audit Committee

policies and procedures for preapproval rather than requiring the specific and explicit

approval of the Audit Committee as envisioned in the Act. This rule places the burden of

assuring that client-auditor arrangements comply with the Act on a public company’s

Audit Committee rather than on the accounting firm.

         In a further effort to assure auditor independence, the Act also calls for firms to

rotate their auditors every few years. Final SEC rules on auditor rotation softened the

burden of this provision. SEC rules require only that particular categories of audit

partners leave a company’s auditing team after five or seven years. However, the

continuity of the team as a whole is not explicitly regulated.



                                                                                                                    23
       The gaps in these rules authorize auditing firms to collect laundered bribes from

dishonest or desperate managers for knowingly and willingly certifying disinformational

reports without squarely exposing themselves to the explicit obligations and penalties that

the corporate managers face themselves. To dream up a parallel situation in criminal law,

one might imagine a penal code that exempted lookouts and drivers of getaway cars from

penalties for participating in armed robbery.

VI.    Concluding Comments

       When it comes to financial reporting, investors seem increasingly more likely to

be shocked by honesty than appalled by deceit. Although observers such as the Financial

Economists Roundtable (2002) attribute the Sarbanes-Oxley Act to a three-way crisis in

accounting, auditing, and corporate governance, SEC followup rulemaking has focused

disproportionately on strengthening the corporate Audit-Committee and governance links

in the informational chain. The SEC has exempted the self-interested ethical codes of the

auditing industry and accounting profession from obligations to affirm the economic

accuracy of audited reports that the Act ought symmetrically to have imposed on them.

That accountants could preserve such asymmetric privileges underscores how difficult it

is for Congress and the SEC to address even blatant market failure. To reregulate

accountants’ incentives may require -- not just a first-class PCAOB and another round of

SEC rulemaking – but a concerted effort by other sectors to reduce industry rents by

encouraging new entry into the accounting and credit-rating industries.




                                                                                        24
References



Bakshi, Gurdip, and Dilip Madan, 1998. “What is the Probability of a Stock Market
       Crash?,” Department of Finance, University of Maryland (unpublished,
       September 2).
Bebchuk, Lucian, Jesse M. Fried, and David Walker, 2002. “Managerial Power and Rent
       Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation,” CEPR Discussion Paper
       No. 3558, London.
Becht, Marco, Patrick Bolton, and Alisa Röell, 2002. “Corporate Governance and
       Control,” NBER Working Paper No. 9371. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of
       Economic Research, Inc. (December).
Dimson, Elroy, and Massoud Mussavian, 1998. “A Brief History of Market Efficiency,”
       European Financial Management, 4, pp. 91-103.
Financial Economists Roundtable, 2002. Statement on the Crisis in Accounting,
       Auditing, and Corporate Governance, Chicago: October 1.
Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver, and Jacobson, 2003. The Post-Enron Corporate
       Governance Environment: Where Are We Now? New York (January 14).
Jacobs, Jane, 1992. Systems of Survival: A Dialogue on the Moral Foundations of
       Commerce and Politics, New York: Random House.
Jensen, Michael C., 1994. “Self-Interest, Altruism, Incentives, and Agency Theory,”
       Journal of Applied Corporate Finance, (Summer).
Squire, Sanders, and Dempsey, 2003. Summary Scorecard of Legislative and Regulatory
       Initiatives: Corporate Governance, Financial and Insider Disclosures, and
       Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, Cleveland, OH. (Updated as of January 29).




                                                                                      25
