                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                 “FIFTY-FOUR FORTY OR FIGHT!”

                                          Herschel I. Grossman

                                           Working Paper 9635
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9635


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




I have received helpful comments from Michelle Garfinkel, Dmitriy Gershenson, Francisco González, Simon
Grant, Luis Locay, Donald Paterson, and Enrico Spolaore and from other participants in seminars at Texas
A&M University, at Rice University/University of Houston, at the International Center for Economic
Research/ University of Turin, at the University of Bologna, and at the University of British Columbia. I
thank Harl Ryder for technical assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Herschel I. Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
“Fifty-four Forty or Fight!”
Herschel I. Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 9635
April 2003
JEL No. D74

                                             ABSTRACT


This paper develops an explanation for historical differences in the ways in which territorial disputes
between sovereign states have been resolved. The main innovation in the analysis is to allow for
three possible equilibria:

·A an unfortified border;

·A a fortified but peaceful border; and

·A armed conflict.

The analysis shows that the possibility of a credible agreement to divide a contested territory and
to leave the resulting border unfortified depends on the effectiveness of spending on arms by one
state relative to another and on the importance that states attach to the potential costs of future armed
conflicts. The analysis also shows that, if all relevant parameters are common knowledge, then, even
if an agreement to have an unfortified border would not be credible, states can resolve a territorial
dispute peacefully by dividing the contested territory and fortifying the border. Finally, the paper
points out that unverifiable innovations, especially innovations in military technology, can cause a
peaceful settlement to break down, resulting in an armed conflict that in turn can provide the basis
for a new peaceful settlement.

Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
herschel_grossman@brown.edu
       The Democratic candidate, James Polk, won the American presidential election of 1844
on a platform that asserted the American claim to the entire Oregon territory, including
the part that later became the Canadian province of British Columbia. The political slogan
“Fifty-four Forty or Fight!”, a reference to 54 degrees 40 minutes north latitude, dramatized
this claim.1
       But, the outcome of this territorial dispute was neither fifty-four forty nor fight. In
the Oregon Treaty of 1846 the United States and Great Britain peacefully resolved their
diﬀerences by dividing the Oregon territory between the United States and Canada.
       While the United States and Great Britain were negotiating this peaceful settlement, they
also were preparing for armed conflict. In the months preceeding the signing of the Oregon
Treaty the British fortified Vancouver Island and the British Pacific Squadron patrolled the
Oregon coast, while the United States government sent troops to protect American settlers on
their way to Oregon. More importantly, the United States had reason to fear that in an armed
conflict over the Oregon territory the British Navy would blockade and bombard American
cities on the Atlantic coast, whereas the British increased their fortifications around the
Great Lakes for fear that the Americans would press their claim to the Oregon territory by
invading Ontario and the St. Lawrence Valley.
       Today a territorial dispute between the United States and Canada, much less an armed
conflict over the border between the United States and Canada, is unimaginable. In the
decades following the Oregon Treaty the United States and Great Britain peacefully re-
solved territorial disputes that arose over the San Juan Islands, rights to hunt fur seals,
and the boundary of Alaska. These agreements completed the demarcation of the current
borders between the United States and Canada, which have now been both undisputed and
unfortified for many years.
   1
       The origin of the slogan is obscure. Both Edwin Miles (1957) and Hans Sperber (1957) conclude that,
contrary to some accounts, it was not used during the election campaign of 1844, but originated during the
congressional debates that followed the election.


                                                     1
       In sharp contrast to the peaceful resolution of the dispute over the Oregon territory, in
the same year, 1846, a territorial dispute between the United States and Mexico led to armed
conflict, with disastrous consequences for Mexico. As the result of the Mexican-American
War the United States annexed previously Mexican territories that now comprise Arizona,
California, Nevada, New Mexico, Utah, and parts of Colorado and Texas.2
       As a schoolboy I learned with pride that the United States and Canada enjoyed the
world’s longest unfortified border between sovereign states. In addition, my elders led me
to believe that this happy state of aﬀairs resulted from the moral superiority of Americans
and Canadians, especially in contrast to Mexicans and also to Europeans, who, being greedy
and quarrelsome, fortified their borders and, even worse, regularly engaged in wasteful and
destructive territorial conflicts, the Second World War that had just ended being the latest
example.
       This paper develops a analysis that yields a less invidious explanation for historical dif-
ferences in the ways in which territorial disputes between sovereign states have been resolved.
This analysis is broadly relevant and applies to a wide variety of situations.

       • The value of controlling a contested territory can comprise either economic factors,
         such as the revenue from exploitation of the territory’s natural resources, as in the
         case of Oregon, or noneconomic considerations, such as geopolitical advantages that
         control of the territory confers, as in the case of Gibraltar.

       • A contested territory can abut the uncontested domains of the parties to the dispute,
         as in the case of Oregon, Alsace, or Kashmir, or it can be separated by either land
         or sea from the uncontested domains of one of both of the parties, as in the cases of
         European states contesting control over colonies on other continents.
   2
       David Pletcher (1973) provides an extensive account of political, diplomatic, and military developments
in the simultaneous territorial disputes between the United States and Great Britain and between the United
States and Mexico.


                                                       2
   • Control of a contested territory can involve explicit annexation and/or direct rule, as
     in all of the examples already mentioned, or it can involve the creation of client states
     and/or spheres of influence, as in the case of the Cold War between the United States
     and the Soviet Union.

   • An armed conflict over control of a contested territory might or might not be confined
     to the contested territory itself. For example, the armed conflict between Argentina and
     Great Britain over the Malvinas/Falkland Islands took place entirely on the Islands and
     the nearby seas. In contrast, in the Mexican-American War, although the United States
     had no serious intention of annexing all of Mexico, the American military strategy
     included an invasion of the Mexican heartland.

   • Although fortifications, which play a critical role in the analysis, can be, like the
     Maginot Line and the Seigfried Line, literally on the border between the parties to
     the dispute, fortifications more generally include any preparations for armed conflict
     over a contested territory, such as the possible positioning of British warships oﬀ the
     Atlantic coast of the United States in anticipation of armed conflict over Oregon.

   The main innovation in the analysis is to allow for three possible equilibria:

   • an unfortified border, like the present borders between the United States and Canada;

   • a fortified but peaceful border, like the border between the United States and Canada
     in 1846; and

   • armed conflict, like the Mexican-American War.

   The analysis of these equilibria is based on three complementary ideas. The first idea,which
derives from the standard theory of repeated interactions between adversaries, is that a cred-
ible agreement to settle a territorial dispute peacefully involves a division of the contested
territory. The second idea, which derives from the work of Michelle Garfinkel (1990) on

                                              3
the strategic role of arms in international conflict, is that a credible agreement to settle a
territorial dispute peacefully can require a fortified border.3
       The present paper integrates these two ideas. The analysis shows that the possibility of
credible agreement to divide a contested territory and to leave the resulting border unfortified
depends on the eﬀectiveness of spending on arms by one state relative to another and on
the importance that states attach to the potential costs of future armed conflicts. The
analysis also shows that, if all relevant parameters are common knowledge, then, even if an
agreement to have an unfortified border would not be credible, states can resolve a territorial
dispute peacefully by dividing the contested territory and fortifying the border. This result
formalizes two well-known prescriptions: Qui desiderat pacem, preparet bellum. Also, “good
fences make good neighbors.” In addition we see that the same factors that determine
whether an unfortified border is possible also determine how a credible peaceful settlement
would divide control of a contested territory and what amount of fortifications a peaceful
settlement would require.
       The third idea is that unverifiability of military technology can prevent the peaceful
settlement of a new territorial dispute and also can cause an existing peaceful settlement of
an old territorial dispute to break down, with armed conflict resulting. This idea is related
to the analysis of Dagobert Brito and Michael Intriligator (1985) and James Fearon (1995)
in which war results from asymmetric information that produces inconsistently optimistic
expectations about the probabilities of success in armed conflict. The present paper adds
the observation that information about the relative eﬀectiveness of spending on arms derived
from the experience of armed conflict can provide the basis for a future peaceful settlement.
   3
       In Garfinkel’s model states contest control over capital stocks that are endogenously determined. In
the present paper the analysis is simplified by taking the value of controlling the contested territory to be
exogenous. In related work on territorial conflict Ronald Findlay (1996) and Herschel Grossman and Juan
Mendoza (2002) analyze the expansion of empires, but these analyses do not consider the possibility of
agreements to limit arms.



                                                      4
A Model of Territorial Conflict
       Consider two sovereign states, denoted State 1 and State 2, each of which wants to
control a contested territory. Either these two states negotiate a peaceful settlement of their
territorial dispute or they engage in an armed conflict for control of the contested territory.
       Although, as mentioned, the analysis of how these states resolve their territorial dis-
pute is broadly relevant, for tractability the analysis abstracts from several complications.
Specifically, the analysis utilizes throughout the following simplifying assumptions:

       • The dispute does not concern either the survival of the two states or control of their
         heartlands and other uncontested domains. Hence, an armed conflict for control of the
         contested territory would not call for a total mobilization of resources and would not
         face either state with a binding constraint on its ability to mobilize resources.

       • Interaction between the two states, through either conflict or negotiation, determines
         control of the contested territory without reference to the preferences of the inhabitants
         of the contested territory.4

       • The states act in this dispute as if they are unitary agents. Their internal politics do
         not bear on this dispute.5

       • The state that wins an armed conflict for control of the contested territory in the
         current period would gain control of the entire contested territory, but only for the
         current period. Hence, the states potentially face this territorial dispute repeatedly.6
   4
       Alberto Alesina and Enrico Spolaore (1997, 2003) develop a complementary analysis in which the pref-
erences of the inhabitants of regions play a role in determining the incorporation of regions into sovereign
states and, thereby, help to determine the boundaries of sovereign states.
   5
       Examples of recent literature on the relation between politics and war include Garfinkel (1994) and
Gregory Hess and Athanasios Orphanides (1995, 2001).
   6
       If, alternatively, the winner of an armed conflict would gain permanent control of the contested territory,
then the prospective costs of future armed conflicts could not serve to make an agreement to settle the dispute


                                                         5
       • Arms include a combination of manpower and items of military hardware that, whether
         or not they are used up in an armed conflict, either depreciate or become obsolete within
         a few years. A period, accordingly, is the number of years necessary to prepare for a
         new armed conflict either by arming or rearming.

       • An armed conflict for control of the contested territory would not cause significant
         collateral damage.7

       • The value for either state of controlling the fraction k of the contested territory in
         the current period would be k times that the value of controlling the entire territory.8

       Let α denote the value for either state of controlling the entire contested territory in
the current period, and let r1 and r2 denote the amounts of resources that in the event
of armed conflict State 1 and State 2 would mobilize in the current period – that is, the
amounts that the states would spend on arms. Assume that each state would choose its
spending on arms to maximize its expected value of armed conflict, taking as given the other
state’s spending on arms.9           Abstracting from collateral damage, the sum of r1 and r2
peacefully credible. Fearon (1995) analyses the problem of the credibility of peaceful settlements in a model
in which adversaries do not interact repeatedly.
   7
       An expectation of collateral damage, which with some eﬀort could be incorporated into the analysis,
would add to the expected cost of armed conflict and would enhance the possibility of a peaceful settlement.
   8
       In this formulation the marginal value of controlling more of the contested territory is constant. We
can readily generalize the analysis to allow for this marginal value either to be decreasing, in which case the
possibility of a peaceful settlement would be enhanced, or to be increasing, in which case the possibility of
a peaceful settlement would be diminished.
   9
       An alternative would be to assume that one state is a Stackelberg leader, who can make an irreversible
choice of its spending on arms before the other state makes its choice. The analysis in Grossman and
Minseong Kim (1995) and in Dmitriy Gershenson and Grossman (2000) suggest conditions under which a
Stackelberg leader would choose to spend enough on arms to cause the other state to give up its claim to
the contested territory.



                                                       6
would represent the cost of an armed conflict.
       Let p1 and p2 , where p1 + p2 = 1, denote the probabilities that State 1 or State 2
would win an armed conflict. Given that both r1 and r2 are positive, assume, as in a
standard contest-success function, that p1 and p2 depend on r1 and r2 according to

                      1                             1                           φ
(1)       p1 =                   and     p2 =               ,     where θ ≡        ,    0 < φ < 1.
                 1 + r2 /θr1                    1 + θr1 /r2                    1−φ

       The parameter φ in equations (1) measures the eﬀectiveness of spending on arms by
State 1 relative to the eﬀectiveness of spending on arms by State 2. A value of φ larger
than one half, or, equivalently, a value of θ larger than one, would mean that the State 1
has an advantage in armed conflict, and vice versa. Assume for now that the value of φ is
common knowledge and that the states behave as if φ is a constant.10
       Let N1 and N2 denote the expected values of armed conflict for State 1 and State
2, where, given the probabilities of winning the armed conflict, the value of controlling the
entire contested territory in the current period, and the amounts spent on arms, we have

(2)                              N1 = p1 α − r1      and        N2 = p2 α − r2 .

From equations (1) and (2) interior solutions to the problem for each state of choosing
spending on arms to maximize the expected value of armed conflict would satisfy the first-
order conditions,

                        dN1    ∂p1                              dN2    ∂p2
                            =α     −1=0              and            =α     − 1 = 0.
                        dr1    ∂r1                              dr2    ∂r2

       These first-order conditions imply the following reaction functions:

(3)                       r1 =     αr2 /θ − r2 /θ    and        r2 =   αθr1 − θr1 .
  10
       Because equations (1) are not linear in φ, this assumption is not innocuous. If the states recognized
φ to be a stochastic variable, then their behavior would depend not only on the expected value of φ, but
also on higher moments of the stochastic process generating φ.


                                                       7
Solving equations (3) for r1 and r2 in terms of α and φ, we obtain

(4)                                   r1 = r2 = α φ (1 − φ).

      Given that r1 and r2 would be equal, equations (1) imply that the probabilities
associated with each state winning control of the territory would be p1 = φ and p2 = 1 − φ.
By substituting equations (1) and (4) into equations (2), we obtain solutions for N1 and
N2 in terms of α and φ,

(5)                          N1 = α φ2      and       N2 = α (1 − φ)2 .

      If φ were equal to one half, and, equivalently, θ were equal to one, in which case
neither State 1 nor State 2 would have an advantage in armed conflict, then according to
equations (4) and (5) r1 and r2 and N1 and N2 each would equal α/4. In this case
armed conflict would dissipate exactly one-half of the value of the contested territory.

An Unfortified Border?
      Now, suppose that these states, seeking an alternative to armed conflict, were to enter
into negotiations to settle their border dispute and were to consider an agreement with two
provisions:

      • First, divide control of the contested territory with State 1 and State 2 getting control
        over the fractions k1 and k2 respectively, where k1 + k2 = 1.

      • Second, promise not to acquire arms intended for use, either defensively or oﬀensively,
        in armed conflict for control of the contested territory.

Under this agreement the border would be unfortified, and the territorial dispute would be
resolved peacefully.
      Would such an agreement be viable? Specifically, if one state does not arm, could the
other state credibly promise not to use armed force to attempt to gain control of the entire

                                                  8
contested territory? To answer this question, assume that either state would break its
promise not to use armed force if and only if, taking into account both current consequences
and expected future consequences, the expected value of breaking its promise would be larger
than the expected value of keeping its promise.11
       To determine the expected value of keeping a promise, assume that, as long as both
states keep their promises, they can make credible promises in the future. To determine
the expected value of breaking a promise, assume that, if one state does not arm, then the
other state could seize the entire contested territory in the current period by surreptitiously
spending a negligible amount on arms. But, assume further that, as long as the parameters
on which the agreement not to arm is based have not changed, if either state were to break
its promise, then future peaceful settlements would be precluded. In that event, starting
in the next period, the states would have to bear the costs of periodical armed conflict
permanently.12
       These assumptions imply that the promises of both states not to arm would be credible
if and only if k1 and k2 satisfy the following credibility conditions:
                    k1 α         ργ                              k2 α         ργ
(6)                       ≥ α+        N1              and              ≥ α+        N2 ,
                   1 − ργ      1 − ργ                           1 − ργ      1 − ργ
where the positive parameter γ is a growth factor, and where the parameter ρ, ρ < 1/γ, is
  11
       This assumption abstracts from the possibility that states can bond themselves to keep their promises
by oﬀering collateral or other hostages. A large literature deals with the question of whether or not political
agents can bond themselves. See, for example, Jeremy Bulow and Kenneth Rogoﬀ (1989).
  12
       The analysis can easily be generalized to allow for a possibility that armed conflict would not be perma-
nent. For example, we could assume that the value of controlling the contested territory is a random variable
that evolves over time according to the following simple stochastic process: Given that this value is positive
in the current period, with some probability this value will be will positive in the next period and with
the complementary probability this value will be zero in the next period and in all subsequent periods. In
this formulation model the probability that the territory will remain valuable would be a component of the
discount factor used in valuing expected future control of the territory. Also, armed conflict would continue
only for as long as control of the territory remained valuable.


                                                        9
a discount factor. In this formulation the value of controlling the entire contested territory
grows at a constant rate of γ − 1 per period.
      The left sides of conditions (6) are the expected value to each state of keeping its promise
not to arm, given that the other state keeps its promise and that both states will keep their
promises in the future. As long as both states keep their promises, each state would receive
now and in the future the value of its agreed fraction of the territory, adjusted for the growth
factor and the discount factor.
      The right sides of conditions (6) are the expected value to each state of breaking its
promise. By breaking its promise, a state at a negligible cost would receive in the current
period the value of controlling the entire territory, but in the future it would obtain only its
expected value from armed conflict, either N1 or N2 , adjusted for the growth factor and
the discount factor. The assumption that the states behave as if φ is a constant implies
that they behave as if N1 and N2 are constants.
      Setting k2 equal to 1 − k1 in conditions (6), and substituting from equations (5) for
N1 and N2 , we find that conditions (6) are satisfied if and only if k1 satisfies

(7)                          ργ [1 − (1 − φ)2 ] ≥ k1 ≥ 1 − ργ (1 − φ2 ).

There exist one or more values of k1 that can satisfy conditions (7) if and only if the left
side of conditions (7) is equal to or larger than the right side of conditions (7). This weak
inequality in turn obtains if and only if the parameters, φ, ρ, and γ, satisfy
                                                        1
(8)                                     ργ ≥                     .
                                                 1 + 2 φ (1 − φ)
      Condition (8) implies that there exist one or more values of k1 that can satisfy conditions
(7) if and only if the product of ρ and γ is suﬃciently large and φ is suﬃciently close
to one half. Figure 1 depicts the combinations of ργ and φ, as indicated by the region
labeled “unfortified border”, that satisfy condition (8).13 Condition (8) and Figure 1 imply
 13
      Condition (8) does not involve α because both sides of the conditions (6) are proportionate to α.


                                                     10
      ργ
         ↑


    1 •                                   •

               Unfortified Border


  2/3 •




                        •                 •     → φ
     0                 1/2                1


Figure 1: The Possibility of an Unfortified Border
the following result:

         Result 1: If the product of the discount factor and the growth factor
         is suﬃciently large, then states can negotiate a credible agreement to
         divide control of a contested territory and not to acquire arms intended
         for use in armed conflict for control of the contested territory. The
         smallest critical value of the product of the discount factor and the
         growth factor obtains for states for whom the eﬀectiveness of spending
         on arms is equal.

       The importance of a large value of ργ exemplifies the “folk theorem” from the standard
theory of repeated interactions between adversaries. The larger is ργ the more valuable it is
to have an viable agreement to avoid future armed conflict. Hence, with a suﬃciently large
value of ργ the prospect of armed conflict in the future would mitigate the temptation to
break the agreement by using armed force to seize control of the entire contested territory
for the current period.14
       The importance of φ being close to one half is a more novel result. For values of φ
much larger than one half, State 1 would have little to fear from future armed conflict,
whereas for values of φ much smaller than one half, State 2 would have little to fear from
future armed conflict. Thus, values of φ that are either much larger or much smaller than
one half weaken for one state or the other the eﬀect of the prospect of future armed conflict
in deterring armed conflict in the current period.
  14
       In this model, as in the standard theory of repeated interactions between adversaries, either a larger
growth factor or a larger discount factor facilitates a peaceful settlement. Alternatively, if the state that wins
an initial armed conflict were to gain control of the contested territory permanently, then the states would
not interact repeatedly, and, interestingly, either a larger growth factor or a larger discount factor would
intensify conflict. Examples of models that exhibit this property include Robert Powell (1993), Stergios
Skaperdas and Constantinos Syropoulos (1996), Grossman (1999), and Garfinkel and Skaperdas (2000).



                                                       11
   This theory suggests that Result 1 applies to the United States and Canada as well as to
those European states, France and Germany being prime examples, that after a long history
of armed territorial conflicts have now been able to dispense with border fortifications. Of
course, in these cases factors from which the analysis has abstracted probably have helped
to make agreements not to fortify borders credible. For example, these states can expect
that armed conflict would cause significant collateral damage. Also, these states can fear
that breaking a promise not to use armed force to seize a contested territory would preclude
future peaceful settlements not only of this territorial dispute but of other potential disputes.
   In a credible agreement not to fortify the border, how do the states divide the contested
territory? If the combination of ργ and φ satisfies condition (8) as an equality, then
a unique value of k1 would satisfy conditions (7).       Alternatively, if ργ and φ satisfy
condition (8) as an inequality, then a range of values of k1 would satisfy conditions (7). In
addition conditions (7) imply that both the minimum and maximum possible values of k1
in this range are increasing functions of φ. Thus, conditions (7) imply the following result:

      Result 2: Under a credible agreement not to acquire arms intended
      for use in armed conflict for control of a contested territory a state
      can control a larger share of the contested territory the larger would
      be the relative eﬀectiveness of its spending on arms.

   Figure 2 illustrates conditions (7). This figure depicts how the range of values for k1
that satisfy condition (7) depends on ργ and φ. As we have seen, conditions (7) can be
satisfied only if ργ is at least as large as two thirds. In addition, if ργ equals two thirds,
then only the combination of φ equal to one half and k1 and k2 equal to one half would
satisfy conditions (7). But, if ργ is larger than two-thirds, then all combinations of φ
and k1 in a set such as the set enclosed by the broken loci would satisfy conditions (7). In
the limit as ργ approaches one, all combinations of φ and k1 in the set enclosed by the
solid loci would satisfy conditions (7).

                                               12
    k1
       ↑


  1 •                                   •


                                  ←         limργ→1
3/4 •

                           ←                2/3 < ργ < 1

1/2 •                 •←                    ργ = 2/3



1/4 •




   0
                      •                 •     →   φ
                     1/2                1


Figure 2: Division of Territory with an Unfortified Border
A Fortified but Peaceful Border?
   Suppose that the parameters, φ and ργ, do not satisfy condition (8). As a result the
states cannot make a credible agreement to divide the contested territory and to leave the
border unfortified.
   Now, suppose that the states were to consider an alternative agreement with the following
three provisions:

   • First, as before, divide control of the contested territory with State 1 and State 2
     getting the fractions k1 and k2 , where k1 + k2 = 1.

   • Second, spend positive amounts, denoted by r1∗ and r2∗ , on fortifying the resulting
     border.

   • Third, promise not to use force to attempt to gain control of the entire contested
     territory.

If the sum of r1∗ and r2∗ were smaller than twice α φ (1 − φ), which is the amount that the
two states together would spend on arms in the event of armed conflict, then, although the
border would be fortified, this alternative agreement would resolve the dispute over control
of the contested territory peacefully and with less cost than an armed territorial conflict.
   Would this alternative agreement be credible? To answer this question, assume that
either state would break its promise not to use force to attempt to gain control of the entire
contested territory if and only if the expected value of breaking its promise would be larger
than the expected value of keeping its promise. To determine the expected value of keeping a
promise under this alternative agreement, assume as before that, as long as both states keep
their promises, they can make credible promises in the future. To determine the expected
value of breaking a promise under this alternative agreement, assume that, were it to break
its promise, State 1 would spend on arms an amount, denoted by r̃1 , that would maximize
its expected value of armed conflict, taking r2∗ as given, and similarly for State 2.

                                              13
      Using equations (3) we obtain the following solutions for r̃1 and r̃2 :

(9)                      r̃1 =   αr2∗ /θ − r2∗ /θ   and   r̃2 =   αθr1∗ − θr1∗ .

Substituting equations (9) into equations (1), we find that, if either State 1 or State 2 were to
break its promise, then its probability of winning control of the territory, denoted by either
p̃1 or p̃2 , would be

(10)                      p̃1 = 1 −    r2∗ /αθ      and   p̃2 = 1 −   θr1∗ /α.

      Also, assume that, as before, if either state were to break its promise, then, starting in the
next period, the states would have to bear the costs of periodical armed territorial conflict
permanently. Under these assumptions the promises of both states would be credible if and
only if k1 and r1∗ and k2 and r2∗ satisfy the following credibility conditions:
                          k1 α − r1∗                   ργ
                                     ≥ p̃1 α − r̃1 +        N1          and
                           1 − ργ                    1 − ργ
(11)
                          k2 α − r2∗                   ργ
                                     ≥ p̃2 α − r̃2 +        N2 .
                           1 − ργ                    1 − ργ
      The left sides of conditions (11) are the expected value to each state of keeping its promise,
given that the other state keeps its promise and that both states will keep their promises in
the future. The right sides of conditions (11) are the expected value to each state of breaking
its promise. If a state were to break its promise, then in the current period it would incur
the cost of the amount that it would choose to spend on arms, either r̃1 or r̃2 , and with
probability of either p̃1 or p̃2 it would receive the benefit, α, from controlling the entire
territory. In future periods it would obtain its expected value from armed conflict.
      Conditions (11) generalize conditions (6) to allow for positive values of r1∗ and r2∗ .
Comparing conditions (11) with conditions (6) we see that the expense of fortifying the
border, as represented by positive values of r1∗ and r2∗ , makes the expected value to each
state of keeping its promise smaller, but that with the border fortified the expected value

                                                    14
to each state of breaking its promise also is smaller. As we will now see, because the latter
eﬀect dominates, conditions (11) can be satisfied, with large enough values of r1∗ and r2∗ ,
even though condition (8) is not satisfied.
   Because k2 equals 1 − k1 , conditions (11) are equivalent to

(12)                                        A ≥ k1 ≥ B,

                                                 N2             r̃2      r∗
             where     A ≡ 1 − (1 − ργ) p̃2 − ργ    + (1 − ργ)         − 2
                                                 α              α        α
                                                                     ∗
                                             N1            r̃1     r
               and     B ≡ (1 − ργ) p̃1 + ργ    − (1 − ργ)     + 1.
                                             α             α       α
Accordingly, in a credible agreement r1∗ and r2∗ must be such that A is equal to or
larger than B. Moreover, an agreement that minimizes the sum, r1∗ + r2∗ , subject to A
being equal to or larger than B, would minimize the cost of resolving the territorial dispute
peacefully. Assuming that the savings from minimizing spending on fortifying the border
are transferable, both states would want to make such an agreement.
   Substituting equations (9) for r̃1 and r̃2 , equations (10) for p̃1 and p̃2 , and equations
(5) for N1 and N2 , into the expressions for A and B, we obtain

                                                     θr1∗           θr∗ r∗
          A = ργ[1 − (1 − φ)2 ] + 2(1 − ργ)               − (1 − ργ) 1 − 2   and
                                                      α              α   α
(13)
                                                 r2∗           r∗  r∗
          B = 1 − ργ(1 − φ2 ) − 2(1 − ργ)            + (1 − ργ) 2 + 1 .
                                                 αθ            αθ   α
The combination of r1∗ and r2∗ that minimizes the sum, r1∗ + r2∗ , subject to A − B ≥ 0,
would satisfy the first-order conditions,

                     d(A − B)   d(A − B)
(14)                      ∗
                              =          ≥0               and   A − B = 0,
                        dr1        dr2∗

where, from equations (13), we have

                       d(A − B)                        θ     θ   1
                                = (1 − ργ)                 −   −      and
                          dr1∗                           ∗
                                                      αr1 α      α

                                                15
                     d(A − B)                       1     1  1
                              = (1 − ργ)                −   − .
                        dr2∗                          ∗
                                                   θαr2 θα   α
The concavity of the relation between the diﬀerence, A − B, and r1∗ and r2∗ insures that
the combination of r1∗ and r2∗ that satisfies these first-order conditions also satisfies the
requisite second-order conditions.
   To explore the implications of conditions (14), begin by assuming that φ equals one
half, and, equivalently, that θ equals one. Under this assumption neither State 1 nor State
2 has an advantage in armed conflict. With φ equal to one half, an analytical solution of
conditions (14) reveals that a credible agreement to resolve the territorial dispute peacefully
and at minimum cost would entail
                                                   2
                                
                                 α    1 − 3ργ/2                         2
                                
                                                       for   0 ≤ ργ <
                                       1 − ργ/2
                                 4
                                                                        3
(15)              r1∗ = r2∗ = 
                              
                               
                                                                 2
                                
                                      0                for   ργ ≥ .
                                                                  3
   According to equations (15), with φ equal to one half, for values of ργ larger than
2/3 the minimum values of r1∗ and r2∗ are zero. This result accords with condition (8). At
the other extreme, if ργ were equal to zero, then the values of r1∗ and r2∗ that minimize
r1∗ + r2∗ would equal αφ(1 − φ), which is the amount that each state would spend on arms
in the absence of a negotiated settlement. For values of ργ that are positive but smaller
than 2/3, r1∗ and r2∗ are equal and inversely related to ργ and, hence, are positive but
smaller than αφ(1 − φ). For example, with φ equal to one half, 2αφ(1 − φ) equals α/2,
whereas with ργ equal to 1/4 the minimized value of r1∗ + r2∗ would be α/4, and with
ργ equal to 1/2 the minimized value of r1∗ + r2∗ would be α/18.
   Figure 3 illustrates equations (15). Equations (15) and Figure 3 imply the following
result:

       Result 3: Even if an agreement to divide a contested territory and
       to leave the resulting border unfortified would not be credible, if the

                                              16
 r1∗ + r2∗
       ↑




α/2 •



             ←   Minimal Fortifications




                                          Unfortified Border

                                          ↓
                                  •              •             →   ργ
   0                             2/3             1



       Figure 3: A Fortified but Peaceful Border
      product of the discount factor and the growth factor is positive, then
      states can negotiate a credible agreement to divide the contested terri-
      tory and, with the resulting border fortified, to resolve the territorial
      dispute peacefully and at a smaller cost than the cost of armed conflict.

   Simulated solutions of conditions (14) reveal that this result generalizes for values of φ
that are either larger or smaller than one half. Specifically, for values of φ not equal to one
half, although the values of r1∗ and r2∗ that minimize r1∗ + r2∗ would not be equal, the
minimized sum r1∗ + r2∗ would be smaller than 2αφ(1 − φ). For example, with φ equal
to one third, 2αφ(1 − φ) equals 4α/9, whereas with ργ equal to 1/4 the minimized
value of r1∗ + r2∗ would be about α/4, and with ργ equal to 1/2 the minimized value of
r1∗ + r2∗ would be about α/16.
   In deriving Result 3 we have not had to take account of destruction and other forms
of collateral damage from armed conflict. As noted above, the expectation of collateral
damage would add to the expected cost of armed conflict and, accordingly, would decrease
the amount of spending on fortifications required for the credibility of an agreement to resolve
a territorial dispute peacefully.
   In a credible agreement to fortify the border, but to resolve the territorial dispute peace-
fully, how do the states divide the contested territory? Given that r1∗ and r2∗ satisfy the
first-order conditions (14), which include A − B = 0, conditions (11) and (12) are satisfied
as equalities. Accordingly, k1 and k2 are uniquely determined. Specifically, if φ equals
one half, in which case equations (15) determine r1∗ and r2∗ , then conditions (12) imply
that k1 equals one-half. In addition, using simulated solutions of conditions (14) we find
that for values of φ that are smaller than one half conditions (12) imply that k1 is slightly
smaller than φ, and that k1 also depends on ργ. For example, with φ equal to 1/4
and ργ equal to 1/2, k1 equals approximately 0.23, whereas with φ equal to 1/4 and
ργ equal to 1/4, k1 equals approximately 0.20.


                                              17
       In sum, we have the following result:

         Result 4: If neither state has an advantage in armed conflict, then a
         credible negotiated agreement that resolves a territorial dispute peace-
         fully and minimizes the amounts spent on arms gives each state con-
         trol over one-half of the contested territory. Alternatively, if one of
         the states has an advantage in armed conflict, then such a credible
         agreement would give that state control of a larger fraction of the
         contested territory that approximately accords with its advantage in
         armed conflict.


Armed Conflict
       Condition (8) is necessary, but not suﬃcient, for states to reach a credible agreement to
divide a contested territory and not to fortify the border. In addition to condition (8) being
satisfied, for the possibility of such an agreement to be realized, the states have to recognize
this possibility. In addition, they have to identify at least one value of k1 in the range of
values that would satisfy conditions (6) and (7), and they have to agree on a value of k1 in
that range.15
       In addition, just as condition (8) is necessary, but not suﬃcient, for an unfortified border,
the possibility of an agreement that satisfies conditions (11) is necessary, but not suﬃcient,
for states to divide a contested territory and to maintain a fortified but peaceful border. For
the possibility of a fortified but peaceful border to be realized, the states have to recognize
this possibility. In addition, they have to identify at least one set of values of r1∗ and r2∗
and k1 and k2 in the range of values that would satisfy conditions (11), and they have to
agree on a set of values of r1∗ and r2∗ and k1 and k2 in that range.
  15
       Alberto Alesina and Allan Drazen (1991) show how with incomplete information bargaining over the
gains from a potential Pareto improvement can become stalemated in “a war of attrition” that delays the
realization of the Pareto improvement.


                                                   18
       Historical experience suggests that sovereign states are commonly able to overcome these
obstacles and to reach agreements to settle territorial disputes peacefully, sometimes with
borders fortified and sometimes with borders being unfortified. Even so, armed territorial
conflict has not been a rare event. Some armed conflicts have involved newly arisen territorial
disputes, as in the conflicts between Britain and France and between Spain and Portugal
for control over territories in the New World. Other armed conflicts have involved the
breakdown of existing agreements to settle old territorial disputes peacefully, as in the case
of the Mexican-American War.
       How can our model be amended to allow for armed conflict? One possibility is to relax
the assumption that the eﬀectiveness of spending on arms by State 1 relative to spending
on arms by State 2, as measured by the parameter φ, is common knowledge.
       Consider a newly arisen territorial dispute. Because the larger is φ the larger is the
share of the contested territory that State 1 could control in a negotiated settlement, State
1 would be inclined to claim that φ is large, whereas State 2 would be inclined to claim
that φ is small. But, suppose that, having never engaged in armed conflict with each other,
neither state can readily verify the claim of the other state. Specifically, assume that states
faced with a new territorial dispute can learn about the relative eﬀectiveness of spending
on arms only from the experience of armed conflict. This assumption implies that armed
conflict can be a necessary prelude to a negotiated settlement of a newly arisen dispute.16
       What about the breakdown of existing agreements to settle territorial disputes peacefully?
Let us start with a situation in which from a previous experience of armed conflict both
states know the value of φ. Given the value of φ the two states have divided control of the
contested territory and, with the border either unfortified or fortified, they also have made
credible promises not to use force to attempt to gain control of the entire contested territory.
  16
       If control of the territory could be more valuable for one of the states than for the other, then unverifiable
claims about the value of controlling the territory would be another possible cause of armed conflict.




                                                          19
       Now suppose that State 1 realizes an innovation, involving, for example, an improvement
in its weaponry or an improvement in its military tactics, that increases the relative eﬀec-
tiveness of its spending on arms. Suppose also that, as a result of this innovation, φ has
increased so much that, given the previously agreed combination of k1 and k2 and r1∗
and r2∗ , State 1 would break its promise not to use force to attempt to gain control of the
entire contested territory.17
       If State 2 could verify the increase in φ, then, rather than facing armed conflict, State
2 would prefer to revise its agreement with State 1 in such a way that the credibility con-
ditions for both states again would be satisfied. This revision presumably would involve
an adjustment of the border to give State 1 a larger share of the contested territory. This
revision also might involve changes in the amounts, if any, spent on fortifying the border.
       In fact, it not easy for one state to verify an innovation that increases the eﬀectiveness
of spending on arms by the other state without seeing the consequences of this innovation.
Accordingly, assume that State 1 can show State 2 that φ has increased only by breaking
its promise not to use force to attempt to gain control of the entire contested territory.
Importantly, however, because this action would show that one of the parameters on which
the existing agreement was based has changed, breaking a promise in this case would not
preclude peaceful settlements in the future.
       Accordingly, an innovation that increases the relative eﬀectiveness of spending on arms
by either one state or the other can cause the breakdown of an existing agreement to resolve
a territorial dispute peacefully, with a period of armed conflict resulting. The information
about the relative eﬀectiveness of spending on arms derived from the experience of armed
  17
       The possibility of an innovation in φ is not consistent with the earlier simplifying assumption that the
states behave as if φ is a constant. Also, conditions (11) do not allow for the possibility that a state would
break an agreement that had previously been credible. On these points I ask the reader to permit me to
employ the common contrivance of allowing an event to occur even though agents behaved as if they had
attached zero probability to its occuring.



                                                       20
conflict would provide the basis for a new negotiated settlement.
   This analysis can account for the Mexican-American War. Apparently the Mexicans ini-
tially rejected American proposals to adjust the border because, having observed the recent
poor performance of the American army in the Second Seminole War, the Mexicans under-
estimated the relative eﬀectiveness of American spending on arms. The lessons learned from
the Mexican-American War induced the Mexicans to cede a large fraction of the contested
territory. These lessons also have prevented another armed conflict between Mexico and the
United States. In contrast, the Americans and the British apparently had enough knowledge
about the relative eﬀectiveness of their spending on arms to be able to settle the dispute
over the Oregon territory without an armed conflict.

Summary
   This paper has suggested an explanation for why some borders between sovereign states
are unfortified, why other borders are fortified but peaceful, and, importantly, why terri-
torial disputes sometimes result in armed conflict. Initially the analysis assumed that the
eﬀectiveness of spending on arms by one state relative to another is fixed and is also common
knowledge. Given these assumptions, we derived the following results.

  1. If the product of the discount factor and the growth factor is suﬃciently large, then
     states can negotiate a credible agreement to divide control of a contested territory and
     not to acquire arms intended for use in armed conflict for control of the contested
     territory. The smallest critical value the product of the discount factor and the growth
     factor obtains for states for whom the eﬀectiveness of spending on arms is equal.

  2. Under a credible agreement not to acquire arms intended for use in armed conflict
     for control of a contested territory a state can control a larger share of the contested
     territory the larger would be the relative eﬀectiveness of its spending on arms.

  3. Even if an agreement to divide a contested territory and to leave the resulting border

                                             21
     unfortified would not be credible, if the product of the discount factor and the growth
     factor is positive, then states can negotiate a credible agreement to divide the contested
     territory and, with the resulting border fortified, to resolve the territorial dispute
     peacefully and at a smaller cost than the cost of armed conflict.

  4. If neither state has an advantage in armed conflict, then a credible negotiated agree-
     ment that resolves a territorial dispute peacefully and minimizes the amounts spent
     on arms gives each state control over one-half of the contested territory. Alternatively,
     if one of the states has an advantage in armed conflict, then such a credible agree-
     ment would give that state control of a larger fraction of the contested territory that
     approximately accords with its advantage in armed conflict.

   The analysis then considered the possibility that the eﬀectiveness of spending on arms
by one state relative to another is neither fixed nor necessarily common knowledge. Specif-
ically, the analysis assumed that states faced with a new territorial dispute or faced with
an innovation in the relative eﬀectiveness of spending on arms can learn about the relative
eﬀectiveness of spending on arms only from the experience of armed conflict. Under this
assumption armed conflict can be a necessary prelude to a negotiated settlement of a newly
arisen territorial dispute. In addition, an innovation that increases the relative eﬀectiveness
of spending on arms by either one state or the other can cause the breakdown of an existing
agreement to resolve a territorial dispute peacefully, with a period of armed conflict result-
ing. The information about the relative eﬀectiveness of spending on arms derived from the
experience of armed conflict would provide the basis for a new negotiated settlement.




                                              22
                                       References

Alesina, Alberto, and Drazen, Allan. “Why are Stabilizations Delayed?” American Eco-
   nomic Review, 81(5), December 1991, 829-850.
Alesina, Alberto, and Spolaore, Enrico. “On the Number and Size of Nations”, Quarterly
   Journal of Economics, 112(4), November 1997, 1027-1056.
Alesina, Alberto, and Spolaore, Enrico. The Size of Nations, MIT Press, 2003.
Brito, Dagobert and Intriligator, Michael. “Conflict, War, and Redistribution”, American
   Political Science Review, 79, December 1985, 943-957.
Bulow, Jeremy and Rogoﬀ, Kenneth. “A Constant Recontracting Model of Sovereign Debt”,
   Journal of Political Economy, 97(1), February 1989, 155-178.
Fearon, James D. “Rationalist Explanations for War”, International Organization, 49(3),
   Summer 1995, 379-414.
Findlay, Ronald. “Towards a Model of Territorial Expansion and the Limits of Empire”,
   in Garfinkel, Michelle and Skaperdas, Stergios, (eds.) The Political Economy of Conflict
   and Appropriation, Cambridge University Press, 1996, 41-56.
Garfinkel, Michelle. “Arming as a Strategic Investment in a Cooperative Equilibrium”,
   American Economic Review, 80(1), March 1990, 50-68.
Garfinkel, Michelle. “Domestic Politics and International Conflict”, American Economic
   Review, 84(5), December 1994, 1294-1309.
Garfinkel, Michelle and Skaperdas, Stergios, “Conflict Without Misperceptions or Incomplete
   Information: How the Future Matters,” Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(6), December
   2000, 793-807.
Gershenson, Dmitriy and Grossman, Herschel I. “Civil Conflict: Ended or Never Ending?”
   Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(6), December 2000, 807-821.
Grossman, Herschel I. “Kleptocracy and Revolutions”, Oxford Economic Papers, 51(2), April
   1999, 267-283.


                                            23
Grossman, Herschel I. and Kim, Minseong. “Swords or Plowshares? A Theory of the
   Security of Claims to Property”, Journal of Political Economy, 103(6), December 1995,
   1275-1288.
Grossman, Herschel I. and Mendoza, Juan. “The Economics of Empire Building”, unpub-
   lished, September 2002.
Hess, Gregory and Orphanides, Athanasios. “War Politics: An Economic, Rational-Voter
   Framework”, American Economic Review, 85(4), September 1995, 828-846.
Hess, Gregory and Orphanides, Athanasios. “War and Democracy”, Journal of Political
   Economy, 109(4), August 2001, 776-810.
Miles, Edwin A. “‘Fifty-four Forty or Fight’ — An American Political Legend”, The Missis-
   sippi Valley Historical Review, 44(2), September 1957, 291-309.
Pletcher, David M. The Diplomacy of Annexation: Texas, Oregon, and the Mexican War,
   University of Missouri Press, 1973.
Powell, Robert. “Guns, Butter, and Anarchy”, American Political Science Review, 87(1),
   March 1993, 115-132.
Sperber, Hans. “‘Fifty-four Forty or Fight’: Facts and Fictions”, American Speech, 32(1),
   February 1957, 5-11.
Skaperdas, Stergios and Syropoulos, Constantinos. “Can the Shadow of the Future Harm
   Cooperation?” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 29(3), May 1996, 355-
   372.




                                            24
