                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         GEOGRAPHY AND EXPORT PERFORMANCE:
                            EXTERNAL MARKET ACCESS AND
                              INTERNAL SUPPLY CAPACITY

                                            Stephen Redding
                                           Anthony J. Venables

                                           Working Paper 9637
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9637


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




This paper is produced as part of the Globalization programme of the UK ESRC funded Centre for Economic
Performance at the LSE. Financial support from the Leverhulme Trust is also gratefully acknowledged. An
earlier version of the paper was entitled ‘Explaining cross-country export performance: international linkages
and internal geography’ and circulated as Centre for Economic Performance discussion paper no 549. We
are grateful to Robert Baldwin, Alan Winters and seminar participants at the NBER-CEPR International
Seminar in International Trade (ISIT) and the London School of Economics for helpful comments. Martin
Stewart provided able research assistance. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Stephen Redding and Anthony J. Venables. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Goegraphy and Export Performance: External Market Access and Internal Supply Capacity
Stephen Redding and Anthony J. Venables
NBER Working Paper No. 9637
April 2003
JEL No. F12, F14, O10

                                          ABSTRACT


This paper investigates the determinants of countries’ export performance looking in particular at
the role of international product market linkages. We begin with a novel decomposition of the
growth in countries’ exports into the contribution from increases in external demand and from
improved internal supply-side conditions. Building on the results of this decomposition, we move
on to an econometric analysis of the determinants of export performance. Results include the
finding that poor external geography, poor internal geography, and poor institutional quality
contribute in approximately equal measure to explaining Sub-Saharan Africa’s poor export
performance.


Stephen Redding                                     Anthony J. Venables
Dept of Economics                                   Dept of Economics
LSE                                                 LSE
Houghton Street                                     Houghton Street
London WC2A 2AE, UK                                 London WC2A 2AE, UK
s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk                               a.j.venables@lse.ac.uk
                                                                                                   1

1. Introduction
There have been wide variations in countries’ export performance over the last quarter
century. East Asian countries have seen real exports increase by more than 800% since the
early 1970s, while those of Sub-Saharan Africa have increased by just 70%. Across
individual countries, real export growth varies from over 1000% for the top five countries to
minus 40% or worse for the bottom five. This divergent performance has raised concerns
that, while some countries are benefiting from globalisation others are, at best, passed by. It
has also stimulated a huge debate about what lies behind the differences. Are certain
countries excluded from major markets by virtue of their geography, their commodity
specialization, or because of discriminatory trade policies? Is export performance beyond the
control of governments or are poorly performing countries largely responsible for their own
fates with weak performance reflecting poor institutions and policies?
       This paper investigates some of the determinants of divergent export performance,
looking in particular at the roles of external and internal geography. This issue is not only of
interest in itself but, in so far as export growth is thought to influence economic performance
more generally, of wider interest in identifying policy priorities nationally and
internationally.1 Whether globalisation creates opportunities for all, or whether some
countries benefit more than others, is clearly of paramount importance in shaping attitudes to
globalization and the political economy of future rounds of international trade negotiations.
       Geography may be expected to influence export performance in a number of ways.
One way is through ‘external geography’ – a country’s location, and in particular its
proximity to rapidly growing export markets, and consequent extent to which it is a recipient
of international demand linkages. For example, countries in South-East Asia have been at the
centre of a fast growing region, this creating growing import demand. Given everything we
know about the importance of distance as a barrier to trade, the export opportunities created
by these growing import demands are likely to be geographically concentrated, creating
spillover effects between countries in the region. Our first objective in this paper is to
measure the strength of these effects. This we do by developing a theoretical model of
bilateral trade flows and using gravity techniques to estimate the model’s parameters. Each
country’s export growth can then be decomposed into two parts. One is based on the
country’s location relative to sources of import demands, which we call the country’s ‘foreign
market access’. The other is due to changes within the country, which we call ‘internal
                                                                                                   2

supply capacity’.
       We find that a substantial part of the differential export growth of various countries
and regions since 1970 can be attributed to variations in the rate at which their foreign market
access has grown. Changes in countries’ foreign market access arise because of changes in
aggregate import demand from other countries – particularly countries that are close. There
may also be particular regional effects arising, for example, from regional integration
agreements. We capture these by refining our modelling to allow the intensity of intra-
regional trade to differ from trade as a whole. These effects are positive for Western Europe
and negative for Sub-Saharan Africa. They also exhibit significant changes through time,
with increasing intra-regional intensities in North America and in Latin America.
       Having separated out the foreign market access and internal supply capacity
contributions to export growth, our next objective is to investigate the determinants of each
country’s internal supply capacity. We develop a simple theoretical structure to show how
this depends on countries’ internal geography (such as access to ports), on measures of their
business environment (such as institutional quality) and also – in equilibrium – on their
foreign market access. The theoretical structure provides the basis for econometric estimation
of countries’ export performance as a function of these variables, and we find that all three
characteristics are significant and quantitatively important. We use our results to explore the
performance of different regions, and show how almost all of Sub-Saharan Africa’s poor
export performance can be accounted for by poor performance in each of these dimensions.
       The paper is organised as follows. The next section outlines a theoretical framework,
and section 3 constructs the measures of foreign market access and internal supply capacity.
The contribution of these measures to each regions’ export performance is reported. So too
are inter-regional linkages, giving the contribution of each region to the foreign market access
growth of each other region. Section 4 extends the analysis to a more detailed investigation
of intra-regional trade, showing how the intensity of this trade has changed through time.
Section 5 endogenises each country’s supply capacity. A simple theoretical framework is
developed and provides the motivation for the export equation that we econometrically
estimate to establish the effects of foreign market access, internal geography and institutions.
                                                                                                      3

2. Theoretical Framework
A key feature of theoretical models of international trade in the presence of product
differentiation and trade costs is the existence of a pecuniary demand effect across countries.
An increase in expenditure on traded goods in one country raises demand for traded goods in
other countries and, because of trade costs, the size of this effect is much greater for
neighbouring countries than for distant countries. How much of countries’ differential export
performances be accounted for by variation in these demand conditions, and how much by
differences in internal supply-side characteristics? Our main task in this paper is to separate
out these different forces, and thereby identify the foreign market access and internal supply
capacity of each country.
        Performing this decomposition requires use of bilateral trade information in a gravity
model. Gravity models offer an explanation of countries’ trade flows in terms of exporter and
importer country characteristics and ‘between country’ information, particularly distance.
The gravity model is consistent with alternative theoretical underpinnings (see for example
Anderson 1979, Deardorff 1998, and Eaton and Kortum 1997) and here we start by
developing one of them, namely a trade model based on product differentiation derived from
a constant elasticity of substitution demand structure.
        The world consists of i = 1,...R countries whose tradeable goods sectors produce a
range of symmetric differentiated products. For the moment we take the range of products
produced in each country and their prices as exogenous; section 5 deals with general
equilibrium. Demand for differentiated products is modelled in the usual symmetric constant
elasticity of substitution way; F is the elasticity of substitution between any pair of products,
implying a CES utility function of the form,

                                                                                                (1)



where ni is the set of varieties produced in country i; xij is the country j consumption of a
single product variety from this set, and all such varieties are symmetric.
        Dual to this quantity aggregator is a price index in each country, Gj, defined over the
prices of individual varieties produced in i and sold in j, pij,


                                                                                                (2)
                                                                                                      4

where we have again exploited the symmetry of products.
        Given country j’s total expenditure on differentiated products, Ej, its demand for each
variety is, (by Shephard’s lemma on the price index),


                                                                                                (3)


Thus, the own price elasticity of demand is F, and the term              gives the position of the
demand curve in market j.
        We assume that all country i varieties have the same producer price, pi, and that the
cost of delivery to market j gives price pij = pi tiTij tj. Trade costs thus take the iceberg form,
and ti and tj are the ad valorem cost factors in getting the product to and from the border in
countries i and j, while Tij is the cost of shipping the product between countries. Thus, ti and tj
capture internal geography, and Tij the external geography of trade flows.
        The value of total exports of country i to country j is therefore


                                                                                                      (4)


This equation for bilateral trade flows provides a basis for estimation of a gravity trade model.
The right hand side of this equation contains both importer and exporter country
characteristics. The term                is country j ‘market capacity’; it depends on total
expenditure in j, on internal transport costs tj, and on the number of competing varieties and
their prices, this summarised in the price index. On the supply side, the term
measures what we refer to as the ‘supply capacity’ of the exporting country; it is the product
of the number of varieties and their price competitiveness, such that doubling supply capacity
(given market capacities) doubles the value of sales.2 We will denote market capacity and
supply capacity by mi and si respectively, so


                                                                                               (5)


From (4), bilateral trade flows can be expressed simply as the product of exporter supply
capacity, importer market capacity, and the term            which measures bilateral transport
costs between them:
                                                                                                    5


                                                                                              (6)


Empirically, supply capacity will capture all observed and unobserved characteristics of an
exporting country i which affect its bilateral trade with all importers. Similarly, market
capacity will capture all observed and unobserved characteristics of an importing country j
which affect its bilateral trade with all exporters.
        We are concerned with each country’s overall export performance, i.e. the value of its
exports to all destinations, denoted Vi. This can be decomposed between supply capacity and
foreign market access by noting that,


                                                                                              (7)


where Mi is the ’foreign market access’ of country i,


                                                                                              (8)


This is simply the sum of the market capacities of all other countries j, weighted by the
measure of bilateral trade costs of reaching each country.
        Analogous to foreign market access is the concept of ‘foreign supplier access’, Si,
defined as the sum of the supply capacity of all other countries, weighted by the measure of
bilateral trade costs in obtaining goods from each individual supplier j,


                                                                                              (9)


This measures proximity to sources of export supply, and the total value of imports of country
i, Zi, is the product of its market capacity and foreign supplier access,


                                                                                             (10)


        Given observed values of total exports and imports, Vi and Zi, and values of bilateral
trade costs,        , for R countries, equations (7) - (10) comprise a system of 4R equations in
                                                                                                  6

4R unknowns (mi, si, Mi, and Si for all i). Solving these gives the required decomposition.3 In
particular, we can find each country’s supply capacity, si, and foreign market access, Mi,
giving the decomposition of exports that we seek, Vi = si Mi. However, doing this requires
that we have values of bilateral trade costs,         , as well as exports and imports, and it is to
this that we now turn.


3. Sources of export growth: decomposition
3.1 Data Sources and Gravity estimation
Estimates of bilateral trade costs are derived from gravity estimation. We use data on the
value of bilateral trade flows for 101 countries during the period 1970-97, obtained from the
NBER World Trade Database (Feenstra et al. 1997, Feenstra 2001). Since we are concerned
with the growth in the real value of countries’ exports, the current dollar data in the NBER
World Trade Database are deflated by the US GDP deflator to obtain a measure of real trade
flows. A country’s market and supplier access depend on its trade with all other countries,
and these trade data have the advantage of being available for a large cross-section of
countries. It is likely that there are substantial year-on-year fluctuations in bilateral trade
flows - particularly for small countries - and we are concerned here with the determinants of
long-run real export growth. Therefore, in the empirical analysis that follows, bilateral trade
flows are averaged over 4-year periods. With 28 years of data, this yields 7 periods of
analysis. See Appendix A for further details.
       To obtain measures of bilateral trade costs we estimate the gravity equation (6) which
implies a relationship between bilateral trade, supplier capacity and market capacity. The
equation is estimated using bilateral distance and a dummy for whether countries share a
common border. Supplier capacity and market capacity are controlled for respectively using
an exporter country and importer partner dummy.4 The estimation results are summarized in
Table 1, and we take the predicted values for bilateral trade costs from this equation as our
measures of trade costs: thus,                                 , where distij is the distance
between a pair of countries i and j, and bordij is a dummy variable that takes the value one if
the two countries share a common border.


3.2 Export growth decompositions
We are now in a position to decompose each country’s total exports into the contributions of
                                                                                                7

supplier capacity and foreign market access. The measures of trade costs derived above are
combined with data on countries’ total imports and exports to solve the system of
simultaneous equations (7) - (10) for all countries’ market capacities, supply capacities,
foreign market access, and foreign supplier access. This implies, of course, that the product
of each country’s supply capacity and foreign market access exactly equals its actual exports
(and analogously on the import side in equations (8) and (10)), permitting an exact
decomposition of actual export volumes.
        An alternative approach would be to use the estimates of the exporter country and
importer partner dummies obtained from the gravity equation as measures of market capacity
and supply capacity. This approach was used in another context by Redding and Venables
(2001) but, for the present purposes, has the disadvantage that the decomposition of total
exports into foreign market access and supply capacity would not then be exact. In practice,
we find a high degree of correlation between measures of foreign market and supplier
capacity constructed from solving the system of equations for all countries total imports and
exports and those constructed based on estimates from bilateral trade flows.5
        The decomposition we undertake is extremely general. Although we derived Vi = si Mi
from a precise theoretical model, this decomposition holds for any theoretical model which
yields a gravity equation of the form in equation (6), where bilateral trade is explained by
exporting country effects, importing partner effects and bilateral trade costs.
        We begin by examining the evolution of foreign market access and supplier access.
To provide a broad overview, we aggregate countries to 9 geographical regions: Eastern
Europe; Latin America; Middle East and North Africa; North America; Oceania; South-East
Asia; Other Asia; Sub-Saharan Africa; and Western Europe. Thus, R(k) denotes the set of
countries in region k, and the foreign market access (FMA) of the region is simply the sum
                    . Similarly, the supply capacity of the region is the sum of values for
individual countries. The upper two panels of Fig. 1 display the evolution of regional FMA,
while the lower two panels graph the time-series of supply capacity. To control for regions
having different numbers of countries, the figure graphs average values rather than totals. To
clarify changes over time, we normalize supplier capacity so that it is expressed relative to its
initial value.
        At the beginning of the sample period, Eastern and Western Europe have the highest
levels of FMA. The Eastern European position is not as surprising as it first seems, because
                                                                                                 8

of its proximity to the countries of Western Europe. These regions are followed by North
America. Looking at the upper right panel (and noting the vertical scale) the initial ranking
then proceeds as SE Asia, Latin America, Other Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and Oceania. The
obvious features over time are the rapid growth of SE Asia and the acceleration of Other Asia
in the second half of the sample period.
       Turning now to export growth, the proportionate growth rates of supply capacity and
foreign market access compound to the observed growth rate of exports.6 Intuitively, the
decomposition of export growth into these two components reveals the extent to which
increases in a country’s exports are due to improved own-country performance or external
developments in trading partners. Appendix Table A1 reports the decomposition for each
country, and Table 2 of the text gives the regional aggregates. The first rows of Table 2, the
benchmark case, report the rate of growth of overall world exports in each period and the
growths of supply capacity and market capacity that would be observed if all countries had
identical export performance.
       A number of results stand out. S.E. Asian countries experience export growth much
faster than the benchmark in both periods. In the first period this was driven particularly by
supply capacity growth, and in the second FMA growth becomes relatively more important.
Looking at individual countries in S.E. Asia (appendix table A1) shows that FMA growth was
generally faster in the first period than in the second. For some of the earlier developers
supply capacity growth slowed sharply in the second period (eg Japan, Taiwan, Korea) while
the later developers experienced a dramatic increase in second period supply capacity growth
(eg Philippines, Thailand, Vietnam).7
       Other Asia experienced below world average export growth in the first period, but this
is accounted for by significantly faster than benchmark market access growth coupled with
much slower than benchmark supply capacity growth. This is in sharp contrast to the second
period where market access growth close to the benchmark was associated with supply
capacity growth at twice the benchmark, giving overall export growth of nearly twice the
world rate.
       Latin America shows a different picture. Close to benchmark market access growth in
both periods was associated with close to benchmark supply capacity growth in the first
period and weak growth in the second. Results for the Middle East and North Africa
aggregate are dominated by oil-exporters, while those for Sub-Saharan Africa elaborate on a
                                                                                                  9

familiar story. Taking the two periods together, the contribution of FMA to Sub-Saharan
Africa’s export growth was nearly 20 percentage points below the benchmark case,
suggesting the importance of geographical location in explaining the region’s poor export
performance. However, supply capacity grew less fast than the benchmark in both periods,
and positive export growth in the second period was achieved by market access growth
offsetting a reduction in supply capacity.
       The main messages from this section are then, that both levels and rates of change of
foreign market access vary widely across countries and regions. Foreign market access levels
in Western Europe are nearly three times those in Sub-Saharan Africa. Thus, taking as given
supplier capacity, FMA plays an important role in accounting for export performance. In
general equilibrium, there will typically also be an endogenous response of supplier capacity
to external conditions, and we consider this idea further in Section 5. Before doing so, we
look in more detail at the regional structure of FMA growth.


3.3. Regional effects
The decomposition of table 2 looks at each country’s FMA growth, but does not divide the
sources of this growth geographically. How much FMA growth do countries receive from the
performance of other countries in their own region and how much do they receive from
growth in other regions. Out of these other regions, which are the more important?
       A country’s foreign market access can be divided according to geographical regions in
which the markets are located, and expressed as the sum of the access to markets in each
region. Thus, if        is the market access derived by country i from region k, then

                                                                                           (11)



Changes in         can be computed for each country, and the final two columns of appendix
table A1 report, for each country, the contribution to FMA growth of the country’s own
region and of other regions in aggregate.
       We concentrate on results not for individual countries, but for their regional
groupings. Thus,         is the market access derived by all countries in region R from region
k, given by
                                                                                                10


                                                                                           (12)



The change in the market access of region R can be decomposed into the contribution of
regions k according to,


                                                                                           (13)




where there are two components to the contribution of each region. Region Rk may make a
large contribution to region RR’s FMA growth either because it constitutes a large share of the
region’s FMA,               , or because there is rapid growth in market demand in the
countries making up that region,                 .
       Results are reported in table 3a, for the period as a whole, and in 3b and 3c, for the
two sub periods.8 Reading across the first row of the tables we see that North America
derived virtually all of its FMA growth from itself. This reflects the fact the Canada’s FMA
is large relative to that of the United States (FMA captures access to markets other than one’s
own), and the United States constitutes an extremely large share of Canada’s FMA. Canada
benefits much more from being located close to the USA than the USA benefits from being
located close to Canada, and own region FMA growth in Canada thus accounts for over 98%
of total FMA growth.
       Latin America was much more dependent on FMA growth from outside the region –
almost entirely so in the first period. Of these extra-regional sources, North America is far
away the most important. Turning to Europe, Western Europe provides a major source of
FMA growth both for itself and for Eastern Europe.
       The striking features of Sub-Saharan Africa are the negative contribution of the own
region effect, and the lack of a dominant external source of FMA growth. Over the period as
a whole, North America was the most important, followed by Western Europe, with the
Middle East and North Africa playing a noticeable role in the first sub-period.
       The Asian figures illustrate two main points. One is the dominant role of intra-
regional linkages with SE Asia, and the other is the growth in the importance of SE Asia for
Other Asia. This arises partly from the growing import demands of SE Asia and partly also
                                                                                                    11

from the westwards expansion of economic activity in the SE Asia region. It is also
interesting to look down the SE Asia column in table 3A, indicating the contribution of this
region to FMA growth in other regions; the region now provides a major potential source of
demand for African exports.


4. Regional trade intensities:
In the gravity model used so far, trade frictions between countries are measured simply by
distance and whether or not the countries share a common border. In this section, we present
a brief exploration of the importance of regional trading, by allowing the costs of trading
within a region to differ from those of trading between regions.
        To allow trade costs to vary in this way, we augment the distance and border effects
with dummies for whether two countries lie within the same geographical regions. Thus the
measure of bilateral trade costs becomes
where      is the estimated coefficient on the dummy for whether countries i and j lie within
region k. This specification allows for differences in trade costs on within-region transactions
and between-region transactions in a general way that imposes a minimal degree of structure
on the data. At the same time, we are able to analyse how the coefficient on the within-region
trade dummy changes over time and relate these changes to explicit policy-based attempts at
regional integration, including for example NAFTA and the European Union.
        The results of estimating the gravity equation including the within-region trade
dummies are reported in Table 4. As shown in the table, the within-region trade dummies are
jointly statistically significant at the 10% level in all periods, and their level of joint statistical
significance increases markedly over time. The dummies capture anything that affects the
ease of trading within the region, and it is not therefore surprising that some of the estimated
coefficients are negative, particularly at the beginning of the sample period. Sub-Saharan
Africa is a case in point, where a recent literature has emphasized the importance of physical
geography and infrastructure in explaining trade and development in Africa (see, for example,
Amjadi, Reincke and Yeats 1996, Gallup et al. 1998 and Limao and Venables 2001). Africa
has few East-West navigable rivers to facilitate water-borne trade within the continent, and
there is much evidence of low levels of transport infrastructure investment that may impact
particularly severely on within-region trade. International political conflict and patterns of
specialization clearly also play a role. For example in the Middle-east, within-region conflict
                                                                                                  12

and the importance of petroleum exports to industrialized countries outside the region
generate a negative estimated within-region effect.
       Over time, we observe a systematic increase in the estimated values of almost all the
within-region effects. This provides evidence of the increasingly regionalisation of
international trade that does not rely on a particular parameterization of the regional
integration process. Nonetheless, one important explanation for increasingly regionalisation
is clearly the proliferation of Regional Preferential Trade Agreements. This is particularly
clear for North America. Here, at the beginning of the sample period, we find a negative
within-region effect, which may reflect policies of import substitution in Mexico that
particularly restricted within-region trade or the fact that the largest cities of Canada and
United States (on which our measures of distance are based) are closer than the true economic
centres (taking into account the whole distribution of economic activity). Nevertheless, over
time, we observe a rise in the estimated within-region effect that is both large and statistically
significant. Thus, the estimated coefficient becomes positive in the period 1990-3 during
which NAFTA was signed.
       The exception is S.E. Asia where the intra-regional effect diminishes sharply through
time. This does not reflect diminishing intra-regional trade, but rather the particularly rapid
growth of trade with countries outside the region. Thus, it shows the extent to which the
region’s trade was becoming more externally rather than internally oriented over the period.
       Other examples of the importance of trade policy in shaping regional integration
include Western and Eastern Europe. In Western Europe, we again observe a systematic rise
in the estimated within-region effect over time. In Eastern Europe, the value of the within-
region effect follows an inverted U-shape, rising between the 1970s and 1980s consistent with
the policies of COMECON in stimulating trade within the former Soviet bloc and declining
markedly in the 1990s following the fall of the Berlin wall and the abandonment of the
COMECON system of public procurement and trading preferences.


5. Determinants of export performance.
We have so far undertaken decompositions based on the identity that a country’s exports are
the product of its supply capacity, si, and foreign market access, Mi. We now turn to the next
stage of the analysis, asking the question: what determines supply capacity? We expect that
it depends on a number of underlying country characteristics including country size,
                                                                                                 13

endowments, and internal geography. It will also depend, in equilibrium, on foreign market
access, since this is one of the variables that determines the potential return to exporting. Our
objective in this section is to econometrically estimate the importance of these factors. We
contribute to a growing literature on the role of geography in determining the ratio of trade to
income and trade performance more generally (see, for example, Ciccone and Alcalá 2001,
Frankel and Romer 1999, Leamer 1988, Radelet and Sachs 1998, and Wei 2000).


5.1 Theory
In order to endogenise supply capacity we have to add to the material of section 2 some
general equilibrium structure of the economy. We do this in a very compact way, by simply
specifying a supply curve for exports, implying that as the quantity of exports produced in a
country increases, so does their price. Using our previous analysis, the quantity of exports
demanded from country i,                     , is given by


                                                                                               (14)


(using equations (4) and (8)). The supply relationship we specify by the function S,


                                                                                               (15)


We assume that the function S is the same for all countries, but add country specific
parameters ci and ai to the relationship: ci is a measure of comparative costs in the export
sector of country i and ai is a measure of the size of the economy. This is a general
equilibrium relationship capturing the opportunity cost of resources used in the export sector.
Expanding the volume of exports produced moves the economy around the production
possibility frontier, increasing the price of exports. Thus, as the export sector expands it
draws resources out of other sectors of the economy – import competing and non-tradeable
activities. Drawing resources out of other sectors tends to bid up their prices, raising costs
and hence price in the export sector.
       Cross country variation is captured by linearization of these relationships.
Logarithmically differentiating (14) and (15) gives,
                                                                                                 14



                                                                                             (16)



where T is the price elasticity of export supply and    denotes a proportional deviation from
some reference point. Eliminating the price term gives


                                                                                             (17)


The total value of exports,                      , (equation (7)) varies according to,


                                                                                             (18)


where the second equation uses (16). One further step is needed, which is to specify whether
export volumes vary through changes in the number of varieties, n, or output per variety, x.
In a standard monopolistic competition model equilibrium output per commodity is a
constant,        , in which case (18) is,


                                                                                             (19)


At the other extreme, if the number of varieties that can be produced by a country is fixed,
       , then using (17) in (18) gives,


                                                                                             (20)


       These equations form the basis of the econometric investigation, with variation in
terms provided by cross-country observations. Notice that the coefficient on foreign market
access in these equations is not generally equal to unity, reflecting the endogeneity of supply
capacity. Thus if F is large relative to T (or, in the second equation if F > 1), then the
coefficient on    is less than unity. High levels of foreign market access are associated with a
less than proportional increase in exports and a lower level of supply capacity (since Vi = si
Mi). This arises because increased demand for exports encounters diminishing returns in the
                                                                                                  15

domestic supply response, bidding up pi . The coefficient on      is smaller for low values of
T, this measuring a more tightly curved production possibility frontier and lower supply
elasticity.
        Other terms in the equations are as would be expected. Cross-country variation in
internal geography is captured by , entering with negative coefficient providing F > 1.
Domestic size, , increases the value of exports, although not necessarily proportionately.
And a high cost export sector, > 0, means that a lower volume of exports is supplied for a
given price.


5.2 Estimation
Motivated by the theoretical analysis of the previous section (equations (19) and (20)), we
estimate the following empirical specification:

                                                                                             (21)


The dependent variable is the log of the value of exports. The log of GDP and of population
are included as two separate measures of country size, and Mi is foreign market access as
calculated in section 3 above. ti represents the internal geography of the country, and is
measured empirically using the percentage of the population living within 100km of the coast
or navigable rivers (see appendix for sources).
        To capture the comparative costs of exporting in each country, ci, we use a measure of
institutional quality, as has been widely used in the cross-country growth literature (see, for
example Acemoglu et al. 2001 and Knack and Keefer 1997). The measure is an index of the
protection of property rights / risk of expropriation (see appendix), and a higher value of the
index corresponds to better institutional quality.
        We also include a full set of dummies for the 9 geographical regions, :k , in order to
control for unobserved heterogeneity across regions in the determinants of export
performance, including other unobserved institutions, features of technology, and
characteristics of regions.
        Before presenting estimates of equation (21), a number of points merit discussion.
First, the measure of Foreign Market Access (M) included on the right-hand side as a
determinant of countries export performance has itself been constructed from the export data.
                                                                                                 16

It is constructed from the solution of a system of simultaneous equations for all countries’
total exports and total imports, and any individual country’s exports enter this system of
simultaneous equations as just one out of the 2R observations on exports and imports. A
country’s foreign market access depends on market capacities in all other countries, weighted
by bilateral trade costs (equation (8)). Nevertheless, to ensure that shocks to an individual
country’s exports are not driving our measure of foreign market access, we also construct for
each country an alternative measure that completely excludes information on the own
country’s exports. In this alternative measure, M*, we exclude one country i at a time and
solve the system of equations in (7) to (10) for the R - 1 other countries j … i (excluding
information on country i’s exports to and imports from these other countries). This yields
measures of market capacity and supplier capacity in all other countries j … i. The alternative
foreign market access measure for country i is then constructed as the trade cost weighted
sum of these market capacities. We repeat the analysis for all countries i 0 R. This
alternative measure provides a robustness check, and the measure turns out to be very highly
correlated with the FMA measure of section 4.
       Second, the income term, GDPi, may itself be endogenous. We consider two
approaches to this problem. First, we impose a theoretical restriction that $1 = 1, and take as
the dependent variable the export to income ratio, Vi /GDPi. In this specification, we focus on
the ability of the explanatory variables to explain variation in the share of exports in GDP.
Second, we use lagged values of GDPi for the independent variable. We estimate equation
(21) using the cross-section variation in the data and focus on the final time period 1994/97.
Here, the corresponding lagged income variable is 1990-93.
       Third, our primary interest in this section is not consistently estimating the structural
parameters of equation (21). Rather, our main concern is conditioning on the right-hand side
variables and examining how much of the cross-country variation in export performance can
be statistically explained by these considerations and how much remains unexplained in the
regional dummies.
       Estimation results are reported in Table 5. The first column gives our base
specification, using the lagged GDP variable. As expected the coefficient on GDP is positive
and highly significant, although also significantly less than unity, reflecting the fact that large
economies are less open than smaller ones. This suggests that working with the ratio of
exports to GDP as dependent variable would be inappropriate. The other size measure,
                                                                                                   17

population, is insignificant.
       We find a positive and statistically significant effect of both external and internal
geography in determining exports. The coefficient on ln(F) is significantly less than unity,
indicating that an increase in FMA increases exports less than proportionately. This is in line
with the theoretical discussion above as the expansion in exports raises costs and prices in the
sector, thereby reducing supply capacity This finding is also consistent with the earlier work
(Redding and Venables 2001) which shows that a higher level of FMA is associated with
higher wages. The coefficient on the proportion of population within 100km of the coast or a
navigable river is also significant and positive, capturing internal geography. Similar results
are obtained if the proportion of population is replaced by the proportion of land area. The
measure of institutional quality (risk of expropriation) has a positive and statistically
significant effect on export performance, consistent with an important role for the protection
of property rights in determining countries ability to export.
       The second column of table 5 gives results for the specification with the export ratio
taken as the independent variable. Coefficients on ln(M) and on internal geography are
similar to those in the first column. However, the population term becomes negative and
significant, and the coefficient on institutional quality becomes smaller and insignificant. The
fact that smaller economies tend to export less is being captured by the negative coefficient on
population, and perhaps also by a positive correlation between institutional quality (now with
a smaller coefficient) and per capita income.
       Columns 3 and 4 repeat the exercise with the alternative measure of foreign market
access discussed above, M*. Signs and significance levels are unchanged using this
alternative variable. The size of the coefficient on ln(M*) is somewhat smaller than that on
ln(M), although the difference is not statistically significant at conventional critical values.


5.3 Effects by region
We use these econometric estimates to shed light on patterns of export performance across the
9 geographical regions. To what extent are the divergent performances of these regions
explained by this model, and which of the independent variables are more important in
explaining the variation in performance across regions?
       The expected value of exports by region k relative to the expected value for the world,
                        , can be expressed as a linear function of regional deviations in
                                                                                                  18

independent variables times their estimated coefficients. Formally, regression equation (21)
implies that,


                                                                                                (22)


where :k is the regional dummy of equation (21), and remaining terms are the regional
contributions of the independent variables:




                                                                                            (23)




Thus,                                           is region k’s FMA, relative to that of the world,
times the estimated coefficient on FMA. Terms "k (t) and "k (c) are the analogous measures
for internal geography and institutions, while size effects are combined in "k (a).
        We illustrate results for each region in Fig. 2, where values are based on the estimates
given in the first column of table 5. The first bar in each of the regional boxes, labelled "k
(V), is the region’s export performance relative to the world average once size effects have
been conditioned out,                                         . Remaining bars sum to this first
bar, since they divide "k (V) into four components (see equation (22)). Bars two to four give
respectively the contributions of foreign market access, M, internal geography, t, and
institutions, c. The residual, after controlling for these factors, is the regional dummy :k,
illustrated as the final bar in each chart.
        What do we learn from this decomposition? North America (including Mexico) has
high trade relative to the world, given its income and population. This is explained partly by
relatively good market access and partly by institutions. It is offset by relatively poor internal
geography leaving a substantial unexplained residual. Western Europe’s high level of exports
is accounted for by a combination of good market access, good internal geography and good
institutions, leaving virtually nothing to the residual dummy variable. For Eastern Europe,
the benefits of good market access and better than average internal geography and institutions
are not fully reflected in the actual level of trade, leaving a large negative regional dummy.
                                                                                              19

This is consistent with the idea that the legacy of communism during the post-war period has
had a long-lasting effect on Eastern Europe’s exports, captured here in the regional dummy.
The outcome for Oceania combines low market access with good internal geography and
institutions.
        Sub-Saharan African has low trade volumes given its income level, and these are
accounted for by below average performance on all three measures, together with some
negative residual. Thus, each of "k (M), "k (t), "k (c) and :k account for between 20% and
30% of Sub-Saharan Africa’s low level of trade after conditioning on country size, "k (V). At
the other extreme is the performance of South-East Asia, with high trade levels only partly
explained by good institutions and internal geography. There remains a large positive
residual, in part due to the entrepot activities of Hong Kong and Singapore, and in part due to
aspects of the Asian Miracle that are not captured by our approach.


6. Concluding comments.
The changes in countries’ export performance over recent decades are symptomatic, at least,
of the extent to which they have succeeded in benefiting from globalization. The real value of
world exports doubled between the early 1970s and mid 80s, and doubled again from the mid
80s to late 1990s. In the second of these periods Latin American exports went up by just
54%, Sub-Saharan Africa’s went up by 10%, and those of the Middle-East and North Africa
fell by 16%.
        This paper takes some steps towards understanding the determinants of cross-country
variation in both the levels and growth of exports. There are several main findings. First,
geography creates substantial cross-country variation in the ease of access to foreign markets,
and this is an important determinant of countries’ export performance. For example, once
country size factors are controlled for, Sub-Saharan Africa has poor export performance,
about one quarter of which is attributable to its poor foreign market access. Furthermore, the
growth of foreign market access varied widely across regions during the periods we studied.
This accounted for some of the poor performance of regions such as Sub-Saharan Africa, not
neighboured by countries with fast growing import demand.
        Second, export performance also depends on internal geography, which is measured in
this paper by the proportion of the population close to the coast or navigable rivers. Looking
at Sub-Saharan Africa again, a further one-quarter of its poor export performance is
                                                                                                  20

accounted for by this variable.
       Finally, export performance also depends on many other domestic supply side factors.
This paper takes a small step towards analysis of these by looking at the role of institutional
quality in determining exports. This, it turns out, accounts for a further one-quarter of Sub-
Saharan Africa’s low export levels. Perhaps the main contribution of this paper is to show to
measure and control for the external and internal geographic factors that shape performance.
Our hope is that once these are successfully controlled for then research will be better able to
identify domestic factors (some of them subject to policy control) that also determine export
performance.
                                                                                                                     21

Table 1 : Bilateral trade equation estimation (country, partner dummies)
 ln(Xij)                        1           2            3           4            5           6            7
 Obs                            9981        9981         9981        9981         9981        9981         9981
 Period                         1970/73     1974/77      1978/81     1982/85      1986/90     1990/94      1994/97
 ln(distij)                     -0.831      -0.866       -0.882      -0.883       -0.853      -0.866       -0.866
                                0.072       0.062        0.059       0.061        0.05        0.05         0.046


 bordij                         0.532       0.494        0.483       0.449        0.528       0.607        0.688
                                0.179       0.157        0.154       0.16         0.146       0.151        0.152


 Country dummies                yes         yes          yes         yes          yes         yes          yes
 Partner dummies                yes         yes          yes         yes          yes         yes          yes


 Estimation                     WLS         WLS          WLS         WLS          WLS         WLS          WLS
 F(@)                           96.56       106.83       124.23      128.43       172         198.71       212.87
 Prob > F                       0           0            0           0            0           0            0
 R-squared                      0.863       0.85         0.852       0.844        0.897       0.906        0.898
 Root MSE                       0.879       0.89         0.891       0.954        0.761       0.7          0.723

Notes: Huber-White Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. ln(Xij) is log bilateral exports
from country i to partner j plus one; ln(distij) is bilateral distance between countries i and j; bordij is a dummy for
whether the two countries share a common border. All specifications include exporting country and importing
partner fixed effects. To allow for measurement error in bilateral trade flows that is correlated with the volume
of trade, observations are weighted by the product of country and partner GDP.
                                                                                                                             22

Table 2: Regional Sources of Export Growth, 1970/73-1994/97, Percentage Rates of
Growth

  Region                    Period                               Exports, V       Foreign           Supplier
                                                                                  Market            Capacity,
                                                                                  Access, M         s

  Benchmark           Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                    326.3%                 106.5%           106.5%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)               104.4%                  42.9%            42.9%
                            Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)              108.5%                  44.5%            44.5%
  North America       Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   288.99%                166.07%          110.86%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)                92.74%                59.42%           54.00%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)              101.82%                 66.90%           36.92%
  Latin America       Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   193.32%                110.82%           48.11%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)                90.17%                40.39%           43.45%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)                54.24%                50.17%            3.25%
  Western Europe      Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   269.37%                 94.29%           96.82%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)                75.05%                33.02%           34.12%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)              111.01%                 46.06%           46.75%
  Eastern Europe      Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   187.43%                 94.84%           39.62%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)               44.03%                 33.95%           10.95%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)               99.56%                 45.45%           25.84%
  Sub-Saharan Africa Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                     70.38%                 86.44%           -7.24%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)               54.18%                 34.71%           10.80%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)               10.50%                 38.40%          -16.28%
  N Africa and M East Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   189.77%                102.82%           41.20%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)              245.48%                 48.38%          135.71%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)              -16.13%                 36.69%          -40.10%
  SE Asia             Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   826.17%                146.35%          238.04%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)              233.67%                 47.88%          119.01%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)              177.57%                 66.59%           54.35%
  Other Asia          Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   371.95%                117.80%          119.31%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)               76.45%                 45.74%           21.01%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)              167.48%                 49.44%           81.23%
  Oceania             Periods 1-7 (70/73-94/97)                   166.82%                104.30%           29.86%
                           Periods 1-4 (70/73-82/85)                48.35%                37.34%            7.89%
                           Periods 4-7 (82/85-94/97)                 79.85%               48.75%           20.36%
Notes: regional variables are the sum of those for countries within a region; see Appendix A for the countries included in
each region. Columns (3)-(5) of the table are based on equation (8). Column (3) is the rate of growth of exports; Column (4)
is the rate of growth of foreign market access; Column (5) is the rate of growth of supplier capacity. The rates of growth of
supplier capacity and foreign market access compound to the rate of growth of total exports. At the country level, this
decomposition is exact. When we aggregate to regions, the decomposition is approximate since
                                                           .
                                                                                                                                              23




Table 3a Percentage Growth Contributions of Partner Regions to the growth of Foreign Market Access of Each Exporting Region
Periods 1-7 (1970/73-1994/7)


             Importer FMA North               Latin       Western     Eastern   Sub         MENA      South     Other          Oceania
                     all regions America      America     Europe      Europe    Saharan               East Asia Asia
 Exporter                                                                       Africa

North America         166.07%       141.42%       3.22%       9.53%       0.29%    -0.43%       1.30%      9.82%       0.33%      0.59%
Latin America         110.82%        59.11%      19.32%      13.99%       0.42%    -0.86%       2.18%     14.93%       0.55%      1.19%
Western Europe        94.29%         15.49%       1.45%      61.91%       2.01%    -0.53%       2.90%     10.15%       0.50%      0.41%
Eastern Europe        94.84%         14.38%       1.44%      60.67%       2.99%    -0.57%       3.66%     11.21%       0.60%      0.45%
Sub-Saharan Africa    86.44%         27.24%       4.57%      23.79%       0.75%    -2.44%       6.00%     23.84%       1.36%      1.34%
N Africa and M East   102.82%        20.36%       2.35%      33.04%       1.08%    -1.08%      23.91%     20.67%       1.65%      0.83%
South-East Asia       146.35%        19.10%       2.18%      13.04%       0.46%    -0.72%       3.40%    104.67%       1.88%      2.34%
Other Asia            117.80%        21.29%       2.56%      19.43%       0.71%    -1.02%       7.67%     58.39%       7.10%      1.67%
Oceania               104.30%        29.99%       5.13%      13.18%       0.44%    -1.02%       3.22%     46.60%       1.26%      5.49%
Notes: a region’s Foreign Market Access (FMA) is the sum of the values of FMA for all countries within that region. Regional FMA growth is
decomposed into the percentage contributions of each partner region using equations (12) and (13). The exporting region is reported in the rows
of the table and the importing partner in the columns.
                                                                                                                                              24

Table 3b Percentage Growth Contributions of Partner Regions to the growth of Foreign Market Access of Each Exporting Region
Periods 1-4 (1970/73-1982/5)


               Importer       FMA North         Latin     Western    Eastern    Sub        MENA S o u t h         Other      Oceania
                          all regions America   America   Europe     Europe     Saharan               East Asia Asia
   Exporter                                                                     Africa
North America            59.42%          51.56%      0.35%    2.36%     -0.11%      -0.22%      1.84%      3.22%      0.25%       0.18%
Latin America            40.39%          27.89%      1.42%    3.17%     -0.17%      -0.48%      3.07%      4.72%      0.41%       0.36%
Western Europe           33.02%           7.42%      0.01% 18.07%       -0.27%      -0.17%      4.20%      3.24%      0.40%       0.12%
Eastern Europe           33.95%           6.81%     -0.00% 18.28%       -0.35%      -0.17%      5.22%      3.57%      0.48%       0.13%
Sub-Saharan Africa       34.71%          12.55%     -0.06%    6.20%     -0.25%      -1.03%      8.58%      7.23%      1.08%       0.41%
N Africa and M East 48.38%                9.50%     -0.03% 10.32%       -0.24%      -0.32% 21.09%          6.45%      1.37%       0.25%
South-East Asia          47.88%           8.54%     -0.12%    2.88%     -0.19%      -0.49%      4.82%     30.18%      1.39%       0.86%
Other Asia               45.74%           9.62%     -0.12%    4.81%     -0.25%      -0.59% 10.73%         16.86%      4.13%       0.55%
Oceania                  37.34%          13.10%     -0.24%    2.32%     -0.22%      -0.81%      4.51%     15.30%      0.95%       2.43%
Notes: a region’s Foreign Market Access (FMA) is the sum of the values of FMA for all countries within that region. Regional FMA growth is
decomposed into the percentage contributions of each partner region using equations (12) and (13). The exporting region is reported in the rows
of the table and the importing partner in the columns.
                                                                                                                                              25

Table 3c Percentage Growth Contributions of Partner Regions to the growth of Foreign Market Access of Each Exporting Region
Periods 4-7 (1982/85-1994/97)


               Importer FMA North             Latin       Western    Eastern    Sub        MENA       South     -Other       Oceania
                       all regions America    America     Europe     Europe     Saharan               East Asia Asia
 Exporter                                                                       Africa
North America            66.90%          56.37%     1.81%     4.50%      0.25%      -0.13%     -0.34%      4.14%      0.05%       0.26%
Latin America            50.17%          22.23% 12.75%        7.71%      0.42%      -0.27%     -0.64%      7.27%      0.10%       0.59%
Western Europe           46.06%           6.07%     1.08% 32.96%         1.71%      -0.27%     -0.98%      5.19%      0.08%       0.22%
Eastern Europe           45.45%           5.65%     1.08% 31.65%         2.50%      -0.30%     -1.16%      5.71%      0.09%       0.24%
Sub-Saharan Africa       38.40%          10.90%     3.44% 13.06%         0.75%      -1.05%     -1.91% 12.33%          0.21%       0.69%
N Africa and M East 36.69%                7.32%     1.60% 15.31%         0.89%      -0.51%      1.91%      9.59%      0.19%       0.39%
South-East Asia          66.59%           7.14%     1.56%     6.87%      0.43%      -0.16%     -0.96% 50.37%          0.33%       1.00%
Other Asia               49.44%           8.01%     1.84% 10.03%         0.66%      -0.29%     -2.10% 28.50%          2.04%       0.77%
Oceania                  48.75%          12.30%     3.91%     7.91%      0.48%      -0.15%     -0.94% 22.79%          0.23%       2.23%
Notes: a region’s Foreign Market Access (FMA) is the sum of the values of FMA for all countries within that region. Regional FMA growth is
decomposed into the percentage contributions of each partner region using equations (12) and (13). The exporting region is reported in the rows
of the table and the importing partner in the columns.
                                                                                                                                                26

Table 4: Bilateral trade equation estimation and within-region trade costs
(country, partner dummies)
 ln(Xij)                               1               2              3               4              5               6              7
 Obs                                   9981            9981           9981            9981           9981            9981           9981
 Period                                1970/73         1974/77        1978/81         1982/85        1986/89         1990/93        1994/97
 ln(distij)                            -0.669          -0.69          -0.71           -0.779         -0.704          -0.688         -0.74
                                       0.089           0.077          0.076           0.081          0.071           0.075          0.086
 bordij                                0.778           0.659          0.578           0.526          0.488           0.416          0.401
                                       0.145           0.124          0.119           0.12           0.112           0.113          0.118
 Within N America                      -0.467          -0.277         -0.205          -0.333         -0.019          0.417          0.543
                                       0.289           0.271          0.281           0.278          0.273           0.327          0.335
 Within L America                      -0.531          -0.278         -0.168          -0.013         0.313           0.626          0.58
                                       0.233           0.202          0.201           0.209          0.191           0.201          0.24
 Within W Europe                       0.565           0.642          0.732           0.657          0.811           0.876          0.802
                                       0.161           0.14           0.135           0.142          0.13            0.142          0.172
 Within E Europe                       1.038           -0.274         3.424           4.139          4.014           2.409          1.817
                                       1.452           1.75           0.305           0.28           0.261           0.212          0.256
 Within Sub-Sahar. Africa              -3.913          -4.067         -4.849          -5.615         -5.2            -1.485         -1.334
                                       0.586           0.609          0.609           0.525          0.449           0.316          0.322
 Within N Africa & ME                  -2.972          -4.225         -4.903          -4.257         -4.073          -3.631         -3.381
                                       0.658           0.595          0.704           0.664          0.683           0.804          0.853
 Within SE Asia                        0.852           0.638          0.225           -0.174         -0.217          -0.232         -0.382
                                       0.297           0.272          0.265           0.293          0.223           0.219          0.23
 Within Other Asia                     -4.65           -0.715         -0.422          -0.574         -0.86           -0.356         -1.278
                                       1.637           0.751          0.962           0.773          0.788           0.634          0.789
 Within Oceania                        0.929           1.09           1.214           0.965          1.177           1.483          1.591
                                       0.525           0.429          0.431           0.339          0.289           0.29           0.39
 Country dummies                       yes             yes            yes             yes            yes             yes            yes
 Partner dummies                       yes             yes            yes             yes            yes             yes            yes
 Estimation                            WLS             WLS            WLS             WLS            WLS             WLS            WLS
 Prob > F(dummies)                     0.077           0.011          0.005           0.004          0.000           0.000          0.000
 Prob > F(@)                           0.000           0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000           0.000          0.000
 R-squared                             0.868           0.856          0.859           0.853          0.903           0.912          0.904
 Root MSE                              0.864           0.873          0.869           0.933          0.736           0.677          0.701
Notes: Huber-White Heteroscedasticity robust standard errors in parentheses. ln(Xij) is log bilateral exports from country i to partner j plus
one; ln(distij) is bilateral distance between countries i and j; bordij is a dummy for whether the two countries share a common border. All
specifications include exporting country and importing partner fixed effects. Within N America is a dummy that takes the value 1 if both
trade partners lie within North America and zero otherwise. The other within-region dummies are defined analogously. Prob > F(dummies)
is the p-value for an F-test of the null hypothesis that the coefficients on the regional dummies are jointly equal to zero. Prob > F (@) is the p-
value for an F-test of the null hypothesis that all coefficients are jointly equal to zero. Since the within-region dummies exploit bilateral
information they are separately identified from the country and partner fixed effects. To allow for measurement error in bilateral trade flows
that is correlated with the volume of trade, observations are weighted by the product of country and partner GDP. To capture the effects of
NAFTA, Mexico is included in the definition of North America.
                                                                                                      27




Table 5: the role of internal geography, external geography, and institutions in
determining export performance, 1994-97.


 Dependent Variable                     ln(V)           ln(V/GDP)         ln(V)          ln(V/GDP)

 Period                                 1994/97         1994/97           1994/97        1994/97

 Observations                           95              95                95             95

 ln(GDP(1991-93))                       0.734                             0.73

                                        0.052                             0.051

 ln(population)                         -0.038          -0.262            -0.025         -0.256

                                        0.057           0.043             0.057          0.043

 ln(M)                                  0.46            0.479             0.342          0.298

                                        0.195           0.205             0.119          0.127

 % Pop within 100km coast & rivers      0.581            0.416            0.596          0.441

                                        0.191           0.061             0.187          0.199

 institutional quality                  0.202           0.023             0.198          0.016

                                        0.062           0.387             0.061          0.061

 Region Effects                         yes              yes              yes            yes

 Estimation                             OLS             OLS               OLS            OLS

                                        F(13,81)=       F(12,82)=         F(13,81)=      F(12,82)=
                                        137.6           7.732             142.2          7.747

 Prob > F                               0               0                 0              0

 R2                                     0.957           0.531             0.958          0.531

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Columns 1 and 2, FMA as computed in section 3. Columns 3 and 4 FMA
computed omitting own country, F*.
                                                                                           28

Appendix:
Data:
Bilateral Trade: data on bilateral trade flows are from the World Bank COMTRADE
database.
GDP per capita: data on current price (US dollars) GDP and on population are from the
World Bank. Deflated by US GDP deflator
Geographical variables: data on bilateral distance, existence of a common border from the
World Bank.
Physical Geography and Institutional, Social, and Political Characteristics: data on
proportion of land and population close to coast or navigable rivers from Gallup, Sachs, and
Mellinger (1998). The data can be downloaded from http://www2.cid.harvard.edu/ciddata.
Institutions: Expropriation risk from International Country Risk Guide database.


Regional groupings:
North America: Canada, USA, Mexico.
Latin America and the Caribbean: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica,
Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala, Haiti, Honduras, Jamaica, Nicaragua,
Panama, Peru, Trinidad and Tobago, Uruguay, and Venezuela..
Western Europe: Austria, Belgium (incl Luxembourg), Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Greece, Ireland, Italy, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey,
United Kingdom.
Eastern Europe: Albania, Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, Romania.
Sub-Saharan Africa: Angola, Benin, Cameroon, Cote d’Ivoire, Cameroon, Ethiopia, Gabon,
Ghana, Guinea, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Mali, Mauritius, Mozambique, Morocco,
Nigeria, Senegal, South Africa, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
Middle-East and North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Iran, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon,
Morocco, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Tunisia, United Arab Emirates.
South East Asia: Cambodia, China, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Papua
New Guinea, Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand.
Other Asia: Bangladesh, India, Sri Lanka, Nepal, and Pakistan.
Oceania: Australia, New Zealand.
                                                                                         29

Table A1 : Country Sources of Export Growth and the Regional Concentration of Foreign
Market Access Growth, Panel A; growth rates.
                    Period         Supply       Foreign   Exports    Own        Other
     Country                      capacity     market                Region     Region
                                               access                FMA        FMA
    North America
    Canada          70/73-82/85    2.71%       73.91%     78.62%     69.4%       4.5%
                    82/85-94/97    2.46%       70.61%     74.81%     65.3%       5.3%
    Mexico          70/73-82/85   307.49%      46.72%     497.87%    36.3%       10.4%
                    82/85-94/97    56.81%      65.22%     159.09%    48.8%       16.4%
    United States   70/73-82/85    52.56%      20.65%     84.06%     3.3%        17.3%
                    82/85-94/97    37.90%      49.10%     105.61%    19.4%       29.7%
    Latin America
    Argentina       70/73-82/85    3.96%       29.04%     34.15%     0.5%        28.5%
                    82/85-94/97    41.04%      63.79%     131.01%    30.3%       33.5%
    Bolivia         70/73-82/85    13.40%      29.65%     47.02%     -1.6%       31.2%
                    82/85-94/97    -35.03%     59.35%     3.53%      24.8%       34.6%
    Brazil          70/73-82/85   105.77%      31.49%     170.58%    -1.6%       33.1%
                    82/85-94/97    -6.65%      51.21%     41.16%     14.1%       37.1%
    Chile           70/73-82/85    18.58%      28.77%     52.70%     -2.0%       30.8%
                    82/85-94/97    83.77%      56.08%     186.83%    19.9%       36.2%
    Colombia        70/73-82/85    23.71%      40.40%     73.69%     3.3%        37.1%
                    82/85-94/97    53.89%      46.69%     125.74%    11.7%       35.0%
    Costa Rica      70/73-82/85    4.72%       45.78%     52.65%     5.1%        40.7%
                    82/85-94/97    62.72%      45.46%     136.68%    8.3%        37.2%
    Dominican       70/73-82/85    -10.00%     49.76%     34.78%     2.7%        47.1%
    Republic        82/85-94/97   108.67%      40.72%     193.64%    3.3%        37.4%
    Ecuador         70/73-82/85    151.37%     39.19%     249.88%    2.0%        37.2%
                    82/85-94/97    -8.07%      48.06%     36.11%     11.1%       37.0%
    El Salvador     70/73-82/85    -28.01%     44.20%     3.81%      2.2%        42.0%
                    82/85-94/97    -18.40%     48.24%     20.97%     8.6%        39.6%
    Guatemala       70/73-82/85    -0.24%      45.09%     44.75%     2.2%        42.9%
                    82/85-94/97    -16.50%     56.30%     30.51%     7.3%        49.0%
    Haiti           70/73-82/85    180.97%     48.56%     317.41%    2.2%        46.3%
                    82/85-94/97    -81.19%     43.96%     -72.92%    6.8%        37.2%
    Honduras        70/73-82/85    6.25%       44.23%     53.24%     2.1%        42.1%
                    82/85-94/97    -36.84%     46.62%     -7.40%     7.7%        38.9%
    Jamaica         70/73-82/85    -43.36%     50.44%     -14.79%    2.9%        47.6%
                    82/85-94/97    3.69%       42.64%     47.90%     4.4%        38.3%
    Nicaragua       70/73-82/85    -51.99%     44.38%     -30.69%    2.7%        41.7%
                    82/85-94/97    -24.25%     47.62%     11.82%     9.1%        38.6%
    Panama          70/73-82/85    -14.80%     42.78%     21.64%     1.8%        41.0%
                    82/85-94/97    6.19%       47.03%     56.12%     9.4%        37.7%
    Peru            70/73-82/85    -10.25%      35.59%    21.69%     1.2%        34.4%
                    82/85-94/97    -1.93%       53.90%    50.92%     17.7%       36.2%
    Trinidad and    70/73-82/85    40.46%       44.13%    102.44%    3.0%        41.2%
    Tobago          82/85-94/97    -52.42%      41.09%    -32.87%    4.6%        36.5%
    Uruguay         70/73-82/85    52.02%       15.49%    75.57%     -6.4%       21.9%
                    82/85-94/97    -7.14%      87.22%     73.85%     58.5%       28.7%
    Venezuela       70/73-82/85    39.69%       43.63%    100.63%    1.9%        41.8%
                    82/85-94/97    -32.04%     47.58%     0.30%      10.6%       37.0%
                                                                                                         30


Table A1 : Country Sources of Export Growth and the Regional Concentration of Foreign Market Access
Growth, Panel B
     Country             Period           Supply        Foreign      Exports      Own           Other
                                         capacity      market                     Region        Region
                                                       access                     FMA           FMA
     Western Europe
     Austria             70/73-82/85     44.54%        28.48%        85.71%        16.8%         11.7%
                         82/85-94/97     58.77%        54.54%        145.37%       39.8%         14.7%
     Belgium             70/73-82/85     11.74%        33.90%        49.62%        24.9%         9.0%
     (incl Luxembourg)   82/85-94/97     45.43%        48.24%        115.58%       40.5%         7.8%
     Denmark             70/73-82/85     22.67%        31.32%        61.09%        19.6%         11.7%
                         82/85-94/97     34.43%        50.51%        102.34%       39.6%         10.9%
     Finland             70/73-82/85     37.30%        30.62%        79.33%        12.0%         18.6%
                         82/85-94/97     77.39%        40.70%        149.60%       23.6%         17.1%
     France              70/73-82/85     27.92%        29.60%        65.79%        18.0%         11.6%
                         82/85-94/97     43.09%        52.71%        118.51%       42.6%         10.1%
     Germany             70/73-82/85     27.51%        28.29%        63.59%        14.5%         13.8%
                         82/85-94/97     37.36%        49.64%        105.55%       32.3%         17.3%
     Greece              70/73-82/85     65.23%        40.26%        131.76%       15.4%         24.9%
                         82/85-94/97     20.21%        39.84%        68.11%        23.5%         16.4%
     Ireland             70/73-82/85     102.15%       34.20%        171.28%       18.6%         15.6%
                         82/85-94/97     133.79%       45.39%        239.91%       32.1%         13.3%
     Italy               70/73-82/85     40.84%        34.67%        89.67%        15.2%         19.5%
                         82/85-94/97     61.49%        43.50%        131.74%       28.5%         15.0%
     Netherlands         70/73-82/85     32.22%        32.16%        74.74%        21.5%         10.7%
                         82/85-94/97     19.07%        46.99%        75.02%        37.5%         9.5%
     Norway              70/73-82/85     93.16%        31.80%        154.59%       15.0%         16.8%
                         82/85-94/97     22.67%        40.04%        71.79%        24.8%         15.2%
     Portugal            70/73-82/85     21.12%        38.31%        67.52%        16.1%         22.2%
                         82/85-94/97     125.85%       49.78%        238.28%       32.5%         17.3%
     Spain               70/73-82/85     100.36%       35.68%        171.84%       15.1%         20.5%
                         82/85-94/97     116.11%       41.68%        206.18%       26.2%         15.5%
     Sweden              70/73-82/85     5.65%         33.87%        41.43%        16.0%         17.9%
                         82/85-94/97     39.53%        40.54%        96.10%        24.3%         16.2%
     Switzerland         70/73-82/85     33.72%        31.84%        76.30%        20.5%         11.4%
                         82/85-94/97     43.52%        51.53%        117.47%       41.7%         9.8%
     Turkey              70/73-82/85     129.06%       36.75%        213.24%       11.8%         24.9%
                         82/85-94/97     87.06%        35.69%        153.82%       19.2%         16.5%
     United Kingdom      70/73-82/85     36.68%        38.55%        89.38%        22.7%         15.8%
                         82/85-94/97     36.49%        35.09%        84.38%        22.0%         13.1%
                                                                                                31


Table A1 : Country Sources of Export Growth and the Regional Concentration of Foreign
Market Access Growth, Panel C
    Country            Period            Supply          Foreign   Exports    Own      Other
                                        capacity        market                Region   Region
                                                        access                FMA      FMA
    Eastern Europe
    Albania             70/73-82/85      84.57%         36.57%      152.07%   0.0%     36.5%
                        82/85-94/97      -43.46%        37.34%     -22.35%    1.3%     36.0%
    Bulgaria            70/73-82/85      27.01%         35.56%      72.17%    -0.7%    36.3%
                        82/85-94/97      -9.33%         43.17%      29.81%    3.0%     40.2%
    Czechoslovakia      70/73-82/85      2.86%          31.08%      34.83%    -0.5%    31.6%
                        82/85-94/97      77.54%         54.48%      174.26%   2.9%     51.6%
    Hungary             70/73-82/85      -11.31%        34.92%      19.66%    -0.6%    35.5%
                        82/85-94/97      44.67%         41.52%      104.73%   3.3%     38.2%
    Poland              70/73-82/85      -0.44%         31.34%      30.76%    -0.2%    31.5%
                        82/85-94/97      57.83%         49.69%      136.25%   1.8%     47.8%
    Romania             70/73-82/85      47.75%         37.74%      103.52%   0.1%     37.6%
                        82/85-94/97      -28.69%        38.34%      -1.36%    2.4%     35.9%
    Sub-Saharan Africa and North Africa & Middle-East
    Angola              70/73-82/85      14.67%          30.48%    49.62%     -2.8%    33.3%
                        82/85-94/97      13.81%          37.95%    57.01%     -1.9%    39.9%
    Benin               70/73-82/85      4.81%           36.35%    42.91%     3.1%     33.2%
                        82/85-94/97      -5.98%          32.10%    24.21%     -4.9%    37.0%
    Cameroon            70/73-82/85      154.00%         37.41%    249.03%    3.7%     33.7%
                        82/85-94/97      -53.45%         31.61%    -38.73%    -5.1%    36.7%
    Cote d’Ivoire       70/73-82/85      30.17%          32.94%    73.04%     -1.5%    34.5%
                        82/85-94/97      -22.83%         39.04%    7.30%      -1.1%    40.1%
    Ethiopia            70/73-82/85      -33.83%         41.87%    -6.12%     -0.8%    42.7%
                        82/85-94/97      -29.71%         35.62%    -4.68%     -0.9%    36.5%
    Gabon               70/73-82/85      169.54%         35.08%    264.10%    0.9%     34.2%
                        82/85-94/97      -16.34%         34.97%    12.92%     -3.5%    38.4%
    Ghana               70/73-82/85      -51.31%         35.75%    -33.90%    1.5%     34.2%
                        82/85-94/97      35.02%          35.38%    82.80%     -3.3%    38.6%
    Guinea              70/73-82/85      134.95%         33.49%    213.63%    -1.9%    35.4%
                        82/85-94/97      -23.31%         39.84%    7.25%      -1.2%    41.0%
    Kenya               70/73-82/85      29.93%          36.42%    77.24%     -1.8%    38.2%
                        82/85-94/97      -12.85%         38.40%    20.61%     -0.5%    38.9%
    Madagascar          70/73-82/85      -37.96%         35.22%    -16.11%    -1.5%    36.7%
                        82/85-94/97      -50.35%         42.61     -29.19%    0.0%     42.6%
    Malawi              70/73-82/85      20.67%          30.46%    57.43%     -3.6%    34.0%
                        82/85-94/97      -18.21%         40.66%    15.05%     0.3%     40.4%
    Mali                70/73-82/85      -88.27%         36.63%    -83.97%    0.5%     36.1%
                        82/85-94/97      -12.42%         38.54%    21.33%     -1.3%    39.9%
    Mauritius           70/73-82/85      37.04%          36.29%    86.77%     -1.5%    37.7%
                        82/85-94/97      97.37%          43.71%    183.63%    -0.5%    44.2%
    Mozambique          70/73-82/85      -75.03%         27.47%    -68.17%    -3.5%    30.9%
                        82/85-94/97      -56.84%        43.73%     -37.96%    4.1%     39.6%
    Nigeria             70/73-82/85      122.31%         35.22%    200.60%    -1.0%    36.2%
                        82/85-94/97      -49.43%         39.04%    -29.69%    -0.7%    39.7%
    Senegal             70/73-82/85      -13.97%         35.84%    16.87%     -1.3%    37.1%
                        82/85-94/97      -48.02%         40.77%    -26.83%    -0.9%    41.6%
                                                                                                         32

Table A1 : Country Sources of Export Growth and the Regional Concentration of Foreign Market Access
Growth, Panel D
     Country             Period           Supply        Foreign      Exports      Own           Other
                                         capacity      market                     Region        Region
                                                       access                     FMA           FMA
     South Africa       70/73-82/85      -6.22%         34.18%       25.83%       -1.2%         35.4%
                        82/85-94/97      33.19%         44.56%       92.54%       -0.5%         45.1%
     Sudan              70/73-82/85      -42.06%        43.21%       -17.02%      -0.8%         44.1%
                        82/85-94/97      -67.13%        34.88%       -55.67%      -0.5%         35.4%
     Tanzania           70/73-82/85      -48.49%        34.51%       -30.72%      -2.3%         36.8%
                        82/85-94/97      -29.50%        39.75%       -1.48%       0.0%          39.7%
     Uganda             70/73-82/85      -48.21%        35.19%       -29.98%      -1.8%         37.0%
                        82/85-94/97      -27.45%       37.45%        -0.28%       -0.6%         39.0%
     Zaire              70/73-82/85      -34.05%        33.43%       -12.00%      -0.9%         34.3%
                        82/85-94/97      -54.51%        37.86%       -36.87%      -1.3%         39.2%
     Zambia             70/73-82/85      -67.90%        33.14%       -57.26%      -0.8%         33.9%
                        82/85-94/97      -49.35%        41.39%       -28.38%      1.6%          39.8%
     Zimbabwe           70/73-82/85      341.18%        24.27%       448.27%      -6.8%         31.1%
                        82/85-94/97      19.76%         41.05%       68.92%       1.7%          39.3%
     Algeria            70/73-82/85      203.95%        37.06%       316.59%      5.7%          31.4%
                        82/85-94/97      -51.74%        40.67%       -32.12%      0.4%          40.3%
     Egypt              70/73-82/85      85.79%         40.23%       160.54%      13.8%         26.4%
                        82/85-94/97      -36.75%        40.37%       -11.21%      0.4%          36.2%
     Iran               70/73-82/85      131.64%        48.88%       244.86%      18.8%         30.0%
                        82/85-94/97      -50.45%        37.76%       -31.74%      -2.9%         40.7%
     Israel             70/73-82/85      30.83%         59.69%       108.92%      34.2%         25.5%
                        82/85-94/97      130.86%        23.37%       184.80%      -7.5%         30.9%
     Jordan             70/73-82/85      312.61%        46.86%       505.96%      26.9%         20.0%
                        82/85-94/97      -20.10%        50.75%       20.46%       24.4%         26.4%
     Kuwait             70/73-82/85      -5.83%         72.11%       62.07%       44.9%         27.2%
                        82/85-94/97      -60.10%        22.24%       -51.23%      -8.8%         31.0%
     Lebanon            70/73-82/85      -42.87%        51.98%       -13.17%      27.6%         24.4%
                        82/85-94/97      -41.90%        35.03%       -21.45%      4.0%          31.1%
     Morocco            70/73-82/85      8.57%          38.31%       50.16%       6.6%          31.8%
                        82/85-94/97      17.92%         40.40%       65.56%       -1.9%         42.3%
     Oman               70/73-82/85      153.43%        63.84%       315.21%      33.8%         30.0%
                        82/85-94/97      -18.49%        37.80%       12.32%       3.0%          34.8%
     Saudi Arabia       70/73-82/85      181.50%        42.94%       302.39%      15.1%         27.8%
                        82/85-94/97      -55.62%        42.06%       -36.96%      3.7%          38.3%
     Syria              70/73-82/85      107.20%        41.39%       192.95%      18.5%         22.9%
                        82/85-94/97      8.35%          42.70%       54.62%       9.6%          33.1%
     Tunisia            70/73-82/85      134.51%        38.48%       224.75%      7.8%          30.7%
                        82/85-94/97      59.91%         34.60%       115.24%      -2.3%         36.9%
     United Arab        70/73-82/85      510.10%        63.88%       899.83%      34.9%         29.0%
     Emirates           82/85-94/97      -27.55%        26.40%       -8.42%       -7.8%         34.2%
                                                                                                                                              33

Table A1 : Country Sources of Export Growth and the Regional Concentration of Foreign Market Access Growth,
Panel E
  Country                   Period                 Supply             Foreign            Exports           Own                Other
                                                  capacity           market                                Region             Region
                                                                     access                                FMA                FMA
  South-East and Other Asia
  Cambodia            70/73-82/85                  -95.59%            38.73%             -93.89%           22.4%              16.4%
                      82/85-94/97                  3187.36%           85.00%             5981.78%          69.7%              15.3%
  China               70/73-82/85                  149.75%            47.05%             267.26%           31.3%              15.7%
                      82/85-94/97                  208.31%            62.89%             402.20%           48.0%              14.9%
  Hong Kong           70/73-82/85                  127.59%            47.08%             234.75%           29.3%              17.8%
                      82/85-94/97                  184.02%            67.31%             375.21%           51.2%              16.1%
  Indonesia           70/73-82/85                  291.97%            45.78%             471.92%           27.1%              18.7%
                      82/85-94/97                  -4.76%             63.79%             55.99%            46.0%              17.8%
  Japan               70/73-82/85                  91.49%             45.33%             178.30%           19.4%              26.0%
                      82/85-94/97                  10.83%             70.04%             88.46%            44.9%              25.2%
  Korea, Republic     70/73-82/85                  361.86%            50.83%             596.65%           35.3%              15.6%
                      82/85-94/97                  113.44%           44.47%              208.37%           30.4%              14.1%
  Malaysia            70/73-82/85                  97.90%             62.23%             221.05%           47.0%              15.3%
                      82/85-94/97                  85.98%             87.44%             248.59%           75.1%              12.3%
  Papua New           70/73-82/85                  83.12%            40.37%              157.04%           20.0%              20.4%
  Guinea              82/85-94/97                  37.54%             50.31%             106.73%           28.2%              22.1%
  Philippines         70/73-82/85                  24.96%             47.43%             84.24%            30.2%              17.2%
                      82/85-94/97                  64.21%             60.92%             164.25%           44.8%              16.2%
  Singapore           70/73-82/85                  201.65%            45.31%             338.34%           27.9%              17.5%
                      82/85-94/97                  123.47%            74.01%             288.86%           58.0%              16.0%
  Taiwan              70/73-82/85                  201.47%            53.89%             363.93%           37.2%              16.7%
                      82/85-94/97                  85.18%             64.30%             204.26%           49.5%              14.8%
  Thailand            70/73-82/85                  111.71%            44.20%             205.30%           24.3%              19.9%
                      82/85-94/97                  230.18%            60.93%             431.34%           43.6%              17.3%
  Viet Nam            70/73-82/85                  3.95%              48.86%             54.74%            31.0%              17.9%
                      82/85-94/97                  844.27%            70.77%             1512.52%          55.0%              15.7%
  Bangladesh          70/73-82/85                  132.16%            45.29%             237.32%           3.7%               41.6%
                      82/85-94/97                  114.21%            53.24%             228.26%           2.1%               51.2%
  India               70/73-82/85                  20.29%             45.17%             74.61%            2.7%               42.5%
                      82/85-94/97                  89.57%             48.34%             181.20%           1.1%               47.2%
  Nepal               70/73-82/85                  -2.75%             45.52%             41.52%            4.6%               40.9%
                      82/85-94/97                  114.41%            53.92%             230.02%           2.5%               51.4%
  Pakistan            70/73-82/85                  13.46%             48.16%             68.10%            5.8%               42.4%
                      82/85-94/97                  55.26%             43.67%             123.07%           3.6%               40.1%
  Sri Lanka           70/73-82/85                  7.04%              44.18%             54.34%            3.6%               40.6%
                      82/85-94/97                  52.39%             48.27%             125.94%           0.5%               47.7%
  Oceania
  Australia           70/73-82/85                  9.21%              37.74%             50.43%            0.6%               37.1%
                      82/85-94/97                  20.59%             49.90%             80.77%            0.6%               49.3%
  New Zealand         70/73-82/85                  2.81%              36.97%             40.81%            4.2%               32.8%
                      82/85-94/97                  19.38%             47.66%             76.29%            3.8%               43.9%

Notes: columns (3)-(5) of the table are based on equation (8). Column (3) is the rate of growth of supplier capacity (s); Column (4) is the rate
of growth of foreign market access (FMA); Column (5) is the rate of growth of exports. The rates of growth of supplier capacity and foreign
market access compound to the rate of growth of total exports. Columns (6) and (7) are based on equation (13). Column (6) reports the
contribution of a country’s own region FMA growth, while Column (7) gives the corresponding contribution of other region FMA growth.
                                                                                                34

Endnotes:
1. There is of course an extensive debate on the relationship between trade and growth. See for
example, Sachs and Warner (1995) and Frankel and Romer (1999) for the positive case, and
Rodrik and Rodriguez (2000), Rodrik et al. (2002) for the case that domestic institutions and
policy are more important.

2. For further discussion of the concepts of market and supply capacity, and the related concepts
of market and supplier access introduced below, see Redding and Venables (2001).

3. Beginning from initial values for mi, si, Mi, and Si we repeatedly solve the system of four
equations in (7)-(8) for all R countries. Irrespective of initial conditions, the system rapidly
converges to unique equilibrium values of mi, si, Mi, and Si.

4. This specification is more general than the standard gravity model, in which country and
partner dummies are replaced by income and other country characteristics. In particular, the
importer partner dummies capture variation in the manufacturing price index G that is a
determinant of market capacity m, and this specification thus controls for what Anderson and van
Wincoop (2001) term ‘multilateral resistance.’ For a recent survey of alternative approaches to
estimating the gravity equation, see Feenstra (2002).

5. The correlation across countries and over time between the measure of foreign market access
constructed from solving the system of equations for total exports/total imports and the measure
based on estimated exporter and importer dummies from the gravity equation is 0.99. The
corresponding correlations for market capacity and supplier capacity are 0.98.

6. Since Vi = si Mi,                      where g is a proportional growth rate. When
we aggregate to the regional level, this decomposition is no longer exact since
                                     .

7. For a discussion of the commodity structure of East Asian export growth and its relationship
to factor endowments and non-neutral technology differences, see Noland (1979).

8. Note that this decomposition of the growth in FMA shares features with the literature
concerned with a shift-share analysis of countries’ export growth (see for example Richardson
1971), although it uses our theoretically-based measures.
                                                                                              35

References
Acemoglu, D, Johnson, S, and Robinson, J (2001) ‘The Colonial Origins of Comparative
       Development: An Empirical Investigation’, American Economic Review, 91(5), 1369-
       1401.
Amjadi, A., Reincke U. and A. Yeats, (1996) Did External Barriers Cause the Marginalization
       of Sub-Saharan Africa in World Trade? World Bank, Washington DC.
Anderson, J (1979) ‘A Theoretical Foundation for the Gravity Equation’, American Economic
       Review, 69(1), 106-16.
Anderson, J and Van Wincoop, E (2001) ‘Gravity with Gravitas: A Solution to the Border
       Puzzle’, NBER Working Paper, 8079.
Ciccone, A and Alcalá, F (2001) ‘Trade and Productivity’, CEPR Discussion Paper, 3095.
Deardorff, A (1998) ‘Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in a Neoclassical
       World?’, Chapter 1 in (ed) Frankel, J, The Regionalisation of the World Economy,
       NBER & Chicago University Press.
Eaton, J and Kortum, S (1997) ‘Technology and Bilateral Trade’, NBER Working Paper, 6253.
Feenstra, R, Lipsey, R, and Bowen, H (1997) ‘World Trade Flows, 1970-92, With Production
       and Tariff Data’, NBER Working Paper, 5910.
Feenstra, R (2001) ‘World Trade Flows, 1980-97’, University of California, Davis,
       mimeograph.
Feenstra, R (2002) ‘Border Effects and the Gravity Equation: Consistent Methods for
       Estimation’, Scottish Journal of Political Economy, 49(5), 491-506.
Frankel, J and Romer, D (1999) ‘Does Trade Cause Growth?’, American Economic Review,
       89(3), 379-99.
Fujita, M, Krugman, P, and Venables, A.J. (1999) The Spatial Economy: Cities, Regions, and
       International Trade, MIT Press.
Gallup, J, Sachs, J, and Mellinger, A (1998) ‘Geography and Economic Development’,
       Proceedings of World Bank Annual Conference on Development Economics, World
       Bank: Washington.
Hall, R and Jones, C (1999) ‘Fundamental Determinants of Output per Worker across
       Countries’, Quarterly Journal of Economics, February, 83-116.
Harris, C (1954) ‘The Market as a Factor in the Localization of Industry in the United States’,
       Annals of the Association of American Geographers, 44, 315-48.
                                                                                            36

Holmes, K, Johnson, B, and Kirkpatrick, M (1997) 1996 Index of Economic Freedom, The
       Heritage Foundation and the Wall Street Journal’, Washington DC and New York.
Knack, S and Keefer, P (1997) ‘Does Social Capital Have an Economic Payoff?’, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 112, 1251-88.
Krugman, P and Venables, A.J. (1995) ‘Globalisation and the Inequality of Nations’, Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, 110(4), 857-80.
Leamer, E (1988) ‘Measures of Openness’, in (ed) Baldwin, R, Trade Policy Issues and
       Empirical Analysis’, University of Chicago Press : Chicago.
Limao, N. and Venables, A.J. (2001) ‘Infrastructure, geographical disadvantage and transport
       costs’, World Bank Economic Review, 15, 451-479.
McCallum, J (1995) ‘National Borders Matter: Canada-US Regional Trade Patterns’,
       American Economic Review, 85(3), 615-23.
Noland, M (1997) ‘Has Asian Export Performance Been Unique?’, Journal of International
       Economics, 43, 79-101.
Overman, H G, Redding, S, and Venables, A J (2001) ‘The Economic Geography of Trade,
       Production, and Income: A Survey of Empirics’, CEP Discussion Paper, 508,
       forthcoming in (ed) Harrigan, J, Handbook of International Trade, Basil Blackwell.
Radelet, S and J. Sachs, (1998) ‘Shipping Costs, Manufactured Exports, and Economic
       Growth’, paper presented at the American Economic Association Meetings, Harvard
       University, mimeo.
Redding, S and Venables, A (2001) ‘Economic Geography and International Inequality’, CEP
       Discussion Paper, 495, London School of Economics.
Richardson, D (1971) ‘Constant Market Shares Analysis of Export Growth’, Journal of
       International Economics, 1, 227-239.
Rodriguez, F and Rodrik, D (2000) `Trade Policy and Economic Growth: A Skeptic's Guide to
       the Cross-national Evidence', Macroeconomics Annual, NBER and MIT Press.
Rodrik, D, Subramanian, A, and Trebbi, F (2002) `Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
       Institutions over Geography and Integration in Economic Development', NBER
       Working Paper, 9305.
Sachs, J and Warner, A (1995) ‘Economic Reform and the Process of Global Integration’,
       Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 0(1), 1-95.
Wei, S (2000) ‘Natural Openness and Good Government’, NBER Working Paper, 7765.
                                       North America                 Latin America
                                       Western Europe                Eastern Europe


                        60000
Foreign Market Access




                        40000




                        20000




                           0
                                1         2         3         4       5         6     7
                                                            Period
                                       Sub-Saharan Africa            SE Asia
                                       Other Asia                    Oceania


                        30000
Foreign Market Access




                        20000




                        10000


                                1         2         3         4       5         6     7
                                                            Period
                                    Figure 1A : Average Regional FMA
                                                        North America                 Latin America
                                                        Western Europe                Eastern Europe
Supplier Capacity Index (Period 1 = 1)



                                               2




                                              1.5




                                               1


                                                    1      2         3         4       5         6     7
                                                                             Period
                                                        Sub-Saharan Africa            SE Asia
                                                        Other Asia                    Oceania
                                               4
Supplier Capacity Index (Period 1 = 1)




                                               3




                                               2




                                               1
                                                    1      2         3         4       5         6     7
                                                                             Period
                                         Figure 1B : Index of Average Regional Supplier Capacity
                North America                    Latin America              West Europe




       "k (V)   "k (M)   "k (t)   "k (c)   :k




                East Europe                     S-S Africa                  ME and NAfrica




                         SE Asia                Other Asia                     Oceania




Figure 2: Regional export performance, 1994-97:
Contributions of foreign market access "k (M), internal geography "k (t), insititutions "k (c), and residual :k
