NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ALCOHOL ABUSE AND SUICIDE ATTEMPTS AMONG YOUTH CORRELATION OR CAUSATION?
Pinka Chatterji
Dhaval Dave
Robert Kaestner
Sara Markowitz
Working Paper 9638
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9638
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

We gratefully acknowledge funding from the Robert Wood Johnson Foundation, Substance Abuse Policy
Research Program (Grant Number 43860). We would like to thank Jon Gruber for providing data. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Pinka Chatterji, Dhaval Dave, Robert Kaestner, and Sara Markowitz. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Alcohol Abuse and Suicide Attempts Among Youth - Correlation or Causation?
Pinka Chatterji, Dhaval Dave, Robert Kaestner, and Sara Markowitz
NBER Working Paper No. 9638
April 2003
JEL No. I1
ABSTRACT
This study uses the Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) and the National Comorbidity Survey
(NCS) to explore the causal relationship between alcohol abuse (binge drinking and clinically
defined alcohol use disorders) and suicide attempts among youth. We use an empirical approach that
allows one to assess the existence and strength of a causal relationship without relying on identifying
assumptions. Our results suggest that a causal relationship between binge drinking and suicide
attempts is very unlikely. The findings, however, support a causal relationship between clinically
defined alcohol use disorders and suicide attempts among girls.

Pinka Chatterji
Center for Multicultural Mental Health Research
at Cambridge Health Alliance/Harvard Medical Center
120 Beacon Street
4th Floor
Somerville, MA 02143
and NBER
pchatterji@charesearch.org
Robert Kaestner
Institute of Government and Public Affairs
University of Illinois at Chicago
815 West Van Buren Street
Suite 525
Chicago, IL 60607
and NBER
kaestner@uic.edu

Dhaval Dave
Graduate Center
City University of New York
Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
ddave@gc.cuny.edu

Sara Markowitz
National Bureau of Economic Research
365 Fifth Avenue, 5th Floor
New York, NY 10016
and Rutgers University, Newark
smarkow@newark.rutgers.edu

INTRODUCTION
Recent years have witnessed widespread public concern over the alarming rate of youth
suicide, as signaled by the publication of the Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent Suicide
(US Public Health Service 1999). More young adults die from suicide in the U.S. than from all
leading natural causes of death combined, including cancer, heart disease, AIDS, and congenital
defects. In 1999, 1,615 teenagers aged 15-19 years old took their own lives, making suicide the
third leading cause of death among youth behind accidents and homicides (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention 2002). Suicide attempts are much more common than completed
suicide; as many as 150 youths attempt suicide for every completed suicide.1 A previous suicide
attempt is considered a leading risk factor for completing a suicide. Moreover, suicide attempts,
regardless of whether or not they are completed, impose real health care and other costs. The
costs associated with both completed and medically treated suicides by youths under 21
amounted to 3.7 billion dollars in 1996 (Children’s Safety Network Economic and Insurance
Resource Center 2003).
A growing body of research implies that alcohol abuse is an important and independent
risk factor for suicide attempts among youth. The strong association between alcohol abuse and
suicide attempts is significant from a policy perspective because it suggests that alcohol use
prevention policies may be effective tools in reducing suicide attempts and completed suicides
among youth. Of course, this possibility depends on whether or not the association between
alcohol abuse and suicide attempts is truly causal. No previous study, however, has tested a
causal hypothesis directly among youth, either because of reliance on state-level rather than on
individual-level data, or because of statistical problems associated with obtaining causal
1

Data from the National Comorbidity Survey, used in this study, indicate that 2 percent of the respondents aged 1524 reported a suicide attempt in the past year. With a suicide death rate of 13.1 per 100,000 in 1991, this translates

1

estimates. The absence of such information undermines the formulation of effective public
policies.
The objective of this study is to use individual-level data on boys and girls from the
Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) and individual-level data on girls from the National
Comorbidity Survey (NCS) to explore the causal relationship between alcohol abuse (including
both self-reports about binge drinking and clinically defined alcohol use disorders) and suicide
attempts among youth. We use both of these data sets in order to take advantage of the superior
binge drinking measures and larger sample size in the YRBS, as well as the rich information on
clinical diagnoses and family background in the NCS. To achieve our objective, we use a novel
empirical approach, recently proposed by Altonji et al. (2001). There are two parts to this
approach. The first step involves obtaining estimates of the effect of alcohol abuse on suicide
attempts from a bivariate probit regression model in which the effect of unobservable variables is
fixed at various levels. This part of the analysis allows us to gauge how sensitive estimates of
the effect of alcohol abuse are to selection on unobserved variables. The second step calculates
the amount of selection on observed variables and obtains estimates of the effect of alcohol
abuse on suicide attempts under the assumption that the selection on unobserved variables is
equal to the selection on observed variables.
The advantage of the Altonji et al. (2001) procedure is that it allows researchers to assess
the existence and strength of a causal relationship without requiring the use of identifying
assumptions that are often not credible—for example, the existence of valid instruments in an
instrumental variables context. As a result, without any other identifying assumptions,
researchers can estimate the amount of selection on unobservable factors using the observed

to 153 attempts for every completion.

2

data, and in our case identify a lower bound on the causal parameter estimate.2
Our results indicate that although self-reports of binge drinking probably do not play a
causal role in suicide attempts, clinically defined alcohol use disorders may cause a significant
increase in the risk of a suicide attempt, at least among teenage girls. We show that there is
considerable selection both into alcohol abuse and into suicide attempts along observable
characteristics. This finding implies the existence of at least some degree of selection on
unobservable characteristics. Our analysis of constrained bivariate probit models, however,
demonstrates that even very modest amounts of selection on unobservable characteristics would
eliminate the effect of binge drinking on suicide attempts. This result provides evidence that a
causal relationship between binge drinking and suicide attempts is very unlikely. In the case of
clinically defined alcohol use disorders, even a large amount of selection on unobservable factors
does not completely eliminate the positive effect of clinically defined alcohol use disorders on
suicide attempts among girls. This finding supports a causal relationship between clinically
defined problem drinking and suicide attempts among girls.
Overall, the results imply that while binge drinking may be an important marker for a
youth at elevated risk for a suicide attempt, preventing binge drinking among youth will not be
effective in preventing suicide attempts. On the other hand, effective treatment for youth who
meet clinical criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence, which may include a significant number
of binge drinkers, may reduce the risk of suicide attempts. The prevalence of alcohol use
disorders in the general youth population is about 15%, but prevalence rates can be 50% or
higher among special populations of youths, such as juvenile offenders (Martseller et al. 1997;
Teplin et al. 2002). Interventions that identify and assist these youths, such as accessible

2

The lower bound is based on the assumption that selection on unobservable variables is no greater than selection
on observables. Below, we provide justification for this assumption.

3

screening and treatment programs, may be more effective in reducing suicide attempts than
broader policies, such as responsible drinking programs and minimum legal drinking ages, that
are aimed at all youth who use alcohol.
BACKGROUND
In his classic work on suicide, Durkheim (1951) asserts that the suicide rate is inversely
related to the degree of social integration. While his work does not consider the linkage between
alcohol and suicide, one can postulate a theoretical link between alcohol abuse and suicide
attempts based on this channel. Several studies document that excessive alcohol use leads to a
deterioration of social ties.3 In addition to this indirect link via social disintegration, more direct
ones also have been documented. There is an extensive literature linking alcohol and drug abuse
to aggression and violence.4 Arguably, suicide is a special class of violence, the result of
aggression and violence against oneself rather than against another individual (Dawson 1997).
An acute state of intoxication due to alcohol may reduce the individual’s self-control, impair
cognition, and thereby trigger suicidal tendencies (Norstrom 1995).5
Given the plausible mechanisms specified above, numerous social scientists have studied
the empirical relationship between alcohol abuse and suicide attempts among young people. In
samples of high-risk youth, there is a strong correlation between clinically defined alcohol
dependence and abuse and suicide attempts (Deykin & Buka 1994). Retrospective studies of
completed adolescent suicides demonstrate that 12 to 44% of females and 27 to 42% of males
met diagnostic criteria for a substance use disorder before their deaths (Marttunen et al 1991;
3

See Norstrom (1995) and Rossow and Lauritzen (1999 & 2001).
See for example Dawson (1997) and Markowitz (2001).
5
Alcohol and drugs are sometimes used by mentally ill individuals to relieve depression and psychological distress
(Saffer and Dave, 2002; Gruenwald et al, 1995). However, such self-medication may actually end up exacerbating
depression, anxiety, and psychological stress. Other biochemical risk factors such as serotonin depletion may also
be aggravated due to alcohol use. Rogers (1992) notes that these effects of alcohol may additionally induce myopia
4

4

Shaffer et al 1996). Alcohol abuse also is associated with suicide attempts in non-clinical
samples of youth (Workman & Beer 1990; Wagner et al. 1996; Felts et al.1992).
Despite this strong correlation in both clinical and general population samples,
researchers have not established that alcohol use and abuse have causal effects on an adolescent's
risk of attempting suicide (Crumley 1990). Alcohol use and abuse often are correlated with
other, sometimes hard to measure, determinants of suicide attempts, making it difficult to
establish causation. In particular, many researchers report that, in addition to alcohol use
disorders, other psychiatric conditions have been linked to suicide attempts among youth,
particularly depressive disorders (Deykin and Buka 1994; Shaffer et al. 1996; Runeson, 1990;
Crumley, 1990). For example, in a study of teenagers who completed suicide, approximately
61% appeared to have experienced a clinically significant mood disorder at the time of death,
and approximately 35% appeared to have had a substance use disorder (Shaffer 2000).
Some research has addressed this issue and found that even after controlling for other
psychiatric disorders, alcohol abuse remains a strong, independent predictor of suicide attempts.
Wagner et al. (1996), for example, note that while co-morbid depression and conduct problems
increase the probability that an alcohol abusing youngster attempts suicide, alcohol abuse also
independently increases the probability of attempting suicide. Similarly, Cutler et al. (2001) find
that among adolescent respondents in the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health,
alcohol use is a statistically significant predictor of suicide attempts, after controlling for
depression. While offering stronger evidence than other studies that alcohol abuse is a cause of
suicide attempts, these studies are still limited by the incomplete measures of co-morbid
conditions available in the data. Thus, in the end, these studies remain less than definitive.

by restricting the individual’s attention to immediate situations, leading to an increased focus on the distressing
issues, inhibiting their ability to solve current problems, and limiting hope for the future.

5

Several recent studies based on state-level data suggest that higher minimum legal
drinking ages and higher beer taxes, through their impact on teenage alcohol use, reduce the
number of completed suicides among young people. Jones et al. (1992), using state-level data
from 1979 to 1984, find that the suicide rate among 15-24 year olds was 9.7% greater among
youth living in states where they could drink legally compared to youth of the same age who
lived in states where they could not drink legally. Birckmayer & Hemenway (1999) find that the
suicide rate among 18-20 year olds was 8% higher in states with a minimum legal drinking age
(MLDA) of 18 years old compared to youth living in states with a MLDA of 21 years old. In
contrast to these studies, Hingson et al. (1985) fail to find an association between the minimum
legal drinking age in Massachusetts and suicides.
These studies are limited, however, in that none address the issue of causation directly.
First, there is the ecological fallacy problem; the existence of an aggregate relationship does not
necessarily imply the existence of an individual causal relationship (Greenland & Robins 1994).
Second, these studies are based on reduced form models, which link state-level policies directly
to state-level suicide rates. Thus, they do not test the direct relationship between alcohol abuse
and suicide and they fail to assess the reasonableness of their findings in terms of the direct
effect of alcohol abuse on suicide. For example, Birckmayer and Hemenway (1999) find that
minimum legal drinking age laws affected suicide rates of those 18 to 21 and those 21 to 23
years of age, even though minimum drinking age laws are not applicable to persons 21 to 23
years of age.6 Third, these studies cannot account for the fact that state minimum drinking age
laws are not exogenously determined. It is not random that Louisiana was the last state in the
country to raise the minimum drinking age to 21.

6

Birckmayer and Hemenway (1999) suggest that this is a plausible effect since alcohol use of those 21 to 23 may be
affected by minimum legal drinking ages, although there is relatively little evidence to support such a conclusion.

6

To summarize, there is considerable evidence that alcohol abuse is associated with
suicide attempts and completed suicides. However, the non-experimental nature of all of these
studies limits their ability to establish a causal relationship. Thus, as is usually the case in social
science research, additional study is warranted in order to provide enough evidence so that policy
makers can make decisions with confidence using a “weight of the evidence” criterion. In this
paper, we extend the literature in this area by using a novel methodology that will significantly
add to the weight of evidence on this issue.
ANALYTICAL FRAMEWORK
Our objective is to assess the existence and strength of a causal relationship between
alcohol abuse and suicide attempts. This task is complicated by two factors. The first is what we
refer to as statistical endogeneity wherein an individual’s suicide attempts and alcohol abuse may
depend on a common set of unobserved factors (for example, mental illness or family history).
The second is what we refer to as structural endogeneity wherein both outcomes may directly
influence each other. For instance, in addition to alcohol abuse causing suicide attempts, a
person with suicidal impulses may binge drink to facilitate a suicide attempt.
We begin with a simple, linear specification of the structural production function for
suicide attempts (Si) and a demand function for alcohol abuse (Ai):7
(1)

Si = α1Ai + α2Xi + α3µi + εi,

(2)

Ai = β1Si + β2Xi + β3µi + ηi.

Equation (1) is a production function for suicide attempts (Si), which is a function of alcohol
abuse (Ai), observable characteristics that affect suicide attempts such as age, gender, and race
(Xi), and unobservable characteristics such as personality traits or a social environment that
encourages risky behavior (µi). Equation (2) is the demand for alcohol. The vector Xi represents

7

observed individual characteristics that determine alcohol abuse; these characteristics are the
same as the observed determinants of suicide attempts (Xi). Similarly, the vector µi represents
unobserved determinants of suicide attempts that also may influence alcohol abuse. The
subscript i refers to the individual, and εi and ηi represent random disturbance terms. Intercepts
are suppressed for convenience.
The parameter of interest is α1, the structural effect of alcohol abuse on suicide attempts.
However, single equation estimation methods, such as Ordinary Least Squares will yield biased
estimates for two reasons. To see why, we derive the reduced form demand function for alcohol
abuse by substituting equation (1) into equation (2).
(3)

Ai = (α2β1 / 1-α1β1) Xi + (β2 / 1-α1β1) Yi + (α3β1+ β3 / 1-α1β1) µi + β1 εi + ηi
Ai = π1 Xi + π2 Yi + π3 µi + β1 εi + ηi

The bias in equation 1 arises if there are common unmeasured factors (µi) that determine both
suicide attempts and alcohol abuse (α3 ≠ 0 and β3 ≠ 0). In such cases, unmeasured factors are
likely to be correlated with alcohol abuse (π3 ≠ 0).

A second reason that alcohol abuse may be

correlated with the error term is structural endogeneity, or the possibility that suicide attempts
are a determinant of alcohol abuse (β1 ≠ 0).

ESTIMATION
Our estimation strategy proceeds in a stepwise fashion. Initially, we ignore the
endogeneity problems and estimate equation (1) using a standard probit regression model. We
start with a probit model that includes a parsimonious set of covariates. Next, we estimate a
7

This model is derived from the model of violence in Markowitz and Grossman (1998).

8

probit model with an expanded set of covariates. Estimating both the basic and the extended
models allows us to evaluate how much of the association between alcohol abuse and suicide
attempts appears to be driven by omitted individual heterogeneity. If the magnitude of the
marginal effect of alcohol abuse is highly sensitive to the inclusion of additional covariates, then
one could surmise that unobservable factors also play some role in this relationship. This
assumption is especially reasonable if one is using a multi-purpose, secondary data set, where the
information collected on respondents may not include all information relevant to the outcome
under study (Altonji et al. 2001).
In this paper, we call this problem selection on observables and selection on
unobservables (Altonji et al. 2001). These two terms are used to acknowledge that teenagers are
not sorted randomly into suicidal and drinking behaviors. Selection on observables refers to the
existence of observed factors (such as age and race) that are correlated with suicide attempts and
with alcohol consumption and will therefore influence the point estimates of the coefficients on
alcohol. Selection on unobservables refers to the possible existence of factors that are not
available in the survey data and that also may be associated with both alcohol use and suicide
attempts (such as family problems). The degree of selection on the observables can be gauged
by comparing the estimated coefficients on alcohol abuse that result from the parsimonious and
expanded models. Unfortunately, the degree of selection on the unobserved characteristics
cannot be measured directly. However, we will attempt to bound this latter effect using an
approach proposed by Altonji et al, and thereby draw inferences about the unbiased relationship
between alcohol use and suicide attempts.
The observed correlation between alcohol abuse and suicide attempts is likely to be
influenced, at least to some degree, by the selection biases discussed above. For this reason, the

9

estimated coefficients on alcohol abuse from the extended models may be considered upper
bound estimates of the impact of alcohol abuse on suicide attempts. Since we expect that
unobservable factors that determine suicide attempts and alcohol abuse are positively correlated,
further efforts to control for selection bias only would attenuate the estimated effect of alcohol
abuse on suicide attempts.
Selection bias is a common problem in applied social science research. In cases such as
ours, previous researchers have used full information maximum likelihood strategies, such as the
bivariate probit, to account for the problem. The bivariate probit model is based on the
assumption that the unmeasured determinants in equations (1) and (3) have a joint, bivariate
normal distribution. This procedure is applicable when suicide attempts (Si) and alcohol abuse
(Ai) are measured as dichotomous variables. The bivariate probit model obtains estimates of
equations (1) and (3) jointly.8 But in our case, since the same vector of socioeconomic and
demographic factors is included in both equations, identification comes purely from functional
form restrictions. In practice, however, such functional form restrictions generally are
inadequate and are difficult to defend.
For this reason, as in the case of instrumental variables, implementation of the bivariate
probit model requires valid exclusion restrictions – variables that affect alcohol abuse but do not
directly affect suicide attempts. However, it is difficult to find valid instruments. A common
strategy in models related to ours is to use alcohol prices and alcohol control policies as
instruments, but this strategy is often inadequate because the instruments are only weakly

8

We also could estimate jointly the two structural equations (1) and (2) using the bivariate probit model, which is
equivalent to estimating (1) and (3). If the bivariate probit model is applied properly, both should yield a consistent
estimate of α1. The only difference is that the correlation between the disturbance terms in equations (1) and (3) is
greater than that between equations (1) and (2). This difference occurs because the reduced form alcohol abuse
equation (3) has netted out the effect of suicide and thus its error εi now also appears as part of the disturbance term
in the reduced form alcohol abuse equation.

10

correlated with alcohol abuse. Under such circumstances, the bivariate probit model performs
poorly, yielding estimates with very large standard errors.9
We rely on an alternative approach proposed by Altonji et al. (2001) that is based on the
bivariate probit model, but does not rely on alcohol control policies as identifying variables.10
First, we estimate a bivariate probit model without any identifying assumptions but with a
constrained correlation coefficient, ρ. We constrain ρ to be 0.10 initially and then examine the
effects of increasing ρ in increments of 0.10 to 0.20, 0.30, 0.40 and 0.50. In this way, we impose
on the model increasingly greater amounts of (positive) selection on unobservables and examine
whether or not the effect of alcohol abuse on suicide attempts is robust to such changes. This
analysis allows us to determine the threshold of selection on unobservables, if any, at which
alcohol abuse no longer has a statistically significant effect on suicide attempts.
Altonji et al. (2001) argue that if the observable determinants of an outcome are truly just
a random sub-set of the complete set of determinants, selection on observable characteristics
must be equal to selection on unobservable characteristics. 11 This assertion of equal selection is
unlikely to be true, and in fact, given our specialized data sets, we would expect selection on
observable factors to be greater than selection on unobservable factors. Thus, estimates obtained
under the assumption of equal selection will be biased downwards. Moreover, there is no
theoretical or empirical evidence that alcohol abuse has the potential to inhibit or prevent a

9

See Rashad and Kaestner (2003) for an analysis that illustrates the poor performance of bivariate probit models in
such circumstances.
10
See Grossman et al. (2002), which studies the relationship between adolescent alcohol use and sexual behavior
using bivariate probit techniques similar to those used in the present study.
11
Altonji et al. (2001) show that this condition implies: cov(S*, X’γ)/var(X’γ) = cov(S*, ε)/var(ε), where S* is an
unobserved, continuous measure of the net benefits from a suicide attempt, X’γ is the vector of observed variables
that affect S* weighted by their corresponding coefficients, and ε is the unobserved determinants of variables that
affect S* weighted by their relevant coefficients. We observe a suicide attempt (S=1) if S* is positive and no suicide
attempt (S=0) otherwise. Because of very strong selection on some exogenous, observable variables, such as age,
we impose this condition excluding variables that are thought to be exogenous (age, gender, race, region, state-level
characteristics, and survey year in the YRBS, and age and race in the NCS).

11

suicide attempt. For this reason, the lower bound estimate is the maximum of zero or the
estimate obtained under the assumption that selection on unobservable variables is equal to
selection on observables. The upper bound effect is the estimate from the naïve single equation
probit model that assumes no selection on unobservable variables.

DATA AND MEASURES
The Youth Risk Behavior Survey
The Youth Risk Behavior Survey (YRBS) samples a nationally representative group of
teenagers in grades 9-12. Data were collected in 1991, 1993, 1995, 1997 and 1999. In each
year, a different group of students numbering between 10,000 and 15,000 is surveyed. The
primary strength of the YRBS data set is its large size, which allows us to estimate models
separately by gender. Estimating models separately for boys and girls is important because
numerous studies indicate that the prevalence of suicide attempts as well as the epidemiology of
suicide attempts varies considerably between adolescent females and males.12 In total, we use
four YRBS samples in the study: (1) all girls (N = 29,870); (2) all boys (N = 27,108); (3) girls
who report any level of alcohol use in the past year (N = 13,410); and (4) boys who report any
level of alcohol use in the past year (N = 13,737). By restricting one set of analyses to
drinkers—a more homogenous group—we reduce the potential for very high degrees of selection
on observed variables. The existence of extremely high levels of selection on observed variables

12

Although completed suicides are much more common among male adolescents, female adolescents are about
twice as likely as male adolescents to report suicide attempts. Major depression is a strong predictor of suicide
attempt for both girls and boys. However, girls who attempt suicide are more likely to have family dysfunction, low
self-esteem, anxiety disorders and to have been sexually abused than boys. Boys who attempt suicide are more
likely than girls to report chronic stress, alcohol problems, and financial problems (Beautrais 2002, Weyrauch et al.
2001, Kelly et al. 2001, Wunderlich et al. 2001)

12

undermines the effectiveness of the bivariate probit models where selection on observed
variables is constrained to be equal to selection on unobserved variables.13
We measure suicide attempts among YRBS youth using a dummy variable indicating
whether or not the respondent reported attempting suicide at least once in the past year. The
weighted percentage of respondents attempting suicide in the complete sample (drinkers and
non-drinkers) is about 7.5 percent during the sample period. The measure of alcohol abuse is not
a clinical diagnosis; clinical information is not available in these data. Instead, we use an
indicator of whether or not the respondent had five or more drinks of alcohol in a row within a
couple of hours on at least one occasion in the past 30 days. About 31.3 percent of respondents
in the complete sample report at least one of these binge drinking episodes in the past month.
The YRBS contains only limited socioeconomic and demographic information on
respondents. Only survey year, state of residence, age, grade-level, and gender are consistently
reported in all surveys. The availability of state of residence allows us to include the state-level
unemployment rate and per capita real state-level income as covariates. These state level
variables are included to proxy family and community economic conditions, which are not
available in the data. The state characteristics also may capture unobserved attitudes towards
risky behaviors that respondents living in the same state might share. The YRBS also does not
have information on mental disorders, family background and stressful life events, which are
important risk factors for a suicide attempt. However, it does have data on risky behaviors; in
particular, the data include an indicator of frequent seat belt use and an indicator for whether or
not the respondent is a daily smoker. Many studies have shown that smoking is a strong
correlate of psychiatric disorder, although tobacco use is not expected to have a direct impact on

13

A high degree of selection on observable variables implies a very high rho, sometimes greater than 1, which
usually results in the lower bound estimate of the effect to be zero.

13

suicidal behaviors (Brown et al. 2000; Breslau et al. 1998; Choi et al. 1997). Thus, this variable
may be a reasonable proxy for psychiatric disorder. We also include an indicator variable that
captures participation on any sports teams, which may reflect the respondent's attachment to and
involvement in school and the community.

The National Comorbidity Survey
Although the YRBS offers a very large sample of adolescents with information on
alcohol use and suicide attempts, the data set lacks information on some of the most important
correlates of suicide attempts, particularly mental disorders. Moreover, the alcohol use
information available in the YRBS does not include a measure of a clinical diagnosis of alcohol
abuse or dependence. For this reason, we also estimate all models using The National
Comorbidity Survey, a second data set that is very strong in these areas. Our estimates generated
from the NCS sample enhance the YRBS analysis in two ways. First, we can evaluate the
robustness of the YRBS binge drinking estimates to the inclusion of a much richer set of
covariates, which is available in the NCS data. Second, we can examine the association between
clinically defined alcohol abuse and dependence and the risk of attempting suicide.
The NCS is a congressionally mandated, nationally representative survey designed to
study mental illness in the United States. The survey respondents are 8,098 individuals aged 1554 between 1990 and 1992, with the majority of interviews being conducted in 1991. In order to
create a sample that is comparable in terms of age to the YRBS sample, we focus on a subsample of females aged 15-19, resulting in a sample size of 364 individuals. We could not
estimate models for 15-19 year old males because only five males reported suicide attempts in

14

this age group. In addition, the small sample size precluded limiting the sample to drinkers;
instead, we use a combined sample of females that includes drinkers and non-drinkers.
As in the YRBS analysis, we measure suicide attempts using an indicator of whether or
not the respondent attempted suicide in the past year. About five percent of NCS respondents
report that they attempted suicide at least once during the past year. The rates of suicide attempts
in the YRBS and NCS samples are somewhat different, probably because of major differences in
the objectives and contexts of the surveys. If we consider suicide attempts that required medical
treatment, the rate for NCS females aged 15 to 19 is 3.3%. The rate of medically treated suicide
attempts for YRBS females ages 12 to 18 is 3.0%.14 Those rates, therefore, are almost identical.
For rates of all female suicide attempts, however, there is a larger difference between the surveys
(7.5% in the YRBS versus 5.0% in the NCS), apparently because NCS respondents were less
likely than YRBS respondents to report suicide attempts that did not require treatment. We
conjecture that the NCS respondents tended to only report serious suicide attempts because (1)
they were questioned by a trained interviewer collecting information about all of their mental
disorders; (2) the NCS instrument is designed to capture serious mental illnesses, unlike the
YRBS; and (3) they were asked the questions as a part of a set of very probing questions about
mental illness and violence. The YRBS respondents answered questions in the classroom and in
the context of questions about all risky behaviors, not mental illness, which may have led them to
report all types of suicide attempts rather than just more serious attempts.
We measure alcohol abuse using both a binge drinking measure (as in the YRBS
analysis) and a measure that captures clinically defined alcohol use disorders. The binge
drinking measure is an indicator of whether or not the respondent consumed five or more drinks
14

We estimated all models with “any medically treated suicide attempt” as the dependent variable. Our results,
which are available upon request, were qualitatively very similar to the results for “any suicide attempt” model

15

on any given day in the past year. We term this binge drinking, though conventionally binge
drinking is defined as consuming five or more drinks in a row. About 20.0 percent of NCS
respondents report binge drinking in the past year.
The NCS clinical diagnosis of alcohol abuse and/or dependence is generated using the
Composite International Diagnostic Interview. The CIDI was developed by the National
Institute of Health, the World Health Organization, and the University of Michigan, and is a nonclinician administered instrument, which generates psychiatric diagnoses. The CIDI has
undergone extensive testing for reliability and validity. Alcohol abuse is defined as either
continued use despite knowledge of its adverse effect on health and social functioning or
recurrent use in situations when use may be physically hazardous. Alcohol dependence requires
the presence of physiological symptoms of tolerance and withdrawal and continued use despite
adverse consequences. We construct a dichotomous indicator that is set equal to one if the
respondent met diagnostic criteria for either alcohol abuse or dependence in the past year. About
7.0 percent of the sample met clinical criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence in the past year.
The NCS is the only nationally representative survey in the United States to collect detailed data
on diagnosed psychiatric disorders, including alcohol use disorders. Controlling for mental
illness is crucial in this study because mental illness has been shown to be a significant predictor
of both substance use and suicidal behaviors (Saffer and Dave 2002; Crumley 1990; Moscicki
1995). The NCS includes information on 12 non-substance related psychiatric disorders:
generalized anxiety disorder; social phobia; simple phobia; panic attack; panic disorder;
agoraphobia; post traumatic stress disorder; major depression; dysthymia; bipolar disorder;
mania; and non-affective psychosis. The criteria and definitions are based on the Diagnostic and
Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders: DSM-III-R (American Psychiatric Association 1988).
results, which are presented in this paper.

16

We construct a dichotomous indicator for past year occurrence of any of the 12 psychiatric
disorders from this information.15
A series of socioeconomic and demographic variables are also defined, including the
respondent’s age, gender, race, family income, and indicators of religion. Since most of the
respondents in our sample have not completed their schooling, we include an indicator of high
school dropout, which is set equal to one if the respondent is not in school and has completed
less than 12 years of education. An indicator of poor physical health is also defined.
The NCS also includes a rich set of information on family background and life events.
Previous studies document that in addition to psychiatric disorders and substance use, suicide
attempts also are correlated with family conflict, parental psychiatric disorder, interpersonal
difficulties, being a victim of physical or sexual abuse, and other adverse childhood experiences
(Brent et al. 2002; Johnson et al. 2002; Glowinski et al. 2001; Dube et al. 2001; Hagedorn &
Omar 2002; Simon et al., 2002; Beitchman et al. 1992). These factors are likely to confound the
relationship between substance use and suicide (Rossow and Lauritzen 2001; Cutler et al. 2001).
To capture some of these risk factors, we include in the models an indicator of whether or not the
respondent lived with both parents until age 15, and whether or not the respondent lives in an
urban area (in a MSA or other urban, non-MSA county). We also include covariates to capture
stressful life events such as whether or not the respondent was: (1) involved in a fire or natural
disaster; (2) sexually abused, physically abused or neglected as a child; (3) suffered through the
death of someone close; (4) witnessed a friend or family member have a major life crisis; and (5)
raped during her lifetime. As in the YRBS analysis, we include in the models variables that may
15

We also ran models that excluded major depressive disorder from our mental illness variables. While suicide
ideation and suicide attempts are neither necessary nor sufficient for this diagnosis, they are factors listed under
DSM-III-R that may satisfy some of the criteria for major depression. We therefore excluded this disorder since it
may introduce spurious correlation between mental illness and the left-hand side suicide variables. Excluding major

17

capture individual differences in tolerance for risk – whether or not the respondent wears seat
belts and whether or not the respondent uses condoms during intercourse.

RESULTS
Tables 1and 2 show selection into binge drinking and suicide attempts along observable
characteristics for the YRBS sample. Tables 3 and 4 show selection into binge drinking,
clinically defined alcohol use disorders and suicide attempts for the NCS sample. Tables 5 and 6
summarize results from the standard probit and bivariate probit models estimated using the
YRBS sample (Table 5) and the NCS sample (Table 6).
Table 1 presents means and standard errors by binge drinking status for all females, all
males, female drinkers and male drinkers from the YRBS. These descriptive statistics show that
the observed characteristics differ greatly based on binge drinking status, thus providing
evidence that there exists important selection into alcohol abuse along observable characteristics.
For example, among both girls and boys in the YRBS sample (Table 1), avoiding seat belt use,
carrying a weapon, getting into physical fights and smoking every day are much more prevalent
among binge drinkers than among teenagers who do not binge drink. These behaviors also are
much more prevalent among those who have attempted suicide, as seen in Table 2. The striking,
observable differences between alcohol abusers and non-abusers, and those who do and do not
attempt suicide, suggest that selection into suicidal and drinking behaviors based on
unobservable factors may be important in the analysis of the YRBS sample. Our assumption of
positive selection on unobserved factors is buttressed by the fact that the set of observable risky
behaviors (i.e. no seat belt use, weapon-carrying, smoking, fighting) increases the probability of

depression, however, does not significantly alter our results.

18

both binge drinking and attempting suicide. This positive selection remains strong even when
the samples are limited to drinkers.
These observations also hold true to some extent for the NCS sample, as seen in Tables 3
and 4. There is considerable, positive sorting into alcohol use disorders along observable
characteristics such as mental illness, living with both parents until age 15, and stressful life
events, such as having a close relative die (Table 3). Similar selection is observed for suicide
attempts (Table 4). Once again, this evidence strongly supports our assumption of positive
selection in the constrained bivariate probit models. That is, individuals who meet diagnostic
criteria for a psychiatric disorder, who did not live with both parents before age 15, and have
experienced the death of a close family member are more likely to both attempt suicide and to
abuse alcohol. We do not find strong selection into binge drinking, which may be due to our use
of a non-standard measure of binge drinking. Because of data limitations in the NCS, we define
binge drinking as “five or more drinks on any given day in the past year” instead of “five or
more drinks in a row within a couple of hours on at least one occasion in the past 30 days,” as we
did in the YRBS analysis. The latter measure is preferred because it better captures intense
drinking by stipulating that the drinks were consumed “in a row”, “within a couple hours” and
“on one occasion.” Moreover, a 30-day measure is superior to a past-year measure because it
maximizes the potential for accurate recall.
Table 5 summarizes results from the suicide attempts models based on the YRBS
sample. The first row of Table 5 presents the marginal effects and t-ratios on binge drinking
from a parsimonious probit model that includes only a small set of covariates, and from a model
that includes a more extensive set of variables. The models are estimated separately for all boys
and all girls, as well for boys who drink and girls who drink. An F-test (reported in Table 5) of

19

all covariates interacted with gender from a fully interacted model empirically supports our
estimation based on gender specific samples.
In all of the probit models, the estimates indicate that binge drinking has a statistically
significant association with attempting suicide. Estimates from models with an extended set of
covariates indicate that binge drinking is associated with a 62% increase in the probability of
suicide attempt for girls and a 40% increase for boys at the sample means. When the samples are
limited to drinkers, binge drinking is associated with an increase in the probability of a suicide
attempt by 37% for girls and 33% for boys at the sample means. These estimates can be
considered upper bound estimates since the model is based on the assumption that binge drinking
is exogenous, and both theory and empirical evidence indicate that positive selection on
unobserved variables will diminish this effect. In all cases, however, the magnitude of the binge
drinking effect is considerably smaller when the full set of covariates, rather than the small set of
covariates, is included in the model. This finding indicates strong selection on observable
characteristics; the additional covariates included in the more inclusive models are both
significant predictors of suicide attempts and are highly correlated with binge drinking.
Given the evidence that selection on observable characteristics is important, and therefore
unobservable variables are likely to be important as well, we attempt to assess the degree of
selection of unobservable variables that would be needed to reduce or even eliminate the large,
statistically significant association between binge drinking and suicide attempts. Table 5 shows
estimates of the association between binge drinking and suicide attempts from six bivariate
probit models (Models 1-6) estimated using the YRBS samples (all girls, all boys, girl drinkers,
boy drinkers). In the first five models, the correlation coefficient ρ is constrained to be 0.1, 0.2,
0.3, 0.4 or 0.5, with larger coefficients corresponding to stronger correlation between the

20

unobservable determinants of alcohol abuse and suicide attempts. In the sixth model, the ρ is
constrained such that the degree of selection on unobservable factors is forced to be equal to the
degree of selection on observable covariates, which is the highest degree of selection on
unobservables that we would expect to encounter. The assumption of positive selection is clearly
justified based on the evidence in Tables 1 and 2.
As models (1)-(5) clearly show, even a very modest amount of selection on unobservable
variables (ρ = 0.1 or 0.2) completely eliminates the positive effect of binge drinking on suicide
attempts in all four YRBS samples. In fact, as we increase the amount of correlation in
increments of 0.10, the estimated coefficient on binge drinking quickly becomes statistically
insignificant, and eventually negative and statistically significant. If we assume that the true
lower bound effect is non-negative, which seems appropriate given that there is little reason to
expect binge drinking to lower suicide attempts, then the only relevant range of selection on
unobserved variables is where the association between binge drinking and suicide attempts is
positive. As noted, this occurs when rho takes on a value between 0.1 and 0.2, suggesting that it
is unlikely that binge drinking has a true causal effect. This inference is further supported by the
estimates from model (6), which reveal a significant amount of selection on observed variables,
as measured by the estimates of rho; indeed, when the sample is not restricted to drinkers, the
estimate of rho is outside the feasible range. Thus, in order for binge drinking to have a true
positive causal effect on suicide attempts, selection on unobserved variables would have to be
close to zero, or only a fraction (10 to 15 percent) of the amount of selection on observed
variables. This appears unlikely, especially since we believe that many important, unobserved
determinants of suicide attempts and binge drinking remain in the error term.

21

Table 6 presents results from the same estimation approach with the NCS sample; the
results pertain to females only because of the small sample sizes and the low incidence rate of
suicide attempts among males in the NCS data. In this analysis, we consider the effects of binge
drinking as well as clinically defined substance use disorders on suicide attempts. As in the
YRBS analysis, estimation of small and more fully specified models indicates that selection on
observed factors is important since the coefficients fall by 89% and 79% for binge drinking and
alcohol use disorder, respectively. The more fully specified models indicate that binge drinking
is associated with an increase in the probability of suicide attempt of about 17%, while a
diagnosis of an alcohol use disorder is associated with an increase in the probability of suicide
attempt of 79% at the sample means. These estimates are our upper bound estimates of the effect
of alcohol abuse on suicide attempts. The estimate of the effect of binge drinking on girls’
suicide attempts is somewhat smaller than the estimate generated from the analysis of YRBS
girls. This is expected given that the binge drinking measure defined in the YRBS is more likely
to capture intense drinking occasions.
When we estimate the constrained bivariate probit models, the NCS analysis of binge
drinking yields similar results to the YRBS analysis of binge drinking (Table 6). As we increase
the amount of positive selection imposed on the model, the association between binge drinking
and suicide attempt quickly becomes less positive and statistically insignificant and eventually
becomes negative in sign and not statistically significant. As in the YRBS analysis, even small
amounts of positive selection on unobserved factors eliminate the positive, statistically
significant effect of binge drinking on suicide attempt that we find in the standard probit models.
However, the same exercise yields very different results when we use the NCS sample to
consider the effect of clinically defined alcohol use disorders on suicide attempts (Table 6). As

22

we impose increasingly greater amounts of positive selection on the bivariate probit model, the
effect of alcohol use disorder on suicide attempt grows smaller, as expected, but remains
statistically significant, even when the correlation coefficient is constrained to be 0.4. Second,
when selection on unobserved variables is set equal to selection on observed variables, the
estimate remains positive and statistically significant. Estimates from model (6) indicate that a
diagnosis of an alcohol use disorder increases the probability of a suicide attempt by about 27
percent. The estimated correlation coefficient in the equal selection model is considerably larger
than the correlation coefficient estimated in the binge drinking analysis (0.307 versus 0.189),
which suggests that selection along observed factors is more important for clinically defined
alcohol use disorders than for binge drinking. This result is consistent with Tables 3 and 4.
Because the NCS was conducted specifically to study the determinants of mental illness,
it is very unlikely that selection on unobservable factors is equal to selection on observables; in
other words, the covariates we can observe, such as mental illness or family background, are
likely to be the most important determinants of suicide attempts. Our lower bound, therefore, is
extremely conservative. Nevertheless, if we use this estimate as a lower bound on the effect and
the standard probit estimate as the upper bound, we conclude that clinically defined alcohol use
disorders increase the probability of suicide attempt, and the magnitude of this effect falls
between 27 percent and 79 percent. This range is broad, as there is no way of knowing how
much selection on unobservable factors exists. However, this range provides strong reason to
believe that the relationship between clinically defined alcohol use disorders and suicide attempts
is indeed causal, and that the magnitude of this effect is meaningful from a policy perspective, at
least among adolescent girls.
DISCUSSION

23

Previous research supports a causal relationship between alcohol use and suicide
attempts, and suggests that state-level alcohol policies, such as minimum drinking ages, beer
taxes and driving while intoxicated laws, can reduce suicide attempts and completed suicide rates
among youth. This study tests the plausibility of this idea by using two data sources to explore
the causal relationship between alcohol abuse and suicide attempts among youth. We find little
evidence that binge drinking and suicide attempts are causally related. This finding implies that
broad-based alcohol use policies and prevention programs will not be very effective in reducing
suicide attempts among youth. Clearly, more research is needed to reconcile these competing
findings and to provide policy makers with a more definitive base of evidence.
However, our study supports the existence of a causal link between clinically defined
alcohol use disorders and suicide attempts among female adolescents. Therefore, identifying and
treating girls who meet diagnostic criteria for alcohol abuse or dependence may be an effective
way to reduce the risk of suicide attempts among youth. To date, there is very little evidence that
any existing suicide prevention policies actually reduce the risk of suicide. This research
suggests that suicide prevention policies may be useful if they focus on moving substance
abusing and dependent youth into effective treatment.

24

REFERENCES
Altonji, JG, Elder, TE, Taber, CR. Selection on observed and unobserved variables: Assessing
the effectiveness of Catholic Schools. Working Paper, April 30, 2001.
American Psychiatric Association Task Force (1988). Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of
Mental Disorders: DSM-III-R. Washington, D.C., American Psychiatric Association.
Beautrais AL. Gender issues in youth suicidal behavior. Emergency Medicine. 2002; 14: 35-42.
Beitchman JH, Zucker KJ, Hood JE, DaCosta GA et al. A review of the long-term effects of
child sexual abuse. Child Abuse & Neglect. 1992; 16: 101-118.
Birckmayer, J, Hemenway, D. Minimum-age drinking laws and youth suicide, 1970-1990.
American Journal of Public Health. 1999; 89: 1365-1368.
Brent, DA. Suicide and suicidal behavior in children and adolescents. Pediatrics in Review.
1989; 10: 269-275.
Brent DA, Oquendo M, Birmaher B, Greenhill L, Kolko D, Stanley B, Zelazby J, Brodsky B,
Bridge J, Ellis S, Mann JJ. Familial pathways to early-onset suicide attempt: risk for
suicidal behavior in offspring of mood-disordered suicide attempters. Archives of
General Psychiatry. 2002;59:801-7.
Breslau, N., Peterson, E.L., Schultz, L.R., Chilcoat, H.D., Andreski, P., 1998. Major depression
and stages of smoking: A longitudinal investigation. Archives of General Psychiatry, 55,
161-166.
Brown, C., Madden, P.A.F., Palenchar, D.R., Cooper-Patrick, L. The association between
depressive symptoms and cigarette smoking in an urban primary care sample.
International Journal of Psychiatry in Medicine, 30, 2000, 15-26.
Centers for Disease Control & Prevention, National Center for Injury Prevention & Control
website, http://webapp.cdc.gov/sasweb/ncipc/leadcaus.html, Accessed 4/19/02.
Children’s Safety Network Economics and Insurance Resource Center website,
http://www.csneirc.org/index.html, Accessed 3/03.
Choi, W.S., Patten, C.A., Gillin, J.C., Kaplan, R.M., Pierce, J.P. Cigarette smoking predicts
development of depressive symptoms among U.S. adolescents. Annals of Behavioral
Medicine, 19, 1997, 42-50.
Crumley, FE. Alcohol abuse and adolescent suicidal behavior. JAMA. 1990; 263: 3051-3056.
Cutler D, Glaeser EL, & Norberg KE. "Explaining the Rise in Youth Suicide" in Risky Behavior
Among Youths-An Economic Analysis, edited by Jonathan Gruber, Chicago, University
of Chicago Press, 2001.
Dawson, D. Alcohol, Drugs, Fighting and Suicide Attempt/Ideation. Addiction Research. 1997.
5:6, p.451.
Deykin, EY, Buka, SL. Suicidal ideation and attempts among chemically dependent adolescents.
American Journal of Public Health. 1994; 4: 634-639.

25

Dube SR, Anda RF, Felitti VJ, Chapman DP, Williamson DF, Giles WH. Childhood abuse,
household dysfunction, and the risk of attempted suicide throughout the life span:
findings from the Adverse Childhood Experiences Study JAMA 2001;286:3126-7.
Durkheim, E. (1951). Suicide (J. A. Spaulding & G. Simpson, Trans.). Glencoe, IL: Free Press.
Felts, WM, Chenier, T, Barnes, R. Drug abuse and suicide ideation and behavior among North
Carolina public school students. American Journal of Public Health. 1992; 82: 870-872.
Glowinski AL, Bucholz KK, Nelson EC, Fu Q, Madden PA, Reich W, Heath AC. Suicide
attempts in an adolescent female twin sample. Journal of the American Academy of
Child & Adolescent Psychiatry 2001;40:1300-7.
Greenland S and Robins J. 1994. “Invited Commentary: Ecologic Studies—Biases,
Misconceptions, and Counterexamples.” American Journal of Epidemiology, 139:747760
Grossman M, Kaestner R, and Markowitz S. “Get High and Get Stupid: The Effect of Alcohol
and Marijuana Use on Teen Sexual Behavior.” NBER Working Paper No. 9216. National
Bureau of Economic Research, September 2002.
Gruenwald, P. and Ponicki, W. “Suicide Rates and Alcohol Consumption in the United States,
1970-1989.” Addiction, August 1995, 90:8, p. 1063.
Hagedorn J, Omar H. Retrospective analysis of youth evaluated for suicide attempt or suicidal
ideation in an emergency room setting. International Journal of Adolescent Medicine &
Health. 2002; 14: 55-60.
Hingson R, Merrigan D, Heeren T. Effects of Massachusetts raising its legal drinking age from
18 to 20 on deaths from teenage homicide, suicide and nontraffic accidents. Pediatric
Clinics of North America. 1985; 32: 221-32.
Johnson JG, Cohen P, Gould MS, Kasen S, Brown J, Brook JS. Childhood adversities,
interpersonal difficulties, and risk for suicide attempts during late adolescence and early
adulthood. Archives of General Psychiatry 2002;59:741-749.
Jones, NE, Pieper, CF, Robertson, LS. The effect of legal drinking age on fatal injuries of
adolescents and young adults. American Journal of Public Health. 1992; 82: 112-115.
Kelly TM, Lynch KG, Donovan JE, Clark DB. Alcohol use disorders and risk factor interactions
for adolescent suicidal ideation and attempts. Suicide & Life-Threatening Behavior.
2001; 31: 181-93.
King, RA, Schwab-Stone, M, Flisher, A, Greenwald, S, Kramer, R, Goodman, S, Lahey, B,
Shaffer, D, Gould, M. Psychosocial and risk behavior correlates of youth suicide
attempts and suicide ideation. 2001; 40: 837-846.
Lewinsohn PM, Rodhe P, Seeley JR, Baldwin CL. Gender differences in suicide attempts from
adolescence to young adulthood. Journal of the American Academy of Child and
Adolescent Psychiatry. 2001; 40:427-434.

26

Markowitz, S. "The Role of Alcohol and Drug Consumption in Determining Physical Violence
and Weapon Carrying by Teenagers," Eastern Economic Journal, 27, No. 4 (Fall 2001),
409-432.
Markowitz, S and Grossman, M. “Alcohol Regulation and Domestic Violence Towards
Children,” Contemporary Economic Policy, 16, No. 3 (July, 1998), 309-320.
Marsteller FA, Brogan D, Smith I, Ash P, Daniels D, Rolka D, Falek A. The prevalence of
alcohol abuse disorders among juveniles admitted to regional youth detention centers
operated by the Georgia Department of Children and Youth Services. March 31,1997.
Accessed
http://www.emory.edu/WHSC/MED/PSYCHIATRY/popstud/CSATFinalReport.htm
Marttunen, MJ, Hillevi, MA, Henriksson, MM, Lonnqvist, JK. Mental disorders in adolescent
suicide: DSM-III-R Axes I and II diagnoses in suicides among 13 to 19 year olds in
Finland. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1991; 48: 834-839.
Moscicki, EK. “Epidemiology of suicidal behavior.” Suicide and life-threatening behavior.
1995; 24: 22-35
Norstrom, T. Alcohol and Suicide: A Comparative Analysis of France and Sweden. Addiction.
1995. 90:11 p1463.
Rashad, I, and Kaestner, R. "Teenage Sex, Drugs and Alcohol: Risky Behaviors and Risky
Econometric Methods". Working Paper, January 2003.
Rogers, J. R. Suicide and Alcohol: Conceptualizing the Relationship from a Cognitive-Social
Paradigm. Journal of Counseling & Development. 1992. 70:4 p. 540.
Rossow I. Lauritzen G. Shattered childhood: a key issue in suicidal behavior among drug
addicts?. Addiction. 96(2):227-40, February 2001
Runeson, B. Psychoactive alcohol abuse disorder in youth suicide. Alcohol and Alcoholism.
1990; 25: 561-568.
Saffer, H and D. Dave. “Mental Illness and the Demand for Alcohol, Cocaine, and Cigarettes.”
NBER Working Paper 8699. January 2002
Shaffer, D, Gould, MS, Fisher, P, Trautman, P, Moreau, D, Kleinman, M, Flory, M. Psychiatric
diagnosis in child and adolescent suicide. Archives of General Psychiatry. 1996; 53:
339-348.
Shaffer, D. Teen suicide. Department of Child Psychiatry, New York State Psychiatric Institute,
Columbia College of Physicians and Surgeons, March 2000.
Simon TR, Anderson M, Thompson MP, Crosby A, Sacks JJ. Assault victimization and suicidal
ideation of behavior within a national sample of US adults. Suicide & Life-Threatening
Behavior 2002; 31: 42-50.
Teplin LA. Abram KM. McClelland GM. Dulcan MK. Mericle AA. Psychiatric disorders in
youth in juvenile detention. Archives of General Psychiatry. 59(12):1133-43, 2002 Dec.
US Public Health Service, The Surgeon General’s Call to Action to Prevent Suicide. Washington
DC, 1999.

27

Wagner, BM, Cole, RE, Schwartzman, P. Comorbidity of symptoms among junior and senior
high school suicide attemptors. Suicide and life-threatening behavior. 1996: 26:300-307.
Weyrauch KF, Roy-Byrne P, Katon W, Wilson L. Stressful life events and impulsiveness in
failed suicide. Suicide & Life-Threatening Behavior. 2001; 31: 311-319.
Workman, M, Beer, J. Relationship between alcohol dependency and suicide ideation among
high school students. Psychological Reports. 1990; 66:1363-1366.
Wunderlich U, Bronisch T, Wittchen HU, Carter R. Gender differences in adolescents and
young adults with suicidal behavior. Acta Psychiatrica Scandinavica. 2001; 194: 332339.

28

Table 1
YRBS Sample
Selection into Drinking on Observable Characteristics
Mean
(Standard Error)
Full Sample: Drinkers and Non-Drinkers
Drinkers Only Sample
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
No Binge
Binge
No Binge
Binge
No Binge
Binge
No Binge
Binge
Suicide Attempt
0.089
0.202***
0.030
0.078***
0.123
0.202***
0.034
0.078***
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.001)
(0.003)
Variables Included in Parsimonious Model
African-American
0.304
0.112***
0.264
0.128***
0.305
0.112***
0.286
0.128***
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Hispanic
0.251
0.286***
0.234
0.294***
0.264
0.286***
0.249
0.294***
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.005)
Other Race
0.084
0.058***
0.091
0.062***
0.062
0.058
0.076
0.062***
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
1991 survey
0.176
0.162**
0.169
0.181***
0.179
0.162
0.165
0.181
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
1993 survey
0.233
0.238
0.234
0.227
0.228
0.238
0.228
0.227
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
1995 survey
0.152
0.154
0.153
0.166***
0.157
0.154
0.159
0.166
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
1997 survey
0.222
0.221
0.229
0.226
0.220
0.221
0.234
0.226
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
1999 survey
0.217
0.224
0.215
0.200
0.216
0.224
0.215
0.200
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
Northeast
0.151
0.148
0.156
0.154
0.158
0.148*
0.164
0.154
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.005)
(0.004)
Midwest
0.164
0.189***
0.173
0.191***
0.160
0.189***
0.172
0.191***
(0.005)
(0.005)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.004)
South
0.481
0.411***
0.465
0.441
0.485
0.411***
0.481
0.441
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
State unemployment
5.76
5.75
5.80
5.81
5.79
5.74
5.81
5.81*
rate
(0.018)
(0.018)
(0.022)
(0.016)
(0.010)
(0.018)
(0.011)
(0.016)
State real income in
153.87
153.53
154.27
153.29
153.51
153.53
153.79
153.29
thousands
(0.266)
(0.252)
(0.319)
(0.220)
(0.141)
(0.252)
(0.158)
(0.220)
Age
16.11
16.28***
16.11
16.55***
16.20
16.28***
16.21
16.55***
(0.008)
(0.014)
(0.009)
(0.012)
(0.015)
(0.014)
(0.018)
(0.012)
Additional Variables Included in Extended Model
Grade Level (1-4)
2.53
2.68***
2.44
2.80***
2.60
2.68***
2.52
2.80***
(0.007)
(0.013)
(0.008)
(0.011)
(0.014)
(0.013)
(0.017)
(0.011)
Plays on at least one
0.430
0.486***
0.636
0.653
0.429
0.486***
0.646
0.653
sports team
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Wears seat belts often
0.655
0.563***
0.613
0.446***
0.608
0.563***
0.532
0.446***
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Carried a weapon
0.068
0.158***
0.234
0.469***
0.113
0.158***
0.339
0.470***
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.005)
Got into a physical
0.247
0.426***
0.379
0.617***
0.329
0.426***
0.498
0.617***
fight
(0.006)
(0.006)
(0.007)
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.006)
(0.004)
(0.005)
Smokes daily
0.031
0.193***
0.035
0.210***
0.058
0.193***
0.065
0.210***
(0.003)
(0.005)
(0.004)
(0.004)
(0.001)
(0.005)
(0.001)
(0.004)
N
22,854
7,016
17,992
9,116
6,394
7,016
4,621
9,116
* = statis. signif. at 0.10 level, ** = statis. signif. at 0.05 level, *** = statis signif. at 0.01 level

29

Table 2
YRBS Sample
Selection into Suicide Attempt on Observable Characteristics
Mean
(Standard Error)
Full Sample: Drinkers and Non-Drinkers
Drinkers Only Sample
Girls
Boys
Girls
Boys
No Attempt
Attempt
No
Attempt
No Attempt
Attempt
No Attempt
Attempt
Binge
0.212
0.410***
0.325
0.573***
0.500
0.642***
0.653
(0.005)
(0.010)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.014)
Variables Included in Parsimonious Model
African-American
0.267
0.198***
0.221
0.151***
0.214
0.154***
0.185
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.010)
Hispanic
0.249
0.338***
0.250
0.339***
0.259
0.360***
0.274
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.013)
(0.004)
(0.010)
(0.004)
Other Race
0.074
0.107***
0.079
0.124***
0.054
0.090***
0.064
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.005)
(0.002)
(0.010)
1991 survey
0.175
0.157***
0.174
0.141***
0.173
0.154**
0.178
(0.004)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.010)
1993 survey
0.231
0.258***
0.230
0.257**
0.231
0.247*
0.226
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.012)
1995 survey
0.151
0.165**
0.157
0.162
0.153
0.169*
0.163
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.010)
1997 survey
0.221
0.218
0.228
0.232
0.218
0.232
0.228
(0.004)
(0.009)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.012)
1999 survey
0.221
0.202***
0.210
0.207
0.225
0.171***
0.205
(0.003)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.011)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.004)
Northeast
0.149
0.159
0.154
0.181***
0.149
0.171***
0.155
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.011)
Midwest
0.174
0.140***
0.180
0.156**
0.181
0.142***
0.186
(0.004)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.002)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.010)
South
0.465
0.460
0.457
0.451
0.449
0.432
0.455
(0.005)
(0.011)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.014)
State unemployment
5.74
5.91***
5.81
5.89
5.74
5.88***
5.96
rate
(0.014)
(0.033)
(0.015)
(0.010)
(0.026)
(0.009)
(0.042)
State real income in
153.79
153.73
153.89
155.09**
153.32
154.50
153.37
thousands
(0.200)
(0.456)
(0.187)
(0.131)
(0.365)
(0.132)
(0.610)
Age
16.18
16.00***
16.25
16.30
16.30
15.96***
16.44
(0.011)
(0.025)
(0.010)
(0.008)
(0.020)
(0.008)
(0.034)
Additional Variables Included in Extended Model
Grade Level (1-4)
2.59
2.35***
2.57
2.49**
2.70
2.33***
2.72
(0.010)
(0.023)
(0.010)
(0.007)
(0.018)
(0.007)
(0.032)
Plays on at least one
0.444
0.443
0.645
0.569***
0.460
0.452
0.655
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.014)
sports team
(0.005)
(0.011)
(0.004)
Wears seat belts often
0.643
0.560***
0.562
0.455***
0.596
0.527***
0.480
(0.005)
(0.011)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.014)
Carried a weapon
0.073
0.211***
0.300
0.588***
0.113
0.259***
0.408
(0.003)
(0.009)
(0.004)
(0.002)
(0.007)
(0.003)
(0.014)
Got into a physical
0.262
0.498***
0.447
0.707***
0.345
0.556***
0.563
fight
(0.004)
(0.011)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.013)
Smokes daily
0.059
0.147***
0.085
0.269***
0.115
0.199***
0.148
(0.003)
(0.008)
(0.003)
(0.001)
(0.006)
(0.002)
(0.013)
N
26,411
3,459
25,863
1,245
11,206
2,204
12,866
* = statis. signif. at 0.10 level, ** = statis. signif. at 0.05 level, *** = statis signif. at 0.01 level

30

Attempt
0.819***
(0.013)
0.130***
(0.011)
0.348***
(0.016)
0.113***
(0.011)
0.138***
(0.012)
0.248
(0.015)
0.171
(0.013)
0.239
(0.014)
0.204
(0.014)
0.187***
(0.013)
0.155***
(0.012)
0.443
(0.017)
6.04
(0.056)
154.76
(0.731)
16.32***
(0.041)
2.52***
(0.037)
0.577***
(0.017)
0.394***
(0.017)
0.684***
(0.016)
0.777***
(0.014)
0.351***
(0.016)
871

Table 3
NCS Sample
Girls
Selection into Binge Drinking and Alcohol Abuse or Dependence on Observable Characteristics
Mean
(Standard Error)
Past Year Binge
Past Year Clinically Defined Alcohol
Abuse or Dependence
No Binge
Binge
No Abuse
Abuse
Suicide Attempt
0.0296
0.1295*
0.0271
0.3458***
(0.1626)
(0.4835)
(0.1698)
(0.3379)
Variables Included in Parsimonious Model
Age
16.7516
17.3635***
16.8128
17.6721***
(1.3609)
(1.2689)
(1.3731)
(1.2555)
Age Squared
282.4964
303.0489***
284.5177
313.8605***
(46.1545)
(43.9780)
(46.5301)
(43.2016)
Income
23.9770
29.5810*
25.7455
16.3534***
(20.3523)
(13.3072)
(19.8633)
(20.4159)
High School Dropout
0.0671
0.0805
0.0488
0.3479***
(0.2158)
(0.4842)
(0.2506)
(0.2739)
Black
0.1588
0.0212***
0.1414
0.0000***
(0.3489)
(0.0000)
(0.3661)
(0.1451)
Hispanic
0.1811
0.0597***
0.1515
0.2295
(0.3591)
(0.4275)
(0.3857)
(0.2385)
Catholic
0.3079
0.4323*
0.3227
0.4629
(0.4682)
(0.5069)
(0.4624)
(0.4986)
Protestant
0.5579
0.3870**
0.5388
0.3268**
(0.4975)
(0.4902)
(0.4992)
(0.4768)
Other Religion
0.0453
0.0888
0.0549
0.0411
(0.2281)
(0.2017)
(0.2083)
(0.2863)
Poor Health
0.1206
0.0638
0.1074
0.1359
(0.3100)
(0.3484)
(0.3263)
(0.2460)
Urban
0.7971
0.8578
0.8021
0.9028*
(0.3990)
(0.3011)
(0.4029)
(0.3515)
Additional Variables Included in Extended Model
Past Year Mental Illness
0.4067
0.5267
0.4019
0.8110***
(0.4921)
(0.5025)
(0.4910)
(0.3980)
No Seat belt
0.0414
0.0828
0.0368
0.2196*
(0.1994)
(0.2773)
(0.1885)
(0.4208)
No Condom
0.0974
0.1121
0.0962
0.1536
(0.2953)
(0.3666)
(0.2970)
(0.3175)
Parents
0.6077
0.5633
0.6146
0.3905**
(0.4891)
(0.4991)
(0.4874)
(0.4959)
Fire
0.0961
0.1322
0.0992
0.1572
(0.2994)
(0.3700)
(0.2952)
(0.3409)
Abused
0.0305
0.0959
0.0306
0.2142**
(0.1726)
(0.4170)
(0.1723)
(0.2963)
Raped
0.0715
0.1505
0.0715
0.2943*
(0.2581)
(0.3598)
(0.2581)
(0.4633)
Molested
0.0886
0.1161
0.0951
0.0801
(0.2938)
(0.2760)
(0.2846)
(0.3223)
Shock
0.1846
0.1956
0.1722
0.3807*
(0.3781)
(0.4936)
(0.3887)
(0.3992)
Death of Relative
0.3046
0.2738
0.2827
0.5091**
(0.4610)
(0.4488)
(0.4510)
(0.5082)
Crisis
0.2427
0.3034
0.2467
0.3625
(0.4317)
(0.4887)
(0.4295)
(0.4627)
Observations
294
79
342
31
* = statis. signif. at 0.10 level, ** = statis. signif. at 0.05 level, *** = statis signif. at 0.01 level

31

Table 4
NCS Sample
Girls
Selection into Suicide Attempt on Observable Characteristics
Mean
(Standard Error)
No Attempt
Attempt
Binge Drinking
0.1816
0.5197*
(0.3860)
(0.5185)
Alcohol Use Disorder
0.0482
0.4899***
(0.5188)
(0.2144)
Variables Included in Parsimonious Model
Age
16.8354
17.5961**
(1.5144)
(1.3557)
Age Squared
285.2627
311.7516**
(52.0281)
(45.9931)
Income
25.4877
17.4001*
(15.6410)
(20.2193)
High School Dropout
0.0563
0.3277*
(0.4871)
(0.2309)
Black
0.1306
0.1479
(0.3684)
(0.3375)
Hispanic
0.1481
0.3277
(0.4871)
(0.3557)
Catholic
0.3306
0.3710
(0.5013)
(0.4711)
Protestant
0.5309
0.3912
(0.5064)
(0.4997)
Other Religion
0.0500
0.1291
(0.3480)
(0.2183)
Poor Health
0.1078
0.1396
(0.3597)
(0.3106)
Urban
0.8022
0.9421*
(0.2425)
(0.3989)
Additional Variables Included in Extended Model
Past Year Mental Illness
0.4076
0.8709***
(0.3479)
(0.4921)
No Seat belt
0.0390
0.2532*
(0.1938)
(0.4513)
No Condom
0.0948
0.2111
(0.4248)
(0.2934)
Parents
0.6200
0.1934***
(0.4099)
(0.4861)
Fire
0.0935
0.2918
(0.4718)
(0.2915)
Abused
0.0304
0.2954
(0.4734)
(0.1719)
Raped
0.0692
0.4314***
(0.5140)
(0.2542)
Molested
0.0917
0.1391
(0.2890)
(0.3591)
Shock
0.1761
0.3928
(0.5068)
(0.3814)
Death of Relative
0.2811
0.6326**
(0.5003)
(0.4502)
Crisis
0.2501
0.3451
(0.4933)
(0.4337)
Observations
359
14
* = statis. signif. at 0.10 level, ** = statis. signif. at 0.05 level, *** = statis signif. at 0.01 level

32

Table 5
YRBS SAMPLE
EFFECT OF BINGE DRINKING IN PAST MONTH
ON ANY SUICIDE ATTEMPTS IN PAST YEAR
Marginal Effect
(T-ratio)

Probit
(1) Rho=.1

Full Sample:
Drinkers and Non-Drinkers
Girls
Boys
Small
Big Set
Small
Big Set
Set
Set
0.117
0.068
0.049
0.018
(25.03)
(14.90)
(17.24)
(7.06)
Bivariate Probit Models
0.033
0.004
(7.61)
(1.39)
0.001
-0.009
(0.200)
(-3.48)
-0.028
-0.021
(-7.39)
(-8.49)
-0.056
-0.033
(-15.35)
(-13.77)
-0.082
-0.625
(-23.91)
(-19.50)

Drinkers Only Sample
Small
Set
0.082
(12.53)

Girls
Big Set
0.052
(7.89)

Boys
Small
Big Set
Set
0.045
0.025
(10.47)
(6.00)

0.022
0.005
(2.79)
(1.11)
(2) Rho=.2
-0.018
-0.013
(-2.40)
(-2.95)
(3) Rho=.3
-0.056
-0.032
(-7.76)
(-7.21)
(4) Rho=.4
-0.094
-0.055
(-13.40)
(-11.77)
(5) Rho=.5
-0.131
-0.083
(-19.48)
(-16.83)
(6) Selection on
-0.232
-0.373
Rho > 1
Rho > 1
observables = selection
(-36.01)
(-50.40)
on unobservables
Rho =
Rho =
(excludes small set)
0.658
0.863
N
29,870
27,108
13,410
13,737
F Test Statistic
F(14, 56,949) = 89.78
F(14, 27,118) = 65.28
Prob > F = 0.0000
Prob > F = 0.0000
NOTE: The small set includes age, region, survey year, state unemployment, and state real income.
The big set includes age, region, survey year, state unemployment, state real income, grade, plays on at
least one sports team, smokes daily, wears seat belts often, physical fight in past year, and carried a weapon
in past year.

33

Table 6
NCS SAMPLE
GIRLS
EFFECT OF ALCOHOL ABUSE IN PAST YEAR
ON ANY SUICIDE ATTEMPTS IN PAST YEAR
Marginal Effect
(T-Ratio)
Model

Binge Drinking
Alcohol Use Disorder
Small Set
Big Set
Small Set
Big Set
Probit
0.0782
0.0083
0.1838
0.0387
(4.79)
(3.39)
(3.57)
(2.16)
Bivariate Probit Models
(1) Rho=.1
0.0054
0.0272
(3.03)
(1.66)
(2) Rho=.2
0.0033
0.0189
(2.67)
(1.16)
(3) Rho=.3
0.0016
0.0129
(2.30)
(0.63)
(4) Rho=.4
0.0002
0.0087
(1.91)
(0.08)
(5) Rho=.5
-0.0014
0.0056
(-0.53)
(1.50)
(6) Selection on observables =
0.0035
0.0126
selection on unobservables
(2.27)
(1.21)
(excludes small set)
Rho = 0.307
Rho = 0.189
N
364
364
NOTE: The small set includes: age, age squared, income, high school dropout, black, hispanic, catholic,
protestant, other religion, poor health, and urban. The big set includes age, age squared, income, high
school dropout, black, hispanic, catholic, protestant, other religion, poor health, urban, past year mental
illness, no seat belt, no condom, fire, abused, raped, molested, shock, death of relative, and crisis.

34

