                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     FALLING TRADE COSTS, HETEROGENEOUS FIRMS,
                              AND INDUSTRY DYNAMICS

                                            Andrew B. Bernard
                                            J. Bradford Jensen
                                              Peter K. Schott

                                           Working Paper 9639
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9639


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2003




We thank Marc Melitz, Nina Pavcnik, Jim Tybout and participants at the 2002 Tuck Trade Summer Camp
and ERWIT 2002 for helpful comments. The research in this paper was conducted at the Center for Economic
Studies. Research results and conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate
concurrence by the Bureau of the Census or by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The paper has
not undergone the review the Census Bureau gives its official publications. It has been screened to insure that
no confidential data are revealed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.
Falling Trade Costs, Heterogeneous Firms, and Industry Dynamics
Andrew B. Bernard, J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 9639
April 2003
JEL No. F1, L1, L6

                                             ABSTRACT


This paper examines the response of industries and firms to changes in trade costs. Several new
firm-level models of international trade with heterogeneous firms predict that industry productivity

will rise as trade costs fall due to the reallocation of activity across plants within an industry. Using
disaggregated U.S. import data, we create a new measure of trade costs over time and industries. As
the models predict, productivity growth is faster in industries with falling trade costs. We also find

evidence supporting the major hypotheses of the heterogenous-firm models. Plants in industries with
falling trade costs are more likely to die or become exporters. Existing exporters increase their
shipments abroad. The results do not apply equally across all sectors but are strongest for industries
most likely to be producing horizontally-differentiated tradeable goods.



Andrew B. Bernard                                       J. Bradford Jensen
Tuck School of Business                                 Institute for International Economics
Dartmouth College                                       1750 Massachusetts Avenue
100 Tuck Hall                                           Washington, DC 20036-1903
Hanover, NH 03755                                       jbjensen@iie.com
and NBER
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu


Peter K. Schott
School of Management
Yale University
135 Prospect Street
New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER
peter.schott@yale.edu
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                             2


1.   Introduction

    The inquiry into the relationship between countries’ trade policy and
their subsequent economic growth has two branches. The first seeks to
relate cross-country diﬀerences in openness to cross-country variation in
GDP growth. The second focuses on the microeconomic link between firm
exporting and firm productivity. This paper uses several new firm-level
models of international trade to explore a third channel, the evolution of
industry productivity resulting from a reallocation of activity across firms
in response to changes in trade costs.
    An increase in aggregate industry productivity as a result of falling trade
costs is a key feature of three heterogeneous-firm, general equilibrium trade
models recently introduced by Bernard et al. (2000), Melitz (2002), and
Yeaple (2002). These models emphasize productivity diﬀerences across
firms operating in an imperfectly competitive industry consisting of hori-
zontally diﬀerentiated varieties. In all three models, the existence of trade
costs induces only the most productive firms to self-select into exporting.
As trade costs fall, industry productivity rises due a reallocation of activity
across firms: lower trade costs cause low productivity non-exporting firms
to exit and high productivity non-exporters to increase their sales through
exports, thereby increasing their weight in aggregate industry productivity.
An important feature of these models is that the increase in aggregate pro-
ductivity is not a result of faster firm productivity growth from exporting.1
    This paper provides the first empirical examination of the relationship
among industry trade costs, firm reallocation, and industry productivity in
the U.S.. A key contribution of our analysis is the connection of plant-level
U.S. manufacturing data to industry-level measures of trade cost changes.
We define trade costs as the sum of ad valorem tariﬀ and transport costs,
and construct them using U.S. product-level trade data. Trade costs are
found to vary substantially across both industries and time.
    We report two main results. First, we find that aggregate industry
productivity rises as trade costs fall. Second, we find support for two of
the four firm-level implications, and weak evidence for a third, that are
   1
     Clerides, Lach, and Tybout (1998), Bernard and Jensen (1999), and Aw, Chung,
and Roberts (2000) find that firm productivity growth is not improved after entry into
exporting.
             Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                      3


integral to industry reallocation in the heterogeneous-firm models. The
probability of plant death is higher in industries experiencing declining
trade costs, as is the probability of successfully entering the export market.
In addition, existing exporters’ exports grow as industry trade costs decline.
These results highlight the heterogeneity of firm outcomes within industries,
calling attention to the fact that there are both winners and losers within
industries as a result of trade liberalization.
    The relationship between falling trade costs and faster productivity
growth is not uniform across industries. We find that within-industry
reallocation in response to changes in trade costs is strongest for industries
where the U.S. has high levels of imports from, and exports to, other high
income countries. These industries are more likely to encompass trading in
horizontally diﬀerentiated varieties, and therefore provide a closer fit with
theory.
    Identifying a connection between declining trade costs, firm realloca-
tion and aggregate industry productivity gains has important implications
for the literature examining the eﬀect of trade liberalization on economic
growth. This literature has been conducted almost exclusively with ag-
gregate cross-country data using various measures of openness to proxy
for changes in trade costs. Though several studies, including Ben-David
(1993), Sachs and Warner (1995) and Edwards (1998), oﬀer evidence of
a positive correlation between trade liberalization and GDP growth, the
robustness of this evidence has been challenged by Rodriguez and Rodrik
(2000). By examining more direct measures of trade liberalization, and
linking them to the responses of individual firms within industries, we pro-
vide direct evidence on the extent to which trade liberalization may aﬀect
productivity and therefore GDP growth. Our results suggest that changes
in openness over time matter for productivity growth but that all industries
are not aﬀected equally.
     The analysis in this paper is related to a broad empirical literature
examining the link between import competition and plant performance sur-
veyed in Tybout (2001). The general consensus of this literature is that
foreign competition both reduces the domestic market share of import-
competing firms and reallocates domestic market share from ineﬃcient to
eﬃcient firms, see Pavcnik (2002). Using explicit measures of trade costs
at the industry level, we also find evidence of reallocation. Our results
             Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                      4


suggest that the reallocation is driven by plant death and entry into ex-
porting rather than through changing domestic market shares of surviving
plants. Our findings are also consistent with studies examining the eﬀects
of changes to particular trading regimes. Using industry-level data, Head
and Ries (1999) and Trefler (2001), for example, find that the Canada-U.S.
Free Trade Agreement induced substantial rationalization of production
and employment. We provide evidence on the exact nature of such within-
industry rationalizations due to falling trade costs.
    The remainder of the paper is organized as follows: the next section
assembles the predictions from the theoretical models on the responses to
lower trade costs. Section 3 summarizes our dataset and describes how
we construct our measure of trade costs. Section 4 presents the empirical
results. Section 5 concludes.

2.   Theory: Heterogeneous Firms and Trade

    Three recent papers by Bernard et al. (2000), Melitz (2002), and Yeaple
(2002) — henceforth BEJK, MM, and SY, respectively — develop firm-level
models of intra-industry trade that are designed to match a set of stylized
facts about exporting firms. These facts reveal that relatively few firms
export and that exporters are more productive, larger, and more likely to
survive than non-exporting firms. An important contribution of the models
is their demonstration that such diﬀerences can arise even if exporting
does not itself enhance productivity, a robust empirical finding (Clerides,
Lach and Tybout (1998), Bernard and Jensen (1999), and Aw, Chung and
Roberts (2000)).
    In each paper, exporter superiority is shown to be the equilibrium out-
come of more productive firms self-selecting into the export market. This
selection is driven by the existence of trade costs, which only the most pro-
ductive firms can absorb while still remaining profitable. All three papers
relate reductions in trade costs to increases in aggregate industry produc-
tivity: as trade costs fall, lower productivity, non-exporting firms die, more
productive non-exporters enter the export market, and the level of exports
sold by the most productive firms increases. In this section, we summarize
the foundation and intuition of these implications before taking them to a
panel of plant-level data. Our discussion centers on MM and notes key
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                               5


diﬀerences among MM, BEJK and SY.

2.1.   Melitz (2002)
    MM builds a dynamic industry model with heterogeneous firms produc-
ing a horizontally diﬀerentiated good with a single factor, adapting Hopen-
hayn’s (1992) framework to monopolistic competition in a general equilib-
rium setting. The paper also extends Krugman’s (1980) representative firm
intra-industry trade model by allowing for variation in firm productivity.
The coexistence of firms with diﬀerent productivity levels in equilibrium
is the result of uncertainty about productivity before an irreversible entry
decision is made: though firms may earn positive profits conditional on
entry, expected profits net of sunk entry costs are zero. Entry into the
export market is also costly, but the decision to export occurs after firms
observe their productivity. Firms produce a unique horizontal variety for
the domestic market if their productivity is above some threshold, and ex-
port to a foreign market if their productivity is above a higher threshold.
MM restricts the analysis to countries with symmetric attributes to focus
solely on the relationship between trade costs and firm performance.
    In equilibrium, declining variable trade costs mean greater profits for
exporters, which are also the most productive firms, because of their in-
creased access to external markets and lower per unit costs net of trade.
Higher export profits pull higher productivity firms from the competitive
fringe into the market, raising the productivity threshold for market entry
and forcing the least productive non-exporters to shut down. Higher ex-
port profits also reduce the productivity threshold for exporting, increasing
the number of firms which export. In addition, declining trade costs invite
more foreign varieties into the market and reduce the domestic sales of all
domestic firms. The increased exports of the most productive exporters
more than compensate for this decline in domestic market share.2 A de-
crease in the fixed cost of exporting has eﬀects similar to a reduction in
variable trade costs. One diﬀerence is that export sales do not increase at
existing exporters. Rather, the increase in exports comes entirely from new
entrants.
    These dynamics provide the following five testable hypotheses:
   2
     An increase in trading partners has similar eﬀects except there are no new entrants
into exporting.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                               6


Hypothesis 1 A decrease in variable trade costs leads to an aggregate in-
dustry productivity gain.

Hypothesis 2 A decrease in variable trade costs forces the least productive
firms to exit.

Hypothesis 3 A decrease in variable trade costs increases the number of
exporting firms; new exporters are drawn from the most productive non-
exporters (or new entrants).

Hypothesis 4 A decrease in variable trade costs increases export sales at
existing exporters.

Hypothesis 5 A decrease in variable trade costs reduces the domestic mar-
ket share (and domestic revenue) of surviving firms.

2.2.   Bernard et al. (2000)
     BEJK construct a static Ricardian model of heterogeneous firms, im-
perfect (Bertrand) competition with incomplete markups, and international
trade. Firms use identical bundles of inputs to produce diﬀerentiated prod-
ucts under monopolistic competition. Within a country without trade, only
the most eﬃcient producer actually supplies the domestic market for a given
product.
     With international trade and variable trade costs, a firm produces for
the home market if it is the most eﬃcient domestic producer of a particular
variety and if no foreign producer is a lower cost supplier net of trade
costs. A domestic firm will export if it produces for the domestic market
and if, net of trade costs, it is the low cost producer for a foreign market.
With positive trade costs, exporters are firms with higher than average
productivity. BEJK use a simulation to demonstrate that as trade costs
fall, aggregate productivity rises (Hypothesis 1) because high productivity
plants expand (Hypothesis 3 and 4) at the expense of low productivity
firms, which fail (Hypothesis 2).3
   3
    Declining trade costs force low productivity plants to exit the market in both BEJK
and MM, but the mechanism by which this occurs diﬀers subtly. In BEJK, low pro-
ductivity plants exit because of increased import competition from foreign varieties. In
               Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                   7


2.3.   Yeaple (2002)
    SY is a static, one factor model of trade in diﬀerentiated products that
diﬀers from MM and BEJK in three respects. First, firms choose be-
tween producing a homogeneous non-tradeable or a diﬀerentiated variety.
Second, workers vary in terms of skill. Finally, firm labor productivity is
determined endogenously as two production techniques are available to pro-
duce diﬀerentiated goods, either low fixed/high unit cost or high fixed/low
unit cost.4 With trade costs, firms with the highest productivity produce
the diﬀerentiated good via the high fixed cost technique and export, while
firms with the lowest productivity produce the homogenous good. Firms
using the low fixed cost technology have intermediate productivity levels.
    A reduction in trade costs increases the incentive for firms to adopt the
high fixed cost production technique and export. As a result, a larger
number of firms adopt this technology while the absolute number of “do-
mestic” firms in the industry falls. Total employment falls and the least
skilled workers leave the industry so that observed labor productivity rises.
These relationships correspond to Hypotheses 1 through 3 above.

3.     Data

3.1.   U.S. Manufacturing Plants Across Industries and Time
   U.S. manufacturing plant data are drawn from the Censuses of Manufac-
tures (CM) of the Longitudinal Research Database (LRD) of the U.S. Bu-
reau of the Census starting in 1987 and conducted every fifth year through
1997. Though CM data are available for earlier periods, we cannot use
them in this study because comprehensive collection of export information
MM, countries’ varieties do not overlap. As a result, an increase in imports raises the
probability of death at all levels of productivity while the death of low productivity plants
is actually driven by the entry into exporting of other domestic firms. In our empirical
work, we will not be able to distinguish between these two competing sources of plant
deaths.
    4
      MM and BEJK model firms as diﬀering in terms of exogenous total factor produc-
tivity (TFP). In SY, TFP is identical across firms, while labor productivity varies with
choice of production technique. TFP and labor productivity are correlated in MM and
BEJK due to the presence of fixed costs of production. As a result we avoid the com-
plications of computing plant level productivity and focus instead on labor productivity
in our empirical tests below.
             Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                         8


did not begin until 1987. The sampling unit for the Census is a manufac-
turing establishment, or plant, and the sampling frame in each Census year
includes detailed information on inputs and output on all establishments.
Plant output is recorded at the four-digit Standard Industrial Classification
level (SIC4).
    The samples used in our econometric work below incorporate several
modifications to the basic data. First, we exclude small plants (so-called
Administrative records) due to a lack of information on exports. Second,
we drop plants in any ‘not elsewhere classified’ industries, i.e. SIC4 in-
dustries ending in ‘9’. These modifications leave us with two panels of
approximately 234,000 plants in 337 manufacturing industries.

3.2.   Trade Costs Across Industries and Time
    An important contribution of our analysis is the creation of a new set
of industry-level trade costs that can be related to plant behavior over
time. To most closely match the notion of trade costs in the theoretical
models, we construct ad valorem trade costs that vary over time and across
industries.
    We define variable trade costs for industry i in year t (Costit ) as the
sum of ad valorem duty (dit ) and ad valorem freight and insurance (fit )
rates, Costit = dit + fit . We compute dit and fit from underlying product-
level U.S. import data complied by Feenstra (1996). The rate for industry
i is the weighted average rate across all products in i, using the import
values from all source countries as weights.5 The ad valorem duty rate is
therefore duties collected (dutiesit ) relative to the Free-On-Board customs
value of imports (fob it ),
                                       dutiesit
                                dit =           .
                                         fob it
Similarly, the ad valorem freight rate is the markup of the Customs-Insurance-
Freight value (cif it ) over fob it relative to fob it ,

                                        cifit
                                fit =          − 1.
                                        fob it

  5
   We use the concordance provided by Feenstra et al. (2002) to match products to
SIC4 industries.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                               9


   We define the change in trade costs for census year t as the annualized
change in tariﬀ and freight costs over the preceding five years,
                       Costit − Costi,t−5   [dit + fit ] − [di,t−5 + fi,t−5 ]
       ∆Costit−5 =                        =                                   .     (1)
                               5                            5
In the empirical work below, we relate changes in trade costs between years
t−5 to t (∆Costt−5:t
                  i   ) to plant survival, plant export decisions, and changes
in the plant’s domestic market share between t to t + 5. The five-year
spacing between time periods corresponds to the interval between Censuses.
    Table 1 reports average tariﬀ, freight and total trade costs across two-
digit SIC industries for five-year intervals from 1982-1997 using the import
values of underlying SIC4 industries as weights. Costs are averaged over the
five years preceding the year at the top of the column. Table 1 reveals that
ad valorem tariﬀ rates vary substantially and are highest in labor-intensive
Apparel and lowest in capital-intensive Paper. Tariﬀ rates decline across a
broad range of industries over time. Indeed, over the entire period, tariﬀs
decline by more than one quarter in thirteen of twenty industries. The pace
of tariﬀ declines, however, varies substantially across industries.6 Freight
costs are highest among industries producing goods with a low value-to-
weight ratio, including Stone, Lumber, Furniture, and Food. Freight costs
also generally decline with time, though the pattern of declines is decidedly
more mixed than it is with tariﬀs.
    Four-digit industries show an even greater dispersion in trade cost changes.
Figure 1 displays the total change in trade costs from 1982 to 1992 relative
to 1982 levels. As indicated in the figure, there is substantial variation in
changes across four-digit industries, with the trade costs of most industries
declining between 1982 and 1992. The average SIC4 industry saw trade
costs fall 0.19 percentage points per year from 1982-92.7 Of the 337 SIC4
industries, we find that 82% experienced declines in tariﬀ rates from 1982
   6
     The median percentage point reduction in product-level ad valorem tariﬀ rates be-
tween 1989 and 1997 is 0.6%. Twenty five percent of products experience reductions
greater than 1.5 percentage points. These diﬀerences do not account for changes in
product codes during this interval or for changes in the non ad valorem component of
tariﬀs, which varies across industries (Irwin 1998). A similar change cannot be computed
for a longer interval because a change in the coding of imports in 1989 precludes direct
product comparison with years after 1989.
   7
     Data on the tariﬀ and freight measures for all 337 (SIC4) industries and years is
available at http://www.som.yale.edu/faculty/pks4/sub_international.htm.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                  10


to 1987, while 53% experienced declines from 1987 to 1992. For freight
costs, 44% of the industries experienced declines from 1982 to 1987, while
66% experienced declines from 1987 to 19928 In terms of overall trade
costs, 79% of SIC4 industries saw trade costs decline between 1982 and 87,
while 62% had declining trade costs between 1987 and 1992.
    In addition to being a good match to the theory, the trade costs con-
structed here have several advantages. They are the first to incorporate
information about both trade policy and transportation costs. In addition,
they vary across industries and time. Finally, they are derived directly from
product-level trade data collected at the border.
    Even with these advantages, two caveats should be noted.            First,
changes in the composition of products or importers within industries can
induce variation in dit and fit even if actual statutory tariﬀs and market
transportation costs remain constant. Shifts in U.S. consumption away
from imports subject to high tariﬀs, or towards trading partners located
closer to the U.S., for example, can decrease the measures of trade costs
even if actual costs are unchanged.9 This concern about the trade cost
data is mitigated to some extent by our focus on the relationship between
trade costs and firm outcomes. For this paper, the composition of compe-
tition (i.e. near or far importers, this product or that one) may be just as
relevant as changes in actual costs in inducing a U.S. response.
    A second caveat is that our trade cost measure is constructed from
U.S. import data. Each of the theoretical models described above contem-
plates symmetric reductions in trade costs across countries. To the extent
that U.S. trade policy or transportation rates diverges from that of other
countries, measured changes in trade costs may over- or underestimate the
changes implemented by other countries. This problem is likely to be more
severe for trade policy than for transportation rates. Unfortunately, be-
    8
      Using a diﬀerent methodology, Hummels (1999) reports a similar decline in aggregate
freight costs during the same period.
    9
      One way to avoid this problem is to aggregate product-level changes rather than levels
up to SIC4 industries. In principle, one could compute the change in tariﬀ and freight
rates across country-product pairs and then average across these changes for industry
observations. In practice, however, such a procedure encounters a number of problems.
Most importantly, the U.S. changed import product categorization systems between 1988
and 1989, i.e. in the middle of our sample. In addition, the set of countries importing
a given product can vary substantially from year to year, yielding numerous zeros for
product-level tariﬀ changes.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                              11


cause disaggregate tariﬀ rates and freight costs are unavailable for U.S.
export destinations during the period in question, we cannot construct a
direct measure of outbound trade costs.10

3.3.   Identifying Industries With Relatively High Varieties Trade
    Each of the three models discussed in Section 2 is based upon interna-
tional trade in horizontally diﬀerentiated varieties. In addition to exam-
ining trends across all manufacturing industries, we attempt to align the
data more closely with the theory by also reporting results for a subset of
industries most likely to capture trade in horizontally diﬀerentiated vari-
eties. Starting from the assumption that trade between the U.S. and the
OECD is the most likely to be characterized by a taste for variety, we select
SIC4 industries using U.S. import and export penetration ratios vis a vis
the OECD.11
    For industry i, we define the OECD import and export penetration
ratios for the U.S., nm       x
                      i and ni respectively, as

                     fob OECD
                         i
       nm
        i =                                                                         (2)
                 fob i + qi − xi
                 xOECD
       nxi =       i
                                                                                    (3)
                      qi
where fob OECD
          i     and xOECD
                      i     are the value of U.S. imports from and exports
to the OECD in industry i, fob i and xi are total U.S. imports and exports
in industry i, and qi is the total value of U.S. production in i. Though
nm         x
  i and ni vary substantially across industries, they are relatively stable
across time. We use values for 1987, the midpoint of our two panels, to
construct our industry subsample. We refer to industries with import and
  10
     To check the appropriateness of using import data for both inward and outward U.S.
trade costs, we compare U.S. and European Union tariﬀs changes across industries from
1992-1997 (after the end of our sample) using the TRAINS database compiled by the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development. This database tracks product-
level tariﬀs for a limited, but growing, set of countries starting in 1990. Using these
data, we find that the correlation of U.S. and EU ad valorem tariﬀ rate changes across
SIC4 industries is positive and significant at the 1% level.
  11
     Rauch (1999) divides two-digit SITC industries into diﬀerentiated and homogenous
categories. The diﬃculties associated with concording these categories to four-digit SIC
industries preclude their use here.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                 12


export penetration greater than the 67th percentile as high bilateral OECD
trade industries (or high-OECD).12 The sixty-seven industries above these
cutoﬀs are reported in Table 2. Two thirds of the industries in this sample
come from SIC 35 to 38, precisely the sectors (Industrial Machinery, Elec-
tronics, Transportation and Instruments) that are most likely to contain
diﬀerentiated products.

4.     Empirical results

   In this section, we examine the relationships between trade costs and
industry- and plant-level outcomes described in Section 2.

4.1.    Industry Productivity Growth
    The most important implication of all three models presented above is
that lower trade costs increase aggregate productivity (Hypothesis 1). As
the models are all single factor models, they do not diﬀerentiate between
labor productivity and total factor productivity. Here we report results
for both, but in subsequent sections we concentrate on labor productivity.13
We estimate a simple regression of the change in SIC4 industry productivity
on the decline in industry trade costs in the previous five years,

             ∆P roductivityit = ct + β 1 ∆Costit−5 + δ i + δ t + εit ,                 (4)

where ∆P roductivityit is the average annual percent change in industry
productivity, either real value added per worker or TFP, from year t to
year t + 5, ∆Costit−5 is the annualized percent change in total trade costs
between years t − 5 and t, and δ i and δ t are sets of industry and year fixed
eﬀects. Data on real value added per worker and five-factor total factor
productivity are drawn from Bartelsman et al. (2000). Our use of prior
changes in trade costs to predict subsequent behavior is helpful for two
reasons. First, it biases the empirical work against Hypotheses 1 to 5
  12
     Varying the cutoﬀ percentile around 67 does not materially aﬀect the results reported
below.
  13
     Constructing plant level total factor productivity levels and changes over time is
especially diﬃcult given the small number of periods in our data and the five-year interval
between observations.
            Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                     13


by excluding contemporaneous reallocation. Second, it helps to mitigate
problems of endogeneity and omitted variables.
    One feature of all three models is that they are designed to focus
on within-industry reallocation, rather than diﬀerences across industries.
However, the theories are silent on the appropriate empirical scope of an
industry. We estimate all our specifications with both two-digit and four
digit fixed eﬀects. The inclusion of two-digit industry fixed eﬀects (SIC2)
allows for potential substitution across 4-digit industries within a sector.
Fixed eﬀects at the four-digit level (SIC4) restrict the analysis to within-
industry changes in trade costs over time.
    The results with SIC2 industry fixed eﬀects are reported in columns
1 (all industries) and 2 (high-OECD industries) of Table 3 with robust
standard errors adjusted for clustering on four-digit industries. Consistent
with the three models, both TFP and labor productivity are negatively
associated with changes in trade costs, i.e. falling trade costs are followed
by more rapid industry productivity growth. For the all-industry sample,
the coeﬃcients are relatively small and only significant at the 10% level for
TFP.
    For the sample of high-OECD industries, the coeﬃcients are large and
significant at the 1% level, suggesting a one percentage point annual decline
in trade costs is associated with annual productivity growth rates 1.0 to
1.6 percentage points higher.
    Results using SIC4 industry fixed eﬀects are reported in columns 3 and
4 of Table 3. The same pattern of results holds. the coeﬃcients on
the change in trade costs for the all-industry sample are not significant for
either TFP or labor productivity. However, in the high-OECD sample,
both coeﬃcients are again large, negative and significant.
    The industry regressions suggest that falling trade costs are associated
with faster industry productivity growth but this relationship is strongest
for a sample of industries with high bilateral trade levels with OECD coun-
tries. We now turn to the specific within-industry predictions of the models
(Hypotheses 2 through 5).

4.2.   Plant Deaths
    To examine the eﬀect of changing trade costs on plant survival, we
estimate a probit with levels and interactions of plant productivity, export
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                 14


status and the change in trade costs. The probability of death for a plant
in industry i between year t and year t + 5 is given by
                                    ¡
      Pr (Dpt+5 = 1|Xpt , Zit ) = Φ ct + β 1 RPpt + β 2 ∆Costit−5 + β 3 Ept                   (5)
                                              4                           5
                                          +β [Ept × ∆Costit−5 ] + β [RPpt × ∆Costit−5 ]
                                                                                     ¢
                                          +β 6 [Ept × RPpt × ∆Costit−5 ] + δ i + δ t


where RPpt (relative productivity) is percentage diﬀerence in plant labor
productivity from that of the mean plant in the SIC4 industry in year
t, ∆Costit−5 is the annual average change in industry trade costs in the
preceding 5 years, and Ept is a dummy variable indicating whether the
plant is an exporter in year t. As above, we report results with SIC2 and
SIC4 industry fixed eﬀects while allowing for robust standard errors and
clustering in four-digit industries.
    All three models predict that low productivity, non-exporters should
be more likely to fail, and that a decline in trade costs should raise the
probability of death (Hypothesis 2). Since all the plant-level empirical
specifications include either SIC2 and SIC4 industry fixed eﬀects, the im-
plicit null hypothesis is that deviations from the average industry change
in trade costs are correlated with plant outcomes.
    Columns 1 and 2 in Table 4 report the results for plants in the all-
industry and high-OECD samples respectively, controlling for SIC2 fixed
eﬀects.14 Plant labor productivity and plant export status have large,
negative, and significant coeﬃcients. As expected, low productivity plants
are more likely to die and exporters are substantially less likely to fail. As
predicted by the models, declines in industry trade costs also increase the
probability of death. While the coeﬃcient on the change in industry trade
costs is negative in both specifications, it is only significant (at the 1%
level) for the industries with high OECD bilateral trade, i.e. the industries
most likely to be characterized by the theoretical models.
    The signs of the coeﬃcients on the interaction terms suggest that ex-
porters are less likely to die as trade costs fall and that higher productiv-
ity among exporters reduces the probability of failure as trade costs fall.
For non-exporters the probability of death rises more for high productivity
  14
     All coeﬃcients reported in the table are changes in the marginal probability evaluated
at the mean of the regressors.
             Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                              15


plants as trade costs fall, significantly so for plants in the preferred sample
of industries with high OECD trade. This latter coeﬃcient is surprising,
as the theory (and common sense) suggests that high productivity non-
exporting plants should not face a higher probability of shutdown in the
face of declining trade costs.
     Columns 3 and 4 in Table 4 contain analogous specifications controlling
for SIC4 fixed eﬀects. For the all-industry sample, the coeﬃcient on the
trade cost variable has an unexpected positive, although insignificant, coef-
ficient. Falling trade costs are not associated with an increased probability
of death in the wide sample of industries. However, for the sample of high-
OECD industries, declines in industry trade costs significantly increase the
probability of death.
     The estimates from the OECD sample with SIC4 fixed eﬀects suggest
that the economic magnitude of the change in trade costs on the probability
of death is substantial. For a plant with average productivity, a reduction
in trade costs of 0.9 percentage points per year (equivalent to a one standard
deviation change) leads to a 3.7 percentage point increase in the probability
of death for a non-exporter and a 0.2 percentage point increase in the
probability of death for an exporter. The average probability of death in
the sample is 26.8%.
     As with the industry productivity regressions, here we find that the pre-
dictions of the theoretical models are strongest for the high-OECD sample:
falling trade costs lead to higher probabilities of death.

4.3.   New Exporters
    In addition to increasing the probability of plant deaths, all three models
also predict that high productivity non-exporters start exporting as trade
costs fall (Hypothesis 3). We estimate the probability that a non-exporter
becomes an exporter as a function of plant labor productivity, the change in
industry trade costs, and their interaction for the sample of non-exporters.15
  15
     A more complete specification on the decision to export would include an estimate
of the sunk costs of exporting and include the entire panel of plants (for example, see
Roberts and Tybout 1997 or Bernard and Jensen 2001). Here, we are interested in the
change in the probability of exporting for non-exporters as trade costs fall.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                 16


The probit is given by
                                             ¡
       Pr (Ept+5 = 1|Ept = 0, Xpt , Zit ) = Φ ct + β 1 RPpt + β 2 ∆Costit−5 (6)
                                                                                ¢
                                            +β 3 [RPpt × ∆Costit−5 ] + δ i + δ t .



     The results reported in Table 5 again yield support for the predictions
of the model, especially for the high-OECD industries.16 Plant labor pro-
ductivity is strongly positively associated with entering the export market.
Declines in industry trade costs significantly increase the probability of be-
coming an exporter for the high-OECD industries. For the all-industry
sample, the eﬀect is not significant and has the wrong sign with SIC4 fixed
eﬀects. The interaction between plant productivity and the change in
trade costs also has the expected sign, although significant only for broad
sample. High productivity non-exporters are even more likely to become
exporters when trade costs decline.
     The magnitude of the eﬀect of falling trade costs is substantial. For
a non-exporter with average productivity, a one standard deviation reduc-
tion in trade costs increases the probability of exporting by 5.8 percentage
points. The average probability of becoming an exporter in the high-OECD
sample is 27%.
     These results, coupled with the increased probability of death as trade
costs fall, oﬀer support for the two major predictions of the models. In
particular, they highlight the heterogeneity of outcomes across plants that
vary in terms of their export status and labor productivity. In response to
falling trade costs, some plants, typically low productivity non-exporters,
are more likely to die, while higher productivity non-exporters take ad-
vantage of the lower trade costs and begin exporting. It is important to
note that the results are only hold for the set of industries that have high
bilateral flows with the OECD.
  16
     All coeﬃcients reported in the table are changes in the marginal probability evaluated
at the mean of the regressors.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                              17


4.4.   Export Growth
   BEJK and MM oﬀer specific predictions that exports will increase at
current exporters as trade costs decline (Hypothesis 4).17 We estimate the
percentage change in exports for current exporters as a function of the
change in industry trade costs,

                %∆EXPpt = ct + β 1 ∆Costit−5 + δ i + δ t + εpit                     (7)
                         EXP     −EXP
where %∆EXPpt = 2(EXPpt+5          pt
                          pt+5 +EXP pt )
                                         .18
    The results, shown in Table 6, provide some support for the prediction
that exports increase more rapidly for plants in industries with falling trade
costs. The trade cost measure is negative in all specifications, although
for high OECD trade industries it is not significant when SIC4 fixed eﬀects
are included. As current exporters are higher productivity plants, this
expansion of export sales serves to increase the reallocation eﬀect of falling
trade costs and boost aggregate industry productivity.

4.5.   Domestic Market Share
    The models oﬀer a variety of predictions about output and employment
growth across plants as trade costs decline. MM has the clearest predic-
tions: domestic market share should fall for all surviving plants (and, of
course, for plants that close) while the expansion in exports more than oﬀ-
sets the declining domestic shipments for all current exporters and some
new exporters (Hypothesis 5). In the models output and employment co-
vary perfectly at the plant level since there is no feedback from exporting
to labor productivity; consequently we limit our attention to changes in
domestic sales.
    To test Hypothesis 5 from MM, we consider the change in market share
  17
     While SY does not oﬀer a specific prediction on the response of exports at existing
exporters, it does have plant exports rising with a decline in trade costs.
  18
     This growth rate is bounded between 2 and -2. Plants that stop exporting have a
growth rate of -2.
               Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                   18


from t to t + 5 for surviving plants,19
        µ            ¶
             Dpt
     ∆                  = ci + β 1 RPpt + β 2 ∆Costit−5 + β 3 Ept                         (8)
          Dit + Mit
                                  +β 4 [Ept × ∆Costit−5 ] + β 5 [RPpt × ∆Costit−5 ]
                                  +β 6 [Ept × RPpt × ∆Costit−5 ]
                                  +millspt + δ i + δ t + εpit .                           (9)
where Dpt is the value of domestic sales by the plant and Dit +Mit is the
sum of domestic industry sales and imports in the industry and millspt is
a Mills ratio to account for the probability of death.20 The dependent
variable is the change in domestic market share of the plant.
     The predictions of the MM model about domestic shipments are not
confirmed by the results in Table 7. Trade costs have no relationship to
changes in domestic market share except at exporting plants. Exporters
experience (significant) declines in domestic market share as trade costs
fall. These results suggest that there is a dichotomy between failure and
performance in the domestic market as trade costs fall. Plant failure
increases but survivors do not grow more slowly.
     We have presented results testing a series of predictions from the new
round of trade models. The results confirm the general predictions and
provide evidence that falls in trade costs will have asymmetric eﬀects on
diﬀerent firms within the same industry. An important caveat is that the
models are not designed to explain the responses of firms in every industry
to changes in trade costs but rather focus on trade with similar countries
in diﬀerentiated products. Our results are systematically strongest for the
sample of industries that have high bilateral trade with the OECD, i.e.
the industries most likely to be characterized by ‘new’ trade models with
heterogeneous firms.

4.6.   Robustness
   In this section, we check the robustness of the results for the high-OECD
sample in two ways. First we add the relative capital intensity of the plant
  19
      The use of market share, rather than the change in domestic sales, accounts for
diﬀerential growth at the industry level due to other factors.
   20
      The specification for the probability of plant failure used to calculate the Mills ratio
is given by Bernard and Jensen (2002) Table 4, column 1.
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                               19


to the specification for plant deaths and entry into exporting. Second we
split the trade cost measure into its separate tariﬀ and freight components.
    Table 8 reports the specification for the high-OECD sample including
relative capital intensity and its interactions.21 None of the eﬀects of trade
costs changes with the addition of capital intensity. The coeﬃcient on the
trade cost measure actually increases in magnitude in both specifications.
Finally in Table 9, we split the trade cost measure into its constituent parts
for both the plant death and export entry. Tariﬀs and freight costs have
the expected negative signs in both specifications.

5.     Conclusions

    In this paper, we examine the response of industries and plants to
changes in tariﬀ and transport costs. Using three recent models of in-
ternational trade with heterogeneous firms, we develop testable predictions
on the reallocation of activity across plants within industries as a result of
changes in trade costs. To test the hypotheses, we create a new dataset of
trade costs by industry over a twenty year period and link the measures to
plant-level data on the entire U.S. manufacturing sector.
    We identify an important new channel of reallocation by which trade
policy can aﬀect the performance of domestic industries in the U.S.. We
find broad support for the predictions of the recent heterogeneous-firm trade
models. Industries with falling trade costs have higher subsequent produc-
tivity growth. The higher productivity growth is driven by three concur-
rent processes within the industry. First, lower trade costs increase the
probability of plant death, especially for lower productivity, non-exporting
plants. Second, surviving high productivity, non-exporters are more likely
to enter the export market, thus expanding their sales. Third, exist-
ing exporters, already the largest and most productive establishments, see
their exports grow more quickly as trade costs fall. The aggregate indus-
try productivity response to falling trade costs reflects the reallocation of
activity across firms, away from low productivity non-exporters towards
high-productivity exporters.
  21
    The relative capital intensity measure is defined as the percentage diﬀerence of the
capital intensity of the plant relative to that in the mean plant in the industry in that
year. Capital is measured as the sum of the book value of machinery, equipment and
structures.
            Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                    20


    The results in this paper provide a new round of evidence in favor
of trade models designed to understand high bilateral trade flows between
similar countries. In particular, the models perform best when we consider
precisely those industries that are characterized by bilateral trade between
countries at similar income levels.
    The results suggest that symmetric reductions in trade costs with simi-
lar partners are indeed associated with faster industry productivity. These
eﬀects are limited to industries most likely to be characterized by trade in
varieties. Alternative theories, perhaps emphasizing comparative advan-
tage, may be needed to explain the responses of firms in other industries
to changes in trade costs.
           Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                21




References

Aw, Bee Yan, Sukyun Chung, and Mark J. Roberts. 2000. Productivity
  and Turnover in the Export Market: Micro-Level Evidence from the
  Republic of Korea and Taiwan (China). World Bank Economic Review
  14, 65-90.

Bartelsman, Eric J., Randy A. Becker, and Wayne B. Gray. 2000. The
   NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database. NBER Technical Work-
   ing Paper 205.

Ben-David, Dan (1993). Equalizing Exchange: Trade Liberalization and
   Income Convergence. Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 108, pp.
   653-679.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 1999. Exceptional Exporter
   Performance: Cause, Eﬀect, or Both? Journal of International Eco-
   nomics Vol. 47, No.1, 1-26.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 2001. Why Some Firms Ex-
   port. NBER Working Paper 8394.

Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen. 2002. The Deaths of Manu-
   facturing Plants. NBER Working Paper 9026.

Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen, and Samuel S.
   Kortum. 2000. Plants and Productivity in International Trade. NBER
   Working Paper 7688.

Clerides, Sofronis, Saul Lach and James Tybout. 1998. Is “Learning-by-
   Exporting” Important? Quarterly Journal of Economics, August, 903-
   948.

Edwards, Sebastian. 1998. Openness, Productivity and Growth: What Do
  We Really Know? Economic Journal 108(March) 383-398.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1996. U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concor-
   dances. NBER Working Paper 5515.
           Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                  22


Feenstra, Robert C, John Romalis, and Peter K. Schott. 2002. NBER
   Working Paper 9387.

Head, Keith and John Ries. 1999. Rationalization Eﬀects of Tariﬀ Reduc-
   tions. Journal of International Economics 47(2):295—320, April.

Hopenhayn, Hugo. 1992. Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run
   Equilibrium. Econometrica, 60(5), 1127-1150.

Hummels, David. 1999. Have International Transportation Costs De-
  clined? University of Chicago mimeo.

Krugman, Paul R. 1980. Scale Economies, Product Diﬀerentiation, and
   the Pattern of Trade. American Economic Review 70:950-959.

Irwin, Douglas A. 1998. Changes in US Tariﬀs: The Role of Import Prices
   and Commercial Policies. American Economic Review 88:1015-1026

Melitz, Marc J. 2002. The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Reallocations
   and Aggregate Industry Productivity. NBER Working Paper 8881.

Pavcnik, Nina. 2002 Trade Liberalization, Exit, and Productivity Improve-
   ment: Evidence from Chilean Plants. Review of Economic Studies, vol.
   69, no. 1, pp. 245-76

Rauch, James E. 1999. Networks Versus Markets in International Trade.
   Journal of International Economics 48:7-35.

Roberts, Mark and James Tybout. (1997). “An Empirical Model of Sunk
   Costs and the Decision to Export.” American Economic Review v87,
   n4: 545-64 .

Rodriguez, Francisco, and Dani Rodrik. 2000. Trade Policy and Economic
   Growth: A Skeptic’s Guide to the Cross-National Evidence. NBER
   Macroeconomics Annual, 2000.

Sachs, Jeﬀrey, and Andrew Warner. 1995. Economic Reform and the Pro-
   cess of Global Integration. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, No
   1, 1-95, Washington DC.
           Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                23


Trefler, Daniel. 2001. The Long and Short of the Canada-U.S. Free Trade
   Agreement. NBER Working Paper 8293.

Tybout, James. 2001. Plant- and Firm-Level Evidence on “New” Trade
   Theories. NBER Working Paper 8418.

Yeaple, Stephen R. 2002. A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, Interna-
   tional Trade and Wages. University of Pennsylvania mimeo.
               Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                                      24




                          Ad Valorem Tariff Costs (d it )   Ad Valorem Freight Costs (f it )    Total Costs (Cost it= d it +f it )
                                   (Percent)                         (Percent)                           (Percent)

Two-Digit SIC Industry      1982       1987        1992       1982       1987        1992       1982          1987         1992

20 Food                      5.7         5.1        4.4       10.2          9.7       8.9        15.9       14.8         13.4
21 Tobacco                   10.4       14.1       16.7        5.9          5.2       2.9        16.3       19.3         19.5
22 Textile                   17.0       13.2       11.2        6.0          6.4       5.4        23.1       19.6         16.6
23 Apparel                   23.3       20.7       16.9        8.6          7.6       6.3        31.8       28.3         23.2
24 Lumber                    3.2         2.3        1.7       11.1          6.5       7.5        14.2        8.8          9.2
25 Furniture                 5.9         4.1        4.1        9.4          8.6       8.5        15.3       12.8         12.6
26 Paper                     0.9         0.8        0.6        3.9          3.1       4.4         4.7        4.0          4.9
27 Printing                  1.7         1.2        1.1        5.9         5.5        5.1         7.5        6.6         6.2
28 Chemicals                  3.8        4.3        4.4        6.4          4.8       4.5        10.1        9.1          9.0
29 Petroleum                 0.4         0.5        0.9        5.2          5.1       8.3         5.6        5.5          9.3
30 Rubber                    7.4         7.9       11.3        7.5          6.8       6.9        14.9       14.7         18.2
31 Leather                    9.0       10.7       11.2        8.3          7.2       5.5        17.3       17.8         16.7
32 Stone                     8.9         6.4        6.5       12.0         11.1       9.6        20.9       17.5         16.1
33 Primary Metal              4.6        3.8        3.4        6.9          6.3       6.0        11.5       10.1          9.4
34 Fabricated Metal           6.6        5.1        4.3        6.8          5.9       5.0        13.4       11.0          9.3
35 Industrial Machinery       4.2        3.9        2.4        4.0          4.0       2.9         8.2        7.9          5.3
36 Electronic                 5.0        4.6        3.3        3.4          3.1       2.4         8.3        7.6          5.6
37 Transportation             1.9        1.6        2.3        4.5          2.5       3.1         6.4        4.1          5.4
38 Instruments                6.8        5.2        4.3        2.7          2.8       2.5         9.5        8.0          6.8
39 Miscellaneous              9.6        5.7        5.2        5.0          4.9       3.6        14.6       10.6          8.8
Average                       4.8        4.4        4.2        5.6          4.4       4.1        10.4        8.8         8.3
Notes: Table summarizes ad valorem tariff, freight and total trade costs across two-digit SIC industries. Costs for each two-
digit industry are weighted averages of the underlying four-digit industries employed in our empirical analysis, using U.S.
import values as weights. Figures for each year are the average for the five years preceding the year noted (e.g. the costs for
1982 are the average of costs from 1977 to 1981). The final row is the weighted average of all manufacturing industries
included in our analysis.


         Table 1: Trade Costs by Two-Digit SIC Industry and Year
             Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                       25



  SIC Industry                                               SIC Industry
 2091 Canned and cured fish and seafoods                    3567 Industrial furnaces and ovens
 2371 Fur goods                                             3571 Electronic computers
 2421 Sawmills and planing mills, general                   3572 Computer storage devices
 2435 Hardwood veneer and plywood                           3578 Calculating and accounting equipment
 2611 Pulp mills                                            3593 Fluid power cylinders + actuators
 2812 Alkalies and chlorine                                 3596 Scales and balances, exc. laboratory
 2816 Inorganic pigments                                    3621 Motors and generators
 2822 Synthetic rubber                                      3624 Carbon and graphite products
 2833 Medicinals and botanicals                             3652 Prerecorded records and tapes
 2865 Cyclic crudes and intermediates                       3672 Printed circuit boards
 3111 Leather tanning and finishing                         3674 Semiconductors and related devices
 3211 Flat glass                                            3675 Electronic capacitors
 3292 Asbestos products                                     3676 Electronic resistors
 3297 Nonclay refractories                                  3678 Electronic connectors
 3313 Electrometallurgical products                         3692 Primary batteries, dry and wet
 3334 Primary aluminum                                      3694 Engine electrical equipment
 3341 Secondary nonferrous metals                           3713 Truck and bus bodies
 3425 Saw blades and handsaws                               3714 Motor vehicle parts and accessories
 3492 Fluid power valves + hose fittings                    3724 Aircraft engines and engine parts
 3511 Turbines and turbine generator sets                   3743 Railroad equipment
 3523 Farm machinery and equipment                          3751 Motorcycles, bicycles, and parts
 3532 Mining machinery                                      3822 Environmental controls
 3533 Oil and gas field machinery                           3823 Process control instruments
 3541 Machine tools, metal cutting types                    3825 Instruments to measure electricity
 3542 Machine tools, metal forming types                    3827 Optical instruments and lenses
 3546 Power-driven handtools                                3844 X-ray apparatus and tubes
 3547 Rolling mill machinery                                3845 Electromedical equipment
 3552 Textile machinery                                     3851 Ophthalmic goods
 3553 Woodworking machinery                                 3861 Photographic equipment and supplies
 3554 Paper industries machinery                            3914 Silverware and plated ware
 3555 Printing trades machinery                             3915 Jewelers' materials + lapidary work
 3556 Food products machinery                               3931 Musical instruments
 3562 Ball and roller bearings                              3951 Pens and mechanical pencils
 3563 Air and gas compressors
Notes: This figure lists four-digit SIC industries where the U.S. has high OECD import and export
penetration (i.e. greater than the 67th percentile) in 1987. Industries are sorted by SIC code. OECD import
penetration is U.S. import value from OECD countries divided by U.S. consumption. OECD export
penetration is U.S. export value to OECD countries divided by U.S. production.

           Table 2: Industries with High Bilateral OECD Trade
            Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                            26



                               ∆Labor           ∆Labor            ∆Labor           ∆Labor
Regressor                    Productivity     Productivity      Productivity     Productivity

∆Cost                           -0.134           -1.594 ***        -0.164           -1.456 **
                               (0.122)          (0.527)           (0.174)          (0.645)

R2                               0.21             0.18              0.52              0.58




Regressor                       ∆TFP              ∆TFP             ∆TFP               ∆TFP

∆Cost                           -0.098 *         -1.047 ***        -0.127           -0.880 **
                               (0.058)          (0.354)           (0.095)          (0.422)

R2                               0.07             0.09              0.42              0.49


Industry Fixed Effects           SIC2             SIC2             SIC4               SIC4

Year Fixed Effects               Yes               Yes              Yes               Yes
High OECD Penetration
Industries Only                   No               Yes              No                Yes

Observations                       1,004              203             1,004              203
Notes: Industry-level OLS regression results. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at
the four-digit SIC industry level are in parentheses. ∆Labor Productivity is average annualized
change in value added per worker from years t+1 to t+5. Value added and total employment for
each SIC4 industry are from Bartelsman, Becker and Gray (2000). ∆TFP is the average
annualized change in Bartelsman, Becker and Gray (2000) five-factor total factor productivity
from years t+1 to t+5. ∆Cost is the change in total trade costs between years t-5 and t.
Regressions cover the years 1982 to 1997. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the
5% level; *Significant at the 10% level. Coefficients for the regression constant and dummy
variables are suppressed.

            Table 3: Industry Productivity Growth, 1982-97
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                          27




                                            Probit              Probit             Probit             Probit
Regressor                                Plant Death         Plant Death        Plant Death        Plant Death
∆Cost                                       -0.793              -5.233 ***          0.595             -3.358 **
                                           (0.678)             (1.681)            (0.541)            (1.622)
Relative Productivity                       -0.043 ***          -0.023 ***         -0.043 ***         -0.024 ***
                                           (1.492)             (0.008)            (0.004)            (0.007)
   x ∆Cost                                  -0.204              -5.662 ***         -0.117             -5.606 ***
                                           (0.416)             (1.409)            (0.479)            (1.326)
Exporter                                    -0.119 ***          -0.139 ***         -0.121 ***         -0.134 ***
                                           (0.006)             (0.009)            (0.004)            (0.009)
   x ∆Cost                                   0.648               2.786              0.159              3.203
                                           (0.795)             (2.271)            (0.621)            (2.194)
    x ∆Cost x Relative Productivity          0.533               5.024 ***          0.726              4.969 **
                                           (0.733)             (2.208)            (0.786)            (2.079)
Industry Fixed Effects                       SIC2               SIC2               SIC4               SIC4

Year Fixed Effects                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
                                                              High Bilateral                       High Bilateral
Industry Sample                               All                                    All
                                                               OECD Trade                          OECD Trade
Observations                                235,790              30,447           235,790              30,447
Log likelihood                              -133461              -17235           -131096              -17009
Notes: Plant-level probit regression results where the reported coefficients represent the change the
marginal probability of plant death at the mean of the regressors. Robust standard errors adjusted for
clustering at the four-digit SIC industry level are in parentheses. Dependent variable indicates plant death
between years t and t+5. ∆Cost is the change in total trade costs between years t-5 and t. Relative
Productivity is plant's labor productivity relative to its' industry's mean. Exporter is an indicator variable
equalling unity if plant is an exporter in year t. Regressions cover two panels: 1982 to 1987 and 1987 to
1992. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level; *Significant at the 10% level.
Coefficients for the regression constant and dummy variables are suppressed.


                      Table 4: Probability of Death, 1987-97
             Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                        28




                                           Probit            Probit             Probit             Probit
Regressor                               Export Next       Export Next        Export Next        Export Next
∆Cost                                      -0.670            -7.928 ***          0.311             -5.192 ***
                                          (0.467)           (2.438)            (0.309)            (1.727)
Relative Productivity                       0.028 ***         0.070 ***          0.031 ***          0.073 ***
                                          (0.004)           (0.009)            (0.003)            (0.009)
   x ∆Cost                                 -0.472 *          -0.434             -0.527 *           -0.324
                                          (0.277)           (1.548)            (0.305)            (1.628)

Industry Fixed Effects                     SIC2               SIC2               SIC4              SIC4

Year Fixed Effects                          Yes                Yes               Yes                Yes
                                                            High Bilateral                       High Bilateral
Industry Sample                             All                                       All
                                                            OECD Trade                            OECD Trade
Observations                                109,699             10,429             109,699           10,429
Log likelihood                              -42663               -5758              -39294           -5622
Notes: Plant-level probit regression results where the reported coefficients represent the change the
marginal probability of exporting at the mean of the regressors. Robust standard errors adjusted for
clustering at the four-digit SIC industry level are in parentheses. Dependent variable indicates plant becomes
an exporter between years t and t+5. ∆Cost is the change in total trade costs between years t-5 and t.
Relative Productivity is plant's labor productivity relative to its' industry's mean. Regressions cover two
panels: 1982 to 1987 and 1987 to 1992. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level;
*Significant at the 10% level. Coefficients for the regression constant and dummy variables are suppressed.


      Table 5: Probability of Entering the Export Market, 1987-97
              Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                          29




                                            OLS                 OLS                OLS                 OLS
Regressor                                 ∆Exports           ∆Exports            ∆Exports           ∆Exports
∆Cost                                      -1.410 **           -4.331 **          -1.051 *            -0.787
                                          (0.608)             (1.920)            (0.549)             (2.378)

Industry Fixed Effects                      SIC2                SIC2               SIC4               SIC4

Year Fixed Effects                           Yes                Yes                Yes                Yes
                                                            High Bilateral                         High Bilateral
Industry Sample                              All                                       All
                                                            OECD Trade                              OECD Trade
Observations                                35,099              8,068                35,099            8,068
R2                                           0.02               0.02                   0.05             0.03
Notes: Plant-level OLS regression results. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the four-digit
SIC industry level are in parentheses. Dependent variable is plant's normalized real export growth between
years t and t+5. (See text for description of normalization.) ∆Cost is the change in total trade costs between
years t-5 and t. Relative Productivity is plant's labor productivity relative to its' industry's mean. Regressions
cover two panels: 1982 to 1987 and 1987 to 1992. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5%
level; *Significant at the 10% level. Coefficients for the regression constant and dummy variables are
suppressed.


                         Table 6: Growth of Exports, 1987-97
               Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                         30




                                           OLS                 OLS                OLS                OLS
Regressor                              ∆Market Share       ∆Market Share      ∆Market Share      ∆Market Share
∆Cost                                    -0.0010              0.0134            -0.0037            -0.0195
                                        (0.0032)            (0.0276)           (0.0046)           (0.0370)
Relative Productivity                    -0.0005 ***         -0.0009 ***        -0.0005 ***        -0.0090 ***
                                        (0.0001)            (0.0003)           (0.0001)           (0.0003)
   x ∆Cost                                0.0022              0.0661             0.0024             0.0631
                                        (0.0064)            (0.0615)           (0.0065)           (0.0638)
Exporter                                 -0.0001              0.0004 **          0.0001             0.0004 **
                                        (0.0001)            (0.0002)           (0.0001)           (0.0002)
   x ∆Cost                                0.0214 **           0.0600 *           0.0220 **          0.0525 *
                                        (0.0099)            (0.0329)           (0.0110)           (0.0298)
   x ∆Cost x Relative Productivity        0.0384 *            0.0791             0.0391 *           0.0959
                                        (0.0207)            (0.1095)           (0.0206)           (0.1119)
Mills Ratio                              -0.0011 ***         -0.0029 ***        -0.0015 ***        -0.0033 ***
                                        (0.0002)            (0.0007)           (0.0002)           (0.0009)
Industry Fixed Effects                       SIC2               SIC2               SIC4               SIC4

Year Fixed Effects                           Yes                 Yes                Yes                Yes
                                                              High Bilateral                       High Bilateral
Industry Sample                               All                                    All
                                                               OECD Trade                          OECD Trade
Observations                                144,723              18,903            144,723             18,903
R2                                            0.05                 0.02              0.05               0.06
Notes: Plant-level OLS regression results. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering at the four-digit
SIC industry level are in parentheses. Dependent variable is change in plant's domestic market share
between years t and t+5. ∆Cost is the change in total trade costs between years t-5 and t. Relative
Productivity is plant's labor productivity relative to its' industry's mean. Exporter is an indicator variable
equalling unity if plant is an exporter in year t. Mills Ratio controls for plant survival. Regressions cover
two panels: 1982 to 1987 and 1987 to 1992. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level;
*Significant at the 10% level. Coefficients for the regression constant and dummy variables are suppressed.


              Table 7: Change in Domestic Market Share, 1987-97
    Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                             31




                                                Probit                   Probit
Regressor                                    Plant Death              Export Next
∆Cost                                                -5.706   ***        -8.621 ***
                                                    (1.844)             (2.966)
Relative Productivity                                -0.018   **          0.062 ***
                                                    (0.007)             (0.009)
    x ∆Cost                                          -5.793   ***        -1.723
                                                    (1.353)             (1.785)
Relative K/L                                         -0.008   **          0.015 **
                                                    (0.004)             (0.007)
    x ∆Cost                                           0.248               2.518
                                                    (1.407)             (1.554)
Exporter                                             -0.138   ***
                                                    (0.009)
    x ∆Cost                                           3.152
                                                    (2.302)
    x ∆Cost x Relative Productivity                   5.221   **
                                                    (2.292)
    x ∆Cost x Relative K/L                           -0.197
                                                    (2.338)
Industry Fixed Effects                           SIC4                    SIC4
Year Fixed Effects                               Yes                     Yes
Industry Sample                             High Bilateral           High Bilateral
                                            OECD Trade               OECD Trade
Observations                                    30,477                  10,429
Log likelihood                                 -17,245                  -5,768
Notes: Plant-level probit regression results where the reported coefficients represent
the change the marginal probability at the mean of the regressors. Robust standard
errors adjusted for clustering at the four-digit SIC industry level are in parentheses.
Dependent variables are plant death and becomming an exporter between years t and
t+5. DCost is the change in total trade costs between years t-5 and t. Relative
productivity and relative K/L are plant's labor productivity and capital-labor ratio
relative to its' industry's mean. Exporter is an indicator variable equalling unity if
plant is an exporter in year t. Regressions cover two panels: 1982 to 1987 and 1987
to 1992. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at the 5% level; *Significant at
the 10% level. Coefficients for the regression constant and dummy variables are
suppressed

       Table 8: Robustness: Capital Intensity, 1987-97
      Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics                                         32




                                                        Probit             Probit
        Regressor                                    Plant Death       Export Next
        ∆Tariff                                         -1.432           -10.500 ***
                                                       (3.065)            (3.533)
        ∆Freight                                        -3.406 **          -4.635 **
                                                       (1.447)            (2.007)
        Relative Productivity                           -0.022 ***          0.070 ***
                                                       (0.007)            (0.011)
            x ∆Tariff                                   -4.663 *           -2.420
                                                       (2.487)            (3.148)
            x ∆Freight                                  -6.202 ***          0.861
                                                       (1.176)            (2.566)
        Exporter                                        -0.133 ***
                                                       (0.011)
            x ∆Tariff                                    4.009
                                                       (4.243)
            x ∆Freight                                   2.358
                                                       (2.345)
            x ∆Tariff x Relative Productivity            6.013 *
                                                       (3.517)
            x ∆Freight x Relative Productivity           3.450
                                                       (2.976)
        Industry Fixed Effects                           SIC4               SIC4
        Year Fixed Effects                               Yes                Yes
                                                   High Bilateral     High Bilateral
        Industry Sample
                                                    OECD Trade         OECD Trade
        Observations                                    30,447            10,429
        Log likelihood                                 -17,007             -5,620
        Notes: Plant-level probit regression results where the reported
        coefficients represent the change the marginal probability of plant death at
        the mean of the regressors. Robust standard errors adjusted for clustering
        at the four-digit SIC industry level are in parentheses. Dependent
        variables are plant death and becomming an exporter between years t and
        t+5. ∆Tariff and ∆Freight are the change in tariff and freight costs
        between years t-5 and t. Relative Productivity is plant's labor productivity
        relative to its' industry's mean. Exporter is an indicator variable equalling
        unity if plant is an exporter in year t. Regressions cover two panels: 1982
        to 1987 and 1987 to 1992. ***Significant at the 1% level; **Significant at
        the 5% level; *Significant at the 10% level. Coefficients for the regression
        constant and dummy variables are suppressed.



Table 9: Robustness: Separate Tariﬀ and Freight Costs, 1987-97
                                          Falling Trade Costs and Industry Dynamics            33




                                      0.30


                                      0.20
     Trade Cost Change 1982 to 1992




                                      0.10


                                      0.00


                                      -0.10


                                      -0.20


                                      -0.30


                                      -0.40
                                              0.00   0.10   0.20         0.30    0.40   0.50
                                                               1982 Trade Cost




Figure 1: Changes in Trade Costs for Four-Digit SIC Industries, 1982 to
1992
