                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               IDIOSYNCRATIC RISK AND THE
                              CREATIVE DESTRUCTION IN JAPAN

                                            Yasushi Hamao
                                             Jianping Mei
                                              Yexiao Xu

                                         Working Paper 9642
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9642


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




We would like to thank Stephen Brown, Jennifer Carpenter, Kalok Chan, Lewis Chan, Gregory Chow, John
Griffin, John Heaton, Jean Helwege, David Hirshleifer, Burton Hollifield, Douglas Joines, Andrew Karolyi,
Donna Keyser, Burton Malkiel, René Stulz, Jessica Wachter, Karen Wruck, Jeff Wurgler, and participants
at NBER Japan Project Meeting, 13th Annual Conference in Financial Economics and Accounting at
University of Maryland, and seminars at City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology, New York University, Ohio State University, University of Southern California for helpful
discussions and suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those
of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Yasushi Hamao, Jianping Mei, and Yexiao Xu. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Idiosyncratic Risk and the Creative Destruction in Japan
Yasushi Hamao, Jianping Mei, and Yexiao Xu
NBER Working Paper No. 9642
April 2003
JEL No.G2

                                            ABSTRACT


The dramatic rise and fall of the Japanese equity market provides a unique opportunity to examine
market-and firm-specific risks over different market conditions. The price behavior of Japanese

equities in the 1990s is found to resemble that of U.S. equities during the Great Depression. Both
show increasing market volatility and a prolonged large co-movement in equity prices. What is
unique about the Japanese case is the surprising fall in firm-level volatility and turnover in Japanese

stocks after its market crash in 1990. This large decrease in firm-level volatility may have impeded
Japan's capital formation process as it has become more difficult over the past decade for both
investors and managers to separate high quality from low quality firms. Using data on firm
performance fundamentals and corporate bankruptcies, we show that the fall in firm-level volatility

and turnover in Japanese stocks could be attributed to the sharp increase in earnings homogeneity
among Japanese firms and the lack of corporate restructuring.




Yasushi Hamao                          Jianping Mei                    Yexiao Xu
Marshall School of Business            Stern School of Business        School of Management
University of Southern California      New York University             University of Texas at Dallas
hamao@usc.edu                          jmei@stern.nyu.edu              yexiaoxu@utdallas.edu
                                   It was the best of times, it was the worst of times, it was the age of
                                   wisdom, it was the age of foolishness, it was the spring of hope, it was
                                   the winter of despair, we had everything before us, we had nothing
                                   before us, we were all going direct to Heaven, we were all going direct
                                   the other way.     –Charles Dickens, “A Tale of Two Cities”




          The chronic stagnation of the Japanese economy is a big puzzle. Once a shining

light for both developing and industrialized nations, it has now become a basket case for

bubble economies. Twelve years after its stock market bubble burst, a once mighty

country is still operating far below its potential productive capacity. While numerous

arguments have been advanced to explain the recent plight of the Japanese economy,

most have focused on lack of consumer demand, collapsing asset values, and non-

performing loans.1 This paper offers a unique perspective by studying the role of

Japanese equity markets. A comparison of the Japanese case to the U.S. market during

the Great Depression reveals important similarities and differences that may contribute to

our understanding of the prolonged economic stagnation in Japan. Specifically, while

there are great similarities in the market volatility and correlation structure of equities, the

behavior of firm-specific volatility of Japanese equities exhibits important differences.

          Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) were the first to provide a

comprehensive study of idiosyncratic risk for U.S. stocks. During the period from 1962

to 1997, they discovered a noticeable increase in firm-level volatility relative to market

volatility. Moreover, they found that all volatility measures (market, industry, and firm)

move together counter-cyclically in the U.S. In other words, firm-level volatility tends to

increase during a recession. In contrast to the U.S. experience, this paper reports a sharp


1
    See for example, Krugman (1999).

                                                    2
reduction in firm-level volatility immediately following the Japanese market crash, and

an increase in market-wide volatility.

        In order to understand the abnormal behavior of idiosyncratic risk in Japan, we

examine the impact of firm performance fundamentals as well as bankruptcy on firm-

level volatility. We find that fundamental performances of firms are tied more closely

together during the post-crash period. We also discover a positive correlation between

changes in aggregate firm-level volatility and corporate bankruptcies. There is some

circumstantial evidence that increasing bankruptcies after 1997 have led to higher firm-

level volatility. In addition, we find idiosyncratic volatility for firms with business group

affiliations is less responsive to economic conditions than that of firms without such

affiliations. All these results suggest that the sharp fall in firm-level volatility could be

due to group protection.

        This anomalous behavior of firm-level volatility may help us understand the poor

performance of the Japanese economy over the last decade. Disaggregated volatility

measures could impact aggregate output in several ways.

        First, macroeconomic models of “cleansing recessions,” such as those described

by Caballero and Hammour (1994) and Eden and Jovanovic (1994), emphasize the

impact of firm-level volatility on resource allocation during recession. A recession may

increase the arrival rate of information about management quality and thus increase

resource reallocation from low quality to high quality firms. Such resource reallocation

is enhanced in the U.S. because firm-level volatility moves counter-cyclically. To the

extent that Japanese market downturns are accompanied by a reduction in firm-level




                                               3
volatility, it makes it more difficult for investors to distinguish low quality from high

quality firms, thereby reducing the effectiveness of the cleansing mechanism.

         Second, recent finance studies demonstrate that a reduction in firm-level volatility

may affect the capital allocation process. Wurgler (2000) presents evidence that

countries with stock markets that impound more firm-specific information into individual

stock prices exhibit a better allocation of capital. Wurgler suggests that efficient

secondary market prices can help investors and managers distinguish good investments

from bad ones.2 Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2001) also find that firms in industries with

greater firm-specific return variation exhibit a higher quality of capital budgeting, in that

their profitability indices (marginal Q ratios) are closer to one (or to a tax-adjusted

benchmark).

         This paper builds on the growing literature exploring the relationship between

financial markets and economic growth.3 While it is based on the methodology

developed by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), we have introduced a number of

innovations. First, we broaden the approach by considering volatility behavior under

different economic conditions. Second, we use firm-level volatility in the Japanese

market to study the capital allocation issue in down markets. Third, we extend the work

of Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) to cover the U.S. market during the1928-

1946 time period.




2
  See also Morck, Yeung, and Yu (2000) and Durnev, Morck, Yeung, and Zarowin (2002).
3
  King and Levine (1993), Levine (1998), Levine and Zervos (1998), Beck, Levine, and Loayza (1999),
Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998) demonstrate that firms in financially developed countries grow
faster. Rajan and Zingales (1998) show that industries that are externally financed grow faster in financially
developed countries. Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) discover that economic growth increases in states that
have less stringent intrastate banking restrictions.

                                                      4
        The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section I provides a brief

description of the data and the various specifications for estimating firm-specific

volatilities, including a simple market model, the Fama and French (1993) three factor-

model, the Xu and Malkiel (2001) approach, as well as a multi-factor APT model.

Section II presents our main empirical results. In Section III we explore relations

between firm-level volatility and institutional features unique to Japan, such as keiretsu

and the main bank system. Section IV describes the implications of the findings,

particularly in comparison with the pre-WWII U.S. market. Section V offers concluding

comments.



   I.       Measuring Idiosyncratic Volatility

A. Data and Background

        Much of modern finance theory strives to establish a quantitative relationship

between risk and return. In some sense, the success of each theory hinges on measuring

risk. In general, there are two types of risks for individual securities: systematic risk,

which is determined by common risk factors; and idiosyncratic risk, which is the residual

risk. Since idiosyncratic risk can be diversified in standard finance theory, its role has

been largely ignored. Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) suggest that

idiosyncratic volatility has increased substantially over the past decade due to the trading

behavior of institutional investors and the pursuit of growth objectives by many

individual companies (see also Xu and Malkiel, 2001). In this paper, we take a new look

at the evolution of idiosyncratic risk after the Japanese market crash.




                                              5
       In order to examine all stocks listed on the First and Second Sections of the

Tokyo Stock Exchange (TSE), we draw on data from different sources. Monthly data on

individual stock returns and volume and annual financial statements (for book value of

equity) are from the PACAP Japan database. Short-term interest rates are from updates

of the database presented in Hamao (1991). GDP and industrial production data are from

the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry. The Nomura Research Institute

and Tokyo Shoko Research provide bankruptcy data.

       This study covers the period from 1975 to 1999. The entire sample period is

divided into five 5-year periods. The first two periods (1975-1979 and 1980-1984) are

before the bubble; the third (1985-1989) is the bubble period, and the last two periods

(1990-1994 and 1995-1999) correspond to the post-crash era. The numbers of stocks in

each sub-period are 1174, 1275, 1368, 1521, and 1607, respectively.

       While a thorough account of Japanese economic history during this sample period

is beyond the scope of this paper, we provide a brief summary of events as background

information.

       After a post-World War II high-growth period (1956-1973, average annual GDP

growth rate of 9.2%), Japan entered a lower growth period, triggered by the oil crises.

The average annual GDP growth rate during the period from 1974 to 1990 was 3.8%.

Our sample period starts in 1975, which is around the beginning of this medium-growth

period. In the latter period of our sample, Japan’s growth rate dropped further to an

average of 1.3% (1991-2000). This low- or no-growth period corresponds with the

aftermath of the crash of the financial market bubble.




                                            6
       Soon after the Plaza Accord of 1985, the value of the yen rapidly appreciated

against the U.S. dollar from 250yen/$ in May 1985 to 170yen/$ in May 1986, and then to

144yen/$ in May 1987. Facing such currency appreciation, Japan, traditionally

dependent on exports, needed to stimulate domestic demand in order to avoid recession.

The Bank of Japan took a decidedly low interest rate policy. The official discount rate

was lowered to 2.5% in February 1987 and was not raised until 1989. In addition to this

expansive monetary policy, credit in general was easy to obtain. Banks were heavily

protected by the Ministry of Finance through the so-called “convoy system,” which

essentially guaranteed that no bank would fail. Given this implicit government guarantee

and the loose corporate governance that resulted from cross-shareholding, the Japanese

banking system found itself in a situation of moral hazard. Banks and their affiliated

financial institutions easily funded stock and land speculators as well as businesses with

optimistic expansion plans. Stock and land prices soared, but the general price level

remained stable.

       Interest rates were finally raised in 1989 and 1990 in order to contain the bubble.

The market started to crash in 1990, and bank balance sheets deteriorated with bad loans.

Since then Japan has been slow in dealing with the problems that arose in the aftermath

of the bubble collapse. Although the banking problem had been well recognized since

the early 1990s, it was not publicly acknowledged until the first failure of a major bank

(Hokkaido Takushoku Bank, in November 1997). In late 1998, two more major banks

(Long-Term Credit Bank and Nippon Credit Bank) ultimately failed and were

nationalized. In March 1998, 15 major banks reluctantly received injections of tax

money totaling 7.45 trillion yen. The bad loan problem has not improved much since



                                             7
then, as the economy went into another round of recession. Ongoing discussion of the

necessity of a second round of bank bailouts continues. The public press often refers to

the 1990s as Japan’s “lost decade.”



B: Model Specification

        Since our study focuses on idiosyncratic risk, we use idiosyncratic volatility to

measure it directly. Unlike total volatility, uncovering idiosyncratic volatility requires

the use of an asset pricing model. As a start, we use the popular market model to

decompose the total return into systematic and idiosyncratic components. That is, we run

the following model,

      Ri , t − R f , t = α i + β m , i ( R M , t − R f , t ) + ε i , t   ,                                            (1)

where Ri ,t , RM ,t , R f ,t are the individual stock return, the value-weighted market return,

and the risk-free rate, respectively. We measure idiosyncratic volatility using the root

mean square of residuals, ε i,t .

        The market model may be misspecified if we fail to measure the market return or

if other risk factors exist, as suggested by the APT model. Despite the fact that we

cannot perfectly rationalize the factors used in Fama and French (1993), their three-factor

model is considered as “state of art” from an empirical perspective. Furthermore, Chan,

Hamao, and Lakonishok (1991) and Daniel, Titman, and Wei (2000) document that size

and book-to-market ratio are significant determinants of the cross-section of Japanese

stock returns. Therefore, we will also use the three-factor model to decompose the total

return as,

             Ri ,t − R f ,t = α i + β m ,i ( R M ,t − R f ,t ) + β SMB ,i R SMB ,t + β HML ,i R HML ,t + ε i ,t   ,         (2)

                                                                         8
where RSMB,t , RHML,t , are the return proxies for the size variable and the book-to-market

variable, respectively. Again, idiosyncratic volatility is computed as the root mean

square of residuals, ε i,t . We have followed the exact procedure of Fama and French

(1993) to construct the two proxies for the size and book-to-market variables.

         Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001) have proposed a model-free

decomposition procedure based on daily data. This approach applies only to computing

the total aggregate idiosyncratic volatility, which is the focus of this paper. Since this

study uses monthly stock returns, we follow a modified approach developed by Xu and

Malkiel (2001). Specifically, the total aggregate volatility σ TV
                                                               2
                                                                  is calculated by value

weighting an individual stock’s total volatility σ i2,TV . The aggregate idiosyncratic

volatility σ IV2 is then computed as the difference between the total aggregate volatility

and the market volatility.4

         Whether we use the market model or the Fama and French three-factor model, it

is still possible that our measurement of idiosyncratic volatility includes other missed

factors. Therefore, we extend our analysis by utilizing multi-factor asset pricing models.

Recent empirical work by Cremers and Mei (2002) shows a close relationship between

idiosyncratic volatility and turnover in the U.S. data. To confirm our results regarding

Japanese idiosyncratic volatility, this paper also applies the duo-factor model of Lo and

Wang (2000) in constructing idiosyncratic volatility and turnover measures. (See

appendix for details and the estimation procedure).

4
  Since volatilities in general are unobservable, we apply rolling statistics as used in Xu and Malkiel (2001)
to estimate them efficiently. The optimal weights are suggested by Foster and Nelson (1999) with a
functional form of e-αt, where αT= 3 . In particular, we choose window length T=12 for our monthly
return as suggested in Xu and Malkiel (2001). This approach estimates both the total volatility and the
market volatility.

                                                      9
   II.      Time-Varying Market Volatility and Idiosyncratic Volatility

         A fascinating fact about the post-1962 U.S. equity market is that, while the overall

market seems relatively calm, idiosyncratic volatility has shown a steady increase over

the past decade. Although the financial world has become increasingly integrated, the

Japanese equity market has gone through different cycles. It is therefore of interest to

examine this issue with respect to the Japanese equity market.



A. Examining the Overall Market

         We first plot aggregate returns and trading volume of the Tokyo Stock Exchange.

As Figure 1 illustrates, the market experienced a rapid run-up after 1985, and it peaked in

December 1989. This period, now widely known as the “bubble period,” was followed

by a rapid decline of the market and a consequent series of ups and downs. For

simplicity, we will call the 1990-1994 period “the crash period” and the 1995-1999

period “the post-crash period.” In the 1990s, the index value stayed between ½ to 2/3 of

its peak and there was a sharp fall in trading volume.

         [Insert Figure 1 approximately here]

         Table 1 provides summary statistics of the data. The first item reported in Table

1 is the mean and standard deviation of the value-weighted market return ( RM ). The

mean market return is positive in the first three periods, with a high 2.8% per month

return in the 1985-1989 period. In the last two periods, however, the market on average

earned negative returns. The standard deviation of market return shows a rising trend.

Next, we report the cross-sectional median, mean, and standard deviation of individual


                                             10
                                     _                                 _
stock returns averaged over time ( Ri ). The mean and median of Ri show a similar

pattern to that of the market return, but the standard deviation does not have a clear-cut

trend as the market index does.

        [Insert Table 1 approximately here]

        The next three columns of Table 1 report the results of the market model

estimation for individual stocks. We first notice a significant reduction in the cross-

sectional variation of firm betas, βi,CAPM, from 0.447 to 0.321 from the bubble period to

the crash period. We also note a remarkable change in the R2 of the market model. On

average it is 13% and 10% in the earlier, pre-bubble periods, but increases to 17% during

the bubble period, and jumps dramatically to 51% in the period immediately following

the market peak. Although it decreases somewhat in the last period, the market model

explains on average 39% of the variation of individual stocks.

        One might suspect that the market “bubble” caused stocks to move in the same

direction, as investors in general may have expected similar returns on stocks with

different characteristics. But the further increased explanatory power of the value-

weighted index after the burst of the bubble indicates that Japanese stocks started to move

together with the whole market, even when the market started to decline and the economy

suffered from recession. In these years, individual stocks lost much of their contribution

of idiosyncratic risk to total risk. This is in contrast to results obtained in the U.S. as

reported by Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001), who find that firm-level volatility

is higher in NBER-dated recessions.

        The sixth column in Table 1 shows the cross-sectional distribution of the

idiosyncratic component of volatility ( σ i, IV ), as measured by the mean square of

                                              11
residuals. We note a slightly increased idiosyncratic volatility in the bubble period

(0.106), followed by a sharp fall to 0.080 in the crash period, and then a recovery to 0.093

in the post-crash period. In addition, we observe more than a 50% decrease in the

variation of σ i, IV during the crash period, dropping from 0.039 to 0.024. Total volatility

( σ i,TV ) reported in the seventh column is the return volatility of individual stocks

measured over each period. While total volatility changed little from the bubble to the

post-crash periods, we notice a 25% drop in the variation of σ i,TV during the crash period,

falling from 0.038 to 0.029.

        Table 1 also presents summary statistics for market capitalization and turnover.

The size of Japanese companies increased during the first four periods, but decreased in

the last period. Average turnover η i of stocks was high (0.056) until the collapse of the

bubble (1989) and then decreased significantly to 0.027 afterwards. In addition, there is

also a significant drop in the variation of η i , changing from 0.039 in the bubble period to

0.022 in the crash period. The simultaneous fall in σ i, IV , the variation of σ i,TV , and the

variation of η i all suggest a much stronger presence of the market factor in both stock

returns and trading volume during the crash period.

        To further investigate the significant shift in the characteristics of Japanese firms

during the bubble-burst period, we performed simple mean tests for levels and F tests for

variances for each sub-period in comparison with the bubble-burst period. The results of

these tests are presented in Table 2. First, as evidenced by the low variation in beta (see

third column in Table 2), differences among systematic risk of individual firms appear to

have dropped significantly. At the same time, both the level of aggregate idiosyncratic


                                               12
volatility and the differences in idiosyncratic volatilities among different firms have gone

down significantly over this period. This suggests that each firm’s contribution to market

risk and its innovative activities are alike.

        [Insert Table 2 approximately here]



B. The Dynamic Behavior of Market and Idiosyncratic Volatility

        The summary statistics provide a strong indication of the differences in behavior

of the volatility components. Figure 2 shows the 12-month moving average of both the

monthly market volatility and the monthly aggregated idiosyncratic volatility. Through

this visual presentation, we can detect a trend of increasing market volatility (the solid

line) with a large jump at the time of the crash in 1990/1991. Consistent with the

summary statistics presented in Table 1, volatility increased during the bubble period as

compared to previous years, and remained higher during the period of market decline in

the 1990s.

        [Insert Figure 2 approximately here]

        While market-wide volatility in Japan appears to have increased after 1985, we

also see a decreasing trend in the behavior of idiosyncratic volatility. There is, however,

a noticeable jump in the last two years, during the period when the Japanese financial

system experienced unprecedented stress and reorganization (e.g., bank failures and

government bailouts).5 Aggregate trading volume was also higher during the boom

period, but since then has decreased to the lowest level in the entire sample. These

figures are shown in Figure 1 in monthly frequency.


5
 Kang and Stulz (2000) document that bank-dependent firms suffered more than others in Japan in early
1990s.

                                                  13
        Both market and aggregated idiosyncratic volatilities seem to be quite persistent.

The observed trends may be due to persistency in the data, or the volatilities could be

non-stationary. Therefore, a careful econometric analysis is necessary for drawing any

definite conclusions. Since volatility is non-negative, we test the unit root hypothesis on

log volatilities. In particular, the following model is estimated in order to apply the

augmented-Dickey-Fuller test:

      ln(σt) = µ + ρ ln(σt-1) + γ t + α1 ∆ln(σt-1) + … + α6 ∆ln(σt-6) + εt   .        (3)

We first study the whole sample period from 1975 to 1999. Since most of the abnormal

behavior in idiosyncratic volatility occurs in the post-bubble era, we also test

idiosyncratic volatility for the sub-sample period from 1985 to 1997. All results are

reported in Table 3. Apparently the second stock market crash in October 1990 had a

larger impact than the first crash in October 1987. This raises the issue of whether this

one-time event may be overshadowing the rest of the sample and distorting some of the

results. In order to reduce the impact of this outlier, we replace the October 1990

observation with the second largest observation in the data set. This admittedly ad hoc

procedure allows us to decrease the influence of the crash while allowing it to remain in the

sample as an important event.

        [Insert Table 3 approximately here]

        For market volatility, the augmented Dickey-Fuller test clearly rejects the unit

root hypothesis at a 5% significance level, which means that market volatility is in fact

stationary. At the same time, the linear trend is positive and statistically significant at a

1% level. Thus, in contrast, the aggregate idiosyncratic volatility ln(σIV) appears to be

non-stationary, with augmented Dickey-Fuller test statistics of -18.75 compared with the

critical value of -24.5. In addition, the trend coefficient is not statistically different from

                                                  14
zero. This conclusion is robust to different specifications of idiosyncratic volatility

measures, such as ln(σCAPM,IV) and ln(σFF3F,IV), as shown in Table 3.

         As Figure 2 shows, idiosyncratic volatility has behaved very differently in the

post-bubble period. The augmented Dickey-Fuller test strongly rejects the unit root

hypothesis. At the same time, there is a statistically significant downward trend in the

idiosyncratic volatility. This is also robust to other measures of idiosyncratic volatilities.

Therefore, while the aggregate stock market volatility in Japan has trended upwards over

the years, firm-level volatility decreased during the 1990s, except for two short episodes

coinciding with the rapid decline of the market in1990/91, and the bank failures in 1998.



C. Rising Correlation among Stock Returns and Turnover

         Although the evidence on decreasing idiosyncratic volatility and increasing

market volatility is strong, we can further examine the issue from the perspective of the

explanatory power of the market model, which is the R2 measure.6 Apparently, the

dispersion between market volatility and idiosyncratic volatility implies an increase in the

R2 for the market model. In Figure 3a, we show the dynamics of average R2 statistics

from the market model. R2s for both returns and turnover are reported. At time t, the

return R2 is computed based on estimating the market model using the previous 24

months of monthly data, and the turnover R2 is computed in a similar way from a single

factor model. We can see the return R2s peaked during 1994-1995 and then declined in

the most recent years, but still remain higher than the level of the 1970s and 1980s.

         [Insert Figure 3a and 3b approximately here]

6
 R2 = 1-(idiosyncratic volatility)/(total volatility). Recently, there is an increasing application of average R2
as a measure of market information inefficiency (see Morck, Yeung, and Yu, 2000; Durnev, Morck, Yeung,
and Zarowin, 2002; and Wurgler, 2000). Higher R2 implies that the market is less informationally efficient.

                                                      15
       Perhaps it is more interesting to examine the changing volatility issue from the

correlation perspective. If market volatility reflects the average covariance among

individual stock returns, the observed phenomenon of decreasing idiosyncratic volatility

could only happen when the average correlation increases. We present correlations

among individual stock excess returns and volume in Figure 3b. At any time t, we

compute the average of pair-wise correlations using the previous 24 months of monthly

data. As the figure shows, we find a clear pattern in the evolution of return and volume

correlations: approximately 0.10 for returns and 0.05 for volume in the 1970s and 1980s.

But in the 1990s, after the collapse of the bubble, the correlations increase significantly,

to as high as 0.50 for returns, and 0.20 for volume.

       The correlation picture uncovers important characteristics about the Japanese

market. During the decline of the market and the contraction of the economy, stocks in

the Japanese market lost their individuality and started to move together, making it more

difficult to separate the good firms from the bad. Faced with stocks that were not very

distinguishable from each other, more and more companies were treated like “lemons” by

Japanese market investors. This behavior may have prevented capital from flowing into

good companies to support innovations and continued competitiveness, thus weakening

their ability to sustain economy-wide shocks. The resulting increased vulnerability of

firms may have induced higher overall market volatility. As Figure 2 suggests, Japanese

investors have faced rising aggregate market risk in the 1990s.



D. Idiosyncratic Risk and R2 in a Multi-Factor Model




                                             16
         We now confirm the above results by explicitly testing the duo-factor model

(outlined in the Appendix) using monthly returns and turnover data for TSE securities

from 1975 to 1999. Table 4 provides the results of the test across a number of factors in

excess return and turnover, including incremental R2 from the k-th factor of the return

and turnover for models for 1 to 10 factors. The first principal component of returns

explains 14% and 11% of the normalized excess returns in the 1975-1979 and 1980-1984

periods, which increases to 18% during the bubble period, followed by dramatic increases

to 52% (1990-1994) and 39% (1995-1999) in the post-bubble periods. These findings

indicate that during a period of market decline, excess returns are largely driven by a

single systematic factor, and are consistent with our previous results showing rising

market risk during the post-bubble period.7

         [Insert Table 4 approximately here]

         The last column of Table 4 shows the average R2 of regressing individual stock

returns and turnover on their corresponding systematic factors for each period. In the

first period, a three-factor model explains on average 25% of variation of stock returns

and a four-factor model explains 31% of variation of turnovers. These R2s go up slightly

for the 1985-1989 period, suggesting a small rise in commonality in time-series

variations of both stock returns and volumes. However, we find a significant increase in

average R2s in the 1990-1994 and 1995-1999 periods for both returns and turnovers.

This indicates that during the post-bubble period, there is a sharp decrease in contribution



7
  Table 4 also reports the number of factors in excess returns and turnover, determined by using a loss
function suggested by Xu (2001). Our results show that there are 3 factors in excess returns in Japan,
except for the 1990-94 period where there are 4 factors. The number of factors in excess returns remains
relatively stable, whereas for turnover, it varies between 3 and 6. However, our main interest here is to
derive measures of idiosyncratic volatility and not to provide a test of the hypothesis that there is the same
number of factors in return and turnover in the duo-factor model.

                                                      17
of idiosyncratic risk in stock returns and trading volume, further confirming our previous

results.

           Cremers and Mei (2002) report a close relationship between idiosyncratic

volatility and idiosyncratic turnover, based on the rationale that idiosyncratic volatility

tends to be driven by firm-specific information on firm cash flows and risk, which also

drives firm-specific trading volume. To the extent that Japanese idiosyncratic turnover

displays a similar reduction during the crash period, our results showing a surprising

decrease in firm-level volatility during the same time period are further strengthened.

           In summary, by examining the Japanese stock market over three periods (pre-

bubble, bubble and post-crash), we have documented different levels of total and

idiosyncratic volatility over time. Total volatility increased after the collapse of the

bubble, but, at the same time, idiosyncratic components significantly decreased. This

stands in sharp contrast with the post-1962 U.S. market where market-level volatility

does not show significant change over time, although firm-level volatility increases over

time, especially during recessions (Campbell, Lettau, Malkiel, and Xu (2001)).



    III.      Why Did Idiosyncratic Volatility Fall after 1990?


           We have so far documented increased market-wide volatility and decreased firm-

level volatility in Japan. In this section, we relate these findings to the economic

environment of Japan, and particularly to some institutional factors that may be driving

these phenomena.



A: An Introduction to “Japanese-Style” Capitalism

                                              18
       The post-WWII Japanese economic system was centered on a “main bank”

system in which major banks played an important, and quasi-public-sector role in

supplying much needed capital for building the economy after the devastation and

destruction of the war. Thus, major banks were at the core of all Japanese industrial

groups (keiretsu). Main banks not only made loans to the keiretsu group, but also owned

up to 10% (5% after 1977) of client firms (many of them in the keiretsu group).

Furthermore, main banks often sent directors to borrowing firms, especially when they

were experiencing financial difficulties, and the monitoring capability of banks was

believed to be effective (Aoki, Patrick, and Sheard, 1994). Main banks also provided

much-needed liquidity for financially distressed firms, thus reducing the cost of financial

distress (Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein, 1990). In addition, since bankruptcy

procedures in Japan were quite time-consuming and expensive, and once filed, conferred

immediate control to court-appointed trustees, managers had a strong incentive not to

resort to them. As a result, as shown later, there were very few cases of bankruptcies of

large, publicly traded firms in Japan.

       While the Japanese model appeared to function well through the high-growth

period, one can argue that it was not able to meet the challenges of the changing

environment in the 1990s. Instead, the system created an excuse for staying with the

status quo rather than implementing timely reforms. After the collapse of the bubble,

many corporations faced problems, such as high leverage resulting from overly optimistic

expansion plans during the bubble period, decreased collateral value owing to the decline

in land values, and decline in revenues due to economic slowdown. However, corporate

managers did not address these issues quickly. It is possible that their previous strong



                                            19
ties with main banks led them to believe that negotiated financial support, rather than

legal bankruptcy procedures, would be possible and desirable.8

         Financial regulators were also slow to reveal the problem of non-performing

loans. Rather than facing the issue, they chose to use “easy” criteria for classifying non-

performing loans in their published statistics, delaying immediate and necessary reforms.

Since banks were not directly writing off the non-performing loans, troubled borrowers

were not forced to go bankrupt. Even firms widely recognized to be in serious financial

distress for more than five years (e.g., large construction companies and some retail

concerns) are still receiving support from banks. The practice of lifetime employment in

large corporations is another element that has made it difficult for the skilled labor force

to move from inefficient to more productive sectors.



B. The Relationship between Bankruptcy and Idiosyncratic Risk

         Protection among keiretsu and main bank affiliated firms and the lack of reform

in Japan’s corporate sector may have led to a lack of “creative destruction” in the

Japanese economy. Figures 4a and 4b compare bankruptcies of all firms in the economy

and those of the Tokyo Stock Exchange listed firms.9 As the figures reveal, the number

of bankruptcies for firms listed on the Tokyo Stock Exchange is much smaller than the

number for the entire economy. Among the former, there were only one to three

bankruptcies per year from 1975 to 1996, with the exception of 1984 when there were


8
  Nissan Motor, for example, asked for help from its main bank (Industrial Bank of Japan) over several
years until at the end, in 1999, the French automaker Renault bought a substantial share of Nissan and sent
a CEO to initiate a drastic restructuring. At the time of this transaction, analysts widely agreed that Nissan
was actually insolvent.
9
  For the economy as a whole, the number of bankruptcies increased gradually from 1975 to 1984, but
decreased during the “bubble” boom period (1985-1990). The number started to increase again after the
collapse of the bubble.

                                                     20
five bankruptcies. In many years there were no bankruptcies at all. Indeed, from 1987 to

1991 (from the boom period to the beginning of the declining period), for five

consecutive years, there were no bankruptcies. This low bankruptcy phenomenon

continued until 1996, well into the period of economic downturn. It was only after 1997

that the number of bankruptcies started to increase, but even then the number remained

below 10 per year. This is in sharp contrast with the U.S., where in 2000 (2001), there

were 176 (257) bankruptcy filings of publicly traded companies.10 Bankruptcies of listed

firms in Japan are particularly low since such firms are considered to have social and

economic importance, and all parties involved (banks, other businesses, and regulators)

deem them to be “too large to fail.”

           [Insert Figure 4a,b approximately here]

           The Japanese stock market mirrored this period of procrastination. Since

immediate restructuring of corporations and banks was not forthcoming, investors may

have come to expect a prolonged period of corporate “bailouts and rescues” where cash

flows from good firms are diverted to save weak firms in the same business group and to

converge economic risk. Thus, we should observe a convergence of stock market returns

and a reduction in firm-level volatility. This implies a positive relation between number

of bankruptcies and idiosyncratic risk, and a negative relation between number of

bankruptcies and market co-movement.

           [Insert Table 5 approximately here]

           To confirm the above hypothesis, we regress changes in firm-level volatility on

the number of corporate bankruptcies of TSE listed firms and the annual growth rate of

GDP. We use annual data for this regression and report the results in Table 5. Changes
10
     See http://www.bankruptcydata.com/

                                                 21
in annual aggregate idiosyncratic risk are computed as changes in the 12-month average

of the cross-sectional mean of idiosyncratic volatility obtained from the market model.

For the full sample period, we find a weak positive relation between changes in firm-

level volatility and corporate bankruptcies; the higher number of bankruptcies is related

to higher idiosyncratic volatility. We also regress changes in average R2 and average

pair-wise correlations on the number of corporate bankruptcies of TSE firms and GDP

growth. Generally we find a negative relation between number of bankruptcies and

changes in average R2 and average pair-wise correlations. However, the relation between

average R2 and GDP growth is mixed.11



C: The Impact of Business Group Affiliation on Idiosyncratic Risk

        We have argued that a lack of creative destruction (bankruptcies) may have

caused Japanese firm-level volatility to decrease during the 1990s. We now turn our

attention to differences in the behavior of idiosyncratic volatility of keiretsu and non-

keiretsu firms, and firms with and without main banks. Our purpose is to examine

whether these unique Japanese institutional features play a role in determining the firm-

level components of volatility and volume.

        We first divide our sample into firms that belong to the six major keiretsu groups

(Fuji, Mitsui, Mitsubishi, Daiichi-Kangyo, Sumitomo, and Sanwa), and firms that do not.

We also divide the sample into firms that have a main bank affiliation and firms that do

not. The classification is based on 1998 data in Kigyo Keiretsu Soran (1999), published

by Toyo Keizai Shinpo Sha. We compute individual idiosyncratic components of return


11
  We also run these regressions for the 1990-1999 sub-period. The coefficients show a pattern consistent
with the full sample. These results are available upon request.

                                                   22
volatility and volume of these firms, and average them across firms within each category

(keiretsu firms and non-keiretsu firms; and firms with main banks and firms without main

banks) to obtain aggregate idiosyncratic components.12 We then regress the difference in

aggregate idiosyncratic components between non-keiretsu firms and keiretsu firms on the

monthly growth rate of industrial production (IP). We include an intercept to control for

the difference in idiosyncratic components due to differences in industrial composition.

        Table 6 reports regression results for the difference in idiosyncratic components

of return volatility and volume between non-keiretsu firms and keiretsu firms (Panel A),

and between firms with main banks and firms without main banks (Panel B). We report

results for before the collapse of the bubble (high- and medium-economic growth

periods), and the post-bubble (low-growth period). Noting that there is a reversal in the

pattern of idiosyncratic risk around 1997, we report results for the 1990-1996 period.

        The results for the 1977-1989 period in Panel A show a generally positive relation

between IP growth and the difference in idiosyncratic components; an increase in IP

growth tends to increase the difference of firm-level volatility between non-keiretsu and

keiretsu firms. A higher growth rate of the IP implies higher firm-level volatility and

volume of non-keiretsu firms compared to keiretsu firms. This means that, in this sub-

period, when economic growth is at a high rate, there tends to be greater disparity of

stock performance among non-keiretsu firms. Less disparity among the performance of

stocks of keiretsu firms during the high-growth period implies the presence of resource

sharing among these firms, whereas independent firms who do not share resources

experience a higher degree of disparity in volatility. Panel B shows that the same results


12
  We have also used other single- and multi-factor models to compute idiosyncratic components. The
results are quite similar and available upon request from the authors.

                                                  23
hold for firms without main banks versus firms with main banks, and all coefficients are

significant.

           When we run the same regressions for the 1990-1996 (post-crash period), the sign

of the coefficients flips to negative, and they are all significant except for one case. In

this sub-period, a decrease in IP growth tends to increase the difference of firm-level

components between non-keiretsu and keiretsu firms (Panel A) and between firms

without main banks and firms with main banks (Panel B). The lower the IP growth, the

higher the firm-level components of non-keiretsu firms (firms without main banks)

compared to keiretsu firms (firms with main banks). This means that in this sub-period

when the rate of economic growth is low, there tends to be greater disparity of stock

performance among non-keiretsu firms and firms without main banks, compared to their

counterparts. These findings suggest that keiretsu firms and firms with main banks are

less sensitive to negative economic conditions compared to independent firms.



D: Increasing Homogeneity of Economic Performance among Japanese Firms

           While the above study has documented a falling firm-level volatility in Japanese

stock returns, one may wonder if this phenomenon is driven by the underlying

fundamentals of firm performance. To address this question, Figures 5a and 5b report the

average 10-year pair-wise return on asset (ROA) correlations and cross-sectional standard

deviation of ROAs over the sample period.13 Since Japanese corporations report earnings

on an annual basis, we are limited to annual ROA figures. The most striking result

shown in Figure 5a is the 300% increase (from 0.05 to 0.23) in the average 10-year ROA

correlations for all firms in the economy. This suggests that in the 1990s, the fortunes of
13
     We use ROA rather than return on equity (ROE) since leverage may differ across firms.

                                                     24
Japanese firms were tied together very tightly and their fundamental economic

performance moved much more in lock step as compared to the pre-crash period. Since

stock returns are related to firm performance through earnings and dividends, the

dramatic rise in ROA correlations appears to be an important driver to rising return

correlations and falling idiosyncratic volatility.

         Another interesting fact revealed in Figure 5a is that group affiliated firms

(keiretsu and main bank (MB)) have higher ROA correlations in the post-bubble period,

suggesting that the fundamental performances of group firms were also more closely tied

together during this period. From Figure 5b, which presents the standard deviations of

ROA for both non-keiretsu and keiretsu firms, we can observe that the standard

deviations of ROA for non-keiretsu firms tend to be higher than those of keiretsu firms. 14

Thus, there is less variation of firm performance among keiretsu firms.

         [Insert Figure 5a and 5b approximately here]

         As shown in Figures 2 and 3, firm-level volatility increased after 1997. Although

the small number of observations does not allow us to conduct a statistical test, it appears

that the increase in firm-level volatility is related to the recent increase in bankruptcies

and discussions in the Japanese parliament on the adoption of a new bankruptcy law.15

As we can see from Figure 5, the standard deviation of ROA had the largest jump for

keiretsu firms after 1997, when several large banks and firms were allowed to fail.

Moreover, there is some anecdotal evidence that the market actually looks forward to


14
   We have also performed the same analysis on the ROAs of firms with and without main banks
affiliations. The results, however, are mixed for the whole sample period.
15
   In April 2000, another bankruptcy procedure under a new law (minji-saisei-hou) was introduced. This
procedure requires fewer legal steps, and once bankruptcy is filed, managers can stay during the
restructuring. Although the number of filings is still low, there were six (seven) cases out of ten (nine)
bankruptcies in 2000 (2001). This may contribute to the future improvement of information efficiency
measures in the Japanese market.

                                                    25
bankruptcy filing of failing firms, rather than prolonged rescue negotiation involving

their main banks.16 On the other hand, when Daiei, a large retail chain, and its banks

agreed on a rescue plan including a 400 trillion yen debt-equity swap on January 15,

2002, the Nikkei average went down by 1% and “the rumor (of the rescue) pushed down

bank stocks by 7% over the previous week.”17



     IV.      The Impact of Financial Markets on Economic Activity

A. A Possible Vicious Cycle in the Capital Formation Process

           The above analysis has demonstrated that a lack of corporate bankruptcy and the

presence of group protection may have contributed to an increase in Japanese equity co-

movement. The role of equity markets, however, is not just a passive reflection of the

Japanese economy.

           Numerous theoretical and empirical studies have demonstrated that equity

markets help improve the capital allocation process, and thus contribute to economic

growth. One theory is that efficient secondary market prices help investors separate good

from bad investments through a mechanism like Tobin’s Q. Another is that lenders and

intermediaries use book-to-market ratios to screen out bad credits (Altman, 2002).

Agency theories argue that pressure from external investors, or managerial ownership,

encourages managers to pursue value-maximizing investment policies (Jensen, 1986).18


16
   For example, when Mycal, a large supermarket chain, filed for minji-saisei-hou bankruptcy on
September 17, 2001, with 74 trillion yen in debt, the Nikkei average went up by 4% because of “the
expectation in the market that the disposition of bad debts by banks would accelerate (Nihon Keizai
Shinbun (Japan Economic Journal), September 17, 2001). A similar market reaction was observed when a
construction company, Sato Kogyo, filed for bankruptcy on March 4, 2002, with a total debt amount of 560
trillion yen, and the Nikkei average went up by 5%.
17
   Nihon Keizai Shinbun (Japan Economic Journal), January 15, 2002.
18
   La Porta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1997) show that effective laws against misuse of
minority investors’ funds are a key determinant of their supply of finance to good projects.

                                                  26
Recent empirical work by Wurgler (2000) demonstrates that equity markets actually do

improve the allocation of capital. Using a sample of 65 countries, he shows that

countries with stock markets that impound more firm-specific information into individual

stock prices – in other words, those that have a smaller R2– do exhibit a better allocation

of capital, …“which appears to be particularly useful for limiting investment in declining

industries.” Durnev, Morck, and Yeung (2001) also find that firms in industries in which

firm-specific return variation is larger exhibit a higher quality of capital budgeting, in the

sense that their profitability indices (marginal Q ratios) are closer to one.

       These results suggest that equity markets play an active role in the allocation of

capital itself. While misallocation of capital by major banks and keiretsu may cause an

increase in Japanese equity co-movement, this in turn could lead to further misallocation

of capital by firms and investors. As discussed in section III, large equity price co-

movement makes it difficult for investors to distinguish good from bad firms. As a

result, some healthy firms will find it difficult to get financing and stay competitive. This

in turn will lead to more “rescues and bailouts” by business groups, which will trigger

further reductions in firm-level volatility, thus leading to a vicious cycle in the capital

formation process.

       We conjecture that this vicious cycle of capital misallocation may help explain the

long stagnation of the Japanese economy. Fundamentally, the strength of an economy

can be measured by whether it allocates its scarce capital efficiently. Capital should be

invested in firms that are expected to have high returns, and withdrawn from firms with

poorer prospects. To the extent that the Japanese economy continues to misallocate large

amounts of scarce capital, its recovery will remain illusive, despite its large capital



                                              27
endowment. While Japanese corporations and government recently have taken steps to

address the issue of corporate reorganization, these results indicate that firm-level

volatility in Japan is still too low (and R2 is too high) compared to other developed

countries, indicating that Japan’s corporate restructuring may still have a long way to

go.19



B. Comparison with the U.S. Market in the Pre-War Period

         In the aftermath of the 1929 crash, the U.S. experienced one of the most severe

and prolonged recessions in its history. Thousands of banks failed, one quarter of its

labor force was unemployed, and the economy did not return to its pre-crash peak until

World War II. While the recent Japanese recessions are much more moderate compared

to the U.S. experience, they have nonetheless lasted on and off for over 10 years. An

interesting question is: what are the similarities between the world’s two most prolonged

recessions?

         [Insert Figure 6a,b approximately here]

         To answer this question, we have computed monthly market volatility and

idiosyncratic volatility from monthly returns of individual stocks using U.S. data from

1928 to 1946, following the same methodology as in Xu and Malkiel (2001). We have

also computed average pair-wise correlation and R2. The results are presented in Figures

6a and 6b. The periods between the two vertical lines are recessions.

         While there are some distinctive features of each market, there is a striking

similarity between the average R2s (and average pair-wise correlations) of the post-1990


19
  At the end of 1999, the average R2 of the Japanese market was 0.25, still much higher than that of the
U.S. (about 0.08 over the 1993-1998 period) and its own pre-crash historical level.

                                                    28
Japanese equity market and the post-1929 U.S. equity market. We observe a large

increase in the average R2s for both markets. While it is reasonable to expect average R2

to increase during a market crash, it is noteworthy that the average R2s for both countries

stayed at high levels for such a long period of time. The average R2 for returns in Japan

exceeded 30% between 1992 and 1999. The average R2 for returns in the U.S. exceeded

40% between 1930 and 1935 and remained above that level between 1937 and 1941.

            There is no doubt that the underlying economic factors driving the large increases

in average R2 are different in the two countries. As we can clearly see from Figure 6a

and 6b, the rising average R2 in the U.S. is accompanied by a dramatic rise in overall

market volatility, possibly due to widespread bank failures and corporate bankruptcies.20

In comparison, the rising average R2 in Japan is accompanied by rapidly falling firm-

level volatility, possibly due to corporate “bailouts” and lack of reorganization. In both

cases, high market volatility could affect capital investment by increasing the cost of

capital. While the increase in market volatility is less dramatic in Japan than it was in the

U.S. in the 1930s, the accompanying sharp fall in firm-level volatility made it equally

difficult for Japanese investors to separate high quality from low quality firms. This may

have had a further adverse impact on the capital formation process and thus worsened the

overall economic conditions.



       V.      Conclusion

            This paper documents an abnormal reduction in firm-level volatility after the

Japanese stock market crash. We find a significant drop in the variation of systematic

risk across firms and a sharp increase in Japanese equity co-movement. In order to
20
     See Bernanke (1981) on the possible cause of U.S. depression.

                                                     29
understand the abnormal behavior of idiosyncratic risk in Japan, we examine the impact

of firm fundamentals as well as bankruptcy on firm-level volatility. We find that firm

fortunes were tied together very tightly during the post-crash period. We discover a

positive correlation between changes in aggregate firm-level volatility and corporate

bankruptcies. There is some circumstantial evidence that increasing bankruptcies after

1997 have led to higher firm-level volatility. In addition, we find that idiosyncratic

volatility for firms with business group affiliations is less responsive to economic

conditions than that of firms without such affiliations. These results suggest that the

sharp fall in firm-level volatility could be due to group protection.

       Based on these results, we hypothesize that the lack of “creative destruction” may

have contributed to an increase in Japanese equity co-movement and added to the

difficulty of sorting out healthy firms in the capital allocation process. Interestingly, we

find that the volatility behavior of Japanese equities resembles that of U.S. equities

during the Great Depression, both of which show a prolonged large co-movement in

equity prices. In both cases, there seem to be deficiencies in the capital formation

process, which may have contributed to the worsening of the overall economic

conditions.

       To obtain a more accurate measure of idiosyncratic risk, this paper has made a

number of methodological innovations. First, we have introduced volume into our asset

pricing studies. Because of the close relationship between idiosyncratic risk and

idiosyncratic volume, examining the time-variation of idiosyncratic volume allows us to

better understand firm-level volatility in the Japanese equity market. Second, as a

robustness check, we employ the duo-factor model of Lo and Wang (2000), which



                                             30
provides an alternative measure of firm-level volatility and trading volume in a multi-

factor setting. Third, we use a recently developed consistent statistic by Xu (2001) to

determine the number of factors in the duo-factor model. This could provide a more

accurate measure of idiosyncratic volatility in a multifactor model.

        This paper raises many interesting research questions. First, while our results

indicate an increase in Japanese equity co-movement and a potential negative impact on

its capital allocation, it would be interesting to examine whether this increase actually

leads to reduced efficiency in Japanese firm capital budgeting. Second, our results

indicate that a reduction in idiosyncratic volatility is accompanied by rising overall

market volatility in Japan. It would be useful to examine whether changes in

idiosyncratic risk have affected asset pricing.21 We leave these topics for future research.




21
  Goyal and Santa-Clara (2002), for example, have examined the issue of whether idiosyncratic risk has
affected asset pricing in the U.S.

                                                   31
Appendix

        Let us briefly introduce the framework we adopt from Lo and Wang (2000).

Assume that asset i returns are generated by an approximate K-factor model:

        Rit = Et(Rit ) + f1t βi1 + ... + fKt βiK + eit      i = 1,...,N;   t = 1,...,T ,   (A1)

where ft '=(f1t,...,fKt) is a vector of unobservable pervasive shocks, (βi1,..., βiK) is a vector

of factor loadings which are constant over the sample period, and eit represents an

idiosyncratic risk specific to asset j at time t. As discussed in Chamberlain (1983), the

above economy implies the following linear pricing relationship if there exist K well-

diversified portfolios:

        Et( Rit ) = rft + λ1t βi1 +...+ λKt βiK,                                           (A2)

where (λ1t,..., λKt) is a vector of risk premiums corresponding to the pervasive shocks

(f1t,...,fKt), and rft is the return on a riskless asset.

        Parallel to Equation (A1), Lo and Wang (2000) derive the proposition that the

turnover of each stock also has an approximate K’-factor structure under certain

regularity conditions. More formally, we have:

        τit = τi + δi1g1t + ... + δiKgK’t + ξit                                            (A3)

Here, δik is the exposure of firm i to economy–wide liquidity shocks gkt. gkt could be

functions of fkt but it is not specified in the model and τi is a constant. ξit has mean zero

and it is assumed to be orthogonal to gkt. Since the models of (A1) and (A3) are both

multi-factor models, we will simply call them the duo-factor model for return and

volume. Our objective here is to use (A1) and (A3) to derive alternative measures of

idiosyncratic volatility and turnover.


                                                   32
         An important issue in measuring idiosyncratic volatility and turnover is the

correct identification of the number of factors in (A1) and (A3). Until now, this crucial

parameter is often assumed, rather than determined by the data.22 This paper introduces a

formal statistical procedure that can consistently estimate the number of factors from

observed data. This procedure is developed by Xu (2001) under the assumption that both

N and T converge to infinity. This extension is of empirical relevance because it fully

exploits the advantage of a large panel data set. In addition, our empirical study employs

an approximate factor structure for both returns and trading volume. Our results hold

under heteroskedasticity in both the time and cross-section dimensions, thus rendering

them more general than the results of Connor and Korajczyk (1993) who assume

homoskedasticity over time.




22
  Brown and Weinstein (1983) emphasize the importance of obtaining correct estimates on the number of
factors. They point out that the common practice of using an over-estimate can cause spurious rejection of
asset pricing models. They note: “…the rejection of the five and seven factor versions is to be expected if
the three factor version is correct.”

                                                    33
References

Altman, E., 2002, “Recent Advances in Corporate Finance; Investing in Junk Bonds;
Default Risk, Mortality Rates,” John Wiley Frontiers in Finance Series.

Aoki, M., H. Patrick, and P. Sheard, 1994, “The Japanese Main Bank System: An
Introductory Overview,” in Aoki, M., and H. Patrick (eds), The Japanese Main Bank
System: Its Relevance for Developing and Transforming Economies, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Beck, T., R. Levine, and N. Loayza, 1999, “Finance and the Sources of Growth,”
Working Paper, University of Virginia.

Bernanke, B., 1981, Bankruptcy, Liquidity, and Recession, American Economic Review,
71, 155-159.

Caballero, R. J., and M. Hammour, 1994, “The Cleansing Effect of Recessions,”
American Economic Review 84, 1350–1368.

Campbell, J.Y., M. Lettau, B.G. Malkiel, and Y. Xu, 2001, “Have Individual Stocks
Become More Volatile? An Empirical Exploration of Idiosyncratic Risk,” Journal of
Finance, 56, 1:43.

Chamberlain, G., 1983, “Funds, Factors, and Diversification in Arbitrage Pricing
Models,” Econometrica, 51, 1305-1323.

Chan L., Y. Hamao, and J. Lakonishok, 1991, “Fundamentals and Stock Returns in
Japan,” Journal of Finance, 46, 1739-1764.

Connor, G. and R. Korajczyk, 1993, “A Test for the Number of Factors in an
Approximate Factor Model,” Journal of Finance, 48, 1263-1291.

Cremers, M., and J. Mei, 2002, “A New Approach to the Duo-Factor-Model of Return
and Volume,” Working Paper, New York University.

Daniel, K., S. Titman, and K.C.J. Wei, 2001, “Explaining the Cross-Section of Stock
Returns in Japan,” Journal of Finance, 56, 743-756.

Demirguc-Kunt, A., and V. Maksimovic, 1998, “Law, Finance, and Firm Growth,”
Journal of Finance, 53, 2107-2137.

Durnev, A., R. Morck, and B. Yeung, 2001, “Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde: Stock Return
Variation and the Quality of Capital Budgeting Decision,” Working Paper, New York
University.




                                           34
Durnev, A., R. Morck, B. Yeung, and P. Zarowin, 2002, “Does Greater Firm-Specific
Return Variation Mean More or Less Informed Stock Trading?” Working Paper, New
York University.

Eden, B., and B. Jovanovic, 1994, “Asymmetric Information and the Excess Volatility of
Stock Prices,” Economic Inquiry, 32, 228–235.

Fama, F. and K. French, 1993, “Common Risk Factors in the Returns on Stocks and
Bonds,” Journal of Financial Economics, 33, 3-56.

Foster, D. P., and D. B. Nelson, 1996, “Continuous Record Asymptotics for Rolling
Sample Variance Estimators,” Econometrica, 64, 139–174.

Goyal, A. and P. Santa-Clara, 2002, “Idiosyncratic Risk Matters!” Working Paper,
University of California, Los Angeles.

Hamao, Y., 1991, “A Standard Data Base for the Analysis of Japanese Security Markets,”
Journal of Business, 64, 87-102.

Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein, 1990, “The Role of Banks in Reducing the
Costs of Financial Distress in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 67-88.

Jayaratne, J., and P. E. Strahan, 1996, “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
Branch Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111, 639-670.

Jensen, M., 1986, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance and Takeovers,”
American Economic Review, 76, 323-329.

King, R. G., and R. Levine, 1993, “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might be Right,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108, 717-737.

Krugman, P., 1999,The Return of Depression Economics, W.W. Norton Company.

La Porta, R., F. Lopez-de-Silanes, A. Shleifer, and R. W. Vishny, 1997, “Legal
Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52, 1131-1150.

Levine, R., 1998, “The Legal Environment, Banks, and Long-Run Economic Growth,”
Journal of Money, Credit & Banking, 30, 596-613.

Levine, R., and S. Zervos, 1998, “Stock Markets, Banks, and Economic Growth,”
American Economic Review, 88, 537-558.

Lo, A., and J. Wang, 2000, “Trading Volume: Definitions, Data Analysis, and
Implications of Portfolio Theory,” Review of Financial Studies, 13, 257-300.

Mei, J., 1993, “A Semi-Autoregression Approach to the Arbitrage Pricing Theory,”
Journal of Finance, 48, 599-620.

                                           35
Morck, R., B. Yeung, and W. Yu, 1999, “Why Do Emerging Markets Have Synchronous
Stock Price Movements?” Working Paper, University of Alberta.

Roll, R. and S. Ross, 1980, “An Empirical Investigation of the APT,” Journal of Finance,
35, 1073-1103.

Wurgler, J., 2000, “Financial Markets and the Allocation of Capital,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 58, 187-214.

Xu, Y., 2001, “Extracting Factors with Maximum Explanatory Power,” Working Paper,
The University of Texas at Dallas.

Xu, Y., and B. Malkiel, 2001, “Investigating the Behavior of Idiosyncratic Volatility,”
Journal of Business, forthcoming.




                                            36
Table 1: Summary Statistics
This table shows some of the summary statistics for Japanese equity markets over different
episodes. Except for “RM”, which is based on the value-weighted market index return, all the
statistics are computed based on the statistics of individual stocks in the specified period. In
particular, σi,IV is the root mean squared residuals from the same CAPM that computes βi,CAPM
and R2CAPM. σi,TV is the return volatility of individual stocks. η i denotes the average turnover
over time of individual stocks, while log( ME i ) is the average market capitalization for
individual stocks.

             RM         Ri     βi,CAPM    R2CAPM        σi,IV       σi,TV    log( ME i )      ηi
                                         1975-79
Median                0.015     0.997     0.117        0.085        0.093      9.523         0.037
Mean        0.016     0.016     0.999     0.132        0.090        0.096      9.586         0.050
S.D.        0.033     0.010     0.580     0.095        0.036        0.037      1.422         0.049
                                         1980-84
Median                0.012     0.951     0.086        0.081        0.085      9.919         0.027
Mean        0.013     0.014     0.996     0.103        0.087        0.091      10.010        0.040
S.D.        0.026     0.011     0.653     0.083        0.040        0.041      1.473         0.040
                                         1985-89
Median                0.028     1.027     0.157        0.097        0.107      10.889        0.049
Mean        0.027     0.028     1.024     0.172        0.106        0.115      11.036        0.056
S.D.        0.041     0.012     0.447     0.113        0.039        0.038      1.440         0.039
                                         1990-94
Median                -0.004    1.016     0.538        0.076        0.116      11.147        0.022
Mean       -0.004     -0.004    1.011     0.513        0.080        0.117      11.270        0.027
S.D.        0.083      0.007    0.321     0.168        0.024        0.029      1.373         0.022
                                         1995-99
Median                -0.007    0.983     0.407        0.085        0.115      10.573        0.021
Mean       -0.004     -0.005    1.006     0.387        0.093        0.122      10.777        0.027
S.D.        0.075      0.012    0.519     0.188        0.039        0.049      1.507         0.024




                                                 37
Table 2: Test of Significance for the Difference between 1990-1994 Period and Other

Periods

This table provides the significant test of selected statistics of 1990-1994 against other time
periods. This comparison period has 1521 stocks. Test statistics for the hypothesis of equal
standard deviation is computed based on an F test, while that of equal mean is based on a t test. In
particular, σi,IV is the root mean squared residuals from the same CAPM that computes βi,CAPM
and R2CAPM. η i denotes the average turnover over time of individual stocks.

               No.                                                       ηi         ηi
                        βi,CAPM    R2CAPM       σi,IV       σi,IV
               Obs.      S.D.      Mean         Mean        S.D.       Mean        S.D.

                                               1975-79
  Statistic    1174      3.268      -69.56      8.498       2.165      16.28       5.171
  P-value                0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000

                                               1980-84
  Statistic    1275      4.152      -79.29      5.037       2.710      11.36       3.505
  P-value                0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000

                                               1985-89
  Statistic    1352      1.942      -62.91      20.87       2.648      24.94       3.288
  P-value                0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000

                                               1995-99
  Statistic    1606      2.624      -19.71      10.86       2.668      -0.167      1.220
  P-value                0.000       0.000      0.000       0.000      0.566       0.000




                                                38
Table 3: Time-Series Analysis of Market and Aggregate Idiosyncratic Volatility

This table provides the significant tests for stochastic trend vs. time trend in both market volatility and idiosyncratic volatility over the entire
sample period from 1975-1999. Similar test statistics are also given for the post Plaza Accord subsample period from 1985-1999. All monthly
volatilities are computed using rolling statistics. Three measures of idiosyncratic volatilities are used. They are σIV according to Xu and Malkiel
(2001), the root mean square of the CAPM residuals σCAPM, IV, and residuals from three factor models of Fama and French (1993) σFF3,IV.
                                        Model: ln(σt) = µ + ρ ln(σt-1) + γ t + α1 ∆ln(σt-1) + … + α6 ∆ln(σt-6) + εt

                                Entire Sample Period: 1975-1999                                       Sub Sample Period: 1985-1999
                      µ                γ                 ρ                  R2                µ                 γ              ρ          R2
                                                                        Market Volatility
 Estimates         -.1728           .00016             .8948             0.901
 T                  -3.63            2.44              31.67
 ADF T(ρ-1)                                            -37.38

                                                                  Idiosyncratic Volatility (σIV)
 Estimates         -.0486           .00001             .9560              .937               -.0975          -.00018         .8958       .950
 T                  -2.68            0.54               58.3                                  -2.98            -2.12          25.2
 ADF T(ρ-1)                                            -18.75                                                               -35.92

                                                                Idiosyncratic Volatility (σCAPM,IV)
 Estimates         -.0438           .00001             .9596                .949             -.1078          -.00023         .8803       .948
 T                  -2.75            0.46               65.9                                  -3.32            -2.42          24.1
 ADF T(ρ-1)                                            -19.96                                                               -46.84

                                                             Idiosyncratic Volatility (σFF3F,IV)
 Estimates         -.0351           .00001             .9699           .963               -.1194             -.00023         .8782       .966
 (Std.E)            -2.44             0.58              78.0                               -3.58               -2.78          25.4
 ADF T(ρ-1)                                            -16.01                                                               -74.82
Table 4: Test of Number of Factors in the Excess Return and Turnover Models for Balanced Panels
This table reports the average incremental coefficient of determination from regressing individual stock returns (or turnover) on each statistical
factor extracted using the “MEC” approach of Xu (2001). The number of factors is determined based on the test statistics suggested by Xu
(2001).
  Period      ∆R21       ∆R22       ∆R23      ∆R24         ∆R25       ∆R26       ∆R27       ∆R28       ∆R29       ∆R210 # factors R21,..,10

                                                                   Stock return

1975-79        0.135      0.060      0.052      0.044      0.028       0.026       0.024      0.022       0.021      0.021      3         0.247

1980-84        0.107      0.066      0.048      0.035      0.031       0.028       0.027      0.025       0.023      0.022      3         0.222

1985-89        0.176      0.095      0.042      0.034      0.031       0.025       0.023      0.021       0.020      0.019      3         0.313

1990-94        0.515      0.049      0.030      0.024      0.022       0.018       0.014      0.014       0.013      0.013      4         0.619

1995-99        0.389      0.048      0.030      0.026      0.026       0.025       0.020      0.019       0.019      0.018      3         0.467

                                                                    Turnover

1975-79        0.123      0.076      0.057      0.048      0.039       0.031       0.031      0.027       0.025      0.024      4         0.305

1980-84        0.101      0.062      0.052      0.042      0.040       0.035       0.033      0.030       0.028      0.026      3         0.215

1985-89        0.103      0.067      0.055      0.053      0.044       0.036       0.035      0.029       0.027      0.026      5         0.322

1990-94        0.208      0.074      0.061      0.058      0.038       0.037       0.031      0.028       0.025      0.022      6         0.476

1995-99        0.137      0.117      0.053      0.045      0.041       0.035       0.031      0.028       0.026      0.024      5         0.391
Table 5: Regression of Changes in Equity Market Characteristics on Bankruptcy and GDP growth (1977-1999)
Equity market characteristics used are average R2 for excess returns using the market model R2(Rt), average R2 for turnover using the
market model R2 (To), average correlation for excess returns among stocks Corr(Rt), and average correlation for turnovers among
stocks Corr (To). The first line provides parameter estimates. The second line gives the t-statistics.

                   Constant Bankruptcy    GDP     Adj. R2
    ∆Idio. Risk     -0.003    0.001       0.035   0.020
                    -0.477    1.526       0.393

   ∆R2(Return)      0.023      -0.006    -0.135    0.125
                    0.943      -2.144    -0.379

  ∆R2(Turnover)     0.035      -0.004    -0.511    0.267
                    2.565      -2.682    -2.600

  ∆Corr(Return)     0.012      -0.003     0.178    0.101
                    0.595      -1.495     0.636

 ∆Corr(Turnover)    0.003      -0.002     0.068    0.079
                    0.307      -1.498     0.443
Table 6: Regression of Difference of Equity Market Characteristics on IP growth (1977-1999)
The first line provides parameter estimates. The second line gives the t-statistics.

                                                     1977-1989 Sample                1990-1996 Sample
                                                 Constant     IP    Adj. R2      Constant     IP    Adj. R2
   A: Keiretsu
   Diff. Idio. Risk (nonKeiretsu-Keiretsu)        0.000     0.002    -0.004       0.000       0.000    -0.014
   (CAPM)                                         -1.960    0.527                 2.955       -0.138

   Diff. Idio. Risk (nonKeiretsu-Keiretsu)        -0.001    0.002    -0.005       -0.001      -0.008   0.087
   (XU)                                           -2.796    0.405                 -9.438      -2.790

   Diff. Idio. Volume (nonKeiretsu-Keiretsu)      -0.002    0.012    0.030        0.000       -0.005   0.103
   (CAPM)                                         -7.151    2.481                 0.637       -3.023

   Diff. Idio. Volume (nonKeiretsu-Keiretsu)      -0.003    0.014    0.030        0.000       -0.005   0.090
   (XU)                                           -7.545    2.470                 0.177       -2.825

   B. Main Banks
   Diff. Idio. Risk (nonMain Bank-Main Bank)      -0.003    0.019    0.102        -0.002      -0.006   0.163
   (CAPM)                                         -10.16    4.460                 -22.43      -3.846

   Diff. Idio. Risk (nonMain Bank-Main Bank)      -0.003    0.019    0.092        -0.003      -0.013   0.094
   (XU)                                           -9.046    4.229                 -17.58      -2.894

   Diff. Idio. Volume (nonMain Bank-Main Bank)    -0.003    0.011    0.033        -0.001      -0.006   0.127
   (CAPM)                                         -12.23    2.587                 -11.95      -3.365

   Diff. Idio. Volume (nonMain Bank-Main Bank)    -0.004    0.012    0.036        -0.001      -0.008   0.165
   (XU)                                           -13.55    2.700                 -11.85      -3.879




                                                               1
2
                                         Figure 1. Cumulative Returns and Trading Volume
                                                    (TSE Value-Weighted Index)

            14                                                                                                      10.5



            12                                                                                                      9



            10                                                                                                      7.5



             8                                                                                                      6
                                                                                                                           Volume




Cum. Ret.
             6                                                                                                      4.5



             4                                                                                                      3



             2                                                                                                      1.5



             0                                                                                                      0
             7501   7701   7901   8101   8301    8501     8701     8901     9101        9301   9501   9701   9901
                                                            Date

                                            Cumulative Return      Trading Volume (%)




                                                                    3
                                   Figure 2. Annualized Market and Idiosyncratic Volatility


35



30



25



20



15



10



 5



 0
     76   77   78   79   80   81     82   83   84    85    86    87    88    89     90   91   92    93       94   95   96   97   98   99

                                               Aggregate Idiosyncratic Volatility        Market Volatility




                                                                      4
                                          Figure 3a. Average R2 Statistics of Returns and Turnover


           0.5                                                                                                                        0.25




           0.4                                                                                                                        0.2




           0.3                                                                                                                        0.15




2
Return R
                                                                                                                                             Volume R2




           0.2                                                                                                                        0.1




           0.1                                                                                                                        0.05




            0                                                                                                                         0
                 77   78   79   80   81   82   83   84   85   86     87   88   89   90   91   92   93   94   95   96   97   98   99

                                                                   Return R2        Volume R2




                                                                               5
                                               Figure 3b. Return and Volume Correlations among Individual Stocks


                     0.6                                                                                                                        0.3




                     0.5                                                                                                                        0.25




                     0.4                                                                                                                        0.2




                     0.3                                                                                                                        0.15




Return Correlation
                                                                                                                                                       Volume Correlation




                     0.2                                                                                                                        0.1




                     0.1                                                                                                                        0.05




                      0                                                                                                                         0
                           77   78   79   80    81   82   83   84   85   86   87   88    89   90   91   92   93   94   95   96   97   98   99

                                                                    Return correlation         Volume correlation




                                                                                         6
                                        Figure 4a. Bankruptcies in Japan

25,000                                                                                                          16,000,000


                                                                                                                14,000,000

20,000
                                                                                                                12,000,000


                                                                                                                10,000,000
15,000


                                                                                                                8,000,000
                                                                                                                             in million yen




10,000
                                                                                                                6,000,000


                                                                                                                4,000,000
 5,000

                                                                                                                2,000,000


    0                                                                                                           0
         1975   1977   1979    1981    1983    1985      1987   1989   1991     1993    1995    1997     1999

                   Number of bankruptcies (left scale)      Total amount of indebtedness (right scale)




                                                                   7
                                 Figure 4b. Bankruptcies of TSE Listed Firms

9                                                                                                                2,500,000


8

                                                                                                                 2,000,000
7


6

                                                                                                                 1,500,000
5


4
                                                                                                                             in million yen




                                                                                                                 1,000,000

3


2
                                                                                                                 500,000

1


0                                                                                                                0
    1975   1977   1979    1981     1983     1985     1987    1989     1991     1993     1995       1997   1999

                   Number of bankruptcies (left scale)      Amount of indebtedness (right scale)



                                                                 8
                          Figure 5a. Ten Year ROA Correlations

0.25




 0.2




0.15




 0.1




0.05




  0
       Non-MB Firms   MB Firms         Non-Keiretsu Firms        Keiretsu Firms   All Firms

                                     1980-1989       1990-1999




                                                 9
                                   Figure 5b. Standard Deviation of ROA's

0.07


0.06


0.05


0.04


0.03


0.02


0.01


  0
       1975   1977   1979   1981    1983     1985           1987        1989        1991   1993   1995   1997   1999

                                           Keiretsu Firms          Non Keiretsu Firms




                                                              10
                               Figure 6a. Market and Idiosyncratic Volatility in the U.S. Market: 1928-1947


0.25




 0.2

                                                                                                         idio
                                                                                                         mkt


0.15




 0.1




0.05




  0
       1928   1929   1930   1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936   1937   1938   1939   1940   1941     1942   1943   1944   1945   1946
                                    Figure 6b. Correlation and R2 in the U.S. Market: 1928-1946

0.8



0.7


                                                                                                            Correlation
0.6
                                                                                                            R2


0.5



0.4



0.3



0.2



0.1



 0
      1928   1929   1930   1931   1932   1933   1934   1935   1936   1937       1938   1939   1940   1941   1942   1943   1944   1945   1946




                                                                            1
