NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

UNNATURAL SELECTION: PERVERSE INCENTIVES
AND THE MISALLOCATION OF CREDIT IN JAPAN
Joe Peek
Eric S. Rosengren
Working Paper 9643
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9643
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

We would like to thank Jeremy Stein, David Weinstein, and participants at the NBER Strategic
Alliances Conference, the Japan Project meeting in Tokyo, and the American Economic Association
meetings for comments on an earlier version of this paper, and Steven Fay for invaluable research
assistance. This study is based upon work supported by the National Science Foundation under
Grant No. SES-0213967. Any opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this study are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Science
Foundation, the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, or the Federal Reserve System.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.
©2003 by Joe Peek and Eric S. Rosengren All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.

Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the Misallocation of Credit in Japan
Joe Peek and Eric S. Rosengren
NBER Working Paper No. 9643
April 2003
JEL No.E51, G21
ABSTRACT
This study examines the misallocation of credit in Japan associated with the perverse incentives of
banks to provide additional credit to the weakest firms. Firms are far more likely to receive
additional credit if they are in poor financial condition, and these firms continue to perform poorly
after receiving additional bank financing. Troubled Japanese banks allocate credit to severely
impaired borrowers primarily to avoid the realization of losses on their own balance sheets. This
problem is compounded by extensive corporate affiliations, which provide a further incentive for
banks to allocate scarce credit based on considerations other than prudent credit risk analysis.

Joe Peek
437C Gatton Business and Economics Building
University of Kentucky
Lexington, KY 40506-0034
jpeek0@uky.edu

Eric S. Rosengren
Supervision and Regulation Department, T-10
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston
600 Atlantic Avenue
Boston, MA 02106-2076
Eric.Rosengren@bos.frb.org

Unnatural Selection: Perverse Incentives and the Misallocation of Credit in Japan
The severe economic crisis in Japan, associated with the collapse of the Japanese stock
and real estate markets and the dramatic deterioration in the health of the Japanese banking
sector, represents one of the major economic events of the late twentieth century. It is even more
striking because the second largest economy in the world remained stagnant for more than a
decade, and even today shows no evidence of returning to the robust health that characterized
most of its postwar history. This study investigates an important contributing factor to this
economic malaise: the misallocation of credit by banks. Japanese banks have incentives to
continue making credit available to the weakest firms, many of which are already insolvent,
insulating those firms from market forces that otherwise would force the restructuring or
bankruptcy of those firms.
Bank regulation and supervision policies in Japan provide banks that have significant
nonperforming loans and impaired capital little incentive to be strict with troubled borrowers. In
fact, it is in the self-interest of banks to follow a policy of forbearance with their problem
borrowers in order to avoid pressure on the banks to increase their own loan loss reserves, further
impairing their capital. This leads to a policy of banks “evergreening” loans, whereby a bank
extends additional credit to a troubled firm to enable the firm to make interest payments on
outstanding loans and avoid or delay bankruptcy. By keeping the loan current, the bank’s
balance sheet looks better, since the bank is not required to report such problem loans among its
nonperforming loans. Although banks have the incentive to evergreen loans, their ability to
aggressively pursue such policies requires government complicity. Our evidence is consistent
with the government being unwilling to force recognition of asset quality problems in bank
portfolios in an attempt to limit costly bailouts of the banking sector and additional firm closures.

1

Using detailed data on loans from individual lenders to individual firms, we show that the
misallocation of bank credit reflects a general problem with the incentives of banks to continue
lending to their most troubled borrowers. Additional credit is far more likely for deeply troubled
firms, which perform poorly after receiving additional credit. Furthermore, banks with reported
capital ratios close to their required ratios are even more likely to make loans to the weakest
firms. This misallocation of credit is far less prevalent for lenders without strong corporate
affiliations with borrowers, as well as for nonbank lenders relative to banks. While resolving
this misallocation of credit requires realization of losses at banks and sales in already depressed
markets, it does not require a complete realignment of the industrial organization of Japan that
would be needed if the problem were due primarily to corporate affiliations rather than
misaligned incentives for banks.
The rest of the study is as follows. The next section provides some background on the
role of banks in allocating credit in the Japanese economy. The second section discusses the
perverse incentives affecting bank lending behavior. The third section describes the data and
empirical results. The final section provides our conclusions.

I.

The role of banks in allocating credit in Japan
Banking relationships in Japan are far more important than in the United States. While

the U.S. is characterized as a market-centered economy, Japan is considered to be a bankcentered economy. Japanese firms rely more on bank debt than firms in the United States,
although bond financing in Japan has become increasingly important over the past decade (Hoshi
and Kashyap 1999). But the differences go deeper than simply the relative importance of
relationship versus arm’s length financing in the two countries. The relationships between banks

2

and firms in Japan are much stronger, being characterized by main bank relationships, as well as,
in many instances, additional ties arising from the lending bank being in the same keiretsu group
as the firm. Furthermore, Japanese capitalism differs from the style prevalent in the United
States, especially when it comes to the allocation of credit. For example, many bank lending
decisions are guided by the perceived national duty of banks to support troubled firms, rather
than being a result of the careful credit risk analysis that would dominate the decision were a
profit maximization motive the primary consideration.1
The firm-main bank relationship in Japan is solidified in a number of ways. The main
bank takes primary responsibility for monitoring the firm and can serve as a form of corporate
governance (Kaplan and Minton 1994). The main bank is particularly important during times of
distress, when it can require changes in the affiliated firm’s management and alter its board of
directors (Kang and Shivdasani 1995; Morck and Nakamura 1999). This oversight provided by
the bank can reduce typical information asymmetries, resulting in firms having greater access to
external credit, which, in turn, affects firms’ investment decisions (Hoshi, Kashyap and
Scharfstein 1991). However, there is a dark side to this close lending relationship: If the bank
rather than the borrower becomes troubled, the ability of the firm to finance investment may be
impeded (Gibson 1995; Kang and Stultz 2000; Klein, Peek and Rosengren 2002).
During the 1980s and early 1990s, most studies of Japanese bank-firm affiliations have
found significant benefits. These studies emphasized the unique features of Japanese bank
affiliations that reduced agency costs (Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein 1993; Hoshi, Kashyap,
and Scharfstein 1990). Banks with intertwined business relationships, shareholding
relationships, board of directors relationships, and financing relationships with their loan
customers should have substantially more information about those firms than do external

3

monitors. Furthermore, to the extent that a firm’s main bank or members of its keiretsu would be
willing to provide backup financing should the firm become financially troubled, firms were able
to maintain a higher ratio of bank debt relative to their total assets. However, the benefits of
close firm-main bank ties may be limited. For example, while Weinstein and Yafeh (1998) find
that a close relationship with a firm’s bank increases the availability of credit, this does not lead
to higher profitability or growth for the firm, perhaps because the bank discourages the firm from
investing in high risk, high expected return projects, or because the bank extracts all the rents.
More recently, studies have been more critical of the close affiliations of Japanese banks
with their borrowers, viewing such affiliations as a problem that has contributed to a decade of
subpar economic growth, rather than as an alternative market model (Kang and Stultz 2000;
Morck and Nakamura 1999). In particular, if the primary role of bank affiliations is to insulate
management from market forces by enabling firms to avoid the discipline that can be provided
by external creditors and investors, this limiting of outside corporate governance would manifest
itself as a misallocation of credit.
The puzzling response of banks to the capital crisis
As banks came under increasing pressure in meeting capital ratio requirements during the
1990s, they faced difficult choices about how best to shrink their balance sheets. One option is
for banks to shrink their foreign operations, which will typically affect foreign borrowers with a
weaker banking relationship than is typical of long-standing domestic borrowers. Indeed, this
seems to be the path initially followed by Japanese banks beginning in the early 1990s (Peek and
Rosengren 1997, 2000). Although the domestic Japanese economy was insulated from declining
bank loans initially, domestic bank loans began to decline by the mid 1990s.2

4

To the extent that the deteriorating health of Japanese banks during the 1990s impaired
their ability to satisfy the credit needs of their loan customers, one might expect that many firms
would rely increasingly on alternative sources of credit. In particular, one might expect to
observe an acceleration of the shift to bond finance that had occurred in response to the easing of
government restrictions on the ability of Japanese firms to issue bonds that began in the mid1970s (Hoshi and Kashyap 2001). However, the shift to bond finance and away from bank
finance by Japanese firms did not continue during the 1990s, even as the bad loan problems at
banks intensified.
Table 1 presents information on the extent to which Japanese firms that are listed on
either the first or second section of the Tokyo stock exchange rely on bonds and loans to finance
their operations. The numbers in the table are the mean values for each liability category
calculated as a percent of firm assets for each year of our 1993 to 1999 sample period. One of
the more striking results in the table is that during this time of severe problems in the banking
sector, firms systematically decreased their reliance on bonds as a share of their assets. Given
the stagnation of the Japanese economy during the 1990s, one might easily attribute this decline
to a weakening of the demand for credit by firms. However, during the 1993 to 1997 period, the
general declines in the firms’ loans-to-assets ratios were less pronounced, and, from 1997 to
1999, the loans-to-assets ratios actually rose markedly, reaching levels exceeding their 1993
values, even as firm reliance on bond finance continued its decline.
One possible explanation for the shift from bond finance to bank finance by many firms
at a time when banks were under severe pressure from the deteriorating quality of their loan
portfolios is that banks were attempting to increase the quality of their loan portfolios by
increasing their exposure to firms that had performed well enough to enter the bond market. In

5

particular, by using the superior information acquired from main bank and keiretsu affiliations
with the firms, banks could “cherry pick” among the better quality firms that had access to the
bond market. If so, then one would expect that the set of firms obtaining additional bank loans
would tend to outperform the average firm.
The results in Table 2 address the relationship between a firm obtaining increased bank
finance and its subsequent performance. For this test, the dependent variable is the percent
change in the firm’s stock price from period t to period t+1. The set of explanatory variables
includes (0,1) dummy variables that have a value of one if the lender category increased loans to
the firm during the previous year, that is, from period t-1 to period t. The specifications also
include a set of annual time dummy variables to control for average changes in stock prices and
the general macroeconomy from year to year, as well as a set of industry dummy variables to
control for differences across industries.
The first column of Table 2 contains the results for the relationship between an increase
in total loans to a firm and the subsequent change in the firm’s stock price for annual stock price
changes for the 1994-98 period. The observations in this panel dataset are at the firm level, with
loans to a given firm from all lender types aggregated across lenders so that there is one
observation per firm per year. Row 1 indicates that an increase in total loans to a firm is
associated with a decline in the firm’s stock price of about three-quarters of a percent during the
subsequent year, although it is not statistically significant. Column 2 presents estimates of the
stock price equation for the 1996-98 period, when a larger proportion of the banks were under
severe pressure to improve the quality of their loan portfolios. The estimated coefficient in
column 2 is now three times as large as in column 1, and statistically significant. Thus, during
this subperiod, an increase in total loans to a firm is associated with a decline in the firm’s stock

6

price of about 2.4 percent during the subsequent year, after controlling for the average change in
stock prices. Furthermore, the significant negative estimated coefficient indicates that any
positive bias embedded in the estimated coefficient associated with a firm’s subsequent
performance being improved by access to additional credit is overcome.
The results in column 3 are more to the point with respect to affiliated lenders possibly
exploiting access to superior information about affiliated firms to identify those with the best
prospects when making decisions to increase loans. The estimated coefficients for main banks
indicate an increase in loans by these banks is associated with a subsequent decline in firm stock
prices in excess of 3 percent. The estimated effect for main banks in the same keiretsu as the
firm is somewhat larger, and both estimated coefficients are statistically significant. The
estimated effects for secondary lenders are much weaker, as would be expected. The estimated
decline associated with increased loans from secondary banks in the same keiretsu as the firm is
less than half that for main banks and is not significant. The estimated coefficient for
nonaffiliated secondary banks is actually positive, although it is not significant. These results are
not consistent with banks picking winners, perhaps by exploiting superior information in order to
direct lending to those firms with the best prospects. Rather, it appears that banks were basing
their lending decisions on supporting troubled firms, many of which may have been returning to
bank (relationship) credit as they were priced out of the (arms length) bond market.

II.

Perverse incentives associated with the banking crisis
The primary hypothesis investigated in this study is that it is in the self-interest of banks

to follow a policy of forbearance with their problem borrowers in order to avoid having to report
impaired loans as nonperforming. The bank can avoid a mandatory increase in its reported

7

nonperforming loans as long as it makes sufficient credit available to the firm to enable it to
make interest payments on the outstanding loans from the bank and to avoid declaring
bankruptcy.3 Consequently, a bank may continue lending to troubled firms to provide sufficient
financing to keep otherwise economically bankrupt firms afloat. This “evergreening” of loans
benefits the firm because it can avoid (or at least delay) bankruptcy. It also enables the bank to
avoid (or delay) a further increase in its reported nonperforming loans, so that the bank does not
have to make additional loan charge offs and loan loss provisions, which would reduce the
bank’s earnings, and thus capital. Such practices, particularly during a time of reduced bank
lending, would appear as increases in loans to the most troubled firms.4 And, given the low
interest rate environment in Japan, it does not require substantial amounts of new credit to enable
troubled firms to make their interest payments so as to remain alive.
Japanese banks also may be responding to significant government pressure to avoid a
credit crunch or a precipitous decline in economic conditions that might occur if they were to
reduce credit to troubled firms. The government, faced with a growing budget deficit and a
voting public weary of funding bank bailouts, may prefer banks to continue their policies of
forbearance in order to avoid the alternative scenario of massive firm, and perhaps bank, failures
and, in particular, the associated costs, both financial and political.5 The lack of transparency
and the use of accounting gimmicks allowed bank supervisors to implement forbearance policies
that allowed banks to understate their problem loans and overstate their capital so that they
appeared to be sufficiently capitalized.6
This discussion suggests several related hypotheses about Japanese bank lending
behavior during the 1990s. The “evergreening” hypothesis is that Japanese banks acted in their
own self interest by making additional loans to weak firms to avoid having to declare existing

8

loans as nonperforming. This hypothesis would be supported by evidence that weaker firms
were more likely to obtain additional loans.7 The “balance sheet cosmetics” hypothesis is that
the incentive for a bank to make additional credit available to troubled firms to which the bank
already has loans outstanding increases as the bank’s reported risk-based capital ratio nears its
required capital ratio. That is, it is the appearance rather than the reality of adequate capital that
is important, even though it is widely believed that Japanese bank capital ratios are substantially
overstated.8 This hypothesis can be tested by examining the extent to which a bank became
more likely to increase loans, especially to the weakest firms, as its reported risk-based capital
ratio approached its capital requirement. Such behavior would be in sharp contrast to the typical
response of troubled U.S. banks that shrank their loan portfolios in order to increase their (riskbased) capital-to-assets ratio. Finally, we test the ”affiliation” hypothesis that corporate
affiliations, in the form of main bank and same-keiretsu ties, increase the likelihood that a bank
will increase loans, with the probability being greater the weaker the affiliated firm.
The basic equation for the hypothesis tests provides estimates for the contributions of
bank and firm health to the probability that a bank increases credit to a firm, controlling for other
firm and bank characteristics, using the following logit equation:

Pr(LOANi,j,t) = a0 + a1FIRMi,j,t-1 + a2BANKi,j,t-1 + a3CAPREQi,j,t-1 + a4AFFILi,j,t-1 +
a5TIMEi,j,t + ui,j,t

(1)

The dependent variable has a value of one if loans to firm i by bank j increased from year t-1 to
year t, and zero if the bank’s loans to firm i were unchanged or decreased from year t-1 to year t.
Thus, for a given firm (i), the regression sample will contain in each year (t) one observation for

9

each bank (j) from which the firm borrows in that year. We focus on increases in loans, since
that requires the lender to take action. The reasons underlying a decline in loans outstanding to a
firm are much more heterogeneous, since such an outcome could result passively from the
amortization of an outstanding loan or the loan maturing, as well as from a lender making the
decision to call a loan, to refuse to renew a loan, or even to forgive a loan.
FIRM is a vector of variables intended to capture firm health and other characteristics of
the firm that are unrelated to its corporate affiliations with lenders, including controlling for loan
demand. The variables considered include the firm’s return on assets (FROA) during the prior
year, the percent change in the firm’s equity price over the prior year (FPCPR), the firm’s liquid
assets as a percent of its total assets (FLIQA) for the prior year, and the percent change in the
firm’s sales (FSALES) over the prior year.9 We also control for other firm characteristics by
including the logarithm of the firm’s total real assets (FLASSET), a set of (0,1) dummy variables
indicating whether a firm just entered the bond market (FENBMKT), is in the bond market
(FINBMKT), or just left the bond market (FEXBMKT), and a set of nine industry dummy
variables. While the set of industry dummy variables should help control for shifts in loan
demand at a more aggregated level, the set of dummy variables for a firm entering, exiting, or
being in the bond market should help control for shifts in loan demand at the individual firm
level.
BANK is a vector of variables intended to capture bank health. These variables include
the percent change in the bank’s equity price over the past year (BPCPR), the bank’s risk-based
capital ratio (BRBC), and the bank’s nonperforming loans as a percent of its total assets
(BNPLA). The reported regressions focus on BPCPR, which dominated the other two
measures.10

10

The CAPREQ vector includes measures related to the deviation of a bank’s reported riskbased capital ratio from its required capital ratio. As a bank’s reported capital ratio approaches
its required capital ratio, the bank comes under more pressure to avoid or delay having additional
loans being declared as nonperforming. Thus, the bank has an even stronger incentive to
evergreen loans to its current customers. Two risk-based capital thresholds are considered that
allow for a differential effect when a bank’s reported capital ratio is near its required capital
ratio. REQ1 is a (0,1) dummy variable that has a value of one if the bank’s risk-based capital
ratio is less than 1 percentage point above the bank’s required capital ratio. REQ2 is a (0,1)
dummy variable that has a value of one if the bank’s risk-based capital ratio is between 1 and 2
percentage points above the bank’s required capital ratio. Each bank’s required capital ratio is
based on its classification as an international (8 percent), a domestic (4 percent), or a “switcher”
bank by Montgomery (2001).
In addition to including REQ1 and REQ2 individually, the CAPREQ vector also includes
REQ1 and REQ2 each interacted with the three measures of firm health: FROA, FLIQA, and
FSALES. While REQ1 and REQ2 allow for differential effects emanating from a bank being
close to its required capital ratio, the interaction terms allow for any enhanced incentive that
banks have to make additional loans to a firm based on the firm’s health. It should be noted that
the estimated coefficients will be biased against a finding of evergreening, insofar as the test
relies on reported capital ratios that are known to be an overstatement of the underlying
economic capital ratios. The estimated coefficients measure a differential effect relative to all
other banks, even though we know that many of the banks with reported capital ratios that are
more than 2 percentage points above their required capital ratio are economically
undercapitalized.

11

AFFIL is a vector of six variables reflecting group affiliations. MBANK is a (0,1)
dummy variable that has a value of one if the bank is the firm’s main bank. The next two
variables reflect the strength of the main bank tie and the health of the firm’s main bank.
MBLFD is measured as main bank loans to the firm as a percent of the firm’s total debt.
MBPCPR is the percent change in the equity price of the firm’s main bank over the prior year.
The other three variables are related to a firm’s keretsu ties. SAMEK is a (0,1) dummy variable
that has a value of one if the lender is in the same keiretsu as the firm. KEIR is a (0,1) dummy
variable that has a value of one if the firm is in one of the eight bank-centered financial
(horizontal) keiretsus (Mitsubishi, Mitsui, Sumitomo, Fuyo, Dai-Ichi Kangyo, Sanwa, IBJ and
Sakura), and zero otherwise. PK is the percent ownership of the firm by keiretsu members
among the top ten equity holders. We also include a set of annual time dummy variables to
capture the effects of the macroeconomy. These annual dummy variables will capture the
average effect of economic conditions in each year.

III.

Data and Empirical Results
We use a rich panel data set to examine bank lending patterns in order to determine how

Japanese banks reacted to the economic problems in the 1990s, and how these reactions affected
credit availability to Japanese firms. By using Japanese firm-level data, we are able to link
individual Japanese firms to their individual lenders. This linking of individual lenders to
individual borrowers is critical for understanding how bank lending behavior can affect the real
economy. Such a link cannot be made clearly in many other countries, such as the United States,
where bank-borrower relationships are considered private information.

12

For our tests, we use annual data for 1993 through 1999. The starting date of our sample
corresponds to when the Basle Accord risk-based capital requirements were fully implemented in
Japan. We then focus on the rest of the decade as banks came under increasing pressure to
maintain capital ratios above minimum capital requirements. To investigate the factors that
impact how banks allocate credit across firms, we examine the pattern of loans obtained by all
firms included in the Pacific-Basin Capital Market Databases (PACAP), which includes all firstand second-section firms that are traded on the Tokyo stock exchange. The PACAP database
includes the balance sheet and income statements of firms based on their fiscal year-end reports.
Bank capital and nonperforming loan data are obtained from Bankscope, produced by FitchIBCA. The data for loans outstanding to individual firms from each lender are obtained from the
Nikkei Needs database, with loan reporting based on the firm’s fiscal year.
To avoid timing problems, we limit our sample to those firms with a fiscal year that ends
in March, which is by far the date most commonly used by Japanese firms, as well as
corresponding to the March balance sheet and income reports by banks. We identify each firm’s
main bank as the first listed reference bank in the Japan Company Handbook. The identification
of keiretsu membership and the share of ownership of keiretsu firms among their top 10 equity
holders by firms in the same keiretsu are obtained from Industrial Groupings in Japan: The
Anatomy of the Keiretsu by Dodwell Marketing Consultants.
Table 3 contains the means, standard deviations, minimum values, and maximum values
for the explanatory variables in the base regression for the set of observations for loans from
market-traded banks. Those variables, both individually and interacted with the REQ1 and
REQ2 dummy variables, are used to obtain the results contained in Table 4 from estimating the
logit specification shown in equation 1. Because including aggregate regressors in the equation,

13

such as the set of annual time dummy variables, suggests a likely correlation among regression
errors within a particular year, we compute robust coefficient standard errors that allow for
dependence of regression errors within years. As discussed above, the dependent variable is a
(0,1) dummy variable having a value of one if the bank increased lending to the firm, and zero
otherwise.
The estimates in Table 4 provide evidence on the evergreening and balance sheet
cosmetics hypotheses. The first column is based on the panel of firm-lender observations that
includes all first- and second-section firms on the Tokyo stock exchange and market-traded
banks for which all required data are available. The second column contains the results for the
same specification as column 1, but with the observations with extreme values excluded from the
sample.11 The estimated coefficients are quite similar across the two specifications, indicating
that the results are robust, insofar as they are not sensitive to observations with extreme values.12
The coefficient estimates provide evidence of the perverse relationship between the
probability of increased bank loans and firm health. The negative and highly significant
coefficients on FROA and FLIQA indicate that the weaker is a firm’s health, the more likely it
will receive additional bank loans, consistent with the evergreening hypothesis. On the other
hand, FSALES has significant positive coefficients, likely indicating that firms with stronger
sales growth also have stronger loan demand.
Consistent with the balance sheet cosmetics hypothesis, both REQ1 and REQ2 have
estimated coefficients that are positive and highly significant. Banks with reported capital ratios
close to their required ratios are more likely to increase loans to firms, with the estimated
coefficients on REQ1 being larger than those on REQ2, as expected. Furthermore, for the full
sample, the estimated coefficients on FROA and FLIQA interacted with REQ1 and REQ2 are

14

each negative, with REQ1*FLIQA and REQ2*FLIQA being significant at the 5 percent level,
and REQ1*FROA being significant at the 10 percent level, indicating that the perverse
relationship with weaker firm performance being associated with a higher probability of
increased loans from banks is even stronger for those banks with reported capital ratios near the
required capital thresholds. For the sample omitting the observations with extreme values, the
estimated coefficient on REQ1*FROA is significant at the 5 percent level, while those on
REQ1*FLIQA, REQ2*FLIQA, and REQ2*FSALES are significant at the 10 percent level.
Thus, the evidence presented in this table provides strong evidence consistent with the
evergreening hypothesis, insofar as firms with a lower return on assets and weaker liquidity are
more likely to obtain additional bank loans. The evidence is also consistent with the balance
sheet cosmetics hypothesis, insofar as those banks with reported capital ratios close to their
required minimums are more likely to increase credit to firms, with somewhat weaker evidence
that they are more likely than other banks to increase credit to firms the weaker is firm health.
Furthermore, that BPCPR, our measure of bank health, does not have a significant effect again
indicates that it is maintaining the appearance of adequate capital, rather than the bank’s actual
economic health, that affects its lending behavior.
The results also indicate that corporate affiliations may be important. The estimated
coefficients on MBANK, PK, and SAMEK are each statistically significant in both
specifications, while that for MBLFD is significant in the second column. The estimated
coefficients on PK, the percent ownership of the firm by other members of its keiretsu among the
firm’s top ten equity holders, are negative, indicating that the more closely the firm is tied to its
keiretsu affiliates through equity ownership, the less likely are banks to increase loans to the
firm. This result might reflect keiretsu firms relying more heavily on other keiretsu members to

15

provide financing during difficult times, perhaps through trade credit from suppliers or from
nonbank lenders. The positive coefficients on MBANK and SAMEK indicate that firms are
more likely to get additional loans if the bank is their main bank and/or in the same keiretsu as
the firm. The positive coefficient on MBLFD, main bank loans to the firm as a percent of the
firm’s total debt, indicates that the firm is more likely to get additional loans from banks the
greater the exposure of the main bank to the firm.
This raises the question of the extent to which corporate affiliations between banks and
their borrowers magnify the evergreening behavior of banks. To the extent that lenders feel an
obligation to come to the aid of affiliated troubled firms, main banks and same-keiretsu lenders
may have additional incentives to keep weak or insolvent firms alive. However, the direction of
the same-keiretsu effect is ambiguous, insofar as a same-keiretsu main bank might reduce its
exposure to the firm (or increase it by less) while other members of the keiretsu shouldered more
of the burden of the bailout. In that case, secondary banks and nonbanks in the same keiretsu as
the firm would tend to increase the availability of credit to the firm in order to offset the
increased exposure of the main bank that otherwise would occur. In this way, even secondary
banks in the same keiretsu as the firm might feel added pressure to make credit available to
troubled firms. In contrast, one might expect the absence of corporate affiliations to allow
secondary lenders not in the same keiretsu as the firm to base their lending decisions on the
prospects of the borrowing firm, so that their lending would be positively related to firm health.
However, to the extent that nonaffiliated lenders are subjected to pressure from either the
government or the firm’s main bank (as organizer of support for a troubled firm) to participate in
any firm rescue, nonaffiliated lenders may still aid such firms, although any correlation between
increased lending and deteriorating firm health would be weaker than for affiliated lenders.

16

By allowing for differential effects for main banks and for same-keiretsu relationships,
we can deduce whether these affiliations magnify the tendency for banks to increase loans the
more troubled is a firm. To test this affiliation hypothesis, the base specification is extended to
include differential effects emanating from corporate affiliations in the following manner:

Pr(LOANi,j,t) = b0 + b1FIRMi,j,t-1 + b2BANKi,j,t-1 + b3CAPREQi,j,t-1 + b4AFFILi,j,t-1 +
b5MB*X1i,j,t-1 + b6SK*X2i,j,t-1 + b7TIMEi,j,t + ui,j,t

(2)

In order to isolate the differential effects of corporate affiliations, we include two sets of
interaction terms, one for main bank ties (MB*X1) and one for keiretsu ties (SK*X2). The
interactive variables for the main bank ties are interacted with MBANK, the (0,1) dummy
variable that has a value of one if the bank is the firm’s main bank. The differential effects of
keiretsu ties are obtained by using SAMEK, the (0,1) dummy variable that has a value of one if
the lender is in the same keiretsu as the firm. The variables in the set of interaction terms include
those in the base specification that are intended to measure strength of affiliation, firm health,
and bank health. The set of main bank interaction variables (X1) include MBANK, in addition
to MBANK interacted with each of the following measures: SAMEK, KEIR, PK, MBLFD,
FROA, FLIQA, FSALES, and BPCPR. The set of keiretsu interaction variables (X2) includes
SAMEK, in addition to SAMEK interacted with the following variables: PK, MBLFD,
MBPCPR, FROA, FLIQA, FSALES, and BPCPR. Note that we did not include both BPCPR
and MBPCPR in the set of main bank interaction variables, since once they are multiplied by
MBANK, the two interactive variables are identical. Similarly, SAMEK is not interacted with
KEIR, since SAMEK and SAMEK*KEIR are perfectly collinear.

17

With this specification, the base group of lenders is secondary banks that are not
members of the same keiretsu as the firm. This includes all observations of firms that are not
members of a keiretsu, as well as all observations of loans to a firm by lenders that are either in a
different keiretsu or not members of a keiretsu. The estimated coefficients on the interactive
terms are then interpreted as measures of the extent to which lending by the firm’s main bank or
by banks in the same keiretsu as the firm responds differently than is the case for nonaffiliated
lenders to measures of the strength of affiliations, firm health, and bank health.
Table 5 contains the estimated coefficients for the expanded specification. The estimated
coefficients for the variables in the base specification shown in Table 4 are essentially unchanged
when the additional main bank and same-keiretsu interactive variables are added to the
specification. The two additional sets of estimated coefficients indicate the differential responses
of main banks (the interactive variable names that begin with MB) and of banks in the same
keiretsu as the firm (the interactive variable names that begin with SK) measured relative to
secondary banks not in the same keiretsu as the firm.
It is still the case that main banks and banks in the same keiretsu are more likely to
provide additional loans to affiliated firms. However, if the main bank is in the same keiretsu as
the firm, that is, MB*SAMEK has a value of one, the bank is slightly less likely than main banks
not in the same keiretsu (0.781 vs. 0.653 = 0.781 – 0.629 + 0.501) to provide additional credit to
the firm, perhaps because the firm has a network of other keiretsu members from which it is able
to obtain any required additional credit. Consistent with this story, SK*PK has a significant
negative estimated coefficient in each column, indicating that banks in the same keiretsu as the
firm are less likely to extend additional loans to the firm the larger the share of the firm owned
by its keiretsu members.

18

We next focus on the extent to which affiliated banks respond differently to firm health
than do nonaffiliated banks. The estimated coefficients on MB*FROA are negative and
significant at the 5 percent level, while those for MB*FLIQA are significant at the 10 percent
level, indicating that main banks are even more likely to extend additional credit to the weakest
firms, compared to nonaffiliated lenders. This is consistent with main banks feeling a stronger
obligation to come to the aid of their troubled firms than is the case for nonaffiliated secondary
lenders. For same-keiretsu lenders, only SK*FSALES has a significant negative effect,
indicating that same-keiretsu banks are more likely to provide additional loans to firms the
weaker is their sales growth. Interestingly, the weaker is bank health, as measured by the percent
change in the bank’s stock price (BPCPR), the more likely (relative to nonaffiliated banks) are
both main banks and banks in the same keiretsu to provide additional loans to affiliated firms.
The results in Table 5 indicate that corporate affiliations tend to magnify the extent to
which banks evergreen loans, although the stronger are the ownership ties of other keiretsu
members to the firm (PK), the less likely it is that banks will increase lending to the firm. This is
consistent with keiretsu members having access to alternative financing through affiliated
suppliers, customers, and nonbank lenders, such as life insurance companies, as discussed above.
To further investigate the role of corporate affiliations on lending behavior, we expand the
sample of lenders to include nonbank financial firms, such as insurance companies, and
government-controlled banks in addition to the market-traded banks that formed the sample for
the previous tables. This allows us to isolate the extent to which bank lending behavior differs
from that of other types of lenders. As with the sample of bank lenders, we differentiate between
nonbank financial firms that are and are not in the same keiretsu as the firm. Table 6 contains
the results for this specification, with each column in the table containing the estimated effects

19

for one of the seven lender categories. These distinctions are important, since they provide
insights into how nonbank keiretsu members might support troubled firms, how governmentcontrolled banks might support troubled firms, and whether nonbank lenders not in the same
keiretsu as the firm differ in the degree to which they support troubled firms.
The results for the three firm health proxies are of particular interest, since they indicate a
strong and widespread inverse relationship between firm health and the likelihood of obtaining
additional loans. All seven of the estimated coefficients on FROA are negative, with six being
significant. It is striking that the lone exception is for nonbank lenders not in the same keiretsu
as the firm, the lender type with the weakest incentive to aid a distressed firm. In fact, the
estimated coefficient is about one-third the value of the next lowest estimated effect, that for
government-controlled banks, and one-sixth that for main banks.
Main banks have the strongest estimated inverse relationship, presumably because of
their strong ties to the firm and their obligation to come to the aid of troubled firms for which
they serve as a main bank. However, even secondary banks display this inverse relationship.
The point estimates indicate that secondary banks in the same keiretsu as the firm are slightly
more likely to increase loans to the firm compared to secondary banks not in the same keiretsu as
the firm, although the difference is not statistically significant. The extent to which even
secondary banks are more likely to make credit available to the weakest firms is consistent with
reports of government pressure on banks to support troubled firms to prevent a credit crunch or
an even sharper rise in firm bankruptcies. In fact, government-controlled banks also are more
likely to increase loans to firms with the lowest return on assets.
Finally, the difference between the responses of nonbank financial lenders that are and
are not in the same keiretsu as the firm is quite striking. The same-keiretsu effect is strong,

20

although the estimated effect is slightly less than that for secondary banks in the same keiretsu,
perhaps because nonbanks are not under as much government pressure as are banks to support
troubled firms. Strikingly, for nonbank lenders not in the same keiretsu as the firm, the least
affiliated lender category, FROA has an estimated coefficient that is only about one-fourth the
size of that for nonbank lenders in the same keiretsu, and that estimated coefficient, alone among
all the lender types, is not statistically significant. Thus, there is no evidence that a nonaffiliated
nonbank lender feels an obligation to support troubled firms by being more likely to increase
loans to the weakest firms.
The results for FLIQA are similar to those for FROA. All seven estimated coefficients
are negative, with all but that for nonbanks not in the same keiretsu being significant. Thus,
lenders are more likely to increase loans to the firms with the weakest liquidity position. This
effect is strongest for main banks not in the same keiretsu as the firm. The effect is somewhat
weaker for main banks in the same keiretsu, both types of secondary banks, and governmentcontrolled banks. While still statistically significant, the estimated effect for nonbanks in the
same keiretsu as the firm is about one-third as large as that for main banks not in the same
keiretsu. Finally, while the effect for nonbank lenders not in the same keiretsu is of the same
magnitude as that for nonbanks in the same keiretsu as the firm, the effect is not statistically
significant. The estimated coefficients for FSALES are mostly positive, but only two are
significant. It is likely that the positive effects are a consequence of loan demand being
positively correlated with sales growth.
The estimated coefficients for the other explanatory variables are consistent with the
results in Tables 4 and 5. The positive coefficients on KEIR suggest that a firm benefits from
being in a keiretsu in terms of obtaining credit, even from lenders outside the firm’s keiretsu.

21

The estimated coefficients on PK are consistently negative, with six of the seven effects being
significant, indicating that the larger the share of the firm owned by its other keiretsu members,
the less likely are these lenders to increase lending to the firm, other things equal. The positive
estimated coefficients on MBLFD suggests that secondary banks may feel that loans to firms
whose main banks have a large exposure are less risky, insofar as the main bank is more likely to
bailout the firm, and thus other lenders, if the firm’s health deteriorates substantially. The
significant negative estimated coefficients on MBPCPR indicate that both nonbank lenders in the
same keiretsu as the firm and government-controlled lenders may be supporting firms with
troubled main banks.
The results in Table 6 make four key points. First, there is widespread evergreening of
loans by banks, with banks being more likely to increase loans to a firm the weaker is the firm’s
health. Lenders appear to be meeting some obligation, perceived or imposed, to support troubled
firms, rather than allocating credit in a way that directs loans primarily to those firms with the
best prospects. This is true even for nonaffiliated secondary banks, perhaps due to pressure from
main banks on other lenders to participate proportionately in any bailout of a troubled firm,
pressure from the government for banks to support troubled firms, or some combination of such
pressures. Second, corporate affiliations, in the form of main bank or keiretsu ties, make it even
more likely that a lender will increase loans to a firm the weaker is that firm’s health. Third,
government-controlled banks also are more likely to increase loans to a firm the weaker is the
firm’s health. Furthermore, in addition to this direct assistance to troubled firms, governmentcontrolled banks provide indirect support of troubled main banks, insofar as governmentcontrolled banks are more likely to increase loans to a firm the weaker is the health of the firm’s
main bank. Finally, the results indicate the extent to which nonaffiliated nonbanks may apply

22

different criteria than other lenders in deciding to supply additional credit to firms. Other things
equal, the weaker is a firm’s health, as measured either by its return on assets or by its liquidity,
nonbanks not in the same keiretsu as the firm are not more likely to increase loans to the firm, in
sharp contrast to each of the other categories of lenders. Thus, nonaffiliated nonbank lenders
appear to be different from these other lender types, insofar as they do not appear to have the
same incentives or pressures to evergreen loans.

IV.

Conclusions
This study empirically investigates how banks responded to incentives to increase loans

to severely impaired firms, even if the firms were not economically viable and the loans were
unlikely to be profitable to the lender. Some of these incentives were internal to the banks,
emanating from financially weak banks attempting to limit the growth in reported problem loans
on their balance sheets in order to maintain required capital ratios, as well as perceived
obligations to come to the aid of firms affiliated with the bank through either main bank or
keiretsu relationships. Other incentives were external to the banks, emanating from government
pressure on banks to continue lending to financially weak firms in order to avoid an even larger
surge in unemployment and firm bankruptcies, as well as limiting the financial costs associated
with massive bank bailouts or failures. The political concerns associated with having to deal
with the official recognition that the banking system was severely undercapitalized and the
consequences of banks severely limiting credit to troubled firms provided bank supervisors with
the incentive to continue their forbearance policies toward banks. The continuing lack of
transparency and the use of accounting gimmicks allowed the forbearance policies to be
implemented. In particular, banks were allowed to understate their nonperforming loans and

23

make loan loss provisions that were insufficient, resulting in bank income, and thus bank capital,
being overstated, allowing banks to continue to appear to be sufficiently capitalized.13
In particular, we test three specific hypotheses: (1) that banks acted in their own self
interest by evergreening loans to the weakest firms; (2) that balance sheet cosmetics were
important, insofar as the incentive for banks to evergreen loans increased as their reported capital
ratio approached their required capital ratio; and (3) that corporate affiliations had the effect of
increasing the availability of loans to affiliated firms, insulating those firms from market
discipline, rather than directing credit to firms with the best prospects as affiliated lenders
exploited the superior information obtained from that affiliation. The empirical results provide
strong support for each of these three hypotheses. Banks have practiced the evergreening of
loans, particularly if the bank had a reported capital ratio close to its required capital ratio and
particularly to affiliated borrowers. It also appears that Japanese banks may have been
responding to government pressure to avoid a credit crunch or a precipitous decline in economic
activity by extending credit to troubled firms. However, in sharp contrast to banks, nonaffiliated
nonbanks do not appear to have had the same incentives to engage in the widespread
evergreening of loans.
Just as forbearance by bank regulators has allowed the banks to be slow to restructure,
bank support for troubled and noncompetitive firms has prevented the needed restructuring of
nonfinancial firms. Thus, while the evergreening of loans in Japan insulated many severely
troubled Japanese firms from market forces and may have prevented a bank capital crunch, that
behavior nonetheless exacerbated economic problems for the economy by promoting the
allocation of an increasing share of bank credit to many of the firms least likely to use it
productively. To the extent that banks reacting to perverse incentives led to credit being

24

allocated to firms with poor prospects, the economic recovery would be hampered. Thus, by
insulating troubled (and perhaps insolvent) firms from market forces that would force either a
major restructuring or bankruptcy of the firms, the misallocation of credit would severely hinder
the economic recovery and prolong the malaise, consistent with the lost decade of the 1990s.
Furthermore, such a misallocation of credit, by inhibiting the needed restructuring of the
economy, would adversely impact the long-run growth prospects of the Japanese economy.

25

REFERENCES
Dvororak, Phred. 2001. “Japan’s Banks Face Debate on What Counts as Capital.” The Wall
Street Journal, November 20, C1.
Gibson, Michael S. 1995. “Can Bank Health Affect Investment? Evidence from Japan.”
Journal of Business, 68, July, 281-308.
Hall, Brian J. and David E. Weinstein. 2000. “Main Banks, Creditor Concentration, and the
Resolution of Financial Distress in Japan.” In Masahiko Aoki and Gary R. Saxonhouse, eds.,
Finance, Governance, and Competitiveness in Japan. New York: Oxford University Press, 6480.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap. 1999. “The Japanese Banking Crisis: Where Did It Come From
and How Will It End?” in Ben Bernanke and Julio Rotemberg, eds., NBER Macroeconomics
Annual 1999. Cambridge: MIT Press.
Hoshi, Takeo and Anil Kashyap. 2001. Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan.
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein. 1990. “The Role of Banks in Reducing the
Costs of Financial Distress in Japan.” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 67-88.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein. 1991. “Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and
Investment: Evidence from Japanese Industrial Groups.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106,
33-60.
Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein. 1993. “The Choice Between Public and
Private Debt: An Analysis of Post-Deregulation Corporate Financing in Japan.” Manuscript.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Anil Shivdasani. 1995. “Firm Performance, Corporate Governance, and
Top Executive Turnover in Japan.” Journal of Financial Economics, 38, 29-58.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Anil Shivdasani. 1997. “Corporate Restructuring During Performance
Declines in Japan.” Journal of Financial Economics, 46, 29-65.
Kang, Jun-Koo and Rene M. Stultz. 2000. Do Banking Shocks Affect Borrowing Firm
Performance? An Analysis of the Japanese Experience.” Journal of Business, 73, 1-23.
Kaplan, Steven N. and Bernadette Minton. 1994. “Appointments of Outsiders to Japanese
Corporate Boards: Determinants and Implications for Managers.” Journal of Financial
Economics, 36, 225-58.
Klein, Michael W., Joe Peek, and Eric S. Rosengren. 2002. “Troubled Banks, Impaired Foreign
Direct Investment: The Role of Relative Access to Credit.” The American Economic Review,
June, forthcoming.

26

Milhaupt, Curtis J. 2001a. “Creative Norm Destruction: The Evolution of Nonlegal Rules in
Japanese Corporate Governance.” University of Pennsylvania Law Review, 149, 2083-2129.
Milhaupt, Curtis J. 2001b. “On the (Fleeting) Existence of the Main Bank System and Other
Japanese Economic Institutions.” The Center for Law and Economic Studies, Columbia
University, Working Paper No. 194, November.
Miwa, Yoshiro and J. Mark Ramseyer. 2001a. “The Fable of the Keiretsu.” The Harvard John
M. Olin Center Discussion Paper No. 316, March.
Miwa, Yoshiro and J. Mark Ramseyer. 2001b. “The Myth of the Main Bank: Japan and
Comparative Corporate Governance.” The Harvard John M. Olin Center Discussion Paper No.
333, September.
Montgomery, Heather. 2001. “The Effect of the Basel Accord on Bank Portfolios in Japan.”
Manuscript presented at NBER Japan Group meeting, Tokyo, September.
Morck, Randall and Masao Nakamura. 1999. “Banks and Corporate Control in Japan.” Journal
of Finance, 54, 319-39.
Morck, Randall, Masao Nakamura, and Anil Shivdasani. 2000. “Banks, Ownership Structure
and Firm Value in Japan.” Journal of Business, 73, 539-67.
Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren. 1997. “The International Transmission of Financial Shocks:
The Case of Japan.” The American Economic Review, 87, September, 495-505.
Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren. 2000. “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank
Crisis on Real Activity in the United States.” The American Economic Review, 90, March, 3045.
Peek, Joe and Eric S. Rosengren. 2001. “Determinants of the Japan Premium: Actions Speak
Louder Than Words.” Journal of International Economics, 53, 285-305.
Petersen, Mitchell A. and Raghuram G. Rajan. 1994 “The Benefits of Lending Relationships:
Evidence from Small Business Data.” Journal of Finance, 49, March, 3-38.
Pilling, David. 2002. “Japanese Banks in ‘Intensive Care,’ says FSA.” Financial Times, April
13-14.
Singer, Jason and Phred Dvorak. 2001. “Shinsei Bank Pressured to Keep Shakey Loans.” The
Wall Street Journal, September 26, C1.
Tett, Gillian and David Ibison. 2001. “Tokyo ‘May Have to Support Banks’.” Financial Times,
September 14.

27

The Economist. 2001. “Mere Fiddling.” June 30, 69.
The Economist. 2002a. “Surreal.” April 20, 74.
The Economist. 2002b. “Nationalized Once, Nationalized Again?” July 6, 71.
Weinstein, David E. and Yishay Yafeh. 1995. “Japan’s Corporate Groups: Collusive or
Competitive? An Empirical Investigation of Keiretsu Behavior.” Journal of Industrial
Economics, 43, December, 359-76.
Weinstein, David E. and Yishay Yafeh. 1998. “On the Costs of a Bank-Centered Financial
System: Evidence from the Changing Main Bank Relations in Japan.” Journal of Finance, 53,
635-72.

28

Table 1
Bonds and Loans as a Percent of Assets, Mean Values
Bonds
Loans
Bank Loans
Main Bank Loans

1993
10.12
18.44
15.03
4.46

1994
10.17
18.72
15.25
4.56

1995
9.73
18.64
15.28
4.65

1996
8.67
17.95
14.87
4.52

1997
8.38
17.46
14.58
4.51

Table 2
Loan Increases and the Subsequent Change in Stock Prices
Ordinary Least Squares Estimation
1994-98
1996-98
Total Loans
-0.775
-2.433**
(1.224)
(0.760)
Main BankSame Keiretsu
Main BankNot Same Keiretsu
Secondary BankSame Keiretsu
Secondary BankNot Same Keiretsu
Number of Observations
4783
2887
0.422
0.478
R2

1998
7.34
17.83
14.83
4.74

1999
7.11
19.87
16.55
5.43

1996-98
-3.463*
(1.390)
-3.042**
(1.011)
-1.489
(2.060)
0.684
(1.158)
2887
0.479

Notes: Each equation also includes a set of annual time dummy variables and a set of
industry dummy variables. Below each estimated coefficient, we report the associated robust
standard error calculated by relaxing the assumption of independence of the errors for a given year.

* Significant at the 5 percent level.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.

29

Table 3
Descriptive Statistics for Regressors, Market-Traded Bank Sample, 1993-99
Mean
Std Dev
Min
Max
KEIR
0.513
0.500
0
1
PK

12.073

16.443

0

88.300

MBLFD

7.135

6.435

0

75.265

MBPCPR

-7.283

23.862

-55.915

57.783

FROA

2.842

2.923

-18.644

24.022

FLIQA

34.061

15.082

0.823

96.198

FSALES

1.708

10.230

-82.763

155.572

BPCPR

-7.464

22.871

-64.746

128.835

MBANK

0.073

0.260

0

1

SAMEK

0.066

0.249

0

1

FLASSET

7.356

1.513

2.750

11.202

FENBMKT

0.014

0.118

0

1

FINBMKT

0.731

0.443

0

1

FEXBMKT

0.037

0.189

0

1

30

Table 4
The Effects of Evergreening and Balance Sheet Cosmetics on Bank Lending
Logit Specification
Full Sample
Extreme Observations Eliminated
FROA
-0.053**
-0.059**
(0.010)
(0.010)
FLIQA
-0.011**
-0.011**
(0.002)
(0.002)
FSALES
0.008**
0.010**
(0.002)
(0.001)
REQ1
0.352**
0.360**
(0.122)
(0.128)
REQ2
0.231**
0.217**
(0.071)
(0.072)
REQ1*FROA
-0.027
-0.025*
(0.014)
(0.013)
REQ2*FROA
-0.004
0.001
(0.006)
(0.011)
REQ1*FLIQA
-0.006*
-0.006
(0.003)
(0.003)
REQ2*FLIQA
-0.004*
-0.004
(0.002)
(0.002)
REQ1*FSALES
0.002
0.000
(0.002)
(0.003)
REQ2*FSALES
-0.003
-0.005
(0.003)
(0.003)
BPCPR
0.001
0.002
(0.003)
(0.003)
MBANK
0.583**
0.573**
(0.022)
(0.021)
MBLFD
0.008
0.021**
(0.004)
(0.006)
MBPCPR
-0.002
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
KEIR
0.070
0.068
(0.043)
(0.047)
PK
-0.006**
-0.006**
(0.002)
(0.002)
SAMEK
0.345**
0.357**
(0.032)
(0.032)
Number of Observations
96565
94074
Log Likelihood
-52083
-50673
Notes: The estimated equations also include FLASSET, FENBMKT, FINBMKT, FEXBMKT, a set of
industry dummy variables, and a set of annual dummy variables. Below each estimated coefficient, we
report the associated robust standard error calculated by relaxing the assumption of independence of the
errors for a given year.
* Significant at the 5 percent level.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.

31

Table 5
Corporate Affiliations and the Probability of Additional Bank Loans
Logit Specification
Full Sample
Extreme Observations Eliminated
FROA
-0.052**
-0.057**
(0.009)
(0.009)
FLIQA
-0.011**
-0.011**
(0.002)
(0.003)
FSALES
0.008**
0.011**
(0.002)
(0.001)
REQ1
0.346**
0.356**
(0.124)
(0.128)
REQ2
0.224**
0.211**
(0.071)
(0.072)
REQ1*FROA
-0.024
-0.023
(0.014)
(0.013)
REQ2*FROA
-0.002
0.003
(0.007)
(0.011)
REQ1*FLIQA
-0.006*
-0.006
(0.003)
(0.003)
REQ2*FLIQA
-0.003*
-0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
REQ1*FSALES
0.002
0.001
(0.002)
(0.003)
REQ2*FSALES
-0.002
-0.005
(0.003)
(0.003)
BPCPR
0.002
0.003
(0.003)
(0.003)
MBLFD
0.008
0.021**
(0.005)
(0.006)
MBPCPR
-0.001
-0.001
(0.001)
(0.001)
KEIR
0.059
0.058
(0.045)
(0.050)
PK
-0.005**
-0.006**
(0.002)
(0.002)
MBANK
0.781**
0.738**
(0.073)
(0.079)
MB*SAMEK
-0.629**
-0.613**
(0.139)
(0.145)
MB*KEIR
0.244
0.264
(0.152)
(0.145)
MB*PK
0.003
0.002
(0.003)
(0.003)
MB*MBLFD
0.003
0.003
(0.005)
(0.006)
MB*FROA
-0.026*
-0.025**
(0.010)
(0.008)
MB*FLIQA
-0.004
-0.003
(0.002)
(0.002)
MB*FSALES
-0.001
-0.003
(0.002)
(0.003)
MB*BPCPR
-0.002*
-0.003
(0.001)
(0.001)
SAMEK
0.501**
0.525**
(0.129)
(0.131)
SK*PK
-0.004**
-0.003**
(0.001)
(0.001)
SK*MBLFD
-0.003
-0.001
(0.003)
(0.004)
SK*MBPCPR
0.002
0.001

32

SK*FROA
SK*FLIQA
SK*FSALES
SK*BPCPR
Number of Observations
Log Likelihood

(0.001)
-0.001
(0.014)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.007*
(0.003)
-0.005*
(0.002)
96565
-52040

(0.001)
-0.006
(0.013)
0.001
(0.002)
-0.007*
(0.003)
-0.004
(0.002)
94074
-50635

Notes: The estimated equations also include FLASSET, FENBMKT, FINBMKT, FEXBMKT, a set of
industry dummy variables, and a set of annual dummy variables. The set of estimated coefficients for
secondary banks not in the same keiretsu is the base, with the estimated coefficients for all other types of
lenders representing differential effects. Below each estimated coefficient, we report the associated
robust standard error calculated by relaxing the assumption of independence of the errors for a given
year.
* Significant at the 5 percent level.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.

33

Table 6
Factors Affecting the Probability of Increased Lending, By Type of Lender
Logit Specification; Omitting Extreme Observations
Main Bank Main Bank Secondary
Secondary
Same K
Not same K
Same K
Not same K
Intercept
0.299
0.275
-0.064
-0.696**
(0.261)
(0.245)
(0.323)
(0.225)
FROA
-0.090**
-0.097**
-0.074**
-0.061**
(0.025)
(0.009)
(0.017)
(0.011)
FLIQA
-0.011*
-0.018**
-0.012**
-0.011**
(0.005)
(0.003)
(0.003)
(0.003)
FSALES
-0.000
0.005
0.001
0.009**
(0.007)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
KEIR
0.449**
0.007
(0.133)
(0.041)
PK
-0.005*
-0.008
-0.009**
-0.005**
(0.002)
(0.004)
(0.003)
(0.002)
MBLFD
0.020
0.029**
0.026**
0.022**
(0.011)
(0.005)
(0.007)
(0.007)
MBPCPR
-0.004
-0.002
-0.001
0.000
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.002)
(0.001)
Number of Observations
142518
Log Likelihood
-74864

Nonbank
Same K
-0.261
(0.320)
-0.063*
(0.026)
-0.006*
(0.003)
0.008*
(0.003)
-0.012**
(0.003)
0.011
(0.009)
-0.008**
(0.003)

Nonbank
Not same K
-0.950**
(0.313)
-0.016
(0.010)
-0.005
(0.004)
0.007
(0.005)
0.383**
(0.140)
-0.012*
(0.005)
0.005
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.003)

Notes: The estimated equations also include FLASSET, FENBMKT, FINBMKT, FEXBMKT, a
set of industry dummy variables, and a set of annual dummy variables. Below each estimated
coefficient, we report the associated robust standard error calculated by relaxing the assumption
of independence of the errors for a given year.
* Significant at the 5 percent level.
** Significant at the 1 percent level.

34

Government
-0.961**
(0.282)
-0.045**
(0.012)
-0.010**
(0.003)
0.003
(0.003)
0.410**
(0.081)
-0.008**
(0.003)
-0.008
(0.006)
-0.004*
(0.002)

1

That Japanese banks have duties other than to maximize profits is made clear by the banking
laws that require new investors and current owners with more than 20 percent ownership in a
bank to obtain regulatory approval, including satisfying a condition that large shareholders “fully
understand a bank’s social responsibilities” (The Economist 2002b).
2

The continuing deterioration in real estate prices, and of the Japanese economy more generally,
resulted in lowered bank ratings, as well as the failure of some banks, and significant increases in
the Japan premium, the additional risk premium Japanese banks paid in the interbank lending
market (Peek and Rosengren 2001).
3

A bank must classify a loan as nonperforming when the borrower has failed to make interest
payments for more than three months, the loan is restructured, or the firm declares bankruptcy.
4

In fact, some banks have even gone to the extreme of taking on loans called in by other banks,
for example, Dai-ichi Kangyo Bank with Mycal loans, or buying loans from Shinsei Bank to
avoid a repeat of the Sogo bankruptcy keyed in part by Shinsei putting its Sogo loans back to the
government. Thus, these banks would be increasing their own exposure to severely troubled
firms in order to delay inevitable bankruptcies by their borrowers.
5

For example, it appears that almost half of the public funds injected into the banking system in
1998 and 1999 was used to provide debt forgiveness to construction companies (Tett and Ibison
2001). Such pressures have come out into the open recently with reports that Shinsei Bank,
perhaps the only bank in Japan that has seriously applied credit risk analysis in its lending
decisions, has been pressured by the FSA to continue lending to severely troubled firms, with
FSA Commissioner Shoji Mori quoted as saying, “Shinsei should behave in line with other
Japanese banks” (Singer and Dvorak 2001).
6

For example, a study by the Nikkei newspaper found that nearly 75 percent of loans to Japanese
firms that declared bankruptcy in 2000 had been classified as sound or merely in need of
monitoring (The Economist 2001). And there is much evidence of government complicity with
banks in the understatement of problem loans. For example, the put options granted to Shinsei
and Aozora associated with the purchases of supposedly cleaned up banks were awarded to the
buyers of the failed banks because the government prevented the bidders from inspecting the
banks’ books so that the exposures of other banks with loans to the same firms would not be
exposed (The Economist 2002b).
7

Certainly, banks do make risky loans. The key issue is whether banks are charging an
appropriate risk premium to compensate them for the risk exposure. However, the evidence is
that Japanese banks, for the most part, were not charging differential interest rates tied to the
riskiness of loans. In fact, the evidence in both Tables 1 and 2 suggests that firms were leaving
the bond market, an arms length market where they would be charged an appropriate risk
premium, and returning to relationship loans from banks, and, furthermore, that firms receiving

35

additional bank loans in the late 1990s had stock prices that tended to underperform the market
during the subsequent year.
8

For example, Bank of Japan Governor Masaru Hayami told parliament that the capital ratios of
Japanese banks in March 2001 would have been only 7 percent rather than the reported 11
percent had they been held to the U.S. standards of capital adequacy (Dvorak 2001). An even
lower, and likely more prudent, estimate of the state of capitalization of Japanese banks is that
the reported 10 percent capital ratios of the big banks represents a capital ratio of only about 2
percent once the public funds injected into the banks, the value of deferred taxes, and the
“profits” from the revaluation of real estate holdings are subtracted from the banks’ capital (The
Economist 2002).
9

The reported regressions do not include FPCPR, since it was dominated as a measure of firm
health by the other measures, never having a significant estimated coefficient. This may not be
surprising, since once a Japanese firm’s health has deteriorated substantially, its stock price
movements are often dominated by news concerning the likelihood that the firm’s lenders will
rescue (bailout) the firm and the magnitude of any assistance the firm is likely to receive from its
lenders, rather than the firm’s own economic performance.
10

This is not surprising, given the widely held views that bank capital ratios in Japan are
substantially overstated and that the nonperforming loan ratios substantially understate the
severity of the deterioration in the quality of loans in bank portfolios. To the extent that analysts
are able to penetrate the veil of reported capital and nonperforming loan ratios, stock prices
should reflect the best estimates of bank health.
11

Extreme observations are defined as those for which any one of the regressors, other than the
(0,1) dummy variables, has a value that is more than four standard deviations from its mean
value. The removal of observations with extreme values reduces the sample size by about 3
percent.
12

Although not shown in the table in order to conserve space, each regression includes a
measure of firm size, a set of three bond market variables, a set of annual dummy variables, and
a set of industry dummy variables, as described above. The logarithm of the firm’s real assets
always has a significant negative estimated coefficient, both here and in later specifications.
Among the bond market variables, the dummy variable that has a value of one when a firm
enters the bond market always has a significant negative estimated coefficient, as would be
expected. Similarly, the dummy variable that has a value of one when a firm exits the bond
market always has a significant positive estimated coefficient, as would be expected.
13

It appears that the FSA may be getting tougher on banks, given the results of the recent FSA
inspections of banks and their problem borrowers. Based on the inspections, 34 of the 149 firms
were reclassified as being “in danger of bankruptcy,” requiring banks to make loan loss
provisions equal to 70 percent of the value of the loans rather than only 15 percent for loans “in
need of monitoring.” As a result, banks have had to substantially increase their loan loss

36

provisions. However, the required provisions still were not large enough to reduce the capital
ratios of any of the top 13 financial institutions below the required capital ratio (Pilling 2002).

37

