                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 BANK TIES AND BOND MARKET ACCESS: EVIDENCE ON
                   INVESTMENT-CASH FLOW SENSITIVITY IN JAPAN

                                          Patrick M. McGuire

                                         Working Paper 9644
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9644


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




I would like to thank Gary Saxonhouse, Matthew Shapiro, Susanto Basu, and I. Serdar Dinc, all from the
University of Michigan. In addition, I received many helpful comments from Anil Kashyap and the
participants in the NBER/CEPR/Tokyo University CIRJE/EIJS Japan Project Meeting in Tokyo, Japan (Sept
13-14, 2002). I would also like to thank Fumio Hayashi from Tokyo University, for help with data
preparation, and the Ministry of Economy, Trade, and Industry in Japan and the Economics Department of
Tokyo University for use of their raw data. Any errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of
the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.


©2003 by Patrick M. McGuire All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Bank Ties and Bond Market Access: Evidence on Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivity in Japan
Patrick M. McGuire
NBER Working Paper No. 9644
April 2003
JEL No. G3

                                            ABSTRACT


The banking literature has established that banks can alleviate information asymmetries between
lenders and borrowers, while the Q literature has used cash flow sensitivity analysis to test whether

financing constraints hinder investment. This paper investigates whether bank ties in Japan were
costly for mature and healthy firms in the 1980's and 1990's, and whether banks continued to

facilitate investment once non-bank financing options became available. Using the explicit bond

issuing criteria to solve the endogenous firm-sorting problem, I measure the investment-cash flow

sensitivity of Japanese firms, and find it lowest for those firms known to have faced bond market

constraints. I then find that the spread in sensitivity was much larger for main bank client firms, once

bond market access is controlled for. This result, coupled with results on the relative profitability

and bond activity of bank-affiliated firms, is consistent with banks capturing the net benefits of

relationship lending during the period of bond market deregulation.

Patrick M. McGuire
Bank for International Settlements
Centralbahnplatz 2 CH-4002
Basel, Switzerland
patrick.mcguire@bis.org
1         Introduction

The relationship banking literature postulates that close bank ties can mitigate the asym-
metric information and moral hazard problems that afflict public capital markets. Related
with this, the Q literature has interpreted excessive correlation between a firm’s investment
and its internal net worth as evidence of financing constraints.1 Combining these literatures,
Hoshi, Kashyap, and Scharfstein (1991) (hereafter HKS91) investigate the investment-cash
flow sensitivity of bank affiliated and independent firms in Japan, and provide evidence that
strong ties helped to alleviate liquidity constraints. Since the Japanese asset market collapse,
a body of work has emerged which focuses on the associated costs of “main banking”. This
paper builds on this literature by examining the investment-cash flow sensitivity of Japanese
manufacturing firms, and uses the explicit bond issuing criteria in a simple test of whether
firms enjoyed positive net benefits from close bank ties in the 1980’s and 1990’s.
        While many have shown that banks can act as effective firm monitors, bank dependence
may be costly to firms if banks use their market power to extract rents (Sharpe (1990)
and Rajan (1992)). If close bank ties are costly for mature and healthy firms, should we
still expect banks to facilitate investment? Do banks retain their ability to lower cash flow
sensitivity when outside financing options are introduced? Can exogenous changes in the
financing environment be used to determine which party enjoys the benefits of relationship
banking? This paper addresses these questions, and highlights the importance of properly
addressing endogenous firm-sorting issues in empirical investment-Q work.
        The empirical work on cash flow sensitivity has struggled with the problem of isolating
financially constrained firms.2 Ideally, exogenous criteria indicative of financing constraints
should be used to sort firms before comparing sensitivity across groups. Often, however,
empirical work is forced to rely on behavioral characteristics which can lead to endogenous
sample selection problems. Japan is a natural place to address this issue both because of its
historical reliance on large domestic banks in corporate financing (the “Main Bank” system),
and because of the government regulation of the capital markets for much of the post war
period.3 Throughout the 1980s, firms had to meet explicit criteria set by the government in
    1
     Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988), Oliner and Rudebusch (1992), Chirinko (1993), and Kaplan and
Zingales (1997).
   2
     See Hubbard (1998) for discussion.
   3
     Reviewing the Japanese Main Bank system, Aoki (1994) noted, “In postwar Japan, the main bank
system has been the main pillar of corporate monitoring and governance, compensating for the lack of more



                                                   2
order to issue bonds in the domestic market. These bond criteria can be exploited in empirical
work to isolate constrained firms, and serve as a partial solution to the endogeneity problem.
   Using these criteria, I first show that sensitivity was lowest for those firms that were
restricted from the bond market during the 1980’s, a result very much at odds with the
standard prediction in the Q literature. That is, the investment of firms known to have
faced capital market restrictions was less sensitive to measures of internal net worth than
that of firms with a wider range of financing options. This result survives several robustness
tests, including controls for negative observations as outlined in Allayannis and Mozumdar
(2001), and may indicate that sensitivity analysis is not an appropriate technique for iden-
tifying financing constraints. However, restricted firms were, by definition, bank-dependent,
meaning the results presented here are consistent with both established theory with HKS91.
   As effective firm monitors, banks may have facilitated the efficient use of capital, and
helped firms to achieve and maintain their first-best investment path. On the other hand,
high monitoring costs may have meant that firms paid a premium for bank financing. In
a more sinister scenario, banks may have enjoyed information monopolies, or market power
from the remaining capital controls, that allowed them to extract rents through higher
interest rates, compensating balance requirements, or pressure to over-borrow (Weinstein
and Yafeh (1998)). This is of particular concern because of the gradual nature of bond
market deregulation; banks may have been able to capitalize on their market power over
firms that did not meet the bond criteria. Thus, the results introduced above do not provide
clear evidence on whether bank ties were a net benefit to firms. Sensitivity may have been
lower for restricted firms because they enjoyed better access to funding (from close banks),
but possibly with high “indirect” costs. Alternatively, sensitivity may have been driven by
artificially high loan flows if firms were pressured to borrow.
   Splitting the sample using both a standard proxy for main bank affiliation and the bond
criteria sheds light on this issue. As in Hoshi et al. (1990b), this section implicitly hypoth-
esizes that if firms enjoyed a positive net benefit from close bank ties, sensitivity should be
lower for bank-affiliated firms, regardless of bond market access. In addition, there should
be some ex post observable difference in performance between affiliated and independent
firms that reflects the benefits of bank ties. If the net benefit accrued to banks (because
of high monitoring costs or rent extraction) then bond-eligible, main bank client firms may
arm’s-length market-oriented means such as the takeover mechanism, and probably obviating a need for
them to develop.”


                                                 3
have had a stronger incentive to move to bond financing, even if this increased the likelihood
of asymmetric information problems. In other words, the implications of higher sensitivity
may have been more palatable to firms than the bank relationship.
    The evidence presented here supports the latter case. For the four firm groups, sensitivity
was highest for main bank client firms that had access to the bond market in the 1980s,
and lowest for main bank client firms that did not. That is, the spread in sensitivity was
larger for bank-affiliated firms than for independent firms once external financing options
are introduced. In addition, bank-affiliated firms accessed the bond market more often, and
with (slightly) larger issues than did independent firms, despite their lower profitability.
    The results are consistent with banks capturing the rents from main bank ties. With
deregulation, mature and healthy firms chose to reduce bank dependence, implying that
internal financing (and its associated costs) was less than the cost of a main bank relationship.
Importantly, these results do not imply that firms never benefited from having a main bank.
Indeed, it is often argued that the bank centered financial system was an important factor
behind Japan’s rapid growth prior to the mid-1970’s, and only became obsolete once Japan
reached the technological frontier. The lack of outside financing options in this earlier period
precludes the firm division proposed in this paper.
    The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the literature
on cash flow sensitivity analysis, with emphasis on recent papers that question its validity,
as well as the empirical work on main banking in Japan. Section 3 presents the empirical
methodology, discusses the bond eligibility criteria in place in the 1980s, and describes the
data. Section 4 presents the empirical results using standard cash flow sensitivity analysis,
and robustness checks based on different firm sorting mechanisms, data samples, and model
specifications. Section 5 concludes.


2     Literature Review

2.1    Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivity
The Modigliani-Miller theorem implies that a firm’s financial structure does not matter for
investment decisions. Absent financing constraints, all positive net-present-value investment
projects are financed, and arbitrage within and across financial markets makes irrelevant the
mix of finance sources. However, capital markets are not perfect, and information asym-


                                               4
metries may mean managers are unable to credibly convey the internal worthiness of their
investment projects to public markets.4
       Starting with Fazzari, Hubbard and Petersen (1988) (hereafter FHP88), a large literature
has emerged that uses investment-cash flow sensitivity to investigate financing constraints.
The central idea is as follows. Firms use a mixture of internal and external funds to finance
investment, but financing constraints drive a wedge between the cost of these funds. With
a large enough wedge, investment will vary not only with the availability of positive net-
present-value projects (as captured by Tobin’s Q), but also with fluctuations in internal
funds.5 Presumably, financing constraints can be measured by comparing the sensitivity
of investment rates to cash flow across different classes of firms that are a priori assumed
constrained. Firms that are the most constrained should display a higher sensitivity, as they
are forced to use internal funds to maintain optimal investment.6
       Several recent papers question the validity of this approach. Kaplan and Zingales (1997)
(hereafter KZ97) reexamine the “constrained” firm group used in the FHP88 study, and
show that within this group, sensitivity is highest for those firms that are the deemed uncon-
strained. They challenge the implicit assumption that the sensitivity of investment to cash
flow increases monotonically with the degree of financing constraint, the so called “mono-
tonicity hypothesis”.7 They argue that the ambiguity of the theory which establishes the
relationship between external financing constraints and the sensitivity of investment to in-
ternal funds implies that it is ultimately an empirical issue. Cash flow may act as a proxy
for investment opportunities not captured by Tobin’s Q, and do so differently for different
groups of firms. Despite their findings, their analysis has been criticized because of small
sample size.8
   4
     Asymmetric information can cause the costs of internal and external finance to diverge (Greenwald,
Stiglitz, and Weiss (1984), Myers and Majluf (1984)). Also see Bernanke and Gertler (1989, 1990), Jensen
and Meckling (1976), and Hart and Moore (1995).
   5
     See Hubbard (1998) and Chirinko (1993). Note that this methodology can detect financing constraints,
but says nothing about their source (either agency costs or asymmetric information).
   6
     FHP88 use dividend payouts to sort firms. Oliner and Rudebusch (1992) find sensitivity highest for
young firms, and firms susceptible to insider trading. Schaller (1993) shows sensitivity is highest for young
manufacturing firms with a dispersed ownership structure. Chirinko and Schaller (1995) use affiliation with
a corporate group, firm age, and whether the firm is in the manufacturing sector.
   7
     In their critique of FHP88, KZ97 use letters to shareholders and supplementary notes to track the inci-
dence of liquidity problems and reclassify firms. In a simple model, they show that whether the monotonicity
hypothesis is satisfied depends on the ratio of the second derivatives of the production and the financing cost
functions.
   8
     Fazzari, Hubbard, and Petersen (2000) defend the original FHP88 results by arguing that the KZ97



                                                      5
    Cleary (1999) reexamines this issue using a large sample of U.S. firms and a sorting index
derived from six financial variables. In agreement with KZ97, he finds that unconstrained
firms have the highest cash flow sensitivity. He draws support for this result from Mayer
(1990), who empirically demonstrates that internal funds are the predominant source of
financing for all firms (implying a correlation between liquidity and investment), and Jensen
(1986), who argues that managers have an incentive to grow firms beyond their optimal size.
    Recently, Allayannis and Mozumdar (2001) have overturned these critiques of cash flow
sensitivity analysis. Using the data from both the KZ97 and Cleary (1999) studies, they
investigate whether the results in each are driven by negative cash flow observations. They
argue that firms with negative cash flow have driven investment down to its lowest possible
level, making it unable to respond to further reductions (or small fluctuations) in cash flow.
This reduces the investment-cash flow sensitivity for these observations. After correcting for
this, they conclude that the Cleary (1999) results no longer hold, and the the KZ97 results
are driven by a few influential observations and small sample size. Reaffirming the original
FHP88 results, cash flow sensitivity is highest for those firms that are a priori assumed
constrained.
    The evidence to date suggests that sensitivity analysis may be useful in detecting financial
constraints, but lacks the rigorous theoretical backing required to determine their source. In
this paper, I present evidence using this approach for the purpose of reexamining Japanese
main bank relationships, but rely on what are arguably exogenous criteria to sort firms.
Further I show that the results presented here survive the robustness check proposed by
Allyayannis and Mozumdar (2002).


2.2     The Case of Japan
“Main banking” has been at the core of the post war Japanese financial system, and as such
has received considerable research attention.9 A substantial portion of this research has
model does not adequately capture the role of cash flow in investment decisions. Kaplan and Zingales (2000)
reply to this critique by pointing out that the model analysis in Fazzari et al. (2000) fails to include second
order effects.
   9
     To name but a few in a large literature, Kaplan (1994), Kaplan and Minton (1994) and Morck and
Nakamura (1999) analyze the appointment of outside directors from main banks to corporate boards. Prowse
(1990) suggests that bank ownership can prevent wealth transfers from debt to equity holders, while Prowse
(1992) shows that the top shareholders of main bank client firms do not take larger positions in cases where
greater control might improve firm performance, presumably because banks have other means by which
monitor management. Sheard (1989) argues that banks replace the takeover mechanism in arms-length


                                                      6
focused on the investment-cash flow sensitivity of Japanese firms, typically in the context
of assessing the benefits of affiliation with large domestic banks. In their seminal paper
in both the Japan and Q literatures, HKS91 examine a panel of 145 manufacturing firms,
and find that firms with strong bank ties exhibited significantly lower investment-cash flow
sensitivity than did independent firms. Since main banks acquire inside knowledge of client
firm’s investment opportunities, the asymmetric information problems that force firms to
rely on internal funds for investment are reduced.
    While main bank client firms may enjoy access to capital, bank affiliation can be costly.
Sharpe (1990) and Rajan (1992) argue that information monopolies or market power allow
banks to extract rents. If a firm is known to be bank-affiliated, it may find it difficult to raise
financing elsewhere since public capital markets may interpret this as bank refusal to extend
credit because of some adverse private information. Thakor (1996) suggests that firms can
seek financing from several sources to eliminate the threat of being held up or denied credit.10
    In Japan, deregulation during the 1980’s provided firms with alternative funding sources
for the first time in the post war era. This expansion of non-bank financing options led to
increased heterogeneity in capital structure across firms which researchers have been able to
exploit in identifying the costs of bank affiliation.11 Hoshi et al. (1990b) examine the shift
toward non-bank financing for a sample of 109 firms, and find sensitivity higher for firms
that decreased their reliance on bank debt. This suggests that the net benefit to firms of
bank affiliation may have been negative (at least in this period) since these firms presumably
could have maintained close bank ties after deregulation.12
    Others have also investigated whether firms enjoyed net benefits from close bank ties,
particularly during the 1970’s and 1980’s. Horiuchi et al. (1988) found no evidence of risk
sharing between banks and their client firms, while Caves and Uekusa (1976), Nakatani
(1984), Kang and Shivdasani (1999) and Weinstein and Yafeh (1995, 1998) all show that
credit markets. Morck, Nakamura, and Shivdasani (2000) investigate the positive and negative effects of
bank ownership on firm value. See Aoki (1994) for a thorough discussion of main banking in Japan. For a
more recent treatment of the Japanese financial system, see Hoshi and Kashyap (2001).
  10
     Ongena and Smith (2000) empirically show that multiple bank relationships can alleviate the hold-up
problem, but that they limit the availability of credit.
  11
     See Hoshi et al. (1993) and Hoshi and Kashyap (2001) for discussion on the development of the bond
market.
  12
     The authors speculate on the nature of the costs of bank affiliation. Banks may require higher rates
of return because of reserve requirements, and may require a premium on loans, which are less liquid than
publicly traded debt. In addition, firms may incur indirect costs if banks (as debt rather than equity holders)
encourage excessively conservative investment policies.


                                                      7
bank-affiliated firms performed worse than independents on a variety of profitability mea-
sures, suggesting that the benefits of bank relationships are not internalized by the firm.13
       In a more direct test, Weinstein and Yafeh (1998) estimate a model where banks can in-
fluence firm investment through shareholding, and force firms to borrow as though their cost
of capital is lower than it actually is. They argue that bank pressure induced artificially high
loan flows and inefficient investment strategies that possibly led to the over-capitalization of
client firms in the 1980’s. Consistent with their story, the deregulation of the bond market
led to a deterioration of the bank’s traditional customer base during the 1980’s. In addition,
banks were initially prevented from entering the underwriting business, which meant fewer
profit opportunities as banks were left with unused deposits.14 Regulated banks lacked the
human capital to properly assess the risk of individual investment projects, and started lend-
ing to smaller, less well known firms, often based on land collateral values. Indeed, the bad
loans that emerged after the market collapse have remained (undisclosed, for the most part)
on the books of most Japanese banks.15 In such an environment, it is not inconceivable that
banks pressured those firms over which they retained market power to borrow more than
was economically efficient, particularly if the government implicitly guaranteed solvency.
       More recently, Hayashi (2000) re-examines the HKS91 firm sample (with different data),
and after excluding outliers, finds no significant difference in the cash flow sensitivity of
bank-affiliated and independent firms.16 In fact, in some of the reported regressions, the
point estimate on cash flow sensitivity for main bank firms is larger than for independent
firms (although the difference is statistically insignificant).17 While this discrepancy may
ultimately be driven by econometric technicalities, it does cast a shadow on the robustness
  13
     Nakatani (1984) also finds that the variance of firm profitability is less for affiliated firms than for
independent firms, suggesting that main banks serve as an “insurance policy” by implicitly committing to
extend credit in times of financial distress in exchange for rents collected when the firm is healthy. This
result is later challenged by Beason (1998).
  14
     This restriction was relaxed in 1993 (Hoshi and Hamao (2000)). For a discussion of the “Big Bang”
deregulation in the 1990s, see Hoshi and Kashyap (1999).
  15
     Hoshi and Kashyap (1999) estimate the cost of the bad loan problem in the 1990s to be roughly 7% of
GDP, several times the size of the U.S. savings and loan crisis.
  16
     The difference in the data used in the HKS91 and Hayashi (2000) studies is of some relevance here.
HKS91 use data from the Nikkei needs database, which does not contain capital stock data by asset type.
The JDB data used in the Hayashi (2000) study (and in this paper) contains a detailed breakdown of asset
types and gross depreciation which allows for more accurate calculation of the real capital stock. For details
on this issue, see the appendix of this paper and Hayashi and Inoue (1991).
  17
     Hoshi (2000) counters the Hayashi (2000) critique by showing that if the data is corrected systematically,
the earlier results still hold.



                                                      8
of the original HKS91 results, and calls for further investigation.
    Building on this literature, this paper investigates the investment-cash flow sensitivity of
Japanese manufacturing firms in the 1980-96 period. While similar in spirit to Hoshi et al.
(1990b), it makes use of a larger panel, uses the more detailed data described in Hayashi
(2000), and uses the bond eligibility criteria as an exogenous firm sorting mechanism. In
addition, it relies on recently developed empirical techniques, and carries the analysis of
cash flow sensitivity and profitability into the 1990’s when bond market deregulation was
complete.


3     Empirical Methodology

The empirical procedure employed here is similar to that used in HKS (1990b, 1991) and
Hayashi (2000), but incorporates alternative model specifications taken from recent papers
in the Q literature, and uses a variety of empirical methodologies in order to control for
measurement error. The goal here is to (a) examine the relative sizes of cash flow sensitivity
for firms with and without access to bond financing in order to establish the robustness of
the HKS91 results, and (b) estimate sensitivity for main bank client firms after controlling
for these outside financing options. As argued below, this latter query serves as a simple
test of whether firms enjoyed positive net benefits from bank affiliation once bond financing
became available.


3.1    Model Specification
The empirical analysis relies on the standard Q equation from the dynamic optimization
problem facing the firm each period, and I briefly review its derivation here. Firms are
assumed to chose It (investment net of sales of existing capital) subject to capital adjustment
costs, and an accumulation constraint on capital, K.
    Let i index firms and t index time periods. A general form of the cost of adjustment
function is                             "                              #2
                                        α  Ii,t     Ii,t−1
                    G(Ki,t−1 , Ii,t ) =          −β        − (c + νi,t )    Ki,t−1          (1)
                                        2 Ki,t−1    Ki,t−2
where c is the (constant) target investment rate, and νi,t is a stochastic shock that contains
both firm and period specific effects. Ii,t is investment during period t, and Ki,t−1 is the
capital stock at the beginning of period t. This functional form is a more general case of

                                                 9
that most often used in the literature (where β = 0), and is used in Love (2000) and Sekine
(1999). Ideally, current investment should not depend on lagged investment. However, if
firms find it difficult to cancel investment projects once they are started, investment rates
will exhibit persistence across periods not explained by movements in Q. Also, a positive β
can capture some reductions in adjustment costs as firms learn to “work around” investment
activity that normally upsets the production process. Since investment has been shown
to be persistent over multiple periods, I test for this possibility by examining the size and
significance of β.
       The derivation of the standard investment equation requires that the conditions laid out
by Hayashi (1982) hold, namely that production and adjustment costs are constant returns
to scale, and that capital markets are perfect. The inclusion of regressors correlated with
the internal net worth of the firm are a method of testing this last assumption. Only when
financing constraints exist (and only if the “monotonicity hypothesis” as outlined in KZ97
holds) would we expect significant coefficients on such regressors.
       Rearranging the first order conditions from the maximization of a dynamic profit function
which contains the adjustment cost function specified above yields the standard equation in
the literature, to which some measure of the firm’s net worth is added as a regressor.
                                    PtI
                                        "                        #
             Ii,t       Ii,t−1   1
                   =c+β        +             (Qi,t − 1) + γcf CFi,t + νi + µt + i,t                (2)
            Ki,t−1      Ki,t−2 α (1 − τt )Pt
Qi,t is beginning of period average q, CFi,t is some measure of cash flow, τt is the corporate
tax rate, Pt and PtI are the beginning of period output and capital prices, respectively, c is
the target investment rate, and α is the adjustment cost parameter.
       In the derivation of equation 2, the (Qt − 1) on the right hand side is valid only under
the assumption that there is no measurement error in the firm specific price ratio. Of
course, the available data for capital and output prices is the same across industries, which
precludes capturing firm level variation. Abel and Eberly (1996) suggest a correction for this
                                                                        1
by allowing the coefficient on the price ratio to deviate from          α
                                                                          .   Thus, I insert a separate
                                       PtI
parameter, γp , on the regressor    (1−τt )Pt
                                                , which is expected to be negative.
       A well documented problem in the literature is measurement error resulting from using
average Q in place of marginal q.18 For Japan, the predominant concern was the asset
appreciation that occurred during the late 1980s, which means that stock values used to
  18
    See Erickson and Whited (2000) for a discussion of measurement error problems. Cummins et al. (1999)
use earnings forecasts from securities analysts to construct more accurate measures of the fundamentals


                                                     10
calculate the numerator of Q may contain “bubble components”. Goyal and Yamada (2001)
have proposed a correction for this by deconstructing Q into its fundamental and speculative
parts. Thus, following their framework, Q is regressed on two lags of sales growth and sales
growth squared (in separate regressions for each year) and a full set of industry dummies.
The predicted dependent variable from each regression is taken as fundamental Q, and the
residuals as the non-fundamental part.19
    Combining these modifications, the base estimation becomes

                                               PtI                     PtI
                                                  "                 #        "                  #
                Ii,t           Ii,t−1    1
                      = c+β            +                Qfi,t + γnf            Qnf
               Ki,t−1         Ki,t−2 α (1 − τt )Pt                  (1 − τt )Pt i,t
                              PtI
                      + γp             + γcf CFi,t + νi + µt + i,t                                          (3)
                           (1 − τt )Pt

where Qfi,t and Qnf
                 i,t are the beginning of period fundamental and non-fundamental parts of

Q, respectively. For comparison with the literature, I estimate this equation using OLS and
firm fixed-effects regressions in which β is assumed to be zero, and Q, as opposed to its
decomposition, is used as a regressor. Equation (3) is then estimated using the Arellano-
Bond GMM estimator, which allows for instrumentation of the current period regressors
using lagged values.


3.2     Data Description
The firm data is from the financial database of the Japan Development Bank, which contains
very detailed accounting data on all non-financial firms listed on the various stock exchanges
in Japan from 1956 to 1997. The availability of price data restricts the sample to manu-
facturing firms, which is then balanced from 1980 to 1996.20 All firms that changed their
that affect the expected returns to investment. Gilchrist and Himmelberg (1998) assume the marginal
productivity of capital follows a VAR process, and use numerous variables to forecast the future profitability
of investment. Laeven (2001) simplifies this by assuming that the current period marginal productivity and
financial variables proxy for Q.
   19
      Using this technique, the coefficients on Q are slightly larger and more significant than the standard
case, but the relative sizes of the other parameters are preserved. In deconstructing Q, a variety of regressors
were tried including lags (and squared lags) of Opperating P rof its/Kt−1 , Opperating P rof its/T At−1 , and
N et Revenue/Kt−1 . These specifications did not alter the results.
   20
      Firms in the mining, agriculture, and utility industries are dropped. The Japanese fiscal year ends in
March. However many firms file late in the year, and in April and May (with few firms filing in the summer
months), making June the appropriate month to divide the calendar data into fiscal years. Thus, the fiscal
year (FY) for a particular observation is the previous year if the firm files before, and the current year if the
firm files after June.


                                                       11
accounting period over these years, firms with values of Q above the 99.5 or below the .05
percentile, and firms with I/K above the 99.5 percentile are dropped, leaving a final sample
of 446 firms.21
       The construction of the variables used in the econometric analysis is similar to that in
Hayashi and Inoue (1991), and a detailed description is available upon request. The JDB
data contains a detailed breakdown of five depreciable asset types, as well as asset specific
gross and current period depreciation. This allows for an estimate of the market value of
assets sold or retired to be calculated, which means that the investment rate net of asset
sales can be used. As discussed in Hayashi (2000), this (possibly) leads to more accurate
capital stock and investment measures than studies that rely on data from the Nikkei data
tapes, which contain only aggregate capital measures.
       It is unclear whether or not land should be included in investment and the capital stock.
Obviously, land is used in the productive process and should show up in the production
function. However, land speculation during the asset appreciation period may have had
nothing to do with production. Japanese law permits firms to carry land at historical rather
than market value, and as a non-depreciable asset, the reported land values are very poor
measures of both the physical land owned by the firm, and the portion of that land actually
used in production. A perpetual inventory method is used to generate a measure of the
market value of land based on Hoshi et al. (1990) and Hayashi and Inoue (1991). The
problem with including this measure in the production function is that the rise in land
prices over the 1980s was not necessarily based on its marginal productivity, which means
the contribution of land would be over estimated. Thus, investment and the capital stock
are constructed based on a separate recursive process for the five depreciable assets, and
average Q is adjusted for the market value of land by subtracting it from the firm’s market
capitalization in the numerator.
       Figures 1 and 2 show the distribution of investment and Tobin’s Q for the sample of firms.
Both Q and I/K are relatively flat during the 1980-87 period, before the asset inflation began.
Starting in fiscal year 1988, both rose dramatically and peaked in 1990. From 1991 to 1993,
both collapsed, before settling at lower levels in the 1994-96 period. For comparison, figure
  21
    The elimination of firms based on extreme values of I/K helps to rule out mergers and acquisitions.
A constant accounting period is necessary because although the calculations of K and Q are unaffected,
the investment level reported on the balance sheets may be downward biased in shorter periods, which will
systematically change its correlation with Q.



                                                   12
3 shows the distribution of total loan growth for all listed Japanese banks.22 Loan growth
rose to 20% a year during the asset appreciation period, and then collapsed in the 1991-93
period, just as firm investment rates fell.


3.3     Firm Sorting
Following the literature, the sample was divided using a priori criteria that are indicative of
financing constraints. Examples used elsewhere include dividend payout rates, firm age, firm
size, or membership in a corporate group. However, criteria based only on firm characteris-
tics, such as dividend payments for example, implicitly assume that such a “choice” variable
is sufficiently correlated with the degree of financing constraints. Some firms may choose
not to pay dividends for reasons that have nothing to do with financing constraints, and the
lack of additional firm specific information usually means that these firms are incorrectly
lumped into the “constrained” group. Fortunately (for this analysis), bond issues in Japan
were heavily regulated throughout the 1980s, and this can be exploited as an exogenous firm
sorting mechanism.

3.3.1    Bond Eligibility Division

The firm sorting technique is similar to that in Anderson and Makija (1999). First, the num-
ber of years between 1980 and 1990 in which a firm was eligible to issue secured convertible
bonds was calculated based on the criteria in table 1.23 Firms were then divided into three
groups based on the 33rd and 66th percentile of the total number of periods of eligibility
using the sample of all listed manufacturing firms. The cutoff levels are one and four; thus,
those firms that were eligible to issue bonds at most one period are considered “restricted”
(R firms), those that were eligible 2-4 periods are “semi-restricted” (S firms), and those that
were eligible five or more periods are “unrestricted” (U firms). This yields 116 R firms, 105
S firms, and 225 U firms.24
  22
     The data used to construct this figure uses all City, Trust, Long-Term Credit, and Regional banks
available in the Nikkei Zaimu database.
  23
     The criteria for secured convertible bonds is used because the criteria for other bond types was more
severe. For example, the bottom of table 1 lists the criteria for secured strait bond issues.
  24
     The sample is balanced over 1980-96, although the eligibility criteria were in place until 1990. It would
be preferable to use the minimum credit rating requirement after 1990, but this data is not available.
Furthermore, this may introduce an endogeneity problem since firms that could have issued bonds (after
1990) may have chosen not to, and thus would not have a credit rating. These firms would be incorrectly


                                                     13
    Using this sorting mechanism, R firms faced known financing constraints since, relative
to S and U firms, they could not access the domestic bond market in the 1980s.25 Thus,
if the monotonicity hypothesis holds, R firms should display higher investment-cash flow
sensitivity than either S or U firms, and this difference should be largest in the 1980s when
the bond restrictions were actually in place.26 This is the view as presented in the Q and
cash flow literature, but the situation in Japan requires a more subtle analysis.
    If bank relationships did reduce financing costs through the acquisition of inside infor-
mation or monitoring, R firms may have actually faced lower financing costs than firms that
relied on arms-length debt financing. This is the central idea behind the HKS91 study and
the subsequent Hayashi (2000) critique.27 On the other hand, the benefits of relationship
banking may have accrued to banks if they extracted rents. If true, then internal financing,
and the associated costs evidenced by higher sensitivity, may have been more palatable to
firms than maintaining the bank tie. In addition, meeting the eligibility criteria increased
the firm’s bargaining power vis-a-vis the bank, and may have reduced the ability of the bank
to influence the firm’s loan position (Weinstein and Yafeh (1998)). Thus, cash flow sensitiv-
ity may appear lower for bank-dependent firms (R firms) because investment responded to
perverse loan flows which reduced its correlation with internal funds.
    Table 3 breaks down by year the incidence of actual bond issues for each firm group. Two
items are noteworthy. First, the share of U firms that actually issued bonds increased from
about 15% in 1980, when deregulation began, to 43% by 1989. Second, there is a jump in
included in the constrained group.
   25
       There are a few firms that issued bonds in periods in which they were supposedly ineligible to do so,
either because they received special permission from the Kisaikai (bond underwriting cartel), or because the
issues were floated on foreign markets. Unfortunately, the data does not provide any information on this.
There are two ways to ensure that the results presented in later pages are not driven by these firm-year
observations. First, any firm that had a bond issue in a period in which it was supposedly ineligible was
eliminated. Second, firms were treated as eligible in such periods, which shifted a few toward the S and U
groups. Neither of these robustness checks altered the results.
   26
      As with all studies in this literature, there is a concern about whether firms self select by altering
behaviour to target the eligibility criteria, thus making the sorting mechanism endogenous. This is difficult
to analyze directly, but analysis of why firms failed provides convincing evidence that the use of these criteria
is appropriate. Table 2 breaks down the criteria failure by year. The single largest failure reason was firm
size, followed by low earnings per share. These are not really choice variables since firm managers are unlikely
to be able to significantly alter firm size in the short run, and should be maximizing shareholder value each
period regardless of bond eligibility.
   27
      Since the division is not conditioned on whether firms actually issued bonds, then it is not necessarily
the case that U firms were bank-independent, as a firm could have been eligible all years, and yet never
issued bonds. If bank ties imply lower financing costs, this would reduce the measured cost for the U group,
and bias away from finding a significant role for banking relationships.


                                                       14
the number of bond issues in 1989 and 1990 for R firms, while the number of S and U firms
that issued bonds decreased dramatically in 1990 and again in 1992. This suggests that the
regulations were binding for at least some firms.
       Tables 4 and 5 present summary statistics using the eligibility division. U firms are larger
based on any size measure (only real sales and total assets presented in the table). For all
three firm groups, investment rates, Q, sales growth, operating profits, and cash flow all
peak in 1988-90, which corresponds to the asset inflation period. In all four periods, U firms
generally have the highest investment rates, Q, cash flow (normalized by P I K), operating
profits, and sales growth, although the differences across groups narrows in the 1990s as a
result of the freer capital markets, as well as the market crash that reduced demand for all
firms. What is important here is that on every measure used in other studies to divide firms
into constrained and unconstrained groups (i.e., division based on size, bond issues, dividend
payout rates, etc.), the relative ranking of the R, S, and U firms is preserved, even after the
bond issuing criteria were lifted in 1990.
       The biggest difference across groups is their reliance on bank debt. The last panel of
table 5 shows that mean bank debt over total liabilities was about 40% for R firms, but
was less than half that for U firms, with an even larger difference in medians. This can be
seen more clearly in figures 4 and 5. Figure 4 displays by year the mean outstanding bonds,
and figure 5 displays the mean bank debt for each firm group, both normalized by total
liabilities. All three firm groups reduced their dependence on banks from the early 1980s to
the late 1980s, but more so for U and S firms. R firms actually increased their reliance on
bank debt through about 1987, after which they too moved to bond financing in response
to the relaxation of the eligibility criteria in that year (see table 1). After the asset market
crash, bank financing again became more important for all firms groups and bond financing
leveled off.

3.3.2       Keiretsu Division

The second firm division employed is membership in an industrial Keiretsu, or corporate
grouping centered on one of the City Banks.28 Eight editions of Dodwell Marketing Con-
sultant’s Industrial Groupings in Japan were used to classify firms. Group membership may
mitigate information problems since long-term relationships with other firms, as well as with
  28
       This includes the Industrial Bank of Japan group which is technically not a City Bank.


                                                      15
the group’s bank, may introduce reputational effects that facilitate credible communication
of investment projects to other members of the group. There were 250 independent firms
(denoted I firms), and 196 group firms (denoted G firms).
       All studies on Japanese main banking struggle to identify firms that have main bank
relationships, and generally use published rosters as a starting point.29 Miwa and Ram-
seyer (2001) argue that the horizontal bank groups, or Keiretsu simply never existed, but
rather “...began as a figment of the academic imagination, and they remain that today.”
In their view, firm rosters were conceived by Marxists committed to locating “domination”
by “monopoly capital” in the 1960s, and became a key part of academic studies as scholars
tried to “search for culture specific group behavior in Japan.”
       The restrictions on the bond market, however, were real, and make it easy to identify
those firms that were bank-dependent out of necessity. If the effects of main banking were
as pervasive as the literature would have us believe, then this looser definition of bank
dependence should provide substantial evidence on the debate between HKS91 and Hayashi
(2000), and is explored in section 4. Despite its frequent use in the literature, Keiretsu
membership is not a perfect measure of main bank affiliation, as some firms may have
business ties with other member firms, but actually rely primarily on non-bank financing.
However, the use of the the bond issuing criteria in conjunction with Keiretsu membership
is a partial solution to this problem since member, bank-dependent firms can be isolated.
Thus, the R, S, and U firm groups created using the bond eligibility division are further
divided based on Keiretsu membership. R (and S) firms that were Keiretsu member firms
most likely had significant bank relationships, whereas member U firms had the option of
non-bank financing. The cross-group names are IR, IS, IU for independent restricted, semi-
restricted, unrestricted firms respectively, and GR, GS, and GU for the corresponding group
firms.30
       Keiretsu firms were generally larger when measured on sales and total assets (sample
statistics omitted for brevity). However, there was virtually no difference in terms of I/K,
  29
      Another publication is the Keiretsu no Kenkyu published by the Keizai Chosa Kyokai (Economic Survey
Association). Both of these classify Keiretsu firms based loan structure, bank share holding, and historical
factors. However, the Keiretsu no Kenkyu publication is problematic because it does not distinguish between
horizontal (bank group) and vertical (subcontracting) groups. Using the Dodwell listing, less than 4% of
the firms in the sample switch into or out of their Keiretsu group over the sample period. Rather than
eliminate these, they are classified as group firms if they were listed for at least half the sample period, and
independent otherwise.
   30
      There are 60 IR, 61 IS, 129 IU, 56 GR, 44 GS, and 96 GU Firms.


                                                      16
Q, and sales growth, although cash flow and operating profits were higher for independent
firms firms in most periods. The biggest difference between the groups is again their relative
reliance on bank debt. Bank debt normalized by total liabilities was generally about 5%
higher for G firms than for I firms in all four periods. This difference in bank dependence is
much smaller than when using the bond eligibility criteria, and suggests that the Keiretsu
division by itself may be a noisy measure of main bank affiliation.


4        Empirical Analysis

Using a variety of empirical methodologies, the standard Q equation including a cash flow
term was estimated using a sample of 446 Japanese manufacturing firms for the 1980-90, and
1980-96 periods. In the OLS and fixed-effects regressions, β is assumed to be zero (lagged
I/K term dropped) for empirical reasons, and for comparison with the standard equation in
the literature. The results are presented in tables 6-18.
       In the bottom panel of each table, equation 3 was estimated using a GMM estimator
based on Arellano and Bond (1991), which allows for simultaneous determination of the
explanatory and dependent variables. Thus, the explanatory variables can be assumed only
“predetermined” instead of the stronger assumption of strict exogeneity required in OLS
and fixed-effects models. This is accomplished by using a specified lag for each explanatory
variable as instruments in a standard GMM estimation, which does not require assumptions
about the distribution of the error term.
       Firm fixed-effects are eliminated by first differencing the equation, and requires that
all instruments be dated t − 2 and earlier.31 GMM, and the use of lagged regressors as
instruments, may be a significant improvement over the OLS and fixed-effects models since
the coefficient on cash flow in these models may be driven by contemporaneous correlation
with the error term. Controlling for this reduces the likelihood that cash flow measures
simply proxy for future profitability not captured by Q.32
  31
     In all GMM regressions, the price ratio is assumed strictly exogenous. In regressions where the coefficient
on cash flow is estimated for the entire sample period, three first-differenced lags are used as instruments
(although different lag structures yielded almost identical results). In regressions where the coefficient is
estimated separately for each sub-period, a single first-differenced lag is used. All other regressors are
instrumented with their entire past history (t − 2 and earlier).
  32
     The validity of the GMM model is tested using the Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions, and
the M test for second order serial correlation. The p − values for both tests are presented in each table.
Heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors are reported for OLS and GMM regressions. Only with a


                                                      17
    It not clear what the correct definition of cash flow should be. Most papers in the
literature use current period cash flow defined as end of period earnings minus dividend
payments plus accounting depreciation (CF1). However, there is evidence that dividend
payments are “sticky” since reputation effects may make it costly for firms to lower dividends
even during periods of financial distress. Dividends are a choice variable, and thus should
not necessarily be subtracted from earnings. Thus, I use a second measure of cash flow (CF2)
defined as operating profits plus accounting depreciation minus taxes paid. In addition to
adding back in dividend payments, the difference in these definitions is that non-operating
revenue/expenses, extraordinary profits/losses, and special dispositions and provisions are
excluded from profits.33
    In all regression tables, rather than label the estimates as in equation 3, their corre-
sponding variable names are used for simplicity. Thus, LAGIK corresponds to β, and is the
coefficient on the lagged investment term, P RAT corresponds to γp , and is the coefficient
on the price ratio, CF corresponds to γCF , and is the coefficient on cash flow normalized
by PtI Kt−1 , and Q corresponds to 1/α, and is the inverse of the adjustment cost param-
eter. In the GMM regressions, Q and Qnf are the coefficients on the fundamental and
non-fundamental parts of Q (as described in section 3.1) respectively.


4.1     Cash Flow Sensitivity-Bond Eligibility Division
Cash flow sensitivity analysis, in its broadest sense, implies that R firms, which faced known
financing constraints, should display higher sensitivity than U firms. Previous empirical
work on Japan, however, suggests a special role for Japanese banks in corporate governance.
Since R firms are also, by definition, the most bank-dependent, the a priori expectation on
the relative sizes of sensitivity across groups is ambiguous.
    The top panel of table 6 presents the estimation of the base equation using the pooled
sample, with CF 1 added as the cash flow measure. Q is insignificant in the OLS model
(with time and industry dummies), but becomes highly significant in the fixed-effects and
homoskedastic error term does the Sargan statistic follow an asymptotic chi-squared distribution. To correct
for this, the p−values reported for the Sargan tests are from the two-step estimator, while the coefficients and
robust standard errors are calculated with the one-step estimator. Arellano and Bond (1991) recommend
using one-step estimators for inference, and several studies have found that the two-step standard errors
downward biased in small samples.
  33
     The special dispositions and provisions are somewhat peculiar to the Japanese accounting system. See
the appendix for a discussion of these items.


                                                      18
GMM regressions (time dummies included in both). Furthermore, the point estimate using
GMM is over twice as large as the fixed-effects estimate, suggesting that the dissection of Q
into its fundamental and non-fundamental parts helps to correct for the effects of the asset
appreciation period. That said, the estimates on Q still imply unreasonably large adjustment
costs, a common result in the literature. As expected, P RAT , the coefficient on the price
ratio, is negative (and marginally significant) in all three models, and the point estimates of
CF are comparable to values found elsewhere, and are very significant.
    Since passing the bond eligibility criteria implies a wider range of financing options,
investment should be less sensitive to cash flow in those firm-year observations where the
eligibility criteria were met. To test for this, the second panel of table 6 includes the inter-
action of CF 1 and a dummy for whether the firm was eligible in a particular year, with a
corresponding coefficient, CF xELIG. Since CF 1 is also included, the total sensitivity for
firm-year observations when the firm was eligible is the sum of CF and CF xELIG. In all
three regressions, CF xELIG is positive and significant, implying that sensitivity was higher
when firms passed the eligibility criteria.34 The rest of this section explores alternative spec-
ifications to determine whether cash flow sensitivity is indeed higher for less bank-dependent
firms.
    Table 7 presents the results for each of the R, S, and U groups separately. Since R firms
passed the eligibility criteria at most once, while U firms passed at least 5 times during the
1980s, cash flow sensitivity should have been highest for R firms. All coefficients have the
expected signs, and, again, the coefficient on Q is larger after correcting for measurement
error in the GMM estimation. The most striking result is the relative size and significance of
the coefficients on cash flow (using CF1). In all three regressions, sensitivity was highest for
U firms and lowest for R firms, with S firms falling somewhere in the middle. The differences
in the point estimates, and the t statistic (z statistic for GMM) for these differences, are
listed in the last column, and are significant at standard levels.35
  34
     Note, however, that the p − value of the Sargan test of over-identifying restrictions is quite low, implying
that the instrument set is highly correlated with the residuals. Thus, one possible explanation for these odd
results is that the OLS and fixed-effects models are biasing the coefficients on CF 1 because of its correlation
with the error term, and, in this particular case, the GMM estimator has failed to reverse this bias.
  35
     The regressions from table 7 were repeated using CF 2 in place of CF 1. Maintaining a certain level of
dividends per share is one of the issuing criteria. Thus, if firms were targeting dividend rates for the purpose
of issuing bonds, CF 1 may distort sensitivity values. Since, presumably, U firms were better able to target
the bond criteria because of their larger size, dividend payments may have been less discretionary than for
R firms, which were more likely to have failed other criteria. This may have reduced the cash flow directed
toward investment in a systematic way, and raise the sensitivity for these firms. However, the pattern in


                                                       19
    Table 8 presents the results after interacting the cash flow regressor (CF 1) with a dummy
for whether the firm issued bonds in a particular year. Like the eligibility dummy interaction
in table 6, the coefficients on this interaction term should be negative since CF 1 is included
separately. Firms should rely on internal funds less in years when they issue bonds, thus
reducing the correlation between cash flow and investment.36 This is not supported by the
results. In all three regressions, CF is significant, with U firms again displaying the highest
sensitivity. In the OLS and fixed-effects regressions, the coefficient on the interaction term
is positive and significant in the pooled regression (first column), as well as in each group
regression. In the GMM regression, the coefficient is positive for both R and S firms, and
significant for R firms. Again, the difference in the base cash flow term between U and R
firms is everywhere significant at all standard levels.
    If the theory underlying cash flow sensitivity analysis is correct, that is, the monotonicity
hypothesis as formulated by FHP88 and KZ97 is actually satisfied, then some firm charac-
teristic must explain why firms known to have been restricted had lower sensitivity. This
difference was possibly bank dependence. In accordance with the original HKS91 results,
bank affiliation reduces financing constraints, and is revealed in lower investment-cash flow
sensitivity. By definition, R firms were more bank-dependent, and if bank relationships mat-
ter, the seemingly backward results are justified. The troubling aspect of this explanation is
that unrestricted firms could have remained bank-dependent, a point first raised in Hoshi et
al. (1990b). If banks were so good at solving asymmetric information problems, why did the
largest and most profitable firms move to the bond market? Banks should have been more
willing to lend to these firms, and yet these firms chose to reduce bank dependence. This is
explored further in the next section.
    A second possibility is that the incidence of negative cash flow observations drives the
results. Allayannis and Mozumdar (2001) argue that firms with negative cash flow have
driven investment down to its lowest possible level, making investment unable to respond
to fluctuations in cash flow. This reduces sensitivity for those firm groups with the largest
number of negative cash flow observations, and is an important robustness check since their
work using U.S. data reversed the KZ97 and Cleary (1999) critiques, and empirically reaf-
firmed the validity of sensitivity analysis. This is of particular concern in this study because
the bond eligibility criteria used in firm sorting does include performance thresholds. As
table 7 survives this robustness check, and these tables have been omitted for brevity.
  36
     This also serves as a robustness check relating to the classification problem described in footnote 25.


                                                     20
shown in table 9, R firms had the highest incidence of negative cash flow observations in
the 1980s. This may artificially lower the measured cash flow sensitivity for these firms, and
thus would explain the “backward” results.
   Table 10 presents the results where negative cash flow observations were separated from
positive observations and given a separate coefficient. The pattern described above emerges
for the positive cash flow observations, and, as expected, the coefficients on the negative
observations are generally negative, but everywhere insignificant. The coefficients on pos-
itive cash flow observations are generally larger for all three firms groups relative to their
corresponding values in table 7, suggesting that the inclusion of negative cash flow observa-
tions does reduce sensitivity. However, this change is consistent across firm groups, and the
differences in the coefficients on positive cash flow are significant in all three regressions.
   A third possibility is that cash flow merely proxys for future profit opportunities not
captured by Q. If true, U firms, with their higher sales growth and operating profits, would
naturally display higher sensitivity. However, this seems unlikely. The sample statistics
show that the large disparity between R and U firms (in terms of cash flow and operating
profits) present in the 1982-87 period narrows considerably by the early 1990s. The level of
Q for R firms is on par with that for U firms by the 1988-90 period, and remains so in the
1991-93 period. Sales growth for R firms is about one third that of U firms in the earlier
period, but is virtually equal across all three groups in the 1988-90 and 1991-93 periods.
The year-by-year sample statistics (not presented) for R firms shows that the gap in Q,
operating profits, and investment rates narrows consistently over the 1980s. In addition, the
relationship between firm profits and the magnitude of sensitivity is not consistent. When
the sample is split using main bank affiliation and bond eligibility, the sensitivity is actually
larger for firm groups that do not have the highest profits or cash flow values. This point
will be discussed in detail in the next section.
   Other robustness checks that were conducted but not reported include:

  1. Polynomials in Q: Since I/K may react non-linearly to movements in Q, or because
      cash flow measures may be proxying for future profit opportunities not captured by Q,
      squared and cubed terms of Q were included in the base equation. The coefficient on
      Q became slightly more significant, but the coefficients on the higher order terms were
      generally insignificant. In all specifications, the cash flow sensitivity pattern described
      above was preserved.


                                               21
   2. Investment in Land: As described earlier, land is difficult to measure properly because
         of the discrepancy between the market and book values, and increases in market value
         in the 1980s were not necessarily correlated with changes in its marginal productivity.
         Nonetheless, the inclusion of the market value of land in I and in K (and thus Q) did
         not reverse the sensitivity pattern.

   3. Firm Division: The three firms groups were redefined several times, each time adjusting
         the number of periods in which a firm had to be eligible to be included in a particular
         group. As the eligibility count was moved up for R firms, and down for U firms
         (squeezing out S firms), the differences in the coefficients on cash flow between the R
         and U firms narrowed. The difference increased slightly when those firms that were
         eligible at most once (currently included in the R group) were transferred to the S
         group.

   4. Expanded Sample: The current sample was chosen by dropping those firms that changed
         their accounting period at least once between 1990-96. Dropping this restriction nearly
         doubles the sample, from 446 to 724 firms, with 188 R firms, 173 S firms, and 363 U
         firms. The pattern of the coefficients on CF 1 across groups was unaffected, although
         the coefficients on Q were more often insignificant.

       This section has presented evidence that either bank dependence matters, or cash flow
sensitivity analysis is flawed. If the latter, then it is difficult to say anything concrete about
the effect of bank ties on investment behavior. If the former is true, then it appears that
the use of the bond eligibility criteria to determine bank dependence yields far more robust
results than the “roster” definitions used elsewhere, and lends support to the original HKS91
empirical results (vis-a-vis Hayashi (2000)). However, the question of why the largest and
most profitable firms left their banks needs to be addressed before concluding that lower cash
flow sensitivity for bank-dependent firms implies that firms enjoyed a positive net benefit
from close bank ties. Before turning to this issue, I briefly explore sensitivity in the 1990s
after the bond market regulations were lifted.
       Several scholars have tested for a credit crunch during the early 1990s under the suspicion
that banks cut lending after the asset market crash.37 In the current analysis, higher cash
  37
   Gibson (1995, 1997) uses a Q model and bond ratings to show that firm investment did not react to
bank health in 1994-95, and was only slightly affected in the 1991-92 period. Sekine (1999) inserts both



                                                  22
flow sensitivity for any or all firm groups in the 1991-93 period would be indicative of a credit
crunch. Table 11 presents the results where negative and positive cash flow observations are
separated, and a separate coefficient is estimated for each of four time periods. U firms
consistently had higher sensitivity than R firms, even when negative cash flow observations
are accounted for.
   However, there is virtually no evidence of a credit crunch for this sample of firms. R and
S firms were the smallest and the least profitable, and being relatively bank-dependent, had
the most to lose from a contraction in lending. Yet for these groups, cash flow sensitivity
decreased from the 1982-87 period to the 1994-96 period, and was smallest in the 1991-93
period. Overall, this is consistent with the bond market deregulation process that gradually
evolved over the 1980s; these firms had the most to gain from deregulation, and their cash
flow sensitivity falls accordingly. Although sensitivity does appear larger in the 1990s for U
firms, the increase relative to the 1980s is small.
   The important thing to note here is that the difference in the coefficients on cash flow
between U and R firms remained significant in the 1990s, even though the bond eligibility
criteria were lifted in 1990. This is consistent with figures 4 and 5 where it was shown that
the relative reliance on bank debt across firm groups was preserved over this 16 year period.


4.2     Keiretsu Membership and Bond Eligibility
Why do the bond eligible firms display higher sensitivity? If bank affiliated firms enjoyed
better access to capital, then these firms should be able to invest closer to their first-best level
regardless of bond eligibility. However, if the costs of maintaining the relationship were large,
or, as suggested by Weinstein and Yafeh (1998), if banks forced firms to over-borrow, firms
may have willingly left their main banks. This section explores this issue by incorporating
both the bond eligibility and the Keiretsu membership firm divisions.
   Suppose there exists asymmetric information problems in the bond market, and these
costs are similar for all eligible firms. The presence of such costs creates a role for internal
funding of investment, as well as for banks that assume monitoring roles. If banks are a net
benefit to firms, then firms with a main bank should have less need to rely on internal funds,
and thus a lower investment-cash flow sensitivity, than firms without a main bank. Effective
bank and firm specific health measures into the Q equation and shows that the coefficient on bank health
measures became significant for small firms after 1993.



                                                  23
monitoring (at least beyond monitoring by shareholders or the bond market) implies it is
in the shareholder’s interest for these firms to maintain their relationships with these banks
even in the presence of outside financing options. Thus, cash flow sensitivity should be lower
for GR, GS, and GU firms than for the corresponding IR, IS, and IU firms.
    If, however, main banks push loans and extract rents in the process, then cash flow
sensitivity should again be lower for GR firms than for IR firms, both of which are restricted
from the bond market. Both sets of firms are bank-dependent, but only those with a main
bank (GR firms) are pressured. These firms may enjoy better access to capital, but possibly
only with large indirect costs. Thus, whether firms benefit from close bank ties or not is
empirically indistinguishable based on results for IR and GR firms alone.
    However, the implications are different for those firms with outside financing options,
since these firms are in a better bargaining position to counter bank pressure. Eligible firms
with a main bank may purposely reduce loan dependence in favor of bond financing, and
turn to internal sources for marginal investment sooner than would an eligible firm without
a main bank. This would occur if the costs of internal finance (including the costs incurred
because of the unpredictability of internal finance) are lower than the rents extracted by the
main bank when loans are extended. IU firms should have lower sensitivity than GU firms
since IU firms do not have a main bank relationship, and therefore have less of a need to turn
to internal financing once funding from the bond market is exhausted. This test gets at the
heart of the original HKS91 and Hoshi et al. (1990b) studies because it attempts to identify
not only bank-dependent firms, but do so after controlling for outside financing options.


4.3        Profitability and Bank-Affiliation
The following sample statistics shed considerable light on which of the above hypotheses
more accurately describes the nature of main bank relationships. Figure 6 shows the mean
total assets for GR, GU, IR, and IU firms (GS and IS firms are excluded from the figures for
simplicity). Group firms, whether bond restricted or not, are larger than their corresponding
independent firms, and the figures are net of yearly industry means to control for composition
effects.
    Figures 7, 8, and 9 track the earnings per share, profit, and “efficiency” rates of these
firm groups (net of industry means). Figure 7 shows that earnings per share of GU firms was
consistently lower than that of IU firms throughout the 1980s, and the difference increased


                                             24
during the asset appreciation period. During the the early 1980’s, the earnings per share of
both restricted groups, GR and IR firms, was similar. However, after the relaxation of the
bond criteria in 1987, earnings per share rose for independent firms, but remained flat for
group firms.
    Figure 8 presents mean before tax profits normalized by total assets (net of industry
means). Until 1990, group firms (GR and GU firms), although larger, were less profitable
than their corresponding independent firm groups (IR and IU firms). This is consistent
with the findings of Nakatani (1984) for the 1960’s and 1970’s, and Weinstein and Yafeh
(1995, 1998) for the 1980s. After 1990, however, the differences disappear. Furthermore, the
gap in profitability between the restricted (IR, GR) and unrestricted (IU, GU) firm groups
narrowed considerably due to the rise in profitability for the former groups following the
loosening of the bond eligibility criteria in 1987.
    Most dramatic is the differences in productive efficiency between group and independent
firms. Figure 9 presents the mean value added normalized by total assets for each group
(net of industry means).38 Group firms are definitively less efficient than their corresponding
independent firms, and, unlike the profitability measures, the differences do not disappear in
the 1990s. This figure is consistent with claims Keiretsu member firms “over-capitalized”.
    Table 12 looks at the incidence and size of bond issues of eligible firms. The first two
columns show the percentage of eligible firms, either independent or group, that actually
issued bonds.39 The last four columns list the mean and median issue sizes (conditional on
positive issue), and show that Keiretsu member firms had larger issues. What is striking is
that in every year, a higher percentage of group firms accessed the bond markets with larger
issues, despite their relatively worse performance.
    Because this is a crucial point, tables 14 and 13 verify for the current sample that Keiretsu
member firms were indeed less profitable prior to the lifting of the eligibility criteria, but
tended to access the bond markets more often. In table 13, various profit measures are
   38
      Value added is calculated using the method described in Keiei Bunseki Handbook (1987). The calculation
is fairly involved, but proceeds generally as follows. Starting with gross sales, various portions of the selling
and administrative expenses, cost of goods manufactured, inventory adjustments, and transfer payments
are subtracted off to get the final value. Each of these components is adjusted so that only the non-
labor and non-depreciation components are subtracted off. The non-labor components of the cost of goods
manufactured includes raw materials, the non-depreciation overhead expenses, and purchases of intermediate
goods. Inventory is adjusted for sales/revaluations of both work in process and final goods inventories.
   39
      In this table, all eligible firm-year observations are used making the total number of firms different for
each year.



                                                       25
regressed on controls for finance structure, firm size, sales trends, capital intensity, corporate
governance, and a Keiretsu membership dummy.40 The top panel shows that in the 1980’s,
Keiretsu membership reduced firm profits, whether measured by operating profits normalized
by total assets, or simply earnings per share. Other profit measures, or value added, yield
similar results and have been omitted to save space. Two things are important. First,
ownership by financial institutions is negative and generally significant above and beyond
bank affiliation captured by the Keiretsu dummy. Second, in the bottom panel which presents
the same regressions for the 1990s after the lifting of the issuing criteria, Keiretsu membership
is generally insignificant.
       Table 14 presents probit regressions where a dummy for actual bond issues is regressed
on firm size, profitability, previous bond activity, dummies for eligibility group and Keiretsu
membership, and corporate governance controls. Despite their lower profitability, member-
ship in a Keiretsu increased the probability of a bond issue in the 1980s, but had no effect
in the 1990s. The inclusion of other combinations of regressors that control for profitability,
finance structure, and firm size all have the expected sign, but the sign and significance of
the Keiretsu dummy is unaffected in for both the 1980s or 1990s.
       Taken together, these results are quite revealing. First, the effects of Keiretsu mem-
bership on profitability and bond activity present in the 1980s disappeared in the 1990s.
For the 1980s, why would firms that had a main bank need the bond market more often
than independent firms? Potentially, this could be explained by differences in performance,
as more profitable firms should be able to access the bond market with a lower premium.
However, the very firms that issued the most often in the 1980s, and with the largest issues,
were relatively less profitable.
       It is possible that firms connected to main banks enjoyed the bank support when issuing
bonds.41 There is evidence that banks acted as “custodians” during the 1980s for their client
firms (however, banks were legally prevented from moving into the underwriting business
until 1993). That said, it is still unclear as to why playing this role was in the bank’s interest
given that they directly competed with the bond market. Why would banks willingly back
their clients that wanted to issue bonds?42 Much more plausible is the idea that bank-
  40
      Weinstein and Yafeh (1998) used a similar analysis for the 1977-86 period. All regressions in tables 13
and 14 include unreported constant terms, and industry and year dummies.
   41
      Diamond (1991), Chemmanur and Fulghieri (1994)
   42
      Hall and Weinstein (2000) find no evidence that independent firms faced an interest premium on bond
issues, even though they did not have the backing of a main bank.


                                                     26
affiliated firms, although less profitable, found the costs of bond financing less than the costs
associated with maintaining their traditional bank ties. Once deregulation gave these firms
access to alternative financing sources, they exercised their new bargaining power over their
banks. This left banks little choice but to back their clients’ bond issues, or risk loosing
them as clients altogether.


4.4    Cash Flow Sensitivity-Keiretsu Division
This section presents evidence on cash flow sensitivity for Keiretsu and independent firms
after controlling for external credit opportunities. As a starting point, table 15 presents the
simple division based on group membership alone. First, Q was larger and more significant for
group firms in the fixed-effects regression. However, when decomposed into its fundamental
and non-fundamental parts in the GMM regression, only the non-fundamental part remained
significant for group firms, while only the fundamental part was significant for independent
firms. This suggests that investment of group firms was less tied to fundamentals during the
asset appreciation period. Second, the difference in cash flow sensitivity between group and
independent firms was statistically insignificant. All robustness checks described above yield
similar results.
   Table 16 repeats the above regressions after crossing the bond eligibility division with
membership in a Keiretsu. As above, Q was more significant for group firms in the fixed-
effects regression, but considerably larger and more significant for independent firms when
decomposed, which again suggests that investment of bank-affiliated firms was relatively
loosely tied to fundamentals. Cash flow sensitivity was smallest for GR firms, and the
difference over IR firms was everywhere significant. The story is reversed, however, for bond
eligible firms. Sensitivity was largest for GU firms, and the difference over the IU coefficient
is statistically significant. Eligibility implied higher sensitivity for both independent and
group firms (consistent with the results of the last section), but the within-group difference
was much larger for group firms. That is , Keiretsu member firms displayed a much larger
spread in sensitivity. Mature and healthy firms with strong bank ties and bond market access
relied on internal funds more than independent firms.
   As a robustness check, in table 17 cash flow is separated into negative and positive
observations, and a separate coefficient is estimated for each. The same pattern emerged,
and the differences in the IR/GR groups and the GU/IU groups were again statistically


                                               27
significant (with the exception of the GR/IR difference in the GMM regression). These
same sets of regressions were repeated using the robustness checks described in section 4,
and have been omitted to save space.
   One point that needs to be revisited is the potential criticism that cash flow sensitivity
merely proxys for profit opportunities not captured by Q. This issue was raised in section 4 in
light of the finding that U firms, which had relatively high profit rates, displayed the highest
investment-cash flow sensitivity. Here, eligible group firms (GU firms) had consistently lower
profit rates than did the corresponding independent firms, yet had higher cash flow sensitivity
than independent eligible firms (IU firms). This is a reversal of the supposed direction of
this specification error, and makes it difficult to conclude that the “proxying” effect drove
the results of section 4.
   In table 18 a separate coefficient is estimated for each of the four time periods. Since
the bond eligibility criteria were lifted in 1990, presumably all firms faced similar financing
options after this date. This would suggest that the differences in cash flow sensitivity
between IR/GR firms and GU/IU firms present in the 1980s should be smaller in the 1990s.
The coefficients on cash flow were everywhere smallest for GR firms (and only marginally
significant using GMM), while those for IR firms are larger and significant. For all firm
groups, sensitivity seems to have decreased from the 1982-87 period to the 1994-96 period.
However, in all cases the same pattern emerges. GU firms again displayed the highest
sensitivity whereas GR firms had the lowest. Note, however, that the difference in sensitivity
between IR/GR firms and GU/IU firms was generally significant in the 1980s (particularly
in the 1982-87 period before the first relaxation of the bond criteria), but not in the 1990s.
As shown in figure 8, and in tables 13 and 14, the difference in profit rates between group
and independent firms that was present in the 1980s disappeared in the 1990s.
   Finally, figures 10 and 11 present the coefficients on CF1 in yearly cross sectional OLS
regressions of investment on P RAT , price adjusted Q and Q squared, a dummy for bond
issues, cash flow defined as CF 1, and a full set of industry dummies. Because land was
such an important element in the asset appreciation of the 1980s, establishing that the
above pattern is robust to its inclusion and exclusion is vital. In figure 10, the dependent
variable, I/K, excludes land and the numerator of Q is adjusted to reflect this (as in previous
regressions). In the bottom panel, I/K includes the investment and the stock of land (market
value). In both figures, the sensitivity coefficient is largest for group unrestricted firms in


                                              28
the 1980s and smallest for group unrestricted. However, after 1987 when the eligibility
criteria were relaxed, the differences across the four groups disappear.43 Note that the
spread in sensitivity in the 1980s when land is included appears larger than when excluded,
particularly in the early years. This contrasts with the results from table 11 where it was
shown that the difference across the bond eligibility groups remained significant in the 1990s.
    The results of this section show that those firms that were known to face financing
constraints in the bond market again displayed lower sensitivity. However, this effect was
exacerbated if the firm was also a member of a Keiretsu group. Rather than conclude that
firms enjoyed a net benefit from relationship banking, I offer this as evidence in support of
the predatory view, since sensitivity was highest for eligible, bank-affiliated firms.


5     Conclusion

If close bank ties are costly for mature and healthy firms, should we still expect banks to
facilitate lower cash flow sensitivity? This study presents evidence on this issue for a sample
of Japanese manufacturing firms over the last 20 years. Using the bond issuing criteria that
were in place in the 1980s as a firm sorting criteria, I first demonstrate that investment-cash
flow sensitivity was smallest for firms that were restricted from issuing bonds. This result
is robust to several econometric specifications, measures of cash flow, and corrections for
negative cash flow observations.
    On the face of it, this finding is at odds with standard predictions in the cash flow
literature; given that bond-eligible firms should face lower financing constraints, these firms
should also display the lowest cash flow sensitivity. Finding the opposite suggests either cash
flow sensitivity analysis is inappropriate because the monotonicity hypothesis as formulated
by FHP88 and KZ97 is not satisfied, or other firm characteristics not controlled for in the
standard investment-cash flow equation drive the results.
    Large banks have historically been at the center of the Japanese financial system, precisely
because of the legal restrictions on alternative financing sources. Many have argued that
long-term banking ties, or “main banking” in the case of Japan, allows debt holders access
to inside information about the investment opportunities facing the firm. This effectively
  43
     The pattern shown in these figures is surprisingly robust. The inclusion/exclusion of Q, the addition of
bank debt/T L and outstanding bonds/T L and their squares, and the inclusion of various corporate gover-
nance measures used in the profitability and probit regressions, firm size, and other profitability measures
did not substantially change the results.


                                                     29
allows client firms to stay on their first best investment path even when internal funds are
insufficient. Recent research, however, has uncovered a dark side to Japanese relationship
banking practices. Consistent with this, the results presented here suggest that banks did
provide relatively easy access to financing (as evidenced by low sensitivity measures for bank
dependent firms), but may have extracted rents in the process. This prompted bond-eligible
firms to shift toward alternative financing sources at the earliest opportunity.




                                              30
                   Table 1: Example Bond Issue Criteria
Table presents minimum approval criteria for domestic issuance of secured convertible bonds and secured
strait bonds for selected years. Criteria are taken from Kaneko and Battaglini (1990) and Karp and Koike
(1990). A firm wishing to issue bonds in period t must have met the below criteria in period t − 1.

  October 1976-July 1987 Criteria for Domestic Secured Convertible Bonds
  Performance Standards            Issuer’s Book Equity
                                   3-6 Billion Yen  6-10 Billion Yen > 10 Billion Yen

  Book Equity/Paid in Capital           NA                  1.50                  1.20
  Book Equity/Total Assets              NA                  0.2                   0.15
  Operational Profit/Total Assets       NA                  0.05                  0.04
  Earnings per share (yen)              NA                  7.00                  7.00
  Dividends per share (yen)             NA                  5.00                  5.00

  Approval Criteria                     NA                  EPS, DPS              EPS, DPS
                                        NA                  and at least          and at least
                                        NA                  two of other          two of other
                                        NA                  three criteria        three criteria


  July 1987-May 1989 Criteria for Domestic Secured Convertible Bonds
  Performance Standards           Issuer’s Book Equity
                                  3-6 Billion Yen  6-10 Billion Yen > 10 Billion Yen

  Book Equity/Paid in Capital           2.00                1.50                  1.20
  Book Equity/Total Assets              0.15                0.12                  0.10
  Operational Profit/Total Assets       0.07                0.06                  0.05
  Earnings per share (yen)              7.00                7.00                  7.00
  Dividends per share (yen)             5.00                5.00                  5.00

  Approval Criteria                     EPS, DPS            EPS, DPS              EPS, DPS
                                        and at least        and at least          and at least
                                        two of other        two of other          two of other
                                        three criteria      three criteria        three criteria


  July 1987-May 1989 Criteria for Domestic Secured Strait Bonds
  Performance Standards           Issuer’s Book Equity
                                  3-6 Billion Yen  6-10 Billion Yen               > 10 Billion Yen

  Book Equity/Paid in Capital           3.00                1.50                  1.20
  Book Equity/Total Assets              0.30                0.12                  0.10
  Operational Profit/Total Assets       0.08                0.06                  0.05
  Interest Coverage                     3.00                1.20                  1.00
  Dividends per share (yen)             at least 5 yen      at least 4 yen        at least 3 yen
                                        per share for       per share for         per share for
                                        past 3 years        past 3 years or 5     past 3 years or 4
                                                            yen previous year     yen previous year

  Approval Criteria                     If firm has no bonds outstanding, then DPS
                                        and at least 3 of other 4 criteria satisfied.
                                        If firm has outstanding bonds: (a) if DPS met in
                                        last 3 years then only 1 remaining criteria
                                        satisfied; (b) if DPS met in previous year,
                                        then 2 of remaining 4 criteria satisfied.




                                                  31
                        Table 2: Why Did Firms Fail the Bond Criteria?
                   The bond issuing criteria are broken into four categories, SIZE, EP S, CAP IT AL RAT IOS,
                   and DP S. The first column lists the number of firms that failed the size requirement. The second
                   column list the number of firms that failed the EP S requirement given passage of the SIZE
                   requirement. The third column lists the number of firms that failed the CAP IT AL RAT IOS
                   requirements given passage of the requirements in columns two and three. Column five lists the
                   number of firms that failed the DP S requirement given passage of all other requirements.


                     FY        SIZE          EP S         CAP. RAT.              DP S         Total Failures
                     80         221           26              4                   9                260
                     81         204           27              8                   4                243
                     82         184           39              5                   5                233
                     83         178           55              5                   4                242
                     84         172           55              4                   2                236
                     85         159           43              5                   5                212
                     86         145           52              7                   7                211
                     87         138           31              6                   8                183
                     88         68            75              7                   10               160
                     89         59            27              9                   14               109



                   Table 3: Bond Issue Criteria and Actual Bond Issues
Table presents the incidence of bond issues (convertible, strait, and warrant) by year and firm group. Firm groups are determined using
the minimum approval criteria for domestic issuance of secured convertible bonds and secured strait bonds taken from Kaneko and
Battaglini (1990) and Karp and Koike (1990). A firm wishing to issue bonds in period t must have met these criteria in period t − 1.
R firms were eligible at most one period between 1980-90, S firms were eligible 2 ∼ 4 periods, and U firms were eligible 5 or more periods.


                Restricted Firms     Semi-Res. Firms     Unrestricted Firms
  FY         No Issue Issue Total No Issue Issue Total No Issue Issue Total
   80          112       4     116  100      5     105   190       35    225
   81          107       9     116  91       14    105   166       59    225
   82          109       7     116  94       11    105   173       52    225
   83          108       8     116  97       8     105   159       66    225
   84          112       4     116  92       13    105   144       81    225
   85          111       5     116  89       16    105   145       80    225
   86          108       8     116  80       25    105   133       92    225
   87          112       4     116  82       23    105   140       85    225
   88          111       5     116  69       36    105   129       96    225
   89          99        17    116  72       33    105   128       97    225
   90          85        31    116  78       27    105   170       55    225
   91          90        26    116  63       42    105   137       88    225
   92          101       15    116  86       19    105   178       47    225
   93          104       12    116  92       13    105   180       45    225
   94          106       10    116  92       13    105   191       34    225
   95          105       11    116  90       15    105   188       37    225
   96          102       14    116  89       16    105   165       60    225
  Obs.        1,782     190 1,972  1,456    329 1,785   2,716    1,109 3,825



                                                                   32
Table 4: Sample Statistics for Bond Eligibility Division
   Table presents statistics on a sample of 446 manufacturing firms split by the number of
   times the firm was eligible to issue bonds from 1980-1990. Firms eligible at most one
   time are restricted (R Firms), firms eligible 2 ∼ 4 times are semi-restricted (S Firms),
   and firms eligible 5 or more times are unrestricted (U Firms). There are 116 R Firms,
   105 S Firms, and 225 U Firms.

         I/K                            1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
        R Firms          Mean            0.089        0.133        0.130        0.074
                         Median          0.071        0.103        0.102        0.062
                         Std. Dev.       0.084        0.113        0.110        0.079
         S Firms         Mean            0.117        0.151        0.127        0.086
                         Median          0.097        0.125        0.101        0.068
                         Std. Dev.       0.097        0.120        0.104        0.094
        U Firms          Mean            0.144        0.176        0.138        0.087
                         Median          0.124        0.155        0.117        0.072
                         Std. Dev.       0.099        0.103        0.098        0.068

           Q                            1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
        R Firms          Mean            0.701        4.096        1.841        0.560
                         Median          0.494        3.121        1.120        0.480
                         Std. Dev.       2.248        4.465        3.596        2.822
         S Firms         Mean            1.284        4.147        1.651        0.768
                         Median          0.631        3.284        1.146        0.570
                         Std. Dev.       2.891        4.017        3.175        2.318
        U Firms          Mean            2.017        4.249        1.361        0.532
                         Median          1.123        3.218        0.841        0.525
                         Std. Dev.       3.405        4.945        3.709        2.724

     Cash F low/K                       1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
       R Firms           Mean            0.161        0.268        0.184        0.151
                         Median          0.154        0.249        0.181        0.165
                         Std. Dev.       0.150        0.161        0.160        0.169
         S Firms         Mean            0.238        0.296        0.217        0.187
                         Median          0.215        0.274        0.195        0.188
                         Std. Dev.       0.140        0.207        0.259        0.134
        U Firms          Mean            0.331        0.380        0.240        0.227
                         Median          0.299        0.342        0.233        0.225
                         Std. Dev.       0.171        0.187        0.163        0.186

      Op. P rof /K                      1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
       R Firms           Mean            0.171        0.300        0.194        0.089
                         Median          0.152        0.256        0.138        0.086
                         Std. Dev.       0.219        0.246        0.254        0.218
         S Firms         Mean            0.288        0.318        0.205        0.145
                         Median          0.242        0.276        0.144        0.110
                         Std. Dev.       0.247        0.311        0.379        0.209
        U Firms          Mean            0.400        0.395        0.194        0.204
                         Median          0.311        0.311        0.146        0.160
                         Std. Dev.       0.321        0.352        0.252        0.223




                                             33
Table 5: Sample Statistics for Bond Eligibility Division
Table presents statistics on a sample of 446 manufacturing firms split by the number of times the
firm was eligible to issue bonds from 1980-1990. Firms eligible at most one time are restricted (R
Firms), firms eligible 2 ∼ 4 times are semi-restricted (S Firms), and firms eligible 5 or more times
are unrestricted (U Firms). There are 116 R Firms, 105 S Firms, and 225 U Firms.

        Real Sales             (in Y10,000)      1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
         R Firms               Mean                5310         5994         6544         6411
                               Median              1483         1882         2012         1947
                               Std. Dev.          13555        14559        15820        16084
          S Firms              Mean                8992         9792        10316        10167
                               Median              2328         3125         3359         3233
                               Std. Dev.          27900        27366        27801        26842
         U Firms               Mean               15098        21496        24151        25996
                               Median              6320         9586        10892        10850
                               Std. Dev.          30385        42493        48159        55141

      Sales Growth                               1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
        R Firms                Mean               0.028        0.078        -0.011       0.005
                               Median             0.024        0.064        -0.013       0.002
                               Std. Dev.          0.125        0.117        0.097        0.089
          S Firms              Mean               0.053        0.075        -0.002       0.020
                               Median             0.050        0.061        -0.002       0.015
                               Std. Dev.          0.120        0.097        0.094        0.087
         U Firms               Mean               0.072        0.080        -0.003       0.033
                               Median             0.062        0.066        0.000        0.024
                               Std. Dev.          0.102        0.082        0.084        0.082

       T otal Assets           (in Y10,000)      1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
          R Firms              Mean                7071         7465         8420         7964
                               Median              1376         1760         1909         1885
                               Std. Dev.          22420        21970        24830        22908
          S Firms              Mean               13504        14391        15556        14761
                               Median              1978         2962         3328         3319
                               Std. Dev.          48389        44874        47133        44123
         U Firms               Mean               15733        24232        27437        28018
                               Median              5837        10158        11234        11642
                               Std. Dev.          35128        49227        55156        55824

  Bank Debt/T ot. Lia.                           1980-87      1988-90      1991-93      1994-96
       R Firms                 Mean               0.441        0.389        0.389        0.417
                               Median             0.447        0.381        0.387        0.432
                               Std. Dev.          0.175        0.176        0.181        0.189
          S Firms              Mean               0.378        0.298        0.300        0.313
                               Median             0.402        0.297        0.292        0.307
                               Std. Dev.          0.174        0.175        0.182        0.196
         U Firms               Mean               0.214        0.148        0.189        0.200
                               Median             0.176        0.102        0.153        0.151
                               Std. Dev.          0.181        0.149        0.171        0.185




                                                34
Table 6: Cash Flow Sensitivity, Pooled Sample, 1980-90
Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and
Arellano-Bond GMM estimation. The dependent variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment
rate, Q is the coefficient on Tobin’s Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf
is the coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K,
P RAT is the coefficient on the price ratio, and CF is the coefficient on cash flow. Industry and
time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time dummies in the fixed-effects and GMM
regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in parentheses, and are calculated
with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors (for OLS and GMM). The superscripts a, b, and c
denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The p − values of the
Sargan and the M test (for second order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression.
The sample period is 1980-90.


  Parameters             OLS              Fixed Effects          First Differenced GMM
  CON ST                  .089                .1255                        .0038
                         (3.49)a             (5.63)a                      (.667)
  LAGIK                                                                    .0358
                                                                          (1.37)
  Q                        .0001                .002                       .0055
                           (.168)              (5.2)a                    (2.49)b
  Qnf                                                                      .0005
                                                                          (.304)
  P RAT                   -.0236              -.0458                      -.0807
                         (−1.79)c            (−3.11)a                   (−1.90)c
  CF                       .2143               .2113                       .3701
                         (14.46)a            (19.45)a                    (7.77)a
  R2 W ithin                                    .146
  R2 Between                                    .334
  R2 All                    .207                .188
  Sargan T est                                                                  .02
  M T est                                                                       .91

  Parameters             OLS              Fixed Effects          First Differenced GMM
  CON ST                  .0932               .1255                        .0018
                         (3.68)a             (5.67)a                      (.317)
  LAGIK                                                                    .0415
                                                                          (1.58)
  Q                        -.0001              .0017                       .0053
                          (−.209)             (4.31)a                    (2.44)b
  Qnf                                                                     -.0004
                                                                          (−.24)
  P RAT                    -.0232             -.0452                      -.0786
                         (−1.77)c            (−3.1)a                    (−1.91)c
  CF                        .1638              .1593                       .2591
                          (9.27)a            (12.83)a                    (4.31)a
  CF xELIG                  .0602              .1001                       .1558
                          (4.97)a             (8.5)a                     (3.35)a
  R2 W ithin                                    .159
  R2 Between                                    .346
  R2 All                    .214                .197
  Sargan T est                                                                  .03
  M T est                                                                       .81

                                                 35
         Table 7: CF Sensitivity, Bond Elig. Division, 1980-90
Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and Arellano-Bond GMM
estimation. The dependent variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q is the coefficient on Tobin’s
Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf is the coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q,
LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on the price ratio, and CF is the coefficient on
cash flow. Industry and time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time dummies in the fixed-effects and
GMM regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in parentheses, and are calculated with
heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors (for OLS and GMM). The superscripts a, b, and c denote significance
at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for second
order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The sample period is 1980-90.


 OLS
 Parameters             All Firms          R Firms         S Firms          U Firms         U-R Difference
 CON ST                       .089             .1227           .1178            .0673
                           (3.49)a           (2.74)a         (1.91)c          (1.93)c
 Q                           .0001            -.0002           .0016           -.0007
                            (.168)          (−.334)          (1.74)c         (−1.36)
 P RAT                      -.0236            -.0353          -.0384           -.0127
                         (−1.79)c           (−1.53)         (−1.24)           (−.68)
 CF                          .2143             .1345           .1775             .236                     .1015
                          (14.46)a            (5.5)a          (3.7)a        (14.05)a                    (3.42)a
 R2                           .207               .15            .175             .219

 Fixed Effects
 Parameters    All Firms                   R Firms         S Firms          U Firms         U-R Difference
 CON ST             .1255                     .1473            .1882            .0418
                  (5.63)a                   (3.08)a          (4.05)a           (1.41)
 Q                   .002                     .0005            .0029            .0011
                   (5.2)a                      (.55)         (3.08)a          (2.18)b
 P RAT             -.0458                    -.0546           -.0823           -.0186
                (−3.11)a                   (−1.74)c        (−2.64)a          (−.963)
 CF                 .2113                     .1047            .1345            .3723                     .2676
                 (19.42)a                   (5.91)a          (6.11)a        (21.18)a                   (10.72)a
 R2 W ithin          .146                       .106            .112              .24
 R2 Between          .334                       .144             .23             .231
   2
 R All               .188                       .113            .137             .193

 First Differenced GMM
 Parameters    All Firms R Firms                           S Firms          U Firms         U-R Difference
 LAGIK              .0358    .0571                            -.0305            .0425
                   (1.37)   (1.02)                             (−.5)           (1.54)
 Q                  .0055    .0073                             .0089            .0074
                  (2.49) b (2.35)b                           (1.78)c          (3.19)a
 Q nf               .0005   -.0008                            -.0019              .001
                     (.30) (−.39)                              (−.8)             (.62)
 CF                 .3701    .1749                             .2478            .4035                     .2286
                  (7.77)a  (3.31)a                           (2.37)b          (6.01)a                   (2.68)a
 P RAT             -.0807   -.0501                            -.1498           -.0557
                 (−1.9)c   (−.57)                          (−2.15)b          (−1.04)
 Sargan T est          .02    .991                              .999              .471
 M T est               .91    .531                              .963              .496

                                                        36
Table 8: CF Interacted with Bond Issue, Bond Elig. Division, 1980-90
     Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and Arellano-Bond
     GMM estimation. The dependent variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q is the
     coefficient on Tobin’s Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf is the coefficient on
     the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on
     the price ratio, CF is the coefficient on cash flow, and CF xBON D is the coefficient on cash flow crossed
     with a dummy for bond issues. Industry and time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time
     dummies in the fixed-effects and GMM regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are
     in parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors (for OLS and GMM).
     The superscripts a, b, and c denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The
     p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for second order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM
     regression. The sample period is 1980-90.


       OLS
       Parameters            All Firms         R Firms         S Firms         U Firms         U-R Difference
       CON ST                     .0943            .1259           .1285             .071
                                (3.74)a          (2.81)a         (2.09)b         (2.05)b
       Q                          .0001                0           .0015           -.0006
                                   (.31)        (−.039)          (1.69)c        (−1.16)
       P RAT                       -.024          -.0374          -.0417           -.0122
                              (−1.84)c          (−1.62)         (−1.35)           (−.68)
       CF                         .1961            .1316           .1691            .2202                    .0886
                               (13.15)a          (5.37)a         (3.62)a       (12.39)a                    (2.93)a
       CF xBON D                  .0891            .1462             .12             .071
                                (6.88)a          (2.33)b         (3.11)a         (4.88)a
       R2                           .222            .157            .189             .233
       Fixed Effects
       Parameters    All Firms R Firms                         S Firms         U Firms         U-R Difference
       CON ST             .1268     .1424                          .1865          .0459
                        (5.71)a  (2.99)a                         (4.05)a         (1.55)
       Q                  .0019     .0006                          .0028          .0011
                        (4.95)a      (.76)                       (2.98)a        (2.13)b
       P RAT             -.0455    -.0514                         -.0797         -.0193
                      (−3.11)a (−1.64)c                        (−2.58)a            (−1)
       CF                 .1999     .0999                          .1229          .3596                     .2597
                       (18.22)a  (5.64)a                          (5.6)a       (19.92)a                  (10.27)a
       CF xBON D            .066    .1541                            .12          .0327
                         (6.6)a  (3.07)a                         (4.45)a        (2.99)a
       R2 W ithin           .154      .114                          .129            .243
       R2 Between           .365      .161                          .227            .245
       R2 All               .202      .122                          .149            .202
       First Differenced GMM
       Parameters    All Firms R Firms                         S Firms         U Firms         U-R Difference
       LAGIK              .0338     .0559                         -.0471           .0406
                           (1.3)     (.99)                       (−.79)           (1.49)
       Q                  .0056     .0082                          .0086           .0076
                         (2.5)b  (2.46)b                         (1.78)c        (3.19)a
         nf
       Q                  .0005    -.0008                         -.0019            .001
                           (.33)  (−.39)                           (−.8)             (.6)
       CF                 .3722       .157                         .2347           .4054                     .2484
                        (7.87)a  (3.06)a                         (2.27)b        (6.72)a                    (3.14)a
       CF xBON D         -.0054     .3272                          .0843          -.0058
                          (−.1)  (2.56)b                          (1.08)         (−.11)
       P RAT             -.0823    -.0149                         -.1506          -.0578
                      (−1.94)c    (−.16)                       (−2.24)b          (−1.1)
       Sargan T est          .03       .89                           .75            .499
       M T est              .888      .598                          .828            .502


                                                            37
Table 9: Negative Cash Flow Observations, Bond Elig. Division
        Table presents the number of negative cash flow observations by firm
        group. Cash Flow (CF1) is defined as after tax earnings minus dividends
        paid plus accounting depreciation.


         Fiscal Year R Firms S Firms U Firms Total
             80            4       0       0     4
             81            7       4       0   11
             82           10       2       1   13
             83           10       1       0   11
             84            9       2       1   12
             85           11       0       0   11
             86           19       2       0   21
             87            4       1       0     5
             88            3       1       0     4
             89            0       0       0     0
             90            5       2       2     9
             91            3       4       5   12
             92            9      12      13   34
             93           12       4      14   30
             94           14       6      11   31
             95           15       7      12   34
             96           12       4       7   23
            Total        147      52      66  265




                                         38
Table 10: Negative CF Observations and Bond Elig. Division, 1980-90
     Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and Arellano-Bond
     GMM estimation. The dependent variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q is the
     coefficient on Tobin’s Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf is the coefficient on the
     non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on the
     price ratio, P OS CF is the coefficient on positive, and N EG CF is the coefficient on negative cash flow
     observations. Industry and time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time dummies in the
     fixed-effects and GMM regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in parentheses,
     and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors (for OLS and GMM). The superscripts
     a, b, and c denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The p − values of
     the Sargan and the M test (for second order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The
     sample period is 1980-90.


       OLS
       Parameters           All Firms         R Firms        S Firms         U Firms        U-R Difference
       CON ST                     .0724            .1044         .0831           .0653
                                 (2.9)a         (2.31)b         (1.42)          (1.9)c
       Q                         -.0002           -.0003         .0011          -.0007
                                (−.65)           (−.51)         (1.29)         (−1.4)
       P RAT                     -.0178           -.0287        -.0262          -.0118
                              (−1.37)          (−1.25)         (−.88)          (−.64)
       P OS CF                    .2425             .173         .2437           .2379                    .0649
                               (18.5)a          (4.94)a       (6.25)a        (13.98)a                   (1.67)c
       N EG CF                     -.026             -.02       -.0264          -.0356
                             (−1.79)c            (−.58)      (−1.66)c          (−.39)
       R2                           .217            .157          .196            .219
       Fixed Effects
       Parameters    All Firms                R Firms        S Firms         U Firms        U-R Difference
       CON ST              .1008                 .1357            .158           .0359
                         (4.55)a               (2.85)a          (3.4)a          (1.21)
       Q                   .0016                 .0004           .0022           .0011
                         (4.08)a                  (.51)        (2.36)b         (2.13)b
       P RAT              -.0408                -.0541          -.0736          -.0164
                        (−2.8)a               (−1.73)c       (−2.38)b          (−.85)
       P OS CF             .2763                 .1605           .2146           .3805                      .22
                       (22.33)a                (7.11)a        (7.78)a        (21.42)a                   (7.66)a
       N EG CF            -.0988                  -.093         -.0347            -.277
                      (−3.17)a                (−1.75)c         (−.83)         (−1.26)
       R2 W ithin            .167                  .118           .131             .243
       R2 Between            .334                  .145           .277             .229
       R2 All                  .2                  .123           .162             .193
       First Differenced GMM
       Parameters    All Firms                R Firms        S Firms         U Firms        U-R Difference
       LAGIK               .0342                   .0551        -.0322           .0416
                          (1.35)                  (1.01)       (−.55)           (1.51)
       Q                     .007                  .0094         .0061           .0075
                         (3.45)a                (3.05)a         (1.48)          (3.3)a
       Qnf                 .0013                  -.0002        -.0028           .0009
                            (.86)                (−.13)       (−1.24)             (.52)
       P OS CF             .3859                   .2001         .3733           .3964                    .1963
                         (7.77)a                (3.04)a         (4.7)a         (6.41)a                  (2.17)b
       N EG CF            -.2211                  -.1485         .0395          1.4012
                        (−1.32)                (−1.15)            (.42)             (.8)
       P RAT              -.0471                    -.026       -.1347          -.0585
                        (−1.11)                (−.303)        (−1.9)c         (−1.11)
       Sargan T est           .05                    .999           .97            .439
       M T est               .788                    .909          .959            .523


                                                            39
Table 11: CF Sensitivity by Period (Neg. Obs.), Bond Elig. Division, 1980-96
           Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using firm fixed-effects and Arellano-Bond
           GMM estimation. The dependent variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q
           is the coefficient on Tobin’s Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf is the
           coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT
           is the coefficient on the price ratio, and P OS CF is the coefficient on positive, and N EG CF is
           the coefficient on negative cash flow (CF1). Time dummies are included in all regressions. The t
           statistics (FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity
           consistent standard errors for GMM. The superscripts a, b, and c denote significance at the .01,
           .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for
           second order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The sample period is 1980-96.

             Fixed Effects
             Parameters       All Firms           R Firms         S Firms        U Firms       U-R Difference
             CON ST                  .1085             .1163           .1399          .0754
                                    (8.3)a            (4.1)a          (4.9)a       (4.39)a
             Q                       .0013             .0003           .0019            .001
                                  (4.08)a             (.364)        (2.36)b        (2.43)b
             P RAT                  -.0491            -.0429          -.0703         -.0379
                               (−6.16)a           (−2.42)b        (−4.05)a        (−3.7)a
             P OS CF 80−87           .2939             .1751           .2744          .3568             .1817
                                (25.13)a              (6.4)a          (9.2)a     (22.91)a             (5.77)a
             P OS CF 88−90           .2412             .1877           .2072          .2897              .102
                                (15.63)a              (5.4)a        (5.42)a      (14.24)a             (2.53)b
             P OS CF 91−93           .1618             .1184           .0961          .3128             .1944
                                  (9.89)a           (2.77)a         (3.89)a      (11.23)a             (3.81)a
             P OS CF 94−96           .1906             .1462           .1355          .2831             .1369
                                  (9.39)a           (3.72)a         (2.63)a      (10.09)a             (2.84)a
             N EG CF 80−87          -.1645            -.0896          -.1386           -.333
                               (−3.52)a            (−1.57)         (−1.21)        (−1.29)
             N EG CF 88−90          -.0417            -.0454          -.0379          .0108
                                 (−1.04)             (−.31)          (−.83)          (.029)
             N EG CF 91−93          -.0081             .0371             .098        -.1688
                                   (−.16)               (.42)           (.88)    (−2.24)b
             N EG CF 94−96          -.0084            -.0633           .2694         -.0261
                                   (−.29)            (−.82)         (1.94)c         (−.83)
             R2 W ithin               .207               .143            .168           .286
             R2 Between               .268                .12            .152             .2
             R2 All                   .202                .14            .156           .231
             First Differenced GMM
             Parameters       All Firms           R Firms         S Firms        U Firms       U-R Difference
             LAGIK                    .073             .0561             .063         .0587
                                  (4.15)a             (1.59)        (1.93)c          (2.7)a
             Q                       .0039               .007          .0043          .0034
                                      (3)a          (2.33)b         (1.91)c        (2.18)b
             Qnf                    -.0015              -.001         -.0025         -.0006
                               (−1.79)c                (−.8)      (−1.68)c          (−.56)
             P OS CF 80−87           .3804             .1926           .4187          .3902             .1976
                                    (9.5)a          (2.74)a         (6.53)a        (8.81)a            (2.32)b
             P OS CF 88−90           .3744             .2803           .3277          .3413             .0610
                                  (5.91)a           (3.58)a         (2.23)b        (5.38)a               (.61)
             P OS CF 91−93           .3254             .0777           .1502           .412             .3343
                                  (3.89)a             (1.03)        (1.73)c        (5.66)a            (3.19)a
             P OS CF 94−96           .3845             .0963           .1986          .4322             .3359
                                  (6.75)a             (1.58)        (2.56)b        (6.12)a            (3.61)a
             N EG CF 80−87          -.2449              -.142         -.0216        7.2093
                                 (−1.04)           (−1.06)           (−.27)          (1.25)
             N EG CF 88−90          -.0621             .2072           .0346       -1.8103
                                   (−.42)               (.62)           (.28)       (−.66)
             N EG CF 91−93          -.2262             .1396           .0086         -.4182
                                    (1.9)c                (.9)          (.06)    (−2.24)b
             N EG CF 94−96          -.0364            -.0337             .107        -.0837
                                   (−.39)            (−.31)             (.76)     (−1.08)
             P RAT                  -.0831            -.0813              -.07       -.0736
                                    (4.5)a        (−2.18)b        (−2.29)b       (−3.31)a
             Sargon T est              .99               .988              .97         .967
             M T est                  .394               .715            .482          .587



                                                             40
Table 12: Incidence and Size of Bond Issues by Eligible Firms
     The statistics are calculated using all eligible firms in each year. The first two columns list
     the share of firms within each group that have a bond issue (either convertible, warrant,
     or strait bonds). Columns 3-6 list the mean and median size (in Y10,000) of each issue by
     group, conditional on non-zero issue.


                Pct. of Firms                Mean        Issue            Median Issue
       FY        Ind Group                   Ind          Group           Ind    Group
       80       0.157 0.321                 724.5         876.9          490.3 560.6
       81       0.325 0.466                 823.9         1140.0         400.0 539.5
       82       0.225 0.433                1025.9         1275.6         376.1 625.2
       83       0.289 0.483                1186.2         1315.7         535.4 838.5
       84       0.370 0.511                1276.8         1555.9         590.1 940.6
       85       0.322 0.505                1236.6         1727.1         522.0 1023.2
       86       0.422 0.545                1434.1         1483.3         616.0 880.8
       87       0.310 0.556                1945.0         1475.5         974.4 1000.0
       88       0.410 0.512                2450.7         2342.5         1014.8 1305.3
       89       0.340 0.549                3963.0         3693.6         1431.7 1715.3
       90       0.257 0.370                1194.6         2235.6         505.6 1050.4




                                                  41
                  Table 13: Keiretsu Profitability Regressions
Table presents results for OLS regressions. The dependent variables are Opp. P rof./T A, operating profits
over total assets, and EP S, earnings per share. Bonds/T L is outstanding bonds divided by total liabilities,
T ot. Debt/T L is outstanding bonds plus bank debt over total liabilities, N om. K/Sales is the nominal capital
stock divided by gross sales, ln(Sales) is the natural log of gross sales, SalesGrth is year-on-year growth
in gross sales, Keiretsu is a dummy variable for Keiretsu membership, and Own F in. Inst., Own. Indiv.,
Own N on F in., Own. T op T en is the percent of outstanding shares owned by financial institutions, individuals,
and non-financial institutions, respectively. Own. T op T en is cumulative ownership by the top ten shareholders.
A constant term, industry, and time dummies are included in each regression but not reported. The t statistics
are in parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. The superscripts
a, b, and c denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The sample period is 1980-90.

  OLS: 1980-90                                           Dependent Variables
  parameters                              Opp. P rof./T A                                     EP S
  Bonds/T L                     -.0031                                    6.3581
                               (−.73)                                      (1.7)c
  T ot. Debt/T L                                -.0581        -.0597                          -45.35             -47.55
                                           (−19.88)a      (−19.5)a                          (−10.5)a         (−9.71)a
  N om.K/Sales                                                  -.003                                          21.1301
                                                             (−.31)                                             (2.27)b
  (N om.K/Sales)2                                                .012                                         -13.7717
                                                              (1.24)                                         (−1.88)c
  ln(Sales)                    -.0009           -.0016        -.0016      1.6437                1.2712           1.3046
                              (−1.54)       (−2.79)a        (−2.9)a     (3.53)a                (2.82)a          (2.91)a
  SalesGrth.                    .1272            .1123         .1134    51.5298               40.0705            41.777
                             (16.56)a        (15.59)a      (15.57)a     (8.09)a                 (6.1)a          (6.53)a
  Keiretsu                     -.0049           -.0023        -.0024    -7.2082                -5.3256          -5.3856
                            (−4.48)a         (−2.16)b     (−2.21)b    (−8.72)a              (−6.78)a         (−6.89)a
  Own. T op T en                .0072           -.0029        -.0014    15.3022                 6.7252            8.068
                                 (.81)         (−.35)        (−.17)      (2.24)b                  (.95)          (1.15)
  Own. Indiv.                  -.0564           -.0645        -.0649    -3.0519                -9.9059          -9.7731
                            (−4.83)a        (−6.04)a      (−6.06)a       (−.39)               (−1.29)          (−1.27)
  Own. F in. Inst.             -.0584           -.0501        -.0503   -13.8283                -5.8417          -5.7498
                              (−5.3)a       (−4.92)a      (−4.93)a    (−2.34)b                (−1.13)          (−1.11)
  Own. N on F in.                -.073          -.0666        -.0673   -16.6126              -11.7136         -12.0825
                            (−6.27)a        (−6.18)a      (−6.22)a    (−2.75)a              (−2.16)b         (−2.21)b
  P sudo R2                       .224            .286           .286         .06                  .119            .121

  OLS: 1991-96                                           Dependent Variables
  parameters                              Opp. P rof./T A                           EP S
  Bonds/T L                   -.0074                                   -8.9249
                            (−1.92)c                                   (−1.8)c
  T ot. Debt/T L                                -.0497       -.0427               -66.2198                   -62.7434
                                           (−14.75)a     (−12.48)a              (−10.84)a                  (−10.48)a
  N om.K/Sales                                               -.0471                                          -31.6799
                                                          (−4.82)a                                          (−2.79)a
  (N om.K/Sales)2                                             .0189                                           17.0205
                                                            (2.27)b                                            (1.84)c
  ln(Sales)                      .0015           .0012        .0009     1.4001       1.0019                       .887
                                (2.1)b         (1.75)c       (1.36)      (1.9)c      (1.34)                     (1.17)
  SalesGrth.                     .1172           .1097        .1019    98.6679       88.626                   84.5285
                              (11.5)a        (11.11)a      (10.58)a     (5.9)a      (5.59)a                    (5.36)a
  Keiretsu                        -.002          .0005        .0006    -5.7437      -2.4252                    -2.3368
                               (−1.6)             (.38)        (.53) (−3.46)a      (−1.62)                    (−1.57)
  Own. T op T en                 .0385           .0269        .0205    17.7555       2.0404                    -1.2701
                              (3.55)a          (2.62)a      (2.03)b     (1.31)         (.16)                     (−.1)
  Own. Indiv.                   -.0712          -.0657       -.0726   -90.5014    -83.4626                   -87.4238
                            (−4.87)a        (−4.87)a      (−5.48)a   (−5.32)a    (−5.53)a                     (−5.8)a
  Own. F in. Inst.              -.0764          -.0635       -.0677   -78.4117    -61.0793                   -63.8497
                            (−5.41)a        (−4.99)a      (−5.38)a   (−4.55)a    (−4.02)a                     (−4.2)a
  Own. N on F in.               -.0967          -.0843       -.0864   -80.7858    -64.3379                   -65.6266
                            (−7.37)a        (−7.18)a      (−7.45)a   (−4.82)a    (−4.28)a                   (−4.38)a
  P sudo R2                        .232            .292         .315       .095         .166                      .169




                                                           42
          Table 14: Bond Issue Probit Regressions
Table presents results for probit regressions where the dependent variable is a dummy for bond
issues. Semi − Res is a dummy for the Semi-Restricted, and U nrestricted a dummy for the
unrestricted firm group. ln(Sales) is the natural log of gross sales, Bonds/T L is outstanding
bonds divided by total liabilities, Oper.P rof./P K is operating profits normalized by the
nominal capital stock, and Own F in. Inst., Own. Indiv., Own N on F in., Own. T op T en
is the percent of outstanding shares owned by financial institutions, individuals, and
non-financial institutions, respectively.       Own. T op T en is cumulative ownership by the
top ten shareholders. A constant term, industry, and time dummies are included in each
regression, but not reported.         The z statistics are in parentheses, and are calculated
with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors. The superscripts a, b, and c denote sig-
nificance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The sample period is 1980-90.


  Probit Regression: Bond Issue Dummy
  Parameters             1980-90              1991-96
  Semi − Res          .2589      .2608    -.1018      -.0913
                    (3.34)a    (3.30) a (−1.04)     (−0.92)
  U nrestricted      -.0026     -.0235    -.5698        -.557
                   (−0.03)    (−0.30) (−5.34)a (−5.09)a
  Keiretsu            .2954      .2517      .089         .082
                    (5.65)a    (4.68)a    (1.31)      (1.20)
  ln(Sales)           .3391      .2662     .2943         .309
                   (15.57)a    (9.87) a (10.23)a     (8.72)a
  Bonds/T L           5.589      5.484     3.796       3.826
                   (21.07)a   (20.36) a (17.50)a    (17.08)a
  Oper.P rof./P K     .4279        .444    .4877         .578
                    (5.18)a    (5.28)a   (3.70)a     (4.22)a
  Own. F in. Inst.               .0919                 1.124
                                (0.22)                (1.58)
  Own. Indiv.                     -.893                  1.76
                             (−2.19)b                (2.47)b
  Own. N on F in.                  .658                  1.31
                               (1.70) c              (1.86)c
  Own. T op T en                -1.868                  -.962
                             (−5.17)a              (−1.69)c
  P sudo R2            .333        .338     .265         .272




                                                43
Table 15: CF Sensitivity, Keiretsu Division, 1980s
Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and
Arellano-Bond GMM estimation. The dependent variable is I/K. CON ST is the target
investment rate, Q is the coefficient on Tobin’s Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost
parameter, Qnf is the coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coeffi-
cient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on the price ratio, and CF is the coefficient on
cash flow. Industry and time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time dummies
in the fixed-effects and GMM regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM)
are in parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors
(for OLS and GMM). The superscripts a, b, and c denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1
levels of significance, respectively. The p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for second
order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The sample period is 1980-90.


 OLS
 Parameters              Independent           Bank Group            Ind.-Grp. Diff.
 CON ST                          .0925               .0842
                              (2.53)a              (2.37)a
 Q                              -.0002               .0008
                               (−.41)               (1.28)
 P RAT                          -.0204              -.0273
                             (−1.07)              (−1.49)
 CF                              .2091               .2185                         -.009
                             (10.26)a             (10.69)a                        (−.33)
 R2                               .192                .246
 Fixed Effects
 Parameters    Independent                     Bank Group            Ind.-Grp. Diff.
 CON ST               .1325                           .1263
                    (3.97)a                         (4.31)a
 Q                    .0014                           .0034
                    (2.81)a                         (5.32)a
 P RAT               -.0445                          -.0542
                  (−2.05)b                        (−2.75)a
 CF                   .2162                           .2031                          .013
                   (15.01)a                        (12.06)a                        (.593)
 R2 W ithin             .135                           .173
 R2 Between             .316                           .334
   2
 R All                  .175                           .207
 First Differenced GMM
 Parameters    Independent                     Bank Group            Ind.-Grp. Diff.
 LAGIK                .0268                           .0404
                       (.85)                           (.98)
 Q                    .0102                           .0023
                    (3.47)a                              (.9)
 Qnf                  .0009                           .0028
                       (.54)                         (1.62)
 CF                   .2752                           .3069                       -.032
                    (4.68)a                         (4.51)a                     (−.353)
 P RAT                .0005                          -.1856
                       (.01)                      (−3.63)a
 Sargon T est           .098                            .369
 M T est                .882                            .889


                                             44
             Table 16: CF Sensitivity, Keiretsu X Bond Elig. Division, 1980s
Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and Arellano-Bond GMM estimation. The dependent
variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q is the coefficient on Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf is the
coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on the price ratio, and CF
is the coefficient on cash flow. Industry and time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time dummies in the fixed-effects and GMM
regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard
errors (for OLS and GMM). The superscripts a, b, and c denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The
p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for second order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The sample period is 1980-90.

 OLS                                 Independent                                      Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters            Restricted     Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         Restricted      Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          IR-GR     IU-GU
 CON ST                     .0525          .2197         .0693               .1184         .0131         .0685
                             (.86)       (2.36)b        (1.35)            (1.83)c           (.17)       (1.45)
 Q                         -.0004            .001       -.0008              -.0002         .0034        -.0006
                          (−.48)            (.88)     (−1.41)              (−.15)        (2.17)b       (−.66)
 P RAT                      .0024         -.0942        -.0048              -.0384         .0102        -.0312
                             (.08)     (−1.95)c        (−.18)            (−1.08)            (.26)     (−1.26)
 CF                         .1781          .1704          .211               .0932         .1892           .31             .0849       -.099
                         (4.82)a        (2.74)a      (10.51)a             (2.83)a        (3.24)a     (11.19)a            (1.72)c    (−2.89)a
 R2                           .185           .184          .19                .171           .202         .297

 Fixed Effects                       Independent                                      Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters            Restricted     Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          Restricted      Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         IR-GR     IU-GU
 CON ST                      .122          .2709        .0488               .1552           .0751         .0203
                          (1.68)c        (4.05)a       (1.08)             (2.51)b          (1.17)          (.53)
 Q                         -.0012           .003        .0008               .0026           .0034         .0019
                         (−1.04)         (2.57)a       (1.26)             (2.11)b        (2.12)b        (2.36)b
 P RAT                     -.0374         -.1309          -.01             -.0622            -.022       -.0295
                            (−.8)      (−2.86)a       (−.35)             (−1.49)          (−.53)       (−1.16)
 CF                         .1528          .1111         .327               .0605           .1897         .4913           .0923       -.1643
                          (5.42)a        (4.28)a    (14.88)a              (2.78)a        (4.29)a      (16.15)a          (2.59)a     (−4.38)a
 R2 W ithin                  .137           .107         .206                .108             .157          .323
 R2 Between                  .228           .192         .178                .015             .307          .314
 R2 All                       .15           .123         .159                .078             .185           .26

 GMM                                 Independent                                      Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters            Restricted     Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          Restricted      Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         IR-GR     IU-GU
 LAGIK                      .0643         -.1185        .0316              -.0065           .0301        -.0168
                             (.86)     (−1.74)c          (.87)            (−.09)             (.34)      (−.47)
 Q                          .0115          .0103        .0108               .0067           .0094         .0014
                          (2.35)b       (1.82)c      (3.53)a               (1.57)        (1.65)c           (.51)
 Qnf                       -.0019         -.0009        .0007               .0024          -.0002         .0047
                          (−.89)         (−.37)            (.4)              (.98)        (−.06)       (2.58)a
 CF                         .1792          .1544        .3262                 .048          .3175         .5285            .1312       -.2023
                         (3.03)a        (1.68)c      (4.74)a              (2.02)b        (3.13)a       (7.78)a           (2.06)b     (−2.09)b
 P RAT                        .093        -.2147       -.0019              -.1443          -.0319        -.1338
                             (.91)     (−2.19)b       (−.03)             (−1.54)          (−.44)        (2.19)b
 Sargon T est                 .915          .899          .947                 .97            .988          .911
 M T est                       .99          .373          .865                .644            .968          .363




                                                                      45
 Table 17: CF Sensitivity (Neg. Obs.), Keiretsu X Bond Elig. Division, 1980s
Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and Arellano-Bond GMM estimation. The dependent
variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q is the coefficient on Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf
is the coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on the price ratio,
P OS CF is the coefficient on positive, and N EG CF is the coefficient on negative cash flow. Industry and time dummies are included in
the OLS regression,and time dummies in the fixed-effects and GMM regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in
parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard errors (for OLS and GMM). The superscripts a, b, and c denote
significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for second order serial
correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The sample period is 1980-90.

 OLS                                 Independent                                     Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters           Restricted      Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         Restricted     Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          IR-GR IU-GU
 CON ST                    .0416           .1501         .0665              .0945         .0142         .0672
                            (.68)         (1.7)c          (1.3)            (1.42)          (.18)       (1.42)
 Q                        -.0004           .0004        -.0009             -.0003         .0033        -.0006
                         (−.56)             (.34)     (−1.46)             (−.26)        (2.13)b       (−.65)
 P RAT                     .0048          -.0647        -.0035             -.0281         .0087        -.0306
                            (.16)        (−1.4)        (−.13)             (−.78)           (.22)     (−1.24)
 P OS CF                   .2121           .2707           .213             .1322         .1944         .3112              .08       -.098
                        (4.19)a         (5.32)a      (10.45)a             (2.56)b       (3.09)a     (11.12)a            (1.11)    (−2.87)a
 N EG CF                  -.0334            -.038       -.0698             -.0192         .0898         .0921
                         (−.43)        (−2.46)b       (−1.48)             (−.52)        (1.87)c        (1.41)
 R2                          .191             .22          .191              .178           .203         .298

 Fixed Effects                       Independent                                     Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters           Restricted      Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          Restricted     Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         IR-GR IU-GU
 CON ST                     .1108          .2161         .0417              .1451          .0792         .0133
                           (1.53)       (3.21)a           (.92)           (2.35)b         (1.23)          (.35)
 Q                           -.001         .0021         .0008              .0025          .0033           .002
                          (−.93)        (1.83)c         (1.19)            (2.01)b       (2.03)b         (2.4)b
 P RAT                     -.0385         -.1079        -.0072             -.0606           -.028       -.0268
                          (−.83)       (−2.37)b        (−.25)            (−1.46)         (−.67)       (−1.06)
 P OS CF                    .2084           .208         .3344              .1054          .2129         .5029            .103       -.169
                         (6.06)a        (5.95)a       (15.1)a             (3.59)a       (4.59)a      (16.27)a          (2.28)b    (−4.43)a
 N EG CF                   -.1497         -.0358        -.3126             -.0572         -.1249        -.2205
                        (−1.34)          (−.81)      (−1.11)             (−1.02)         (−.63)        (−.62)
 R2 W ithin                   .148          .131           .209              .116            .163          .326
 R2 Between                   .191          .282           .173              .027             .28          .314
 R2 All                       .156          .168           .158              .088            .183          .261

 GMM                                 Independent                                     Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters           Restricted      Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          Restricted     Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         IR-GR IU-GU
 LAGIK                         .06        -.1199        .0295               -.0072        .0351         -.0191
                              (.8)     (−1.82)c          (.82)             (−.11)            (.4)      (−.53)
 Q                         .0119           .0061        .0108                .0074        .0099          .0019
                         (2.43)b          (1.24)     (3.49)a              (1.71)c       (1.76)c           (.69)
 Qnf                        -.002         -.0012        .0003                .0028        .0004          .0046
                         (−.94)          (−.47)          (.17)              (1.14)         (.12)       (2.54)b
 P OS CF                     .172          .3009        .3061                 .185        .2955          .5162          -.013          -.21
                         (2.39)b        (3.01)a      (4.86)a              (2.42)a       (2.86)a         (7.4)a         (−.12)      (−2.24)b
 N EG CF                   .0616          -.0028      3.3625                -.1851          .129        1.3402
                          (.313)         (−.05)        (1.06)           (−1.73)c           (.34)          (.76)
 P RAT                     .0919          -.1773         -.013              -.1318         -.034        -.1373
                            (.91)      (−1.71)c       (−.18)             (−1.43)         (−.47)        (2.25)b
 Sargon T est                   .9          .886          .983                 .94          .867            .92
 M T est                     .998           .383          .935                .737          .715           .061




                                                                     46
         Table 18: CF Sensitivity by Period, Keiretsu X Bond Elig. Division
Table presents results on the standard cash flow equation using OLS, firm fixed-effects, and Arellano-Bond GMM estimation. The dependent
variable is I/K. CON ST is the target investment rate, Q is the coefficient on Q and is the inverse of the adjustment cost parameter, Qnf is the
coefficient on the non-fundamental portion of Q, LAGIK is the coefficient on lagged I/K, P RAT is the coefficient on the price ratio, and CF
is the coefficient on cash flow. Industry and time dummies are included in the OLS regression, and time dummies in the fixed-effects and GMM
regressions. The t statistics (OLS, FE) and z statistics (GMM) are in parentheses, and are calculated with heteroskedasticity consistent standard
errors (for OLS and GMM). The superscripts a, b, and c denote significance at the .01, .05, and .1 levels of significance, respectively. The
p − values of the Sargan and the M test (for second order serial correlation) are presented for the GMM regression. The sample period is 1980-96.

 OLS                                  Independent                                     Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters            Restricted      Semi-Res.   Unrestricted        Restricted      Semi-Res.  Unrestricted          IR-GR     IU-GU
 CON ST                      .1062           .2022         .151             .1448           .1333            .1
                          (2.93)a         (4.55)a       (5.27)a          (2.94)a          (2.52)b      (3.82)a
 Q                            -.001              0       -.0005             .0007            .003        .0001
                           (−1.3)          (−.04)      (−1.05)               (.84)         (2.2)b         (.18)
 P RAT                      -.0284          -.0932       -.0478              -.043         -.0475       -.0458
                         (−1.51)        (−4.13)a     (−3.17)a           (−1.86)c        (−1.83)c      (−3.5)a
 CF 80−87                    .1921           .2942        .2201             .0852           .1744        .3153             .1069       -.0952
                          (4.53)a         (5.37)a     (10.22)a            (2.43)b         (3.04)a    (11.45)a            (1.94)c    (−2.72)a
 CF 88−90                    .1912           .0837        .1786             .1062           .2128        .2606              .085       -.0820
                        (2.603)a          (1.385)     (5.829)a           (1.376)         (1.852)c    (3.517)a                (.8)     (−.08)
 CF 91−93                    .1516           .0884        .1298             .0401           .0739        .1838             .1115       -.0540
                          (2.19)b           (1.35)      (3.93)a              (.78)         (1.16)      (3.15)a            (1.29)        (−.8)
 CF 94−96                    .0905           .1654        .0806             .1081           .1543        .1105            -.0176       -.0299
                          (3.35)a         (3.21)a       (3.54)a           (1.79)c         (1.75)c       (2.2)b           (−.27)       (−.54)
 R2                            .172           .193         .249               .174           .167          .283

 Fixed Effects                        Independent                                     Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters            Restricted      Semi-Res.  Unrestricted         Restricted      Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         IR-GR     IU-GU
 CON ST                     .1275           .1935         .118              .1388           .1246         .0501
                          (3.11)a         (4.94)a       (4.6)a           (3.61)a         (2.97)a         (2.1)b
 Q                         -.0014            .002        .0011              .0028             .003         .002
                         (−1.52)          (2.11)b      (2.12)b           (2.69)a          (2.05)b        (2.9)a
 P RAT                       -.043         -.0986       -.0448             -.0503            -.054       -.0346
                        (−1.71)c        (−3.97)a    (−2.92)a            (−2.01)b        (−2.21)b      (−2.44)b
 CF 80−87                   .1718           .2481        .2809              .0537           .1816         .4101            .1181       -.1292
                           (5.2)a         (7.14)a    (14.61)a             (2.01)b        (3.88)a      (15.54)a          (2.78)a     (−3.96)a
 CF 88−90                   .2073            .074        .2254              .0937           .2307         .3749            .1136       -.1495
                          (4.57)a         (2.37)b     (9.58)a             (2.15)b        (3.59)a       (8.96)a            (1.8)c    (−3.12)a
 CF 91−93                   .1719           .0901        .1889              .0129           .0748         .2437            .1590       -.0548
                          (3.36)a         (3.43)a     (6.94)a                 (.3)         (1.41)      (5.84)a          (2.38)b       (−1.1)
 CF 94−96                   .0718           .1514        .1198              .0982           .1658         .1739           -.0264       -.0541
                           (1.51)         (2.81)a     (5.36)a            (2.61)a          (2.42)b      (5.01)a           (−.43)      (−1.31)
 R2 W ithin                   .159           .174         .264               .145             .154         .306
 R2 Between                   .147           .152         .195               .006             .209         .232
 R2 All                       .157           .164          .23               .119             .153         .255

 GMM                                  Independent                                     Bank Group                            Difference
 Parameters            Restricted      Semi-Res.    Unrestricted       Restricted      Semi-Res.   Unrestricted         IR-GR     IU-GU
 LAGIK                         .022          .0311         .0572            .0259           .0475          .062
                              (.44)           (.68)       (2.1)b             (.73)           (.98)      (2.23)b
 Q                           .0069           .0062         .0061            .0076           .0115         .0046
                          (1.69)c         (2.49)b       (3.28)a           (2.39)b        (2.86)a        (2.06)b
 Qnf                        -.0025          -.0013        -.0003            .0043           .0022         .0018
                         (−1.62)           (−.83)        (−.24)           (3.15)a            (.86)       (1.58)
 CF 80−87                    .2622           .2395         .2712              .084          .3214         .4003            .1782        -.1291
                          (4.03)a         (2.69)a       (5.75)a           (1.65)c        (3.64)a        (7.57)a          (2.16)b     (−1.82)c
 CF 88−90                    .2897           .1094         .2387            .1146           .2753         .3704            .1751        -.1317
                          (3.62)a           (1.11)      (4.06)a            (1.44)        (3.45)a        (4.73)a           (1.55)      (−1.35)
 CF 91−93                    .1879           .1003         .1961              .101          .0203         .2277            .0869        -.0316
                          (2.45)b             (1.5)     (4.59)a           (1.81)c            (.35)      (2.18)b             (.91)      (−.28)
 CF 94−96                    .0854           .1735         .1691            .0642           .1514         .1979            .0212        -.0288
                          (1.98)b         (2.66)a       (2.98)a              (.89)       (1.69)c        (2.37)b             (.25)      (−.29)
 P RAT                      -.0292          -.1342        -.0993           -.0978          -.0329        -.0374
                           (−.57)       (−2.95)a      (−3.12)a          (−2.64)a          (−.82)       (−1.56)
 Sargon T est                  .918             .87          .84               .95             .93         .901
 M T est                       .659            .638         .347              .739            .918         .618


                                                                      47
                     Figure 1: Distribution of Net Real I/K


.4




.3




.2




.1




 0
     80    81   82   83   84   85   86   87 88 89       90   91   92   93   94   95   96
                                          Fiscal Year
          o=mean, +=median, .=10,30,70,90 percentiles


                Figure 2: Distribution of Tobin’s Average Q



10




 5




 0




-5
     80    81   82   83   84   85   86   87 88 89       90   91   92   93   94   95   96
                                          Fiscal Year
          o=mean, +=median, .=10,30,70,90 percentiles


                                            48
Figure 3: Distribution of Total Loan Growth From Domestic Banks


.2




.1




 0




-.1
      80    81   82   83   84   85   86   87 88 89       90   91   92   93   94   95   96
                                           Fiscal Year
           o=mean, +=median, .=10,30,70,90 percentiles




                                             49
                   Figure 4: Mean Outstanding Bonds/TL
     Figure displays the mean outstanding bonds divided by total liabilities for R, S, and U firm groups.


                  Restricted                                                Semi Restricted
                  Unrestricted

.3




.2




.1




0
       80    81     82     83     84     85     86    87 88 89             90     91     92    93     94    95   96
                                                       Fiscal Year



                           Figure 5: Mean Bank Debt/TL
     Figure displays the mean total bank debt divided by total liabilities for R, S, and U firm groups.


                  Restricted                                                Semi Restricted
                  Unrestricted

.5




.4




.3




.2




.1
       80    81     82     83     84     85     86    87 88 89             90     91     92    93     94    95   96
                                                       Fiscal Year



                                                      50
                     Figure 6: Mean Total Assets (Y10,000)
        Figure displays the mean total assets (in Y10,000) for IR, IU, GR, and GU firm groups. Industry
        means are subtracted off to control for possible composition effects.


                     Ind. Restricted                                      Ind. Unrestricted
                     Grp. Restricted                                      Grp. Unrestricted

2000




1000




   0




-1000




-2000
         80     81    82     83    84    85     86    87 88 89           90     91    92    93     94     95   96
                                                       Fiscal Year



                         Figure 7: Mean Earnings per Share
        Figure displays the mean earnings per share for IR, IU, GR, and GU firm groups. Industry means
        are subtracted off to control for possible composition effects.


                     Ind. Restricted                                      Ind. Unrestricted
                     Grp. Restricted                                      Grp. Unrestricted


  10




   0




  -10




  -20
         80     81    82     83    84    85     86    87 88 89           90     91    92    93     94     95   96
                                                       Fiscal Year


                                                     51
                      Figure 8: Mean Before-Tax Profits/TA
       Figure displays the mean before tax profits divided by total assets for IR, IU, GR, and GU firm
       groups. Industry means are subtracted off to control for possible composition effects.


                    Ind. Restricted                                           Ind. Unrestricted
                    Grp. Restricted                                           Grp. Unrestricted

.04




.02




  0




-.02




-.04
         80    81     82     83     84     85     86    87 88 89             90     91     92     93    94      95   96
                                                         Fiscal Year



                           Figure 9: Mean Value Added/T A
       Figure displays the mean value added for IR, IU, GR, and GU firm groups. Industry means are
       subtracted off to control for possible composition effects. Value added is calculated according to the
       method laid out in Keiei Bunseki Handbook (1987).


                    Ind. Restricted                                           Ind. Unrestricted
                    Grp. Restricted                                           Grp. Unrestricted

  .1




.05




  0




-.05
         80    81     82     83     84     85     86    87 88 89             90     91     92     93    94      95   96
                                                         Fiscal Year

                                                        52
      Figure 10: Year-by-Year Coefficients on CF1 (no land)
      Figure displays the year-by-year coefficients on CF1 in OLS regressions of I/K on P RAT , price
      adjusted Q and Q squared, a dummy for bond issues, cash flow defined as CF 1, and a full set of
      industry dummies. Investment does not include land and the numerator of Q is adjusted to reflect this.


                   Ind. Restricted                                           Ind. Unrestricted
                   Grp. Restricted                                           Grp. Unrestricted


.4




.2




 0




-.2
        80    81     82     83     84     85     86    87 88 89             90     91     92     93    94      95   96
                                                        Fiscal Year



         Figure 11: Year-by-Year Coefficients on CF1 (land)
      Figure displays the year-by-year coefficients on CF1 in OLS regressions of I/K on P RAT , price
      adjusted Q and Q squared, a dummy for bond issues, cash flow defined as CF 1, and a full set of
      industry dummies. The investment rate includes the market value of land.


                   Ind. Restricted                                           Ind. Unrestricted
                   Grp. Restricted                                           Grp. Unrestricted

.4




.2




 0




-.2
        80    81     82     83     84     85     86    87 88 89             90     91     92     93    94      95   96
                                                        Fiscal Year
                                                       53
References
(1987): Keiei Bunseki HandobukkuNihon Shoken Keizai Kenkyujo-hen: Nihon Keizai Shin-
  bunsha, Tokyo, Japan.

Abel, A., and J. Eberly (1996): “Investment and q with Fixed Costs: An Empirical
 Analysis,” Working Paper: presented at NBER Economic Fluctuations Research Meeting.

Allayannis, G., and A. Mozumdar (2001): “The Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivity
 Puzzle: Can Negative Cash Flow Observations Explain It?,” Virginia Tech Working Paper
 98-5.

Anderson, C. W., and A. K. Makhija (1999): “Deregulation, disintermediation, and
 the agency costs of debt: Evidence from Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 51,
 309–339.

Aoki, M. (1994): “Monitoring Characteristics of the Main Bank System: An Analytical
 and Developmental View,” in The Japanese Main Bank System: Its Relevance for Devel-
 oping and Transforming Economies, ed. by M. Aoki, and H. Patrick, pp. 109–141. Oxford
 University Press, Oxford.

Arellano, M., and S. Bond (1991): “Some tests of specification for panel data: Monte
 Carlo evidence and an application to employment equations,” The Review of Economic
 Studies, 58, 277–297.

Beason, D. (1998): “Keiretsu affilitation and share price volatility in Japan,” Pacific-Basin
 Finance Journal, 6, 27–43.

Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler (1989): “Agency Costs, net worth, and business fluctu-
 ations,” American Economic Review, 79, 14–31.

        (1990): “Financial Fragility and economic performance,” Quarterly Journal of
  Economics, 105, 97–114.

Caves, R., and M. Uekusa (1976): Industrial Organization in Japan. The Brookings
 Institution, Washington D.C.

Chemmanur, T. J., and P. Fulghieri (1994): “Reputation, Renegotiation and the choice
 between bank loans and publically traded debt,” Review of Financial Studies, 7, 475–506.

Chirinko, R., and H. Schaller (1995): “Why does liquidity matter in investment equa-
 tions?,” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking, 27(2), 527–548.

Chirinko, R. S. (1993): “Business Fixed Investment Spending: Modeling Strategies, Em-
 pirical Results, and Policy Implications,” Journal of Economic Literature, XXXI.

Cleary, S. (1999): “The Relationship between Firm Investment and Financial Status,”
 The Journal of Finance, LIV(2), 673–692.



                                             54
Cummins, J., K. Hassett, and S. Oliner (1999): “Investment Behavior, Observable
 Expectations, and Internal Funds,” mimeo, New York University.

Erickson, T., and T. Whited (2000): “Measurment error and the relationship between
 investment and q,” Journal of Political Economy, 108(5), 1027–1057.

Fazzari, S., G. Hubbard, and B. Petersen (1988): “Financing Constraints and Cor-
  porate Investment,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, pp. 141–195.

         (2000): “Investment-Cash flow sensitivities are useful: A comment on Kaplan and
  Zingales,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 695–705.

Gibson, M. S. (1995): “Can Bank Health affect Investment? Evidence from Japan,”
  Journal of Business, 68, 281–308.

         (1997): “More Evidence on the Link between Bank Health and Investment in
  Japan,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 11, 296–310.

Gilchrist, S., and C. Himmelberg (1998): “Investment: Fundamentals and Finance,”
  NBER Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 223–62.

Goyal, V. K., and T. Yamada (2001): “Asset Price Bubbles, Investment, and Liquidity:
 Evidence from Japan,” Working Paper, Department of Finance, Hong Kong University of
 Science and Technology.

Greenwald, B., J. Stiglitz, and A. Weiss (1984): “Information imperfections and
 macroeconomic fluctuations,” American Economic Review, 74, 194–199.

Hall, B. J., and D. E. Weinstein (2000): “Main Banks, Creditor Concentration, and the
 Resolution of Financial Distress in Japan,” in Finance, Governance, and Competitiveness
 in Japan, ed. by M. Aoki, and G. Saxonhouse, pp. 64–80. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Hart, O., and J. Moore (1995): “Debt and Seniority: An Analysis of the role of hard
 claims on constraining management,” American Economic Review, LXXXV, 567–585.

Hayashi, F. (1982): “Tobin’s marginal q and average q: A neoclassical interpretation,”
 Econometrica, 50, 261–280.

         (2000): “The Main Bank System and Corporate Investment: An Empirical Re-
  assessment,” in Finance, Governance, and Competitiveness in Japan, ed. by M. Aoki, and
  G. Saxonhouse, pp. 81–98. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Hayashi, F., and T. Inoue (1991): “The Relation Between Firm Growth and Q with
 Multiple Capital Goods: Theory and Evidence from Panel Data on Japanese Firms,”
 Econometrica, 59(3), 731–53.

Horiuchi, A., F. Packer, and S. Fukuda (1988): “What Role Has the “Main Bank”
 Played in Japan?,” Journal of the Japanese and International Economies, 2, 159–80.



                                           55
Hoshi, T. (2000): “The Main Bank System and Corporate Investment: Further robust-
 ness tests,” in Finance, Governance, and Competitiveness in Japan, ed. by M. Aoki, and
 G. Saxonhouse, pp. 99–105. Oxford University Press, Oxford.

Hoshi, T., and A. Kashyap (1999): “The Japanese Banking Crisis: Where Did It Come
 From and How Will It End?,” NBER Working Paper Series: Working Paper #7250.

       (2001): Corporate Financing and Governance in Japan: The Road to the Future.
  MIT Press.

Hoshi, T., A. Kashyap, and D. Scharfstein (1990): “The Role of Banks in Reducing
 the Costs of Financial Distress in Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 33–60.

        (1990b): “Bank Monitoring and Investment: Evidence from the Changing Structure
  of Japanese Corporate Banking Relationships,” in Asymmetric Information, Corporate
  Finance, and Investment, ed. by G. Hubbard, pp. 105–26. University of Chicago Press.

         (1991): “Corporate Structure, Liquidity, and Investment: Evidence from Japanese
  Industrial Groups,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 106.

         (1993): “The Choice between Public and Private Debt: An Analysis of Post-
  Deregulation Corporate Financing in Japan,” NBER Working Paper Series: Working
  Paper #4421.

Hubbard, R. G. (1998): “Capital-Market Imperfections and Investment,” Journal of Eco-
 nomic Literature, XXXVI.

Jensen, M. (1986): “Agency Costs of free cash flow, corporate finance, and takeovers,”
  American Economic Review, 76, 323–329.

Jensen, M., and W. Meckling (1976): “The theory of the firm: Managerial behaviour,
  agency costs, and ownership structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, III, 305–360.

Kaneko, Y., and L. Battaglini (1990): “Yen-denominated Convertible Bonds,” in The
 Japanese Bond Market: An Overview and Analysis, ed. by F. Fabozzi. McGraw Hill,
 London.

Kang, J.-K., and A. Shivdasani (1999): “Alternative mechanisms for corporate gov-
 ernance in Japan: An analysis of independent and bank-affiliated firms,” Pacific-Basin
 Finance Journal, 1(22), 1–22.

Kaplan, S. N. (1994): “Top Executive Rewards and firm performance: A comparison of
 Japan and the United States,” Journal of Political Economy, 102, 510–46.

Kaplan, S. N., and B. A. Minton (1994): “Appointments of Outsiders to Japanese
 Boards: Determinants and Implications for Managers,” Journal of Financial Economics,
 36.



                                          56
Kaplan, S. N., and L. Zingales (1997): “Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivites Provide
 Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII, 169–
 215.
          (2000): “Investment-Cash flow sensitivities are not valid measures of financing
  constraints,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, May, 707–712.
Karp, E., and A. Koike (1990): “The Japanese Corporate Bond Market,” in The Japanese
 Bond Market: An Overview and Analysis, ed. by F. Fabozzi. McGraw Hill, London.
Laeven, L. (2001): “Financial Liberalization and Financing Constraints: Evi-
  dence from Panel Data on Emerging Economies,” World Bank Working Paper,
  RePEc:wop:wobadc:2467.
Love, I. (2000): “Financial Development and Financing Constraints: International Evi-
  dence from the Structural Investment Model,” Mimeograph, New York, Columbia Univer-
  sity.
Mayer, C. (1990): “Financial Systems, corporate finance, and economic development,” in
 Asymmetric Information, Corporate Finance and Investment, ed. by G. Hubbard. The
 University of Chicago Press, Oxford.
Miwa, Y., and J. M. Ramseyer (2001): “The Fable of the Keiretsu,” Disussion Paper,
 Harvard University, CIRJE-F-109.
Morck, R., and M. Nakamura (1999): “Banks and Corporate Control in Japan,” The
 Journal of Finance, LIV(1), 319–39.
Morck, R., M. Nakamura, and A. Shivdasani (2000): “Banks, Ownership Structure,
 and Firm Value in Japan,” Journal of Business, 73(4), 539–67.
Myers, S., and N. Majluf (1984): “Corporate financing and investment decisions when
 firms have information investors do not have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13, 187–
 221.
Nakatani, I. (1984): “The Economic Role of Financial Corporate Grouping,” in The Eco-
 nomic Analysis of the Japanese Firm, ed. by M. Aoki, pp. 227–258. Elsevier Science
 Publishers B.V.
Oliner, S., and G. Rudebusch (1992): “Sources of the financing hierarchy for business
 investment,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 74, 643–654.
Ongena, S., and D. Smith (2000): “What Determines the Number of Bank Relationships?
 Cross-Country Evidence,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, 9, 26–56.
Prowse, S. D. (1990): “Institutional Investment Patterns and Corporate Financial Behav-
  ior in the United States and Japan,” Journal of Financial Economics, 27(1), 43–66.
          (1992): “The Structure of Corporate Ownership in Japan,” Journal of Finance,
  47(3), 1121–40.

                                           57
Rajan, R. (1992): “Insiders and outsiders: The choice between relationship and arms length
 debt,” Journal of Finance, 47, 1367–1400.

Schaller, H. (1993): “Asymmetric information, liquidity constraints, and Canadian in-
  vestment,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 26, 552–574.

Sekine, T. (1999): “Firm Investment and Balance-Sheet Problems in Japan,” International
  Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/99/111.

Sharpe, S. (1990): “Asymmetric Information, bank lending and implicit contracts: A
  stylized model of customer relationships,” Journal of Finance, 45(1069-1087).

Sheard, P. (1989): “The Main Bank System and Corporate Monitoring and Control in
  Japan,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, 11.

Thakor, A. V. (1996): “Capital Requirements, Monetary Policy, and Aggregate Bank
 Lending: Theory and Empirical Evidence,” Journal of Finance, 51(279-324).

Weinstein, D., and Y. Yafeh (1995): “Japan’s Corporate Groups: Collusive or Com-
 petitive? An Empirical Investigation of Keiretsu Behavior,” The Journal of Industrial
 Economics, XLIII(4).

        (1998): “On the Costs of a Bank-Centered Financial System: Evidence from the
  Changing Main Bank Relations in Japan,” The Journal of Finance, LIII(2).




                                           58
