NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SOURCES OF FUNDS AND INVESTMENT ACTIVITIES
OF VENTURE CAPITAL FUNDS:
EVIDENCE FROM GERMANY, ISRAEL, JAPAN AND THE UK
Colin Mayer
Koen Schoors
Yishay Yafeh
Working Paper 9645
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9645
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

We thank Hedva Ber, Marco Da Rin, Michel Habib, Thomas Hellman, Eugene Kandel, Ken Kim, Jan-Peter
Krahnen, Saul Lach, Sophie Manigart, Alan Morrison, Seki Obata, Kristian Rydqvist, Juro Teranishi and
Naoyuki Yoshino for helpful comments and suggestions. We have also benefited from comments by seminar
participants at the Bergen School of Management, the European Central Bank, the Oslo School of
Management, the University of Oxford and Waseda University, and from participants at the CEPR
Conference “Understanding Financial Architecture” (Madrid), the IMF/Hitotsubashi Conference on
“Designing Financial Systems in East Asia and Japan” (Tokyo), the Mannheim Conference on “Industrial
Economics and Input Markets,” the NBER 2002 Japanese Economy Workshop (Tokyo) and the Yale
Conference on Entrepreneurship. Financial support from the European Commission Research Training
Network “Understanding Financial Architecture: Legal and Political Frameworks and Economic Efficiency”
is gratefully acknowledged. This research project was initiated while Koen Schoors and Yishay Yafeh were
visiting fellows at the University of Oxford (Saïd Business School, and St. Antony’s College and the Nissan
Institute, respectively) whose hospitality and financial support are gratefully acknowledged.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Colin Mayer, Koen Schoors, and Yishay Yafeh. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Sources of Funds and Investment Activities of Venture Capital Funds:
Evidence from Germany, Israel, Japan and the UK
Colin Mayer, Koen Schoors, and Yishay Yafeh
NBER Working Paper No. 9645
April 2003
JEL No. G20, O32
ABSTRACT
We compare sources of funds and investment activities of venture capital (VC) funds in Germany,
Israel, Japan and the UK using a newly constructed data set. The data provide a rare opportunity to
evaluate relations between funds' sources of finance and activities. We find that sources of VC funds
differ significantly across countries, e.g. banks are particularly important in Germany, corporations
in Israel, insurance companies in Japan, and pension funds in the UK. VC investment patterns also
differ across countries in terms of the stage, sector of financed companies and geographical focus
of investments. These differences in investment patterns are related to the variations in funding
sources - for example, bank and pension fund backed VC's invest in later stage activities than
individual and corporate backed funds. The relations differ across countries; for example, bank
backed VC funds in Germany and Japan are as involved in early stage finance as other funds in these
countries, whereas they tend to invest in relatively late stage finance in Israel and the UK. We
consider the implication of this for the influence of financial systems on relations between finance
and activities.

Colin Mayer
Saïd Business School
University of Oxford
and CEPR
colin.mayer@sbs.ox.ac.uk

Koen Schoors
University of Ghent
koen.schoors@rug.ac.be

Yishay Yafeh
Hebrew University of Jerusalem
and University of Montreal
Msyafeh@mscc.huji.ac.il

1. Introduction
The role of the financial sector in promoting innovation has been extensively
debated over a long period.

Some believe that the supply of entrepreneurs, the

science base, technical transfer from universities to industry, the ability of
entrepreneurs to capture the fruits of their inventiveness and other institutional
influences on the demand for finance are the key determinants of innovation. Others
regard the financial system and the supply of risk capital as critical factors on their
own account.
This paper contributes to the debate by examining the role of the venture
capital (VC) industry and in particular the relation of its activities to its sources of
finance. However, the paper provides more than just an industry, albeit an important
industry, study. The data that are used in this paper provide a rare opportunity to
analyse the relation between sources of finance of financial intermediaries and their
activities. It is not usually possible to identify the types of investments that individual
firms make. Company accounts categorize investments under such broad headings as
financial versus physical, plant and machinery versus land and buildings, and
inventories versus fixed investment and R&D.

However, they provide little

information on the stage, sector or geographical distribution of investments.
Company accounts also provide little information on sources of finance.
Distinctions are drawn between debt and equity, between different types of equity
sources, for example preference versus ordinary shares, and sometimes between bank
and bond finance. However, information is not in general available at the individual
firm or institution level on the suppliers of finance, i.e. whether they are individuals,
institutions, other companies or the public sector.

1

Venture capital funds do provide this information, albeit in qualitative form.
Several venture capital associations report data on the stage, sector and geographical
distribution of VC firm investments.

They also record their sources of finance,

distinguishing between individuals, banks, pension funds, insurance firms, other
companies and government.

It is therefore possible to carry out a quite unique

analysis of the relation between the investment activities and sources of finance of VC
firms.
Why is this of interest? Firstly, it is frequently suggested that institutions
attempt to match the maturity of their assets and liabilities. For example, with longterm liabilities, pension funds might be expected to invest in longer-term assets than
banks. Secondly, the success of venture capital activity in the UK and US is often
associated with active institutional investment by, in particular pension funds.
Institutional investment would be expected to be more prevalent in some countries
than others and to encourage earlier stage investment than other investors. Thirdly,
there are pronounced differences across countries in the structure of their financial
systems that might affect the relation between sources of finance and activities. For
example, in countries with close relations between banks and corporations, bank
backed funds may be willing to invest in longer-term activities than in countries in
which banks are used to more arms-length relations.
To address these issues, we report results from a newly constructed database
consisting of about 500 venture capital firms in four countries – Germany, Israel,
Japan and the UK, all of which have significant and/or rapidly growing VC industries.
The present paper therefore departs from the traditional focus on the US in the VC
literature.1 The spread of countries is of special interest because it includes two bank1

For example, in a collection of articles, Gompers and Lerner (1999) consider several financial aspects
of VC investments and their impact on the performance of VC backed firms in the US (e.g. at the time
2

oriented systems (Germany and Japan), one (non-US) market-oriented system, the
UK, and one major high technology success story, Israel, with supposedly the largest
concentration of VC investments outside of California and Massachusetts. Within
Europe, Germany and the UK are particularly important for the study of the VC
industry, because these two countries together account for over half of all VC
investments in the Continent (BVK, the German venture capital association, 2000).
Our empirical analysis proceeds in four stages. We first provide descriptive
statistics of the VC industries in the four countries. We then analyze the correlation
between sources of finance and types of investments, focusing on the technological
stage of companies receiving VC finance.

We examine several regression

specifications explaining VC activity, measured by stage, sector and geographical
focus of investment. Initially, we assume that there are similar relations between
sources of finance and activities across countries. We then relax this assumption and
allow the relations to be country specific.

This permits us to evaluate whether

financial systems in different countries bear on the relations between sources of
finance and activities. For example, are the activities of bank backed VC firms
different in the bank-oriented financial systems in Germany and Japan from those in
the market-oriented system in the UK? Our analysis sheds light on possible reasons
for differences in VC activity across different funds within a country and between
countries.
Our main results are the following. Firstly, there are substantial differences
across countries in terms of the stage of finance of VC firms. They are much more
of the IPO). Hellman and Puri (2000) study the influence of US VC funds on the activities of their
clients, and Kaplan and Stromberg (2002) examine the contractual relations between the funds and
their clients, also within the US. For more information on the empirical VC literature, see, for
example, Manigart and Sapienza (2000) and Gompers and Lerner (2001). The theoretical VC literature
is also, to a very large extent, motivated by observations about the US VC industry, for example with
respect to the type of contracts used (e.g. Cornelli and Yosha, 2002, Hellman, 1998). Some
information on VC activity outside the US is provided in Botazzi and Da Rin’s (2002) survey on
innovative firms in Europe and in Cumming’s (2001) study of VC in Canada.
3

focused on early stage investments in some countries, most notably Israel, than others,
in particular Japan. There is a remarkably close similarity in stage of finance between
Germany and the UK, despite the frequently cited differences in their financial
systems.

Secondly, there are significant differences in sector focus.

While

biotechnology and life sciences receive a substantial level of attention in all four
countries, a much larger fraction of VC firms in Israel and Japan focus on information
technology (IT) and software than in Germany and the UK, where the manufacturing
sector receives more attention. VC investment in electronics appears to be relatively
uncommon in Japan.
There are also substantial variations across countries in VC firms’ sources of
funds. Banks are a major source of external finance in all countries, particularly in
Germany and Japan. Pension funds are much more significant in the UK than in the
other three countries. Corporations are a more important source of finance of VC
firms in Israel than elsewhere.
There are significant relations between the sources of VC finance and their
investment activities within countries. In particular, banks, insurance and pension
fund backed VC funds invest in later stage activities, whereas VC funds relying on
private individual investors and corporations favour earlier stage activities. Individual
and corporate backed funds invest in IT, software and electronics in preference to
manufacturing sectors, while the reverse holds for insurance and pension fund backed
funds. Bank and pension backed funds invest domestically while individual and
corporate backed funds invest globally. Financial intermediary backed funds are
therefore focused on late stage investments in relatively low tech domestic industries,
while individual and corporate backed funds invest globally in early stage activities in

4

high tech industries. Finally, government backed funds are focused on domestic
investments.
There are significant differences in the relations between financing and
investment stage across countries. While bank backed VC firms in Israel and the UK
invest in later stage activities relative to other sources of finance, this is not the case in
Germany and Japan. In contrast, investment in early stage activities by corporate
backed funds is a feature of Germany and the UK, not of Israel and Japan. Early
stage investment by individual backed funds is a feature of Germany and Japan but
not of Israel and the UK.
These results have interesting implications for theories of corporate finance.
In particular, they support theories that suggest that banks are associated with
investments in less innovative, more traditional activities that benefit from active
screening and monitoring requiring geographic proximity to investments (e.g. Allen
and Gale, 2000, Carlin and Mayer, 2002). The cross-country variations indicate that
this is less pronounced in some countries - those with bank oriented financial systems.
This could be because long-term relations between banks and firms render banks as
willing to finance early stage innovative investments as other intermediaries.
Individual and corporate backed funds are associated with more innovative and higher
technology industries and greater international diversification.

There is some

evidence suggesting that this feature may be more pronounced in bank oriented
systems where there is less emphasis on diversification through financial instruments
and markets.
The paper is organized as follows. In the next section, we present a set of
testable hypotheses. Our database and the descriptive statistics on VC in the four
countries are described in Section 3. Section 4 presents the empirical results, and

5

Section 5 relates the results and their implications to the hypotheses of Section 2.
Section 6 concludes the paper.

2. Hypotheses and Conjectures
Our conjectures regarding the relation between the activities of VC firms and
their financing are summarized in the following ten hypotheses, H1 through H10.
In the presence of perfect capital markets, there should be no systematic
relation between sources of finance and activities.
H1: The activities of VC are independent of their sources of finance.
However, in the presence of imperfect information and incomplete contracts,
several reasons have been suggested for why there may be a relation between
financing and activities. Allen (1993) and Allen and Gale (2000) argue that banks can
exploit economies in acquiring information about firms where there is a high degree
of consensus about more traditional investments whose technologies are well
understood.

In addition, the liability structure of banks is short-term and they are

exposed to maturity transformation risks from long-term investments.

The

requirement to be actively involved in screening and monitoring makes the focus of
their investments local and national.
H2: Bank backed VC firms are inclined towards late stage investments in
domestic, relatively low technology sectors, such as manufacturing.
Like banks, pension funds and insurance companies can exploit economies of
scale in information collection but, in contrast to banks, their liabilities are long term.
Their preferred investment profile might therefore be expected to be early stage but
with a focus on sectors that are subject to little speculative investment. As in the case

6

of banks, screening and monitoring make the focus of pension fund and insurance
backed VC funds domestic.
H3: Pension fund and insurance company backed VC firms invest in early
stage activities in relatively low technology domestic sectors such as manufacturing
and services.
In contrast, individual investor participation is found where there are few
economies of acquiring information about firms and there are greater benefits from
aggregating the diverse views of many investors about, for example, new technologies
(Allen and Gale, 1999).

In addition, there may be diversification benefits from

investing in overseas as well as domestic markets
H4: Individual investor backed VC funds are focused on early stage
investments in high technology sectors such as biotechnology, IT and electronics in
global as well as domestic markets.
Companies will look to VC firms as ways of undertaking activities that they
cannot perform in-house. For example, VC vehicles may be used to invest in earlier
stage and higher risk activities than those in which the sponsoring firm is engaged.
H5: Corporate backed VC firms invest in early stage activities in high
technology sectors overseas.
Finally, governments will be concerned with rectifying domestic market
failures, which are most likely to be observed for long-term investments in risky
domestic sectors.
H6: Government backed VC firms invest in early stage activities in domestic
high technology sectors.
The predicted stage, industry and geographical focus of different types of
funds are summarized below:

7

Source of Funds

Stage

Sector

Geographical Focus

Banks

Late

Low technology

Domestic

Pension funds/ insurance cos.

Early

Low technology

Domestic

Individuals and corporations

Early

High technology International

Government

Early

High technology Domestic

We now turn to differences in the relations between sources of finance and
investment activities in different financial systems. Our null hypothesis assumes that
all financial markets operate in a similar fashion.
H7: There are similar relations between VC activities and sources of finance
across countries.
Domestic financial conditions may affect the above relations. It is possible
that in countries where bank-firm ties are strong, banks will be better placed to fund
long-term investments.
H8: The tendency of bank backed VC funds to finance later stage investments
is less pronounced in countries where long-term relations between banks and firms
are common.
In countries with large stock markets, there are more opportunities for
diversification through financial instruments and markets than elsewhere (Allen and
Gale, 2000). The emphasis of individual and corporate backed VC funds on early
stage, high tech sectors should be particularly pronounced in markets where these
opportunities are less readily available.2

2

A competing conjecture could be that individuals invest more in early stages in countries where they
are better able to diversify risk.
8

H9: The focus of individual and corporate backed funds on early stage
investments in high tech sectors is particularly in evidence in bank-oriented
economies where diversification opportunities are limited.
Finally, there may be less of a requirement for governments to correct market
failures in investing in high technology, long-term activities in countries where
diversification opportunities are present.
H10: Government backed funds will be particularly focused on early stage
activities in high technology sectors in bank oriented financial systems.
The differences expected across countries are summarized below:
Financing Source

Stock Market Economies

Bank backed funds

More late stage, low tech
investment

Bank Oriented Systems

Individual and corporate
backed funds

More early stage, high tech
investment

Government backed funds

More early stage, high tech
investment

3. Data
3.1 Sources and Sample Coverage
For Germany, Israel and the US, our data are drawn from the individual
countries’ venture capital associations. For Germany and the UK, we use information
from the European association of venture capitalists (evca.com) as well as from their
respective local associations in 2000. For Israel, we use data provided by the Israeli
association of venture capital (ivc-online.com, a “snapshot” as of late 2000). For
Japan we rely on a survey conducted by Nikkei Kinyu (Financial Nikkei) in 1999 on
venture capital activities in Japan.

9

For Germany, Israel and the UK we have data on all VC funds included in the
associations, although some funds do not fully disclose data on their sources of funds
and investment activities. Our database includes 187 German funds, 119 from Israel
and 140 from the UK.3 For Japan, the survey we use includes information on 62 VC
funds, about half of the extant population of VC funds in Japan according to this
survey. We have no reason to suspect any particular bias in this sample of
respondents. 4
For each VC fund we collect information on fund size (section 3.2),
organizational form and types of investments (section 3.3), sources of funds or
ownership (section 3.4), and investment strategies by stage of investment (section
3.5), sector (section 3.6) and location of investment (section 3.7).

3.2 Size of Funds
Measuring fund size in terms of assets under management, British venture
capital funds are by far the largest, with mean capital of over 900 million US dollars,
about eight times bigger than the average Japanese fund ($115m)5, and twelve times
bigger than the average Israeli fund ($73m). Although no information on individual
fund size is available for Germany, aggregate statistics suggest that the average
German fund is about the same size as the average Israeli fund, with capital of about
$77m (BVK, 2000). Using medians rather than means suggests that in all countries

3

Membership of a particular country’s VC association is open to funds operating in that country
irrespective of where the fund is owned or controlled.
4
A 2000 VC survey by METI (the Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry) lists about 60
respondents as well, which do not completely overlap with our list of funds (they refer to a much larger
number of funds in existing in Japan). A 2001 survey conducted by Nikkei Venture Business is based
on a larger sample of about 100 VC funds and other providers of finance, but with only limited
information on their activities. A survey conducted by the Asian Venture Capital Journal reports the
existence of about 220 VC funds in Japan, although only about half of them are active (Lerner and
Hardymon, 1999). Further information on the Japanese venture capital industry is available in Sako
and Kelly (2002).
5
This figure is very close to the one reported by the Asian Venture Capital Journal.
10

the majority of funds are much smaller. In the UK the median VC has capital of
about $140m, compared with only $12m in Japan and about $40m in Israel.
Interestingly, the median Israeli fund is bigger than the median Japanese fund,
although both are much smaller than the median British VC.

3.3 Corporate Form and Types of Investment
VC firms have different legal structures in the four countries of our sample. In
the Japanese sample, all VC funds are joint stock companies, often affiliates of banks
and securities companies.6

In Germany about a quarter of the funds are listed

companies (AG’s), and in the UK limited partnership is the most common form of VC
organization (only about 5 percent of the funds are public companies).
Data on types of investment made by funds are available for Germany and
Israel. In both countries, equity is the dominant form of investment, unlike the US,
where convertible securities have been documented as the most common form of VC
finance. Lerner and Hardymon (1999) report that equity finance is common among
Japanese VC funds as well. Loans are provided by about one-sixth of funds in
Germany, and in Israel convertible debt (but not straight debt) is provided by about
half of the funds.7

6

Sako and Kelly (2002) note that it was only in 1998 that the Japanese government enacted the
Limited Partnership for Venture Capital Investment (Toshi jigyo yugensekinin kumiai ho) which
defined the legal basis for the limited liability of non-general partners.
7
Cumming (2001) provides evidence that VC contracts in Canada also involve a variety of financial
contracts, in contrast with the convertible securities typically used in the US. He also makes references
to studies documenting similar contracts between VC and client firms in various countries. Bascha and
Walz (2001) study the organization of the venture capital industry in Germany, and document the use
of various types of financial contracts, which, in their view, depend on the severity of agency problems.
Gilson and Schizer (2002) argue that tax considerations account for the differences between the US and
other countries in this respect.
11

3.4 Sources of Finance
As noted, all venture capital funds in our Japanese sample are joint stock
companies, and their owners are also their investors and providers of funds. In other
countries, funds report whether they received finance from a certain category of
investors. The data reported below are a snapshot of the stock of sources of finance
used by VC funds, rather than a flow of money in a given period, or financing patterns
over time. With the exception of Japan, our data sources do not provide the precise
amounts of money received from each source, and we therefore define a number of
qualitative and not mutually exclusive dummy variables that equal one if the fund
reports having used a given source of finance. These dummies signify whether there
is bank finance (BANK), finance from pension funds (PENSION), insurance
companies (INSUR), other financial institutions (OTHER), corporate investors
(CORPORATE), private individual investors (INDIVIDUAL) or the government and
regional authorities (GOV’T).
Table 1 displays the sources of external finance for the VC industry in the four
countries.8 There are clearly some important differences between the countries. In
Germany, banks are by far the most important source of finance for the VC industry,
nearly twice as popular as the second largest source of finance, individual investors.
Bank finance is between three and four times more popular in Germany than finance
from industrial corporations or insurance companies. Relying exclusively on bank
finance is also very common in Germany: over 60 percent of the VC funds that raise
money from banks use this source exclusively. The equivalent figure for the UK is
about one third, and for Israel about one fifth. Surprisingly, despite the typical

8

In the UK sample, there are 19 funds that rely exclusively on their own or their parent company
funds.
12

characterization of the Japanese economy as bank dominated (like Germany), only
one seventh of the Japanese VC funds in our sample rely exclusively on bank finance.
Pension funds are conspicuously absent as a source of venture capital funds in
Germany.9

This is in sharp contrast to the UK where pension funds, other

institutional investors, and individual investors provide funds to as many companies
as banks. Government (typically local authority) funding plays a more important role
in the UK than it does in Germany, and is negligible in the other countries.
Sources of funds for the Israeli VC industry are widespread, with industrial
corporations (typically from the US) being the single most popular source of funds.
Since Japanese funds are organized in the form of joint stock companies (rather than
as limited partnerships) with the owners providing the sources of funds, the figures for
Japan in Table 1 are based on ownership data. Financial institutions other than banks
(e.g. securities firms, credit card or leasing companies and mortgage institutions) are
the single most important category of finance among Japanese funds, followed by
banks and insurance companies.10

It is quite common in Japan for the

owners/providers of finance for Japanese VC funds to be all affiliated with the same
bank-centered corporate group, or to be otherwise related to each other. In over half
of the Japanese funds in our sample, at least three of the five largest shareholder
providers of finance are related to each other or affiliated with the same group.
As noted above, VC funds in Germany tend on average to use fewer sources
of funds than do VC’s in other countries (Table 1, Panel B). By contrast, funds in

9

In the German data, up to 1999 pension fund contributions to VC funding have been small (BVK,
2000) and are included in the category “other financial institutions.” BVK (2000) suggests that, as a
result of on-going reforms in the German pension system, pension funds have become a much more
important source of funds for the VC industry. Differences between Germany and the UK in this
respect may therefore diminish over the next few years.
10
Some, but not all, of these institutions are partly bank owned, sometimes indirectly. However, we do
not track the ultimate ownership of any of the institutions providing finance to VC companies.
13

Israel, Japan and the UK tend to use many sources of finance; in particular, about a
quarter of the UK funds report using at least four different sources.
For the UK and Germany, it is possible to compare the figures in Table 1 with
aggregate statistics on sources of finance to VC and private equity (BVK 2000).
Aggregate figures differ somewhat from the figures in Table 1, because they are based
on the amounts invested not on whether a particular source is used. They also reflect
a size-weighted average of the sources used by individual funds, whereas our figures
are simple averages. Finally, the aggregate statistics refer to private equity in general,
rather than specifically to VC funds. Nevertheless, aggregate figures support our
conclusions that banks are by far the most important source of finance for the German
VC industry, providing about 40 percent of funds in 1999, far more than any other
source. In the UK, pension funds, banks and insurance companies, in this order, were
the largest sources of finance in 1999, providing 31 percent, 25 percent, and 14
percent of the funds, respectively.11 The figures in Table 1 are consistent with those
reported for Japan in 2000 by the Asia Venture Capital Journal. According to these
aggregate statistics, corporations (aggregating financial and other), banks and
insurance companies were the most important sources of finance for the Japanese
venture capital industry, providing 48 percent, 25 percent, and 13 percent of all funds,
respectively. By way of comparison, aggregate figures for the US suggest that the
most important sources of funds for the American VC industry in 1999 were pension
funds, individuals, corporations, and insurance companies.

These provided 23

percent, 22 percent, 15 percent, and 13 percent of funds in the US, respectively
(NVCA, 2000).
11

The significance of individual investors as a source of funds is greater in our data than in the
aggregate figures, probably because they provide small amounts of money relative to other,
institutional, sources of funds. Individual investors provided only 4 percent of the total amount of
private equity raised in the UK in 1999.
14

3.5 Type of Investment Activity: Investment Stage
Table 2 provides statistics on the type of investment activity funded by VC’s
in the four countries, characterizing investments by the technological stage at which
they are made, sector and geographical focus. Panel A displays the percentage of VC
funds investing in different stages and their average stage of investment. Funds report
focus on one or more categories of investments (seed, start-up, middle, expansion and
growth, and later stages including refinancing and management buy-ins and buy-outs)
without specifying the precise amounts invested in each activity.
We categorize stages as “early” for seed and start-up, “middle” for middle,
expansion and growth investments, and “late” for later stage investments.12 For ease
of exposition, we also calculate a summary statistic, which we call “average stage,”
by assigning the value 1 to early, 2 to middle and 3 to late stage investments. We
derive the mean investment stage under the assumption of equal investment in all
stages in which the fund invested positive amounts.
Panel A of Table 2 shows that the VC industry in Israel provides finance
primarily to companies in early stages of development.

Nearly all funds report

positive investments in firms in their early stages. The average stage of investment is
1.4, between “early” and “middle” stages. VC funds in Germany and the UK provide
funding to companies in all stages, with a slight bias towards later stages of
development (their average investment stage is about 2 or “middle”) with the figure
for the UK somewhat higher than that of Germany.

In Japan, VC funds are

predominantly directed at companies in (middle and) later stages of development with
very little support for seed and start-up companies. Average stages of financing in
Germany, Israel and Japan are all statistically different from those in the UK. The
12

In the Japanese data, the definition of the stages is somewhat different, but the three categories in the
survey correspond to early, middle and later stages. We discuss the possible impact of differences in
the stage definitions between Japan and the other countries in the sample below.
15

distributions of fund investments by stages are also statistically different at the 5
percent level in Israel and Japan from the UK. The proportion of funds investing in
early stages is significantly higher (at the 5 percent level) in Germany than in the UK.
These observations are consistent with evidence from other sources. Using
aggregate data, EVCA (2000) reports that the distribution of investments for UK
funds is centered on firms in middle stages of development, when measured by the
number of companies in which investments are made.13 Jeng and Wells (2000) report
that investment in early stages relative to GDP has been slightly higher in Germany
than in the UK in recent years, although in the past the UK has invested relatively
more in companies in their early stages.

BVK (2000) provides figures that are

consistent with these observations as well. IVA (2000) confirm our observation that
VC investments in Israel are focused on early stages. Lerner and Hardymon (1999)
describe the Japanese VC industry as focused on investment in much older firms than
its American counterpart. Seed and startup investments accounted for only 17 percent
of all VC investments in Japan in 1996, whereas expansion and “mezzanine”
investment accounted for over 80 percent. METI (2000) indicates that only a small
fraction of the Japanese VC funds focus exclusively on early stages.

3.6 Type of Investment Activity: Sector
VC funds record the industries in which they invest.

We classify these

investments into one or more of the following five categories of industries: (1) life
sciences, biotechnology and environmental technology; (2) software, communication
and information technology; (3) electronics and semiconductors; (4) manufacturing

13

In terms of amounts invested, there seems to be more weight on later stage investments involving
MBI/MBO activities.
16

(including chemicals); (5) services and other sectors.

Again we have binary

information on whether or not a fund invests in a particular sector.
For the purposes of producing summary statistics in Table 2, we construct
industry shares under the assumption of equal investments in all the industries in
which a fund invests positive amounts. Thus, if a fund invests in n industries, each
industry’s share in total investment is calculated as 1/n.
Panel B of Table 2 reports the industry distribution of VC investments in the
three countries. There are substantial differences. VC funds in Israel and Japan
invest predominantly in the IT and software industry, whereas the distribution of
investments across industries in Germany and the UK is more even, and surprisingly
similar to each other. Another surprising result is that, in Japan, the electronics
industry seems to be a less favorable target for VC investments than it is in other
countries, perhaps because R&D in this sector is carried out within large companies.
Manufacturing and chemicals are relatively more popular in Germany and the UK.
Panel C of Table 3 reports the number of industries in which VC funds, on
average, invest in the four countries. Funds are heavily diversified across sectors
(four or more) in the UK and Germany, and somewhat less so in Japan. In Israel,
many more funds are concentrated in only one sector.
Again, the available aggregate statistics are not easily comparable because the
industry classifications used differ between sources and because of our assumption
that funds invest equal amounts in all sectors in which they report positive investment.
Nevertheless, for Israel, IVA (2000) provide figures on VC investments by industries
that are consistent with ours. For Germany and the UK, BVK (2000) confirms the

17

relative even spread of investments across sectors, with IT and manufacturing being
important investment targets.14

3.7 Type of Investment Activity: Location
Finally, we gather information on the geographical concentration of fund
investments in specific regions or countries. We assign the number 1 to a fund if it
invests within a single region within a country; 2, if it invests anywhere in its
domestic country; 3 if it operates within a single continent; 4, if it operates worldwide
(i.e. in two or more continents). Since Japanese companies report the fraction of their
investments invested abroad (with no geographical breakdown), we construct the
variable for Japan in a slightly different way. We assign the number 1 to it if the fund
is regional; 2 if it invests in Japan only; 3 if it invests up to 50 percent of its funds
abroad; and 4 if over 50 percent of the fund’s investment are abroad.
There are again some interesting differences across countries (Panel D of
Table 2). The UK venture capital industry is the most international with 60 percent of
funds having some investments outside the UK. By contrast, two thirds of German
funds invest only in Germany (or in a region within Germany). Aggregate statistics
from BVK record that UK VC funds invest 25 percent of their capital abroad,
compared with 15 percent invested outside Germany by German VC firms. Figures
for Japan (as reported by the Asian Venture Capital Journal) suggest that investment
outside Japan constituted 24 percent of total investment by Japanese VC funds in
2000.

14

Earlier figures for Japan are somewhat different from ours: Lerner and Hardymon (1999) report
substantial VC investments in financial and other services, as well as in (the not clearly defined)
“consumer products.” The Asian Venture Capital Journal figures (which refer to 2000) are closer to
ours in that they report substantial investment in services, but, like us, find that computer related
investments constitute about 27 percent of the total amounts invested, far more than the life sciences
and electronics sectors.
18

4. The Determinants of VC Investments
We now turn to the analysis of the relation between the sources of funding and
the nature of VC investment activity.

Section 4.1 provides partial correlation

coefficients between sources of finance and investment activities.

Section 4.2

describes the estimated relations between sources of funding and VC investments.

4.1 Partial Correlation Coefficients
Table 3 reports partial correlation coefficients between sources of finance,
country dummies and stage of investment.

Correlation coefficients with both

individual stage responses and average stage are reported, and record similar results.
There is a negative association between bank, insurance and pension backed funds
and early stage investment, and a positive correlation with average stage.

The

backing of VC funds by financial intermediaries is therefore associated with the
provision of later stage finance.
There is a positive correlation between corporate and individual investor
backed funds and early stage and a negative correlation with average stage. Corporate
and private individual finance is therefore associated with the provision of earlier
stage investment.
Regarding location of VC funds, the positive correlation of early stage and the
negative correlation of average stage with the Israeli dummy means that Israeli funds
are early stage investors. Conversely, in Japan and to a lesser extent in the UK,
Japanese and UK funds tend to be later stage investors. German funds are most
closely correlated with middle stages.

19

4.2 Estimating the Determinants of VC Investments
We examine three measures of fund activity: stage of investment, sector and
geographical focus. First, we estimate the choice of early and late stages as seemingly
unrelated zero-one Probit regressions.

We then estimate regressions where the

dependent variable is the average stage of investment.

Since the averages are

bounded between one and three, we estimate Tobit regressions.15
For sectors, we estimate the sector share variables (maintaining the
assumption of equal investment) as a system of four seemingly unrelated equations.16
Finally, we estimate the determinants of the geographical focus of investment using
Ordered Probit regressions, where the dependent variable takes values between 1 and
4, as described above.

4.2.1 Investment Stage
Table 4 presents Probit and Tobit estimates of the determinants of the stages
of investment. The results are very consistent for the different estimates. The Probit
results, in Panel A, reveal that bank, insurance and pension backed funds are
associated with later stage investments, whereas funds that obtain finance from
corporations and individuals are more likely to invest in early stages. The left column
of Panel B of Table 4 reports the Tobit estimates of the determinants of average stage
15

Average stage can take only five possible discrete values (1, 1.5, 2, 2.5 and 3). It is therefore
possible to estimate the determinants of average stage using Ordered Probit (rather than Tobit)
regressions. The results are virtually identical to the Tobit results reported below. The calculation of
average stage generates a ranking of funds according to their preferred stages of investment. Note that
for the ranking to be valid, the assumption of equal investments in all stages is not necessary; it is
sufficient to assume that investments in later stages tend to be larger than in earlier stages, as is
typically the case.
It should be noted that since there is an obvious question of whether sources of finance can be treated
as exogenous, we have been careful to avoid drawing causal inferences about the relation between
sources of finance and activities rather than just documenting associations. However, since we do not
have appropriate instruments with which to allow both the sources of funds and the investment choices
to be jointly determined, the regression results have to be interpreted with caution.
16
We also estimated the four equations separately using Tobit regressions and obtained very similar
results.
20

(which lies between 1 and 3), which also suggest that bank finance is associated with
later stage investment, VC funds that rely on pension funds tend to favour later stages,
whereas funds obtaining money from individual investors prefer earlier stages. In this
regression, shifting from individual to bank finance is associated with an increase of
0.26 in average investment stage.

This compares with a standard deviation of

between 0.45 in average stage (in Germany) and 0.76 (in Japan). The shift therefore
represents between 0.3 and 0.6 of a standard deviation. The within country relations
between investment stage and source of funds are therefore economically as well as
statistically significant.
Several tests of robustness of the results were performed (Table 4, Panel B,
right columns). Firstly, there may be a variation in VC firms operating in different
sectors. To investigate this, we disaggregated the regressions on average stage by
sector, finding a high degree of consistency across sectors. A positive relation was
found between average stage and bank, insurance and pension fund backing in all
sectors. Conversely, a negative relation between corporate, private and government
backing and stage was observed in all sectors.
Secondly, an implicit assumption behind our analysis is that VC funds face a
common demand by entrepreneurs, so that differences between them reflect the
preferences of the various providers of finance. To test this, we disaggregated the
regression by geographical focus. In particular, we repeated the regression on average
stage excluding VC firms that stated that they operate at a regional rather than a
national or international level. 93 observations were dropped but the results remained
almost identical to those reported above. The size and significance of coefficients
were little affected with the exception that pension funds were no longer significant at
the 10 percent level.

21

4.3.2 Sector
Table 5 reports seemingly unrelated regressions of VC investments by sector
on sources of finance. The table suggests that VC funds that rely on pension funds
and insurance companies for finance (“institutional investors”) are less likely to focus
on IT and software, and more likely to favour the life sciences (insurance backed
funds) and manufacturing (pension backed funds).

In contrast, corporate and

individual backed funds are less likely to invest in manufacturing and more likely to
direct more resources to IT and software. Institutional backed funds therefore tend to
invest in relatively low technology manufacturing in preference to high technology IT
and software, and corporate and individual backed funds in high technology IT and
software in preference to low technology manufacturing.17

4.3.3 Geographical Focus
We examine the relation between geographical focus of VC investment and
sources of finance using Ordered Probit regressions (Table 6). We observe that bank
backed VC funds tend to invest more locally, whereas funds backed by industrial
corporations, insurance companies and individual investors tend to invest more
abroad. Government funding is particularly closely associated with local and national
investment.

4.3.4 Country Specific Estimates
To date, we have imposed the same coefficients on sources of financing in
different countries. Table 7 reports the results of regressions with country-specific
17

Note that these conclusions are based on investment shares, calculated under the equal investment
assumption. It is also possible to estimate Probit regressions, where the dependent variable is a dummy
which equals one if a fund invests in a particular sector. We do not present the results of this
specification because we believe the industry shares shed more light on the relative fund focus between
different industries.
22

coefficients. The tendency of banks to favor later stage investments is observed in
British and Israeli VC funds but not in German and Japanese funds, where bank
finance is not associated with significantly earlier or later stage investment. The
coefficients on the bank variable in Israel and the UK are economically as well as
statistically significant amounting to 0.65 and 0.59 of a standard deviation in
investment stage respectively in the two countries. The tendency of individual and
corporate backed VC firms to invest in early stage activities is observed in Germany
and Japan but not in Israel and the UK. The association of government backed funds
with early stage activities is observed in Germany but not in the UK. Overall, a
hypothesis that the four country coefficients are equal can be rejected at the onepercent level.
The country-specific intercepts in Table 7 appear to differ from each other,
much like the coefficients on the country dummies in the previous regressions. In
Table 4, the country dummy variables for Japan and Israel are highly statistically
significant. The Israeli VC industry is associated with earlier stage of investment than
that in the UK, and Japan appears to be associated with later stage investment than the
UK.18
Similarly in Table 5, the country dummy variables are significant (relative to
the UK) and suggest an Israeli and Japanese focus on IT, software and life sciences,
18

MBI/MBO activity is extremely rare in Japan, suggesting that some of the funds classified as
engaged in financing later stage activities in the Japanese survey could perhaps be viewed as
supporting middle stage companies according to the other data sources. Lerner and Hardyman’s (1999)
description of VC activity in Japan is also consistent with this view. To address this possibility, we
converted all Japanese funds with later stage investments into middle stage, and found no significant
changes in the coefficients on the sources of finance, although this conversion did render the Japan
country dummy statistically insignificant (i.e. not different from Britain). Nevertheless, it is clear that
early stage investments (in seed and start-up companies) are rare in the Japanese funds included in our
data. It should also be noted that the Japan dummy was negative in both Probit regressions (Panel A of
Table 4), and positive in the other stage specifications. This is due to the fact that Japanese funds
typically invest in only one stage (middle or late) whereas British funds invest in many stages.
Therefore, when estimating the determinants of investment in a particular stage separately, as in the
Probit specification, it appears that UK funds invest more than Japanese funds in both early and later
activities.
23

away from manufacturing. German VC investment is directed more towards the life
sciences and away from investment in IT and software.
Finally, Table 6 shows that funds in the UK tend to invest more abroad than
funds in other countries. In contrast to investment stage and sector preference, the
coefficients on some funding sources are of similar magnitude to the country dummy
variables suggesting that source of finance is as critical a determinant of location of
investment as the country of operation of a fund. We discuss possible interpretations
of the country-specific intercepts in the next Section.

5. Summary and Implications of Results
In summary, we find that:
Investment activities of VC funds as measured by stage, sector and geographical
focus of investments are closely associated with sources of finance. We therefore
reject Hypothesis 1 that the activities of VC firms are independent of their sources
of finance.
Bank backed funds invest in late stage, domestic activities. We therefore fail to
reject Hypothesis 2.
Pension and insurance-backed funds invest in late stage activities in low
technology sectors and insurance-backed funds invest internationally. We do not
therefore reject Hypothesis 3’s prediction about sector but we do reject its
prediction about stage and the geographical focus of insurance funds.
Corporate and individual backed VC firms invest in early stage, high technology
activities globally rather than domestically. We do not therefore reject Hypothesis
4 or Hypothesis 5.

24

Governments invest in domestic activities. We therefore do not reject Hypothesis
6.
With the exception of Hypothesis 1, it has not therefore been possible to reject any
of the hypotheses described in section 2 though we do not find a difference in stage of
investment between bank backed and pension and insurance backed funds. Instead,
financial intermediary-backed funds all invest in relatively late stage activities.
In relation to the hypotheses on financial systems, we find that:
Relations between sources of finance and VC activities differ across countries,
leading to a rejection of Hypothesis 7.
The association of bank backed VC’s with later stage activity is weaker in the
bank-based systems of Germany and Japan, relative to the UK (although it is
present in Israel, whose financial system is also dominated by banks). We cannot
therefore reject Hypothesis 8.
The association of individual backed activities with early stage investment is a
feature of the bank-based systems of Germany and Japan. The association of
corporate backed activities with early stage is observed in Germany (although not
Japan). We cannot therefore reject Hypothesis 9.
The relation of government backed funds to early stage investment is found in
Germany, in which less diversification opportunities through financial instruments
and markets are present. We cannot therefore reject Hypothesis 10.
Finally, it is worth noting the positive association between pension backed
funds with investment stage in the UK, and of insurance backed funds with stage in
Germany. In neither country does the long-term nature of their liabilities encourage
long-term finance.

In contrast, Japanese funds financed by non-bank financial

institutions invest relatively more in earlier stages.

25

Regulation may bear on these

observations in so far as it encourages institutions to pursue conservative investment
strategies to meet, for example, US-style “prudent man” regulations and, in the UK,
“Minimum Funding” requirements.19
There are several factors that could account for the importance of the country
dummy variables. These include differences in the availability of investment projects,
i.e. the supply of entrepreneurs rather than finance, alternative sources of finance for
innovative activity in different countries, for example business angels, differences in
the location of innovative activity within as against outside firms, tax incentives, legal
differences, and macroeconomic conditions.
The present analysis does not readily lend itself to an assessment of the
influence of other factors.

However, one piece of evidence that suggests that

entrepreneurial demand may be a key factor comes from the geographical focus of
funds. When we concentrate on funds that operate in an international market and
therefore face common worldwide demand functions (i.e. with the geographical focus
variable equals 4), then the country of origin of the fund as well as it sources of funds
are generally insignificant determinants of the preferred investment stage.20

19

On the “Prudent Man” regulation and its relaxation in the US, see Gompers and Lerner (1998).
Minimum Funding Requirements stipulate the conduct of pension funds and the basis on which their
liabilities should be valued.
20
The one exception is the Israel dummy, which remains significantly negative. This probably reflects
the fact that Israeli VC funds are not as global as international funds in other countries. We also
examine the investment strategies of six funds operating in both Germany and UK, and another fund
operating in both the UK and Japan, finding no significant difference in the stage of investment of
these funds in different countries. This could reflect similar demand conditions in Germany and the
UK, or a general investment strategy adopted by funds that is independent of where they operate.
26

6. Conclusions
The purpose of this article has been to examine the financing of the VC
industry in four countries where VC funds are important or growing and to establish
how institutional differences in the financing of VC firms relate to the types of
activities in which they invest.
To answer this question, we have collected a new data set on VC funds and
their sources of finance and provided cross-country controls that allow us to analyse
the relation between sources of finance and the activities in which the funds are
engaged. We use the data to test a range of hypotheses concerning the relation
between sources of finance and investment activities.
We have documented substantial differences across countries in the sources of
funds used to finance VC investment and pronounced variations in the activities in
which they invest. We have found that the sources of finance are significantly related
to the differences in VC activities within countries.

In particular, financial

intermediary-backed funds are associated with late stage investments in relatively low
technology industries. In contrast, individual and corporate backed funds invest in
early stage, higher technology industries. Their investment is also more globally
focused than that of financial intermediary backed funds.
We have argued that these observations are consistent with theories that
emphasize the different information collected by financial intermediaries and market
participants. They are also in line with patterns of relations that would be expected of
funds operating in countries with different bank-firm relations and opportunities for
risk spreading through financial markets and instruments. Consistent with a role for
government in correcting market failures, public sector funding is associated with
investment in domestic early stage activities.

27

However, we have also found that sources of finance only account for a
portion of the differences in VC activities across countries. A range of other factors
including demand for funds (i.e. supply of entrepreneurs), alternative sources of
entrepreneurial finance (for example, business angels) and different corporate
organization of entrepreneurial activities may also be relevant.

28

Data Sources
Asian Venture Capital Journal (2002), “The 2002 Guide to Venture Capital in Asia,”
(available on the Internet at asiaventure.com).
BVK (2000), Venture Capital in Europe, 1999 (German Venture Capital Association,
Berlin).
EVCA (2000), Mid-Year Survey, January-June 2000, (European Venture Capital
Association, available on the Internet at evca.com).
IVA (2000), 2000 Yearbook, (Israel Venture Capital Association, Tel Aviv).
METI, Japanese Ministry of Economy, Trade and Industry, (2000), 2000 Yearbook on
Japanese Venture Capital Investment (prepared by Thomson Financial / Venture
Economics, Newark New Jersey).
Nihon Keizai Shinbunsha (2001), Nikkei Venture Business Nenkan (Nikkei Annual
Corporation Reports of Business) (Nikkei, Tokyo).
Nikkei Kinyu (1999), Venture Capital Chosa (Venture Capital Survey) (Venture
Club, Tokyo).
NVCA (2000), NVCA Yearbook 2000 (National Venture Capital Association,
Arlington, VA).

29

References
Allen, F. (1993), “Stock Markets and Resource Allocation,” in C. Mayer and X.
Vives, (eds.), Capital Markets and Financial Intermediation (Cambridge University
Press, Cambridge).
Allen, F. and D. Gale (1999), “Diversity of Opinion and Financing of New
Technologies,” Journal of Financial Intermediation, Vol. 8, pp. 68-89.
Allen, F. and D. Gale (2000), Comparing Financial Systems (MIT Press, Cambridge,
MA).
Bascha, A. and U. Walz (2001), “Financing Practices in the German Venture Capital
Industry: An Empirical Assessment,” unpublished manuscript, University of
Tubingen.
Botazzi, L. and M. Da Rin, M. (2002), “Venture Capital in Europe and the Financing
of European Innovative Firms,” Economic Policy, Vol. 17, pp. 229-269.
Carlin, W. and C. Mayer (2002), “Finance, Investment and Growth,” forthcoming,
Journal of Financial Economics.
Cornelli, F. and O. Yosha (2002), “Stage Financing and Convertible Debt,”
forthcoming, Review of Economic Studies.
Cumming, D. (2001), “United States Venture Capital Financial Contracting: Evidence
from Investments in Foreign Securities,” unpublished manuscript, University of
Alberta.
Gilson, R. and D. Schizer (2002), “Understanding Venture Capital Structure: A Tax
Explanation for Convertible Preferred Stock,” unpublished manuscript, Stanford
University.
Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (1998), “What Drives Venture Capital Fundraising?”
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity (Microeconomics), pp. 149-192.
Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (1999), The Venture Capital Cycle, (Cambridge, MA, MIT
Press).
Gompers, P. and J. Lerner (2001), “The Venture Capital Revolution,” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol. 15, pp. 145-168.
Hellman, T. (1998), “The Allocation of Control Rights in VC Contracts,” RAND
Journal of Economics, Vol. 29, pp. 57-76.
Hellman, T. and M. Puri (2000), “The Interaction between Product Market and
Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital,” Review of Financial Studies, Vol.
13, pp. 959-984.

30

Jeng, L. and P. Wells (2000), “The Determinants of Venture Capital Funding:
Evidence Across Countries,” Journal of Corporate Finance, Vol. 6, pp. 241-289.
Kaplan, S. and P. Stromberg (2002), “Financial Contracting Theory Meets the Real
World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts,” forthcoming, Review of
Economic Studies.
Lerner, J. and F. Hardymon (1999), Venture Capital and Private Equity: A Case Book
(New York, Wiley and Sons Press), Chapter 19.
Manigart, S. and H. Sapienza (2000), “Venture Capital and Growth,” in D. Sexton
and H. Landstrom (eds.), The Blackwell Handbook of Entrepreneurship (Blackwell,
Oxford).
Sako, M. and W. Kelly (2002) “Governance of Start-ups in Japan: What Scope for
Change?” unpublished manuscript, Saїd Business School, Oxford.

31

Table 1: Sources of External Funds for the VC Industry
This table reports sources of funds of VC firms in Germany, Israel, Japan and the UK based on binary
responses to a question of whether or not a particular fund uses a certain source. Panel A records the
fraction of funds that report using a given source. Panel B records the percentage of funds using one,
two, three, or four or more sources. * and ** denote mean values which are statistically different from
those of the UK at the 10 and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Panel A: Fraction of Funds using Particular Sources
Funds

Banks
0.59**

Insurance
Companies
0.22**

Pension
Funds
0**

Corporate
Investors
0.16**

Individual
Investors
0.36*

Germany

187

Israel

Gov’t
0.09**

Other
Institutions
0.21**

119

0.51

0.11**

0.02**

0.60**

0.36

0.01**

0.54

Japan

62

0.56

0.43

0**

0.27

0.21**

0.03**

0.80**

UK

140

0.44

0.36

0.49

0.26

0.45

0.24

0.55

Panel B: Percentage of Funds using Particular Number of Sources
Germany

1
61%

2
22%

3
9%

4 or more
8%

Israel

38%

27%

21%

15%

Japan

21%

39%

29%

11%

UK

35%

16%

15%

24%

32

Table 2: Characteristics of VC Investments
Table 2 reports the characteristics of VC investments based on discrete responses by firms. Panel A
refers to investment stage and reports the proportion of funds investing in different investment stages:
“early” refers to seed and start-up, “middle” to expansion and growth, and “late” to later stages. Panel
B refers to the sectors of investment using five groups of industries: life sciences, IT and software,
electrical and semi-conductors, manufacturing and chemicals, and other industries (further discussion
of the calculation used to derive these results is in the text). Panel C records the percentage of funds
investing in one, two, three, or four or more industries. Panel D records the regional, national or
international nature of investments by funds. It reports the percentage of funds investing in a region
within a country, in several regions within a country, within a single continent, or in two or more
continents (the definition for Japan is slightly different, see text). * and ** denote mean values which
are statistically different from those of the UK at the 10 and 5 percent levels, respectively.

Panel A: VC Investments by Stage
Funds
Germany

187

Early
(1)
0.68**

Middle
(2)
0.89*

Late
(3)
0.74

Average
Stage
2.0**

Israel

98

0.93**

0.49**

0.28**

1.4**

Japan

57

0.15**

0.19**

0.65**

2.5**

UK

140

0.48

0.84

0.80

2.1

Panel B: VC Investments by Industry
Funds
Germany

183

Life
Sciences
0.21**

IT and
Software
0.23

Elect and
Semi-C.
0.16

Mnfg and
Chemicals
0.23

Other
Industries
0.17

Israel

95

0.24**

0.51**

0.16

0.08**

0.01**

Japan

56

0.26**

0.49**

0.05**

0.06**

0.14

UK

140

0.17

0.26

0.15

0.24

0.19

Panel C: Percentage of Funds Investing in Certain Number of Industries
Germany

1
9%

2
16%

3
15%

4 or more
60%

Israel

39%

23%

17%

21%

Japan

3%

12%

42%

42%

UK

11%

7%

7%

75%

33

Panel D: VC Investments by Region
Percentage of Funds Investing in Different Locations
Funds
Germany

187

Region within
Country
(1)
34%

Country only

Worldwide

Average

(2)
32%

County and
Continent
(3)
18%

(4)
17%

2.18*

Israel

97

1%

67%

25%

7%

2.35*

Japan

55

13%

44%

38%

5%

2.28*

UK

139

16%

24%

35%

24%

2.68

34

Table 3: Partial Correlation Coefficients
Table 3 reports partial correlation coefficients and p-values (in brackets) of sources of funds (bank,
insurance companies, pension funds, corporate, individual, government and other) and location of VC
firms with stage (early, middle, late and average stage), sector of investments (life sciences, IT and
software, electrical and semi-conductors, manufacturing and chemicals) and geographical focus (the
percentage of funds investing in a region within a country, in several regions within a country, within a
single continent, or in two or more continents (see text for the definition of this variable for Japanese
funds).

Avg.
Stage Life Sciences

IT and
Software

Geog.

Electronics Manufactng. Focus

Early

Middle

Late

BANK

-0.05
(0.25)

0.11
(0.01)

0.09
(0.06)

0.10
(0.03)

0.10
(0.03)

0.09
(0.04)

0.10
(0.03)

0.06
(0.21)

-0.12
(0.00)

INSURANCE

-0.16
(0.00)

-0.00
(0.97)

0.08
(0.06)

0.18
(0.00)

0.13
(0.00)

-0.07
(0.13)

-0.03
(0.54)

0.09
(0.06)

0.14
(0.00)

PENSION

-0.15
(0.00)

0.10
(0.02)

0.15
(0.00)

0.16
(0.00)

0.18
(0.00)

0.10
(0.02)

0.19
(0.00)

0.24
(0.00)

0.16
(0.00)

CORPORATE

0.13
(0.00)

-0.14
(0.00)

-0.20
(0.00)

-0.16
(0.00)

-0.14
(0.00)

-0.03
(0.58)

-0.10
(0.03)

-0.16
(0.00)

0.21
(0.00)

INDIVIDUAL

0.11
(0.02)

0.00
(0.96)

-0.07
(0.13)

-0.09
(0.04)

-0.09
(0.06)

-0.05
(0.27)

-0.04
(0.41)

-0.06
(0.19)

0.10
(0.02)

GOVERNMT

-0.03
(0.50)

0.09
(0.05)

0.07
(0.10)

0.04
(0.35)

0.09
(0.05)

-0.07
(0.15)

0.15
(0.00)

0.15
(0.00)

-0.08
(0.07)

OTHER

-0.09
(0.03)

-0.19
(0.00)

-0.02
(0.63)

0.06
(0.16)

-0.05
(0.29)

0.08
(0.07)

-0.10
(0.02)

-0.07
(0.09)

0.10
(0.03)

GERMANY

0.07
(0.10)

0.32
(0.00)

0.17
(0.00)

0.05
(0.20)

0.20
(0.00)

-0.14
(0.00)

0.18
(0.00)

0.23
(0.00)

-0.14
(0.00)

ISRAEL

0.35
(0.00)

-0.25
(0.00)

-0.41
(0.00)

-0.46
(0.00)

-0.20
(0.00)

0.03
(0.46)

-0.15
(0.00)

-0.32
(0.00)

-0.03
(0.43)

JAPAN

-0.34
(0.00)

-0.39
(0.00)

0.01
(0.83)

0.30
(0.00)

-0.14
(0.00)

-0.01
(0.75)

-0.36
(0.00)

-0.24
(0.00)

-0.01
(0.88)

UK

-0.19
(0.00)

0.18
(0.00)

0.21
(0.00)

0.19
(0.00)

0.09
(0.04)

0.13
(0.00)

0.20
(0.00)

0.24
(0.00)

0.19
(0.00)

35

Table 4: Estimates of the Determinants of the Stage of Investment
This table reports the results of pooled regressions of stages of investment on sources of funds reported
by individual VC funds with individual country intercepts. Panel A reports the results of seemingly
unrelated Probit estimates where the dependent variables are EARLY and LATE. The left column of
Panel B reports the results of a Tobit regression of average stage of investments of a fund (which lies
between 1 and 3) on sources of funds. The right columns of Panel B report the results of similar
regressions for several sub-samples. The country-specific intercepts are measured relative to the UK. *
and ** denote statistical significance at the 10 and 5 percent levels, respectively

Panel A: Seemingly Unrelated Probit Estimates
EARLY

LATE

CONSTANT

0.02
(0.17)

0.88**
(0.19)

BANK

-0.05
(0.13)

0.25*
(0.13)

INSURANCE

-0.18
(0.16)

0.06
(0.16)

PENSION

-0.45*
(0.25)

0.31
(0.27)

OTHER

0.06
(0.15)

0.08
(0.15)

CORPORATE

0.26
(0.16)

-0.31**
(0.15)

INDIVIDUAL

0.31**
(0.14)

-0.29**
(0.13)

GOVERNMENT

0.09
(0.20)

-0.13
(0.21)

GERMANY

0.33*
(0.18)

-0.24
(0.20)

ISRAEL

1.32**
(0.27)

-1.35**
(0.23)

JAPAN

-1.17*
(0.27)

-0.57**
(0.26)

482

482

N
LOG LIKELIHOOD

-475.2

36

Panel B: Average Stage Tobit Regressions
Full
Sample

Life
Sciences

CONSTANT

2.04**
0.09

2.16**
0.09

2.03**
0.09

2.17**
0.08

Local
Funds
Excluded
2.17**
2.04**
0.08
0.11

BANK

0.14**
0.07

0.15**
0.07

0.13*
0.07

0.09
0.06

0.12*
0.07

0.18**
0.08

0.11
0.08

0.05
0.08

0.19**
0.09

0.18**
0.08

0.14*
0.08

0.11
0.09

0.24**
0.12

0.10
0.12

0.22
0.14

0.11
0.11

0.10
0.12

0.20
0.15

OTHER

-0.01
0.07

0.07
0.07

0.01
0.08

0.11
0.07

0.05
0.08

-0.02
0.09

CORPORATE

-0.10
0.08

-0.12
0.08

-0.10
0.09

-0.20**
0.08

-0.15*
0.08

-0.14
0.09

INDIVIDUAL

-0.12*
0.07

-0.05
0.07

-0.18**
0.08

-0.08
0.07

-0.03
0.07

-0.14*
0.08

GOVERNMENT

-0.11
0.11

-0.22**
0.10

-0.03
0.12

-0.11
0.09

-0.13
0.09

0.04
0.16

GERMANY

-0.10
0.10

-0.21**
0.10

-0.06
0.10

-0.17*
0.09

-0.14
0.09

-0.03
0.12

ISRAEL

-0.79**
0.12

-0.82**
0.13

-0.71**
0.13

-0.75**
0.11

-0.74**
0.14

-0.79**
0.13

JAPAN

0.65**
0.14

0.49**
0.15

0.70**
0.15

0.38
0.24

-0.02
0.21

0.69**
0.16

347
0.15

409
0.14

295
0.17

263
0.12

INSURANCE

PENSION

N
Pseudo R²

482
0.14

IT and Electronics
Software

37

Mnfg.

389
0.15

Table 5: The Determinants of Industry Investment Shares
This table reports the results of seemingly unrelated OLS regressions of the share of a fund’s
investment in five different sectors (life sciences, IT and software, electronics and semiconductors,
manufacturing and services and other sectors) on sources of funds. * and ** denote statistical
significance at the 10 and 5 percent levels, respectively

Life Sciences
0.15**
(0.03)

IT and Software
0.29**
(0.03)

Electronics
0.14**
(0.02)

Manufacturing
0.70**
(0.05)

BANK

-0.03
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.01)

0.01
(0.02)

INSURANCE

0.07**
(0.02)

-0.06*
(0.03)

-0.02
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

PENSION

0.06
(0.04)

-0.11**
(0.05)

0.02
(0.02)

0.08**
(0.03)

OTHER

-0.01
(0.02)

0.02
(0.03)

-0.00
(0.14)

0.00
(0.02)

CORPORATE

0.00
(0.02)

0.05*
(0.03)

0.01
(0.14)

-0.04**
(0.02)

INDIVIDUAL

-0.03
(0.02)

0.06**
(0.03)

0.00
(0.01)

-0.05**
(0.02)

GOV’T

-0.01
(0.03)

-0.04
(0.04)

0.02
(0.02)

0.01
(0.02)

JAPAN

0.10**
(0.04)

0.18**
(0.05)

-0.09**
(0.03)

-0.16**
(0.03)

GERMANY

0.07**
(0.03)

-0.09**
(0.04)

0.02
(0.02)

0.02
(0.02)

ISRAEL

0.11*
(0.03)

0.16**
(0.04)

0.00
(0.02)

-0.12**
(0.03)

0.05

0.21

0.07

0.25

CONSTANT

N
R2

474

38

Table 6: Ordered Probit Estimates of the Determinants of Geographical Focus
The table reports the results of a regression of geographical focus (which takes values between 1 and 4,
where 1 corresponds to investment within a region within a country, 2 to investment in one country, 3
to investment in a continent, and 4 to worldwide investments) on sources of funds. * and ** denote
statistical significance at the 10 and 5 percent levels, respectively

BANK

-0.21**
(0.10)

INSURANCE

0.28**
(0.12)

PENSION

-0.02
(0.20)

OTHER

0.02
(0.11)

CORPORATE

0.56**
(0.12)

INDIVIDUAL

0.19*
(0.10)

GOVERNMENT

-0.70**
(0.17)

GERMANY

-0.52**
(0.15)

ISRAEL

-0.52**
(0.18)

JAPAN

-0.41*
(0.20)

N

478

PSEUDO R2

0.06

39

Table 7: Regressions with Country-Specific Coefficients
This table reports the results of a pooled regression of stages of investment on sources of funds
reported by individual VC funds with individual country intercepts and coefficients. For each country,
the table reports the results of Tobit regressions of average stage of investments of a fund (which lies
between 1 and 3) on sources of finance. * and ** denote statistical significance at the 10 and 5 percent
levels, respectively

CONSTANT

GERMANY
Avg. Stage
(Tobit)
2.06**
(0.11)

ISRAEL
Avg. Stage
(Tobit)
1.01**
(0.18)

JAPAN
Avg. Stage
(Tobit)
3.68**
(0.34)

UK
Avg. Stage
(Tobit)
1.98**
(0.10)

BANK

-0.02
(0.11)

0.34**
(0.17)

-0.18
(0.22)

0.30**
(0.12)

INSURANCE

0.21*
(0.12)

0.12
(0.24)

0.07
(0.21)

-0.02
(0.16)

PENSION

N/A

-0.09
(0.37)

N/A

0.32**
(0.16)

OTHER

0.08
(0.12)

-0.01
(0.16)

-0.91**
(0.30)

-0.07
(0.14)

CORPORATE

-0.27**
(0.13)

0.07
(0.16)

0.08
(0.24)

-0.25
(0.16)

INDIVIDUAL

-0.17
(0.11)

0.05
(0.18)

-0.58
(0.25)

-0.09
(0.12)

GOV

-0.29*
(0.16)

N/A

N/A

0.13
(0.15)

N
PSEUDO R2

482
0.18

40

