NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BARRIERS TO ENTERING MEDICAL SPECIALTIES
Sean Nicholson
Working Paper 9649
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9649
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

I received helpful comments from Mark Pauly, Jonathan Ketcham, Patricia Danzon, Dan Polsky, and seminar
participants at Brigham Young University. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Sean Nicholson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Barriers to Entering Medical Specialties
Sean Nicholson
NBER Working Paper No. 9649
April 2003
JEL No. I11, J31, J44, J51
ABSTRACT
Non-primary care physicians earn considerably more than primary care physicians in the United
States. I examine a number of explanations for the persistent high rates of return to medical
specialization and conclude that barriers to entry may be creating an economic shortage of nonprimary care physicians. I estimate that medical students would be willing to pay teaching
hospitals to obtain residency positions in dermatology, general surgery, orthopedic surgery, and
radiology rather than receiving the mean residents’ salary of $34,000. In the simulation, the
quantity of residents in these four specialties would increase by an estimated six to 30 percent,
rates of return would fall substantially, and teaching hospitals would save an estimated $0.6 to
$1.0 billion per year in labor costs.

Sean Nicholson
Health Care Systems Department
The Wharton School
3641 Locust Walk
Philadelphia, PA 19104
and NBER
nicholss@wharton.upenn.edu

2

I. Introduction
Physicians who practice in the primary care specialties of general internal medicine, family
practice, and pediatrics earn substantially less than physicians in non-primary care specialties. If one
controls for the one to two years of additional residency training required in non-primary relative to
primary care specialties, there are still substantial rates of return to specialization. In 1998, for example,
the estimated rates of return to specializing in radiology, orthopedic surgery, general surgery,
obstetrics/gynecology, and anesthesiology relative to entering family practice, exceeded 25 percent.1
These rates of return are considerably larger than empirical estimates of the real discount rate, which is
about three percent (Gramlich, 1990).
In theory these relatively high rates of return could be consistent with an equilibrium
characterized by equalizing differences, variation in returns to ability by specialty, and/or liquidity
constraints. Although these supply-side factors may be relevant, they cannot fully explain the high rates
of return to specialization, because throughout the 1990s there have consistently been more medical
students seeking entry into specialties with high rates of return than there are residency positions
available. This implies that barriers to entry in the market for residents, a demand-side (for residents)
factor, affect the realized supply and price of physician services, and help create rents for non-primary
care physicians. The normative perception among many policymakers and health service researchers, on
the other hand, is that there are too many non-primary care physicians, or specialists, in the United States
(Physician Payment Review Commission, 1995). I propose in this paper that barriers to entry may be
creating an economic shortage of non-primary care physicians. This suggests that welfare could possibly

1

I describe the methodology for calculating the cross-section rates of return in Section II.

3

be improved if the number of non-primary care residency positions were allowed to increase, thereby
increasing the supply of non-primary care physician services and reducing the price of those services.2
In Section II of this paper I estimate cross-section rates of return in six non-primary care
specialties over the 1986-1998 time period using data from the American Medical Association’s (AMA)
annual physician survey. Although rates of return to specialization have fallen over time, they are still
strikingly large. In the third section of the paper I examine a number of explanations for the persistence
of high rates of return to specialization related to the supply of medical students to residency programs in
different specialties, and teaching hospitals’ demand for residents.
I offer three explanations for why the market for residents fails to clear. Residency Review
Committees (RRCs), private organizations that consist primarily of physicians from a particular specialty,
essentially have complete control over the number of residents who train in each specialty, and therefore
control the flow of new physicians to a specialty. Like utility-maximizing labor unions that negotiate
with firms in order to maximize employment and rents (Pencavel, 1984; MaCurdy and Pencavel, 1986), I
show that RRCs could set the flow of residents in order to achieve their desired combination of licensed
physicians and physician rents. In 2002 a group of physicians filed a class action lawsuit against seven
medical organizations, including the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME),
which oversees the 26 different RRCs. The lawsuit contends that the ACGME has created anticompetitive standards that restrict medical students’ access to residency programs (Jung, 2002).3
I also offer two more benign explanations why the market for residents may not clear. The
ACGME historically has required that teaching hospitals pay residents a reasonable wage and pay
residents in all specialties the same amount. However, the wage that clears the market for residents in
2

The welfare implications of removing the barriers to entry are ambiguous if physicians induce demand for their
services in response to an increase in the supply of physician services. McGuire (2000) examines the theoretical
and empirical aspects of physician-induced demand.

4

pediatrics or family practice may be too high to clear the market for surgical residents. Finally, the
market for residents may fail to clear if there is insufficient clinical raw material (patients) to train the
number of non-primary care physicians who seek entry into these specialties and hospitals are unable to
increase patient supply. I show that these later two explanations -- minimum wage regulation and scarcity
of teaching material -- could have the same effect as conscious rent-seeking behavior by RRCs.
In the fourth section of the paper I simulate the set of residents’ wages that would allow the
market for residents to clear, and examine the implications of market clearing on the quantity of residents
in each specialty, the rates of return to specialization, and teaching hospitals’ labor expenses. I estimate
that medical students would be willing to pay teaching hospitals for residency training in dermatology,
general surgery, orthopedic surgery, and radiology. Since teaching hospitals currently pay residents about
$34,000 per year, on average, this would result in $0.6 to $1.0 billion in annual savings for teaching
hospitals, depending on the supply and demand parameters used in the simulation. Furthermore, the
quantity of residents would increase by an estimated six to 30 percent, and the rates of return would fall
substantially in these four specialties, toward empirical estimates of the real discount rate.

II. Rates of Return to Medical Specialization
Consider a medical student who graduates from medical school in year t=0 and expects to work
for T years. Her expected present value of lifetime earnings in primary care (specialty j), which requires
three years of residency training, will be:

(1) E[Y j] =

3

3

∑ (1 + r ) −( t -1) w res jt +
t =1

T

∑ (1 + r )
t =4

− ( t −1)

y jt ,

The lawsuit also claims that these seven organizations and teaching hospitals exchange information in the National
Resident Matching Program in order to pay residents lower wages and require more hours worked than would occur
in a competitive labor market, and the Match itself removes students’ ability to negotiate wages.

5

where r is the discount rate, wresjt is a resident’s salary in specialty j in year t, and yjt is the expected
earnings from practicing medicine in specialty j in year t. A similar expression could be written for the
expected present value of lifetime income in non-primary care (specialty k), which requires four or five
years of residency training. The rate of return to the incremental training in specialty k, relative to
specialty j, is the discount rate rk that equates the expected net present values in the two specialties. That
is, rk solves the following equation:
T

(2)

∑ (1 + r
t =1

k

) −(t −1) ( y kt − y jt ) = 0

If students’ earnings expectations are rational, one could measure the expected rate of return to
specialization using a panel data set that contains the mean income that a cohort of physicians actually
received throughout their careers. To analyze changes in expected rates of return over time, one would
need panel data sets for successive cohorts of students. Panel data sets for even a single cohort of
students are rare, and these data sets usually span only a small portion of a medical career. I adopt the
more practical empirical strategy of estimating rates of return using repeated cross-section data sets that
contain the earnings of physicians with different experience levels at a point in time. If students expect
the contemporaneous experience-earnings profile of practicing physicians to remain constant in real terms
in the future, the cross-section rate of return will be an accurate representation of medical students’
expected returns to specialization.4
In order to calculate returns to specialization, one needs to establish a reference specialty that
requires a minimum amount of training. I use family practice as the reference, benchmark specialty
because it involves a relatively short residency period, is chosen by a large number of medical students,
and the clinical training is general in nature. Eleven percent of U.S. medical students who entered the

4

Nicholson and Souleles (2002) examine the determinants of medical students’ subjective income expectations.
Although students do condition their expectations on contemporaneous physician income in the specialty they plan
to enter, they find that students also anticipate, to some extent, subsequent changes in specialty income.

6

2001 National Residency Matching Program (“the Match”) received a position in family practice.
Although internal medicine was a more popular specialty (25 percent of U.S. medical students), many of
these individuals will eventually practice in an internal medicine sub-specialty such as cardiology or
gastroenterology. Burstein and Cromwell (1985) define general practitioners as the baseline specialty,
and Marder and Willke (1991) define the baseline specialty to be physicians with one or two years of
years of experience who are not board certified and are practicing in a primary care specialty.5 Although
most states allow physicians with at least one year of residency training to obtain a license, almost all
physicians receive at least three years of residency training. In the 1998 Community Tracking Study
Physician Survey, for example, only 3.9 percent of physicians received fewer than three years of
residency training.
Self-reported data on physician earnings and hours worked are available from the American
Medical Association’s (AMA) Socioeconomic Monitoring System (SMS) survey for 1986 to 1998. Each
year the AMA surveys about 4,000 practicing physicians who are nationally representative by specialty,
experience, board certification status, and membership in the AMA.6 The AMA reports the mean income
from medical practice, after medical expenses but before taxes, by specialty for the following age groups:
physicians under 36 years old, between 36 and 45, between 46 and 55, between 56 and 65, and over 65
years old. I make a number of assumptions in order to estimate the cross-section age-income profile for
specialty in each year. First, I assume that the mean practice income for an age category corresponds to
physicians at the midpoint of each age range. For example, the mean income of a 50-year old pediatrician
is set equal to the reported mean income of pediatricians between 46 and 55 years of age. Second, I
linearly interpolate between age-specific observations. Third, prospective physicians are assumed to
5

Most general practice residency programs were converted into family practice residency programs, with the
changes beginning in the 1970s.
6
The AMA publishes summary data from the Socioeconomic Monitoring Study surveys in the Physician
Socioeconomic Characteristics publication. Each year the AMA surveys about 4,000 full-time, practicing

7

graduate from medical school when they are 26 years old, spend the number of years as a resident that is
required for board certification, begin practicing medicine immediately after completing residency
training, and retire when they are 65 years old.7 The mean number of hours that physicians work per year
ranged in 1997 from 2,300 in radiology to 3,100 in obstetrics/gynecology.8 I perform a Laspareyes-type
adjustment to account for differences in work effort. Specifically, the mean income in specialty k (Yk) is
multiplied by (Hj/Hk) to standardize leisure at the observed level in the benchmark specialty (specialty j).9
The discounted present values of lifetime earnings between 1986 and 1998 are presented in Table
1 for nine specialties.10 I assume the real discount rate is three percent and I convert the earnings to 1998
dollars using the urban consumer price index. In 1986 the net present value of lifetime income ranged
from $2.6 million in family practice, pediatrics, and general internal medicine to $5.7 million in
orthopedic surgery. Physician lifetime income increased in real terms in all specialties between 1986 and
1992, and increased more substantially in the non-primary than primary care specialties (second to last
column of Table 1). The net present value of lifetime income fell by at least seven percent in every non-

physicians based on a nationally representative sample from the AMA Masterfile, which is a census of all
physicians (whether or not they are members of the AMA).
7
Data on the average residents’ salary is available from surveys conducted by the Association of American Medical
Colleges. I assume that the residents’ salary does not differ across specialties, which is almost always the case
within a teaching hospital and is very nearly true in national data. The number of years of residency training
required in each specialty is taken from the Graduate Medical Education Directory, 1996-1997.
8
I derive the mean hours worker per year in a specialty by multiplying the mean number of weeks worked per year
by the mean number of hours worked in a typical week, as reported in the AMA surveys.
9
Lindsay (1973) demonstrates that a Laspareyes-type adjustment may over or understate the rate of return to
specialty training. However, if an investment in training in specialty j is worthwhile with a Laspareyes-type
adjustment, it will always be worthwhile.
10
The AMA reports combined data on earnings by age group for general internists and internal medicine subspecialists, and combined earnings data for general surgeons and surgical sub-specialists. These two groupings
include specialties that require different amounts of residency training. For example, cardiologists,
gastroenterologists, and general internists are all included in the internal medicine category although they require
different amounts of residency training. The AMA does report the mean earnings of general internists and general
surgeons (without any sub-specialists includes), but not mean earnings by age group for these two specialties. To
estimate the age-specific mean earnings of general internists, I multiply the ratio of the general internist to overall
internal medicine (including sub-specialists) mean earnings by the age-group mean earnings for all internal
medicine physicians. I assume, therefore, that the age-earnings profile of general internists has the same shape as
the combined internal medicine physicians, but is shifted up or down. The same method is used to derive the agegroup mean earnings for general surgeons.

8

primary specialty between 1992 and 1998. The incomes of family practitioners and general internists
continued to increase in real terms during this time period, although the increases were modest. If the
age-earnings profile remains constant in the future, medical students who entered radiology and
orthopedic surgery in 1998 will earn almost $6 million during their careers, almost twice as much as
students entering family practice, general internal medicine, and pediatrics.
I report rates of return to specialization in Table 2. In every year between 1986 and 1998 there
was a positive return to an investment in specialized training, where family practice represents the
benchmark specialty with only three years of residency training. The rates of return are strikingly large,
especially between 1986 and 1992, and have persisted for a longer time period than could be explained by
the lag between an income shock and an increase in the supply of newly trained physicians. The rates of
return in anesthesiology and radiology, specialties that require only one additional year of training
relative to family practice, often exceeded 100 percent. The rates of return in orthopedic and general
surgery, specialties that require two extra years of training, were greater than 38 percent. Cross-section
rates of return have fallen in all specialties since 1992 but still greatly exceed the empirical estimates of
the real discount rate (Gramlich, 1990).
Investments in specialty training appear to have become more lucrative over the last two decades.
Using income data from 1967 to 1980, Burstein and Cromwell (1985) estimate a cross-section rate of
return for obstetricians/gynecologists and general surgeons of between 10 percent and 15 percent. Marder
and Willke (1991) also estimate large cross-section rates of return to training in the non-primary care
specialties using data from 1987: radiology (47 percent), anesthesiology (40 percent), ob/gyn (26
percent), psychiatry (24 percent), and general surgery (22 percent). These rates of return are smaller than
the ones I estimate for 1986, probably because their benchmark specialty consists of primary care
practitioners with fewer than three years of residency training, whereas my benchmark is dominated by
board-certified family practitioners with three years of residency training.

9

III. Explanations for Persistently High Rates of Return to Specialization
I now examine reasons why the rates of return to specialization presented in Table 2 are so high.
If medical students have the same preferences, ability, discount rates, and there are no liquidity
constraints and barriers to entering specialties, the rate of return in each specialty should be equal to the
discount rate (Willis, 1986). If any of these assumptions does not hold, the rate of return to specialty
training could vary across specialties and differ from the discount rate.
I begin by examining four explanations why the rates of return to specialization might be so large
that all relate to the supply of medical students to specialties: equalizing differences, heterogeneous
ability, liquidity constraints, and the nature of medical students’ income expectations. I then examine
three explanations that relate to the demand for residents: restrictions on the number of residents due to
cartel behavior, scarcity of teaching material, and restrictions on the residents’ wage imposed by a private,
accrediting organization.
When medical students choose a specialty they clearly care about more than just income and
leisure. In a 1992 survey, medical students were asked to identify specialty attributes that had a strong or
major influence on their specialty decision. The attributes receiving the largest number of affirmative
responses were the intellectual content of the specialty (61 percent), the existence of challenging
diagnostic problems (60 percent), and the degree of emphasis on people skills (39 percent). Only seven
percent of the students indicated that the relative income of the specialty had a strong or major influence
on their choice. Predictable working hours, prestige, and the presence of research opportunities were all
considered to be more important than income.
When preferences for non-monetary attributes are heterogeneous, the compensating differential
of the marginal student — the student exactly indifferent between family practice and an alternative
specialty -- will determine the rate of return for that specialty. The larger is the compensating differential

10

of a particular specialty relative to family practice, the higher will be the rate of return to that specialty
because students will require “extra” compensation in order to enter. Large rates of return to
specialization will exist if medical students believe that non-primary care specialties have relatively
undesirable non-monetary attributes, such as inflexible work schedules or a higher incidence of
malpractice suits.
A second possible explanation for large rates of return to specialization is the presence of
liquidity constraints. A medical student who wants to maximize his lifetime income and smooth
consumption over his lifetime might decide to forego a non-primary care specialty with a high rate of
return for a primary care specialty if he is unable to borrow sufficient funds while a resident. If this
occurs on a wide scale, non-primary physicians’ incomes will be driven up. Smoothing consumption
becomes more challenging when residents have substantial debt payments. The mean amount of debt
among U.S. medical school graduates in 2001 was $82,000, up from $45,000 in 1992.11
A third possible explanation for high rates of return to specialization is that there are returns to
ability in medicine, and these returns are particularly large in non-primary care specialties. In such a
scenario, high-ability students would self-select into non-primary care specialties and low-ability students
would become primary care physicians. When estimating cross-section rates of return, I assume
implicitly that the returns to ability do not differ across specialties. If the returns to ability are higher in
non-primary than primary care, the observed mean income of family practitioners would understate what
a high-ability student would expect to earn in primary care, and I would estimate too high a rate of return
to specialization.
Bhattacharya (2000) estimates a model where a student’s choice of specialty and her specialtyspecific income are endogenous. A student’s debt and age at the completion of medical school are
assumed to affect her specialty choice but not her income conditional on the choice of specialty. Using
11

Data on indebtedness is from the AAMC Medical School Graduation Questionnaire.

11

data from 1990, Bhattacharya estimates the income that physicians in specialty A would make if they had
chosen specialty B instead, and compares this estimated income with the actual incomes of physicians
practicing in specialty B. Although he finds evidence that students who select non-primary care
specialties would earn more as primary care physicians than primary care physicians actually earn, the
annual wage premiums are usually less than five percent. If Bhattacharya’s result from 1990 can be
generalized, self-selection on the basis of ability does not appear to be the primary explanation for high
rates of return to specialty training.12
A final supply-side explanation is that the cross-section rate of return calculation assumes that
medical students have static income expectations; they expect the contemporaneous age-earnings profile
in each specialty to remain constant in real terms. If students have forward-looking income expectations,
then medical students’ expected returns from training might diverge sharply from the cross-section rates
of return. For example, although practicing radiologists and anesthesiologists are currently receiving
large incomes, medical students might believe that managed care, technological changes such as digitized
radiology, and the increased supply of nurse anesthetists will drive down physician incomes in these
specialties in the future. In this case, the expected rate of return that is influencing students’ specialty
choices might be substantially lower than the 83 percent (radiology) and 47 percent (anesthesiology)
figures reported in Table 2. Nicholson and Souleles (2002) find evidence that medical students do, to
some extent, incorporate future trends in specialty income into their own income expectations.
If students consider ability, debt, and equalizing differences when selecting the specialty that
maximizes utility, and if a large number of students choose primary care as a result, then rates of return to
specialization could certainly vary across specialties and exceed the discount rate. However, collectively
these factors cannot fully explain the observed high rates of return. If supply-side considerations were the

12

Nicholson and Souleles (2002) also find some evidence of selection according to ability; students who chose nonprimary care specialties expected to earn more in those specialties than students who actually chose primary care
specialties.

12

sole cause of high rates of return, the supply of medical students to each specialty would equal the
demand for residents in that specialty. This is not the case; there is a persistent excess supply of residents
to most specialties that have high rates of return, which indicates that medical are trying unsuccessfully to
capture the perceived rents in non-primary care.
The method by which medical students choose residency positions offers a rare opportunity to
separately observe the desired and realized supply of labor, and therefore to observe a market in
disequilibrium. More than 80 percent of the students who graduate from a U.S. medical school apply for
a residency position through the National Resident Matching Program (“the Match”). Each applicant
ranks residency positions in the Match in descending order of his preference; each residency program
ranks applicants in descending order of its preference; and a computer algorithm makes binding
assignments. Ratios of the supply of to the demand for residents between 1991 and 2002 are presented in
Figure 1 for nine specialties. The supply of residents to a specialty is defined as the number of applicants
who rank a residency program from that specialty as their first choice in the Match; the demand for
residents is defined as the number of first-year residency positions offered in the Match by teaching
hospitals.
In 1991 there was an excess supply of residents in radiology, ob/gyn, and orthopedic surgery -specialties with high rates of return according to Table 2 (column 3 and 4). In dermatology, which began
offering residency positions through the Match in 1997, there are almost twice as many applicants as
positions available. These ratios probably understate the imbalance between the number of students who
want to get into specialties with high rates of return and those who are actually accepted. Nicholson
(2002) argues that there are costs of not receiving a position in the Match, so risk averse students with a
relatively low probability of entering their desired specialty may choose an alternative as their first choice
in the Match. Due to the excess supply of residents, forty percent of the U.S. medical graduates who

13

ranked an orthopedic surgery program first in the Match did not receive an assignment in that specialty.13
The unmatched rates in radiology (23 percent) and ob/gyn (17 percent) were smaller but still substantial.
According to Figure 1, specialties with relatively low earnings such as family practice, internal medicine,
pediatrics, and psychiatry were experiencing an excess demand for residents.14
Since disequilibrium in the market for residents may create an economic shortage of non-primary
care physicians in the physician services market and create rents for non-primary care physicians, I now
examine more closely how the market for residents functions. In 2002, residency programs were offered
in 26 different specialties by over 1,200 U.S. teaching hospitals. Medical students must receive at least
one year of residency training in order to practice medicine in the United States, and if a medical student
wishes to become licensed to practice, he must attend an accredited residency program. Therefore, the
market for residents is an intermediate market that largely determines the number and distribution of
physicians in the United States, much as law schools are an intermediate market for determining the
number of lawyers.
Consider a well functioning market for residents and physicians in the simple case where there is
a single primary care (PC) and a single non-primary care (NPC) specialty. Consumers’ aggregate demand
for primary and non-primary care physician services is depicted in Panel B of Figure 2 as a downward
function of the price of physicians’ services, or the physicians’ fee (PNPC and PPC). Residents are an input
into the production of hospital patient care and perhaps also an argument in the utility function of a nonprofit hospital. Teaching hospitals’ aggregate demand for primary and non-primary care residents,
depicted in Panel A of Figure 2, is negatively related to the residents’ wage (wPC and wNPC), as with all
factors of production. Conditional on the residents’ wage, the supply of physician services in a specialty
(SNPC and SPC in Panel B) is an increasing function of the price of physicians’ services in that specialty
13

Data on match rates are from the NRMP (National Resident Matching Program) Data Book.

14

because more medical students will enter the specialty as expected lifetime earnings increase; conditional
on the price of physicians’ services, the supply of residents (SrNPC and SrPC in Panel A) is an increasing
function of the residents’ wage in a specialty for the same reason.15
The markets for residents and physicians are depicted in long-run equilibrium in Figure 2. Each
year teaching hospitals hire Qr*NPC non-primary care residents and Qr*PC primary care residents and pay
them wages WNPC and WPC, respectively. This flow of residents just offsets the number of physicians
retiring in the two specialties each year, such that the supply of physician services remains unchanged at
Q*NPC and Q*PC. The residents’ wages and prices for physicians’ services are such that the marginal
medical student is indifferent between the two specialties. In this well-functioning market, non-primary
and primary care residents may receive substantially different wages in equilibrium unless they are
perfect substitutes in the hospital production function and the desired supply to the two specialties are
identical.
According to Figure 1, in many specialties with high rates of return the supply of residents
exceeds teaching hospital’s demand for residents. In a well-functioning labor market, medical students
who wanted to enter orthopedic surgery, radiology, ob/gyn, and dermatology -- specialties with high rates
of return relative to family practice and an excess supply of residents in the Match -- would bid down the
residents’ wage in those specialties. As the cost of hiring these residents falls, teaching hospitals would
move down their demand curve and offer more residency positions in these specialties. Over time, as
more residents complete training in non-primary care specialties, the supply of non-primary care
physician services in Panel B of Figure 2 would shift out, and the price of non-primary care physician

14

Although it had a high rate of return, anesthesiology also had an excess demand for residents. As mentioned
above, however, during this time period medical students probably expected future anesthesiology incomes to be
below their contemporaneous levels due to the advent and growth of nurse anesthetists.
15
In Figure 2 the supply curves are upward-sloping rather than perfectly elastic because I assume there are
heterogeneous preferences among medical students for the non-monetary attributes of the two specialties; it will
take a large increase in the primary care fee, for example, to induce a student who places a high value on the
prestige associated with non-primary care to switch specialties.

15

services and the rate of return to non-primary care would fall as well. Likewise, teaching hospitals would
be expected to raise the residents’ wage when necessary to fill vacancies, such as occurred in pediatrics,
family practice, and internal medicine in the early 1990s.
I offer three possible explanations for why the market for residents does not clear. One
explanation is that the Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education (ACGME), a private
organization responsible for overseeing residency training, may purposefully limit residency positions in
order to secure rents for practicing physicians. The ACGME is sponsored by five organizations: the
American Medical Association, the American Board of Medical Specialties Specialties (e.g., American
Board of Dermatology), the Association of American Medical Colleges, the American Hospital
Association, and the Council of Medical Specialty Societies (e.g., American Academy of Dermatology)
(Graduate Medical Education Directory, 1996). The ACGME sets overall policies and allows a separate
Residency Review Committee (RRC) to review and accredit residency programs in each of the 26
specialties. Each of the five sponsoring organizations appoints four representatives to an RRC and the
government appoints one non-voting representative.
A teaching hospital that wants to open a new residency program or increase the number of
residents in an existing program must apply to the relevant RRC.16 A RRC considers a number of factors
when deciding whether to approve a program and how many residents may be trained at each program:
“Those numbers (of residents who may be trained by a program) will be based primarily on the number,
qualifications, and commitment of the faculty; the volume and variety of the patient population available
for educational purposes; the quality of the educational offering; and the totality of the institutional
resources” (Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education, 1996). The current approval process

16

The RRCs also periodically review established programs to ensure they are in compliance with the standards.
Programs may be placed on probation and eventually closed if they do not address concerns of the RRC. For
example, the Thoracic Surgery RRC reviewed 43 vascular surgery programs in 1990 and 1991. Twenty-six percent
of the programs were cited for inadequacies in continuity of care, and 16 percent were cited for a lack of formal
periodic evaluation of the residents (Barnes, 1993).

16

for residency positions has the appearance of a “fox guarding the chicken coop.” A Residency Review
Committee consists primarily of physicians from the same specialty, and its decisions affect the future
supply of physicians and physician income in that specialty.
A RRC essentially has complete control over the flow of physicians into a specialty because
medical students who attend residency programs that are not certified by the ACGME are not eligible to
take the licensing exam, and thus are not able to practice in the United States. In this sense, a RRC has
the same power as a labor union that is the sole source of a certain type of labor and negotiates
collectively with a firm or set of firms. Economists have modeled labor unions as maximizing a utility
function whose arguments are the quantity of union members employed and either the workers’ rents or
the total wage bill, subject to the firms’ labor demand (Pencavel, 1984; MaCurdy and Pencavel, 1986).
The union chooses the wage and firms respond by hiring a quantity of union workers such that the
marginal product equals the wage.
The relevant constraint for a RRC is consumers’ aggregate demand for physician services (DNPC
in Figure 3 for the non-primary care RRC). The RRC’s utility function is tangent to the demand curve at
Point J. Whereas a union chooses the wage and allows a firm to choose the profit-maximizing quantity of
labor conditional on that wage, a RRC would choose the flow of residents (QrNPC) that will in the long run
produce the desired, utility-maximizing quantity of physician services (QNPC) and price of those services
(PNPC).17 In order to ensure that the optimal quantity of non-primary care services will be supplied, the
RRC could place a cap of QrNPC on the number of residency positions that could be approved. In Panel A
of Figure 3, the effective demand for non-primary care residents would be truncated at QrNPC.

17

Although a residency review committee can control the number of physicians in a specialty, it cannot control the
number of hours physicians work once they are licensed, and therefore cannot precisely determine the quantity of
services supplied.

17

Whether a RRC’s imposition of restrictions on residency positions reduces welfare depends on
whether physicians can induce demand for their services.18 In Panel B of Figure 3, the shaded rectangle
represents the rents that non-primary care physicians receive, where P*NPC is the price of physician
services that would prevail if the market for residents cleared.19 These rents represent a transfer from
consumers to physicians and therefore do not represent a loss of social welfare. At Point J there will not
appear to be a shortage of non-primary care physician services because supply equals demand at the
prevailing price PNPC. However, if the RRC allowed the market for non-primary care residents to clear
and physicians were not able to or were unwilling to affect the demand for their services, the price for
non-primary care physician services would fall to P*NPC, and the quantity of services would increase.
Therefore, the black triangle in Figure 3 would represent the loss in consumer surplus due to the
restrictive behavior of the RRC. The more elastic is the demand for physician services, the greater would
be the welfare loss. If physicians are able to induce demand for their services, on the other hand, then
increasing the flow of non-primary care residents from QrNPC to Qr*NPC may actually reduce welfare
because the physicians would perform services whose costs exceed their benefit.
If cartel behavior by RRCs explains the rents enjoyed by non-primary care physicians, then a
logical question is why the primary care RRCs don’t further reduce the flow of residents to increase the
income of primary care physicians closer to the levels experienced by non-primary care physicians.20
One explanation is that the demand for primary care services may be more elastic than for non-primary
care services, so the rents available to a primary care RRC would be much lower than for a non-primary
care RRC. That is, a primary care RRC facing a flatter demand curve would choose a higher quantity of
18

See McGuire (2000) for an extensive review of the role of physicians as agents, and their ability to induce
demand for their services.
19
Kleiner (2000) finds that workers in professions that require licensing, such as dentists, earn rents relative to
workers of comparable human capital.
20
It is possible that primary care physicians are capturing rents relative to students who enter a non-medical
occupation. Weeks et al. (1994), however, find that primary care physicians experience lower rates of return to

18

physicians and lower rents than a non-primary care RRC facing a steep demand curve if the two
committees have the same preferences. It seems plausible that there are more substitute providers for
primary than non-primary care, and therefore that the primary care demand curve will be relatively
elastic.21 A second explanation is that the primary care specialties are relatively populous, and it may be
more difficult for a RRC representing a large constituency to restrict entry than one representing a small
constituency. There are between 50,000 (pediatrics) and $98,000 physicians (general internal medicine)
in each of the three primary care specialties, whereas the non-primary care specialties displayed in Table
1 have between 23,000 (orthopedic surgery) and 45,000 physicians (psychiatry). A third explanation is
that primary care RRCs may have different preferences; they may place a greater weight on the quantity
of physicians in the specialty relative to the rents received than non-primary care RRCs.
There is a second, more benign possible explanation for why the market for residents does not
clear. In many procedural specialties, the RRCs have established a threshold for the minimum number of
procedures that residents must complete during their training.22 The RRC for Thoracic Surgery, for
example, requires vascular surgery residents to perform at least 70 “major” cases (Barnes, 1993). A
teaching hospital applying to expand an existing residency program or open a new program must show
that there is a sufficient volume and variety of patients such that residents will meet these thresholds.23 A
minimum volume threshold could have the same impact on the market for residents as cartel behavior. In
Figure 3, teaching hospitals’ demand for non-primary care residents would be truncated at QrNPC if that is
the maximum number of residents that can be trained given the existing quantity of non-primary care
patients at teaching hospitals.

educational training than students who receive a masters in business administration from a highly-ranked school and
attorneys – people who arguably face the same occupational choice sets as medical students.
21
Nurse practitioners and specialists, for example, can perform many of the functions of a primary care physician.
22
According to personal correspondence with Dr. David Leach, Executive Director of the ACGME, in April 2001.
23
Most RRCs do not report the volume thresholds to the public.

19

One benefit of licensing is that when there is asymmetric information about the product or
service, such as exists between a patient and a physician, licensing assures the patient that the physician
has been adequately trained and will provide services exceeding some minimum acceptable (to the
licensing organization) quality (Leland, 1979). It is possible, of course, that the minimum volume
thresholds are a way of camouflaging cartel behavior. However, a RRC could conceivably enhance rather
than decrease social welfare if the marginal benefit of an additional case on a physician’s skill is large,
and physicians would under invest in these skills without regulation because consumers cannot detect
quality differences between physicians. However, if non-primary care RRCs are restricting residency
positions to ensure a competent labor force, why don’t teaching hospitals increase the number of patients
available to residents? This could be achieved by either rotating residents through multiple hospitals in
the course of their training, which already occurs to some extent, or by centralizing scarce types of
patients at a single facility.
A third possible explanation for why the market for residents does not clear is that the ACGME
has established a minimum wage for residents and requires teaching hospitals to pay all residents the
same wage, regardless of specialty. Until recently, the ACGME had established the following policy
related to residents’ salaries: “Financial support of residents is necessary to ensure that residents are able
to fulfill the responsibilities of their educational programs. All residents at similar levels of experience
and training in all of an institution’s programs should receive a comparable level of financial support.
Exceptions must be justified to the institution’s Graduate Medical Education Committee” (Accreditation
Council of Graduate Medical Education, 1996). Teaching hospitals have adhered to the ACGME’s
policy. The mean residents’ salary nationally was almost constant across specialties in 1992, ranging
from $28,200 in family practice to $29,300 in radiology. Anecdotal data and an analysis of a small
sample of New England teaching hospitals indicates that almost all teaching hospitals paid residents the
same salary, regardless of their specialty.

20

The Federal Trade Commission interpreted the ACGME’s policy on residents’ wages as a
restraint of trade, so the ACGME recently added “adequate” to the beginning of the policy statement
quoted above, and dropped the second and third sentences: “Adequate financial support of residents is
necessary to ensure that residents are able to fulfill the responsibilities of their educational programs.”24
The principal objective of the current ACGME policy is to ensure that residents are paid enough so they
will not feel compelled to take a second job, such as working a 24-hour shift in a hospital emergency
room.25 Moonlighting when a resident is already working 60 to 80 hours a week is perceive to endanger
patients’ lives and/or reduce the quality of the residency training.
The ACGME has not specified what the minimum wage is. However, one could imagine that a
teaching hospital seeking permission to open or expand a program would risk rejection by the RRC if it
proposed to pay its residents substantially less than the prevailing mean wage. The imposition of a
minimum wage for residents could create abnormally high rates of return to specialization. In Figure 3,
say the minimum wage is set at W. QrNPC residents would be hired, the same number as under the cartel
model and the situation with limited clinical “teaching material.” Therefore, each of the three potential
explanations for why the market for residents does not clear could result in the same number of realized,
observed non-primary care residents, and thus the same number of non-primary care physicians. Since it
is difficult to distinguish empirically which of these three explanations is the principal cause of market
failure, I focus in the next section on simulating the impact of allowing the market for residents to clear,
without specifying the specific policy that would achieve this objective.

IV. Simulating the Clearing of the Market for Residents
In this section I estimate the set of specialty-specific residents’ wages that would equate the
supply and demand of residents, and examine the implications of market clearing on the quantity of
24

http://www.acgme.org

21

residents in each specialty, the rates of return to specialization, and teaching hospitals’ labor expenses.
Designing the policy that would allow the market to clear requires knowing what is preventing the market
failure. If RRCs were purposefully restricting residency positions to gain rents, the relevant policy would
be the establishment of an objective, unbiased organization to approve residency programs. If there is
insufficient teaching material in certain specialties, then the implicit action behind the simulation is a
centralization of scarce patient types at teaching hospitals. If market failure is due primarily to the
minimum residents’ wage, the relevant policy is the elimination of this rule.
Panel A of Figure 3 depicts a specialty with an excess supply of residents. QrNPC residents are
hired at wage W. QMNPC, the number of applicants who rank the specialty as their first choice in the
Match, is also observed. Let W*NPC be the wage that equates the supply of and demand for residents, and
Qr*NPC the quantity of residents employed under such circumstances. My goal is to estimate, for
specialties that are currently experiencing an excess supply of residents, the market clearing wage and
quantity (W*NPC and Q*r). That is, I am trying to identify where the unrestricted supply and demand
curves for residents intersect (Point K in Panel A of Figure 3). I simulate a partial rather than a general
equilibrium model, because I do not allow medical students’ income expectations to be affected by
changes in the flow of residents, or medical students’ subjective expectation of entering a specialty to
depend on the number of residency positions offered.
If one knows the percentage change in the quantity of residents demanded associated with a one
percent increase in the residents’ wage (0d), and the percentage change in the quantity of medical students
who wish to enter a specialty associated with a one percent increase in the residents salary in that
specialty (0s), then one can solve the following two equations for W* and Q* -- the wage and quantity of
residents that would clear the market at Point K:
(3)
25

Q* = Qs (1 + ηs (W* - W) ; Q* = Qd (1 + ηd (W* - W) ,
W
W

According to personal correspondence with the Executive Director of the ACGME in April 2001.

22

where Qs is the observed number of students who currently rank a specialty first in the Match (supply), Qd
is the observed number of residency positions offered in the Match (demand), and W is the prevailing
residents’ salary, which is the same in both specialties.
I use an estimate of 0d (-0.08) from Nicholson and Song (2001). This parameter is identified by
cross-sectional variation (across hospitals) in the change in the price of residents caused by a revision in
1986 of the government subsidization of residents.26 The dependent variable in this analysis was the
change in the number of residents hired by a teaching hospital between 1986 and 1991. One reason
teaching hospitals may be unresponsive to changes in the price of residents is that they are constrained,
either by residency review committees or by the lack of patients, in how many positions they can offer. If
there were constraints on the demand for residents during this time period, the –0.08 demand elasticity
would be biased toward zero; if teaching hospitals had been unconstrained when the policy altered the
financial incentives to hire residents, they would have responded more aggressively to the change. Based
on aggregate data, the barriers to entry were weaker between 1986 and 1991 than they are now. In the
1986-1991 period, for example, there was an average of 110 fewer residency positions available in the
Match per year than there were applicants, whereas in the 1997-2002 period, there was an average of
4,800 fewer positions available per year than applicants. Nevertheless, in the simulation I also examine a
scenario where the demand elasticity is twice as large in absolute value (-0.16) as that estimated in
Nicholson and Song (2001).
Since I am simulating the residents’ wage that will clear the market for residents, ideally I would
like 0s to be an estimate of how responsive medical students’ specialty choices are to the residents’ wage.
There is, as mentioned above, little cross-sectional variation in the residents’ wage between specialties, so
it is difficult empirically to measure such an elasticity. Therefore, I estimate 0s as the responsiveness of
26

In 1986 Medicare made indirect medical education payments less generous and allowed teaching hospitals in
Massachusetts and New York to receive these payments.

23

medical students to the mean income of a practicing physician in a specialty, and then convert this
estimate into a comparable measure in terms of the residents’ wage.27 Specifically, I estimate the
following regression equation using ordinary least squares:
(4)

log(Qsj,t) = β0 + β1Specialtyj + β2log(Yj,t-1) + εj,t ,

where Qs is the number of Match applicants who rank specialty j as their first choice in year t. Qs is the
number of students who desire to enter a specialty rather than the number who successfully enter a
specialty, and should therefore be a reasonably good measure of the supply of residents if there were no
constraints on the number of positions available. The above equation is estimated using aggregated data
on all Match applicants from 1986 and 1991-1999 for 12 specialties.28 Mean physician income in
specialty j (Yj,t-1) is lagged one year because most surveys of physician income, including the AMA
survey data that are used here, are published and available to medical students one year after the survey is
conducted.29
Specialty indicator variables are included in equation (4), so the coefficient β2 is identified by
variation over time within a specialty in the mean income of practicing physicians. It is evident from
Figure 4 that during the 1990s there was substantial variation between specialties in the growth rate of
physician income. When the contemporaneous mean income rises in a specialty that already has an
excess supply of residents, the rents associated with the specialty will increase, but the probability of
27

I use the mean income of a specialty rather than the cross-section net present value of lifetime income because
age-specific income data are not available in dermatology and emergency medicine. β2 (in equation 4) measures the
percentage change in the number of medical students who rank a specialty first in the Match in response to a one
percent increase in the mean income of physicians in that specialty. In order to simulate residents’ wages that will
clear the market for residents, I want to know how medical students’ specialty choices respond to changes in the
residents’ wage rather than the change in the mean income of practicing physicians. A general surgeon will practice
for about 30 years but serve as a resident for only five years. Using general surgery as a representative non-primary
care specialty, a one percent increase in the annual income of a practicing physician has the same cumulative impact
on a surgeon’s present value of lifetime earnings as a 27 percent increase in the annual salary of a resident. In the
simulation, therefore, I divide β2 by 27 when analyzing how a change in the residents’ wage affects specialty
choices.
28
Data on the number of Match applicants who rank a specialty first were not available for 1987-1990.
29
Income is adjusted for differences in hours worked between specialties using a Laspareyes-type adjustment based
on hours worked by family practitioners.

24

entering the specialty will remain less than one. Since there are costs associated with failing to receive an
assignment in the Match (Nicholson, 2002), the increased rents may convince fewer students to rank the
specialty first in the Match than if there were no barriers to entry. In a specialty that is not demandconstrained, on the other hand, an increase in contemporaneous income may overstate the change in
students’ expected lifetime income if students forecast that the supply of physicians in that specialty will
increase, which will eventually drive down the price of physician services.30 Since β2 may be biased
downward, in the simulation I include a scenario where the supply elasticity is 50 percent larger than the
elasticity derived with β2.
I estimate equation (4) separately for U.S. and international medical school graduates (IMGs)
because these groups may respond differently to income variation between specialties. I use the β2
coefficient estimate from the U.S. medical school regression in the simulation below. I include year
indicator variables in the IMG regression because immigration policy may affect the total number of nonU.S. citizens allowed to enter the Match.
Results from the specialty choice regression are presented in Table 3. The coefficient on income
in the U.S. medical school graduate regression (column 1) is positive and significant. A one percent
increase in a specialty’s contemporaneous income is associated with a 1.35 percent increase in the number
of U.S. medical school graduates who rank that specialty as their first choice in the Match.31 The
coefficient on income is also positive in the international medical graduate (IMG) specification but is not
significantly different from zero at the 10-percent level. The monotonically increasing coefficients on the
year dummies in the IMG regression indicate that the total number of foreign-trained physicians entering
the U.S. for residency training increased throughout the 1990s.
30

Siow (1984) presents a model where only a single cohort of lawyers expect to receive rents following a shock to
expected income because future cohorts will arbitrage away the rents.
31
This supply elasticity is similar to the 1.42 estimated by Nicholson (2002). Using a cross-sectional data set of
medical students who graduated in 1992, he accounts for entry barriers by allowing a student’s expected lifetime
earnings in a specialty to depend on his likelihood of entering the specialty.

25

In Table 4 I present the simulation results for the wage that would clear the market for residents
in four specialties where there is currently an excess supply of residents. In most specialties in the 2001
Match there were more U.S. and international students who ranked a specialty as their first choice than
there were positions available in that specialty. For purposes of the simulation, I adopt a more
conservative definition of a specialty that has an excess supply of residents: a specialty where the number
of U.S. medical school graduates (international medical graduates are omitted) who rank that specialty
first in the Match exceeds the number of available positions. U.S. medical students are generally
perceived by residency programs to be better qualified than students trained internationally, as evidenced
by the much higher acceptance rate of U.S. students relative to IMGs in the Match.32 If teaching hospitals
have a minimum quality threshold for residents, the effective supply of residents will be less than the
observed supply. Four specialties were experiencing excess supply in the 2001 Match according to this
stricter definition: dermatology, general surgery, radiology, and orthopedic surgery.
The first column of Table 4 reports the number of residency positions offered in the 2001 Match
(Qd). The excess supply of residents is reported in the second column, where “excess supply” is defined
as the number of U.S. medical students who ranked a specialty first in the Match but did not receive a
position in that specialty in the Match. This is an underestimate of the true excess supply because some
international students who did not receive a position in the Match would be hired by teaching hospitals at
some wage, and the figure is an overestimate because some of the U.S. students who rank the specialty
first would not be hired by teaching hospitals regardless of the wage.
The top panel of Table 4 presents results of the simulation using the -0.08 elasticity of demand
from Nicholson (2002) and the elasticity of supply estimated above (1.35), converted into an elasticity
with respect to the residents’ wage rather than the mean income of a practicing physician. As mentioned

32

In the 2001 Match, for example, 79 percent of U.S. medical school graduates who ranked orthopedic surgery as
their first choice received a position in that specialty in the Match, versus 25 percent of the IMGs who ranked
orthopedic surgery as their first choice (NRMP Data, 2001).

26

previously, in a market with no or fewer barriers to entry, teaching hospitals might be more priceresponsive than they have been in the past. Therefore, in the bottom panel of Table 4 I report simulation
results with an elasticity of demand for residents, which is twice as large in absolute value as in the top
panel (-0.16) and an elasticity of supply that is about 50 percent larger than that of Table 3 (2.0).
Using the relatively inelastic elasticity parameters (Scenario I), teaching hospitals are predicted to
receive an annual payment of $95,000 from dermatology residents rather than paying them $34,000 per
year, as is currently the case. The quantity of first-year dermatology residents is predicted to increase
from 252 to 328, or by 30 percent. The new residents’ wage is predicted to reduce the rate of return to the
incremental year of dermatology training (relative to family practice) from 47 percent to 12 percent, a
figure that is much closer to empirical estimates of the discount rate. If the increased supply of
dermatologists eventually lowers the price of dermatology services, the new expected rate of return to
dermatology would fall even further.
The equilibrium residents’ wage in general surgery, radiology, and orthopedics are likewise
predicted to be negative, but not as large in absolute value as for dermatology. The number of first-year
residents hired in these three specialties is predicted to increase by 8 percent, 16 percent, and 10 percent,
respectively, and the rates of return to training fall below 24 percent in all three specialties. One
implication of removing the barriers to entering residency programs is that teaching hospitals are
predicted to reduce their net wage payments to residents by $1.0 billion per year if the lower wages were
fully phased-in to residents of all experience levels (not just first-year residents) in the affected
specialties.
In the bottom panel of Table 4 I simulate the residents’ wage that clears the market when teaching
hospitals and prospective residents are more responsive to price changes. In Scenario II, the equilibrium
quantity of residents in each of the four specialties is larger and the equilibrium residents’ wage is smaller
than in the first simulation. Dermatology residents, for example, are predicted to pay hospitals $40,000

27

per year, and the quantity of dermatology residents is predicted to increase by 35 percent. Teaching
hospitals would be predicted to spend $572 million less on resident salaries, and rates of return in all four
specialties would be below 32 percent.

Conclusion
Medical students have experienced persistently large rates of return to specialization. These
relatively high rates of return could be due, in part, to equalizing differences, variation in returns to ability
by specialty, and liquidity constraints. However, these factors cannot fully explain the high rates of
return to specialization because throughout the 1990s there have consistently been more medical students
seeking entry into specialties with high rates of return than there are positions available. This implies that
barriers to entry in the market for residents may affect the realized supply and price of physicians services
and help create rents to non-primary care specialists.
I examine a number of explanations for persistent high rates of return to medical specialization
and conclude that barriers to entry may be creating an economic shortage of non-primary care physicians.
I estimate that medical students would be willing to pay teaching hospitals for residency training in
dermatology, general surgery, orthopedic surgery, and radiology rather than receiving the average
residents’ salary of $34,000. When I simulate the residents’ wage that clears the market, the quantity of
residents in these four specialties is predicted to increase by an estimated six to 30 percent, rates of return
would fall substantially, and teaching hospitals would save an estimated $0.6 to $1.0 billion per year.

28

References
Accreditation Council of Graduate Medical Education, 1996. Graduate Medical Education Directory,
1996-1997. Chicago, IL.
Barnes, Robert W., 1993, “The Residency Review Committee for Surgery and the Training of Vascular
Surgeons,” Journal of Vascular Surgery 17: 971-974.
Bhattacharya, Jayanta, 2000, “What Are the Returns to Specialization in Medicine?,” mimeo.
Burstein, Phillip L., and Jerry Cromwell, 1985, “Relative Incomes and Rates of Return for U.S.
Physicians,” Journal of Health Economics, 4: 63-78.
Gramlich, Edward M., 1990. A Guide to Benefit-Cost Analysis, 2nd edition. Englewood Cliffs, NJ:
Prentice Hall.
Jung versus Association of American Medical Colleges. Filed May 7, 2002, in the U.S. District Court for
the District of Washington, D.C. Available at www.aamc.newsroom/jungcomplaint/jung~mrmp.pdf.
Accessed March 11, 2003.
Kleiner, Morris, 2000, “Occupational Licensing,” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(4): 189-202.
Lindsay, Cotton M., 1973, “Real Returns to Medical Education,” Journal of Human Resources, 3(3): 331348.
Leland, Hayne E., 1979, “Quacks, Lemons, and Licensing: A Theory of Minimum Quality Standards,”
Journal of Political Economy 87(6): 1328-1346.
MaCurdy, Thomas E., and John H. Pencavel, 1986, “Testing Between Competing Models of Wage and
Employment Determination in Unionized Markets,” Journal of Political Economy 94(3): S3-S39.
Marder, William D., and Richard J. Willke, 1991, “Comparisons of the Value of Physician Time by
Specialty,” in Frech, H.E. (ed). Regulating Doctor’s Fees. Washington, D.C.: American Enterprise
Institute Press.
McGuire, Thomas, 2000, “Physician Agency,” in Handbook of Health Economics, edited by Anthony J.
Cuyler and Joseph P. Newhouse. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science B.V.
Miller, Frances H., and Thomas L. Greaney, 2003, “The National Resident Matching Program and
Antitrust Law,” Journal of the American Medical Association 289(7): 913-918.
Nicholson, Sean, and David Song, 2001, “The Incentive Effects of the Medicare Indirect Medical
Education Subsidy,” Journal of Health Economics 20(6): 909-934.
Nicholson, Sean, 2002, “Physician Specialty Choice Under Uncertainty,” Journal of Labor Economics,
forthcoming.

29

Nicholson, Sean, and Nicholas S. Souleles, 2002, “Physician Income Expectations and Specialty Choice,”
mimeo.
Pencavel, John, 1984, “The Tradeoff Between Wages and Employment in Trade Union Objectives,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 99(2): 215-231.
Physician Payment Review Commission, 1995. Annual Report to Congress. Washington, D.C..
Siow, Aloysius, 1984, “Occupational Choice Under Uncertainty,” Econometrica, 52(3): 631-645.
Weeks, William B., Amy E. Wallace, Myron M. Wallace, and Gilbert Welch, 1994, “A Comparison of
the Educational Costs and Incomes of Physicians and Other Professionals,” The New England Journal
of Medicine 330(18): 1280-1286.
Willis, Robert J., 1986, “Wage Determinants: A Survey and Reinterpretation of Human Capital Earnings
Functions,” in O. Ashenfelter and R. Layard, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics. The Netherlands:
Elsevier Science Publishers.

5.73
4.24
4.57
3.69
3.24
2.57
2.69
2.56

Orthopedic surgery

General surgery

Anesthesiology

OB/GYN

Psychiatry

Family Practice

General internal med

Pediatrics

2.92

3.11

2.76

3.49

4.86

5.02

4.73

6.76

5.78

1990

3.08

3.10

2.78

3.70

4.63

5.29

4.94

6.18

6.30

1992

2.81

2.89

2.77

3.20

3.99

4.91

4.63

5.95

5.30

1994

3.11

3.23

2.99

3.21

4.70

N/A

4.55

6.35

6.42

1996

2.89

2.99

3.07

3.32

3.82

4.34

4.46

5.60

5.84

1998

9.8%

15.2%

8.2%

14.2%

25.5%

15.8%

16.5%

7.9%

20.5%

-6.2%

-3.5%

10.4%

-10.3%

-17.5%

-18.0%

-9.7%

-9.4%

-7.3%

Percentage Change
1986–1992 1992-1998

33

Adjusted using the urban consumer price index.

Source: Physician Socioeconomic Characteristics, American Medical Association; author’s analysis.

Notes: the net present values are adjusted for differences in hours worked per year, and a three percent real discount rate is used. In 1996
the American Medical Association did not report income data for anesthesiologists with several experience levels in, so the net present
value was not available (N/A).

5.23

1986

Radiology

Specialty

Cross-Section Net Present Value of Lifetime Practice Earnings, 1986-1998
($ millions, 1998 dollars)33

Table 1

30

4
4
4
5
5

Anesthesiology

OB/GYN

Psychiatry

Orthopedic surgery

General surgery

43.5

71.7

41.0

45.4

105

107

1986

43.3

74.2

61.6

132

N/A

89.2

1990

41.7

59.9

123

82.3

235

N/A

1992

40.0

60.8

49.8

70.9

216

119

1994

26.2

48.8

12.8

119

N/A

173

1996

25.1

38.9

17.2

49.8

46.5

83.3

1998

Source: Physician Socioeconomic Characteristics, American Medical Association; author’s analysis.

Notes: adjusted for differences in hours worked per year. N/A: income data are not available for certain experience levels from the
American Medical Association survey.

4

Years of
Training

Radiology

Specialty

Cross-Section Rates of Return to Specialization, 1986-1998
(relative to family practice)

Table 2

31

32

Table 3
Coefficient Estimates of the Supply of Medical Students to Specialties
Variable

US Medical Students

Log(mean physician income t-1)
($000)

International
Medical Graduates

1.35**
(0.309)

0.960
(0.700)

Constant

0.916
(1.52)

0.141
(0.124)
0.317**
(0.127)
0.460**
(0.127)
0.531**
(0.126)
0.633**
(0.125)
0.752**
(0.122)
0.780**
(0.122)
0.878**
(0.124)
1.45
(3.44)

Observations

113

102

Adjusted R2

0.92

0.90

Year indicator variables (1991 omitted)
- 1992
-

1993

-

1994

-

1995

-

1996

-

1997

-

1998

-

1999

Notes: Dependent variable is the log(number of applicants to the Match who rank a specialty first) for
1986 and 1991-1999. Data on international medical graduates are not available for 1986. Indicator
variables are included for each of the 12 specialties.

252
1,041
875
566

153
297
219
139

Excess
Supply

252
1,041
875
566

153
297
219
139

Excess
Supply

46.9
25.1
83.3
38.9

12.4
11.6
23.4
18.5

-$40.0
-$4.0
$0.3
$0.9

340
1,227
1,014
654

46.9
25.1
83.3
38.9

16.8
14.8
31.8
23.0

Estimated Equilibrium
Rate of Return
Residents’ Salary Positions 1998 w/ New Wage

328
1,125
924
625

Rate of Return
1998 w/ New Wage

$64
$288
$123
$97
$572

Annual
Hospital Labor
Savings

$110
$508
$218
$171
$1,007

Annual
Hospital Labor
Savings
($ million)

Notes: Baseline residents’ wage is $34,000, the national mean in 1998. The excess supply of residents is the number of U.S. medical
school students who ranked a specialty first in the Match in 2001 and did not receive a position in that specialty in the Match. Given
estimates of the labor demand and labor supply elasticity parameters, I calculate the equilibrium residents’ wage (or payment to the
teaching hospital if the wage is negative) and number of residency positions that equates supply and demand. The rate of return is based
on cross-section data from 1998 and the benchmark specialty is family practice. Teaching hospital labor savings are based on the number
of residents employed in these four specialties and the estimated change in the residents’ wage.

Dermatology
General surgery
Radiology
Orthopedic surgery

Specialty

First-Year Positions
Offered, 2001

-$94.6
-$33.2
-$25.7
-$24.6

Estimated Equilibrium
Residents’ Salary Positions
($000)

Scenario II: Demand elasticity = -0.16; supply elasticity = 2.00

Dermatology
General surgery
Radiology
Orthopedic surgery

Specialty

First-Year Positions
Offered, 2001

Scenario I: Demand elasticity = -0.08; supply elasticity = 1.35

Simulating Specialty-Specific Resident Wages That Would Clear the Market

Table 4

33

0.3

0.5

0.7

0.9

1.1

1.3

1.5

1.7

1.9

91

92

93

Pediatrics

O B/G Y N

O rthopedics

94

95

Y ear

96

97

98

99

A nesthesiology

2000

2001

D erm atology

2002

Internal M edicine
Fam ily Practice

Psychiatry

Radiology

N otes: D ata from R esults and D ata, N ational R esident M atching Program. D esired supply is defined as the num ber of M atch
applicants w ho rank a specialty first, and dem and is defined as the num ber of positions m ade available by teaching hospitals in
the M atch.

# students
ranking
specialty
1 st / # of
positions
offered by
teaching
hospitals

2.1

R atio of Supply:D em and of R esidents by Specialty (1991-2002)

Figure 1

34

WNPC

WPC

Residents’
wage

r
QNPC

r
SNPC

D
LPC

r
QPC

Quantity of Residents

D
LNPC

Panel A: Market for Residents

r
SPC
P*PC

P*NPC

Price of
physician
services
(fee)

Figure 2

DNPC

QPC
Quantity of physician services

QNPC

SNPC

DPC

Panel B: Market for Physician Services

SPC

35

*
W NPC

W

Residents’
wage

Q rNPC

Q r*NPC
QM
NPC

K

r
S NPC

Quantity of Residents

L NPC

D

P*NPC

P NPC

Price of
physician
services

Panel A: Market for Non-primary Care (NPC) Residents

Figure 3

S NPC

D NPC

RRC indifference
curve

Quantity of physician services

Q NPC Q*NPC

J

Panel B: Market for NPC Physician Services

36

100

150

200

250

300

90

91

92

93

Fam ily Practice
94

Surgery

95

Orthopedic surgery

96

97

98

Radiology

Pediatrics
Psychiatry

Internal med

Dermatology
Anesthesiology
OB/GYN

Notes: Data from Physician Socioeconomic Characteristics, AM A. Income data are converted to 1998 using the urban
consumer price index.

($000)
in 1998
dollars

350

M ean Physician Income by Specialty, 1990-1998

Figure 4

37

