                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 WHY SOME DOUBLE TAXATION MIGHT MAKE SENSE:
                 THE SPECIAL CASE OF INTER-CORPORATE DIVIDENDS

                                           Randall Morck

                                         Working Paper 9651
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9651


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2003




Comments by Lucien Bebchuk, Martin Feldstein, Assaf Razin, Emmanuel Saed, Andrei Shleifer, Rene Stulz,
and Bernard Yeung are gratefully acknowledged. Work by Gloria Tian for constructing diagrams of Canadian
corporate ownership is much appreciated. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Randall Morck. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Why Some Double Taxation Might Make Sense: The Special Case of Inter-corporate Dividends
Randall Morck
NBER Working Paper No. 9651
April 2003
JEL No. G3

                                          ABSTRACT
Arguments for eliminating the double taxation of dividends apply only to dividends paid by
corporations to individuals. The double (and multiple) taxation of dividends paid by one firm to
another – intercorporate dividends - was explicitly included in the 1930s to eliminate pyramidal
corporate groups. These structures exist elsewhere, and are associated with corporate governance

problems, corporate tax avoidance, and a greater concentration of economic power than is currently

possible in the United States. Current US tax reform proposals do not distinguish dividends paid to
individuals from intercorporate dividends and, by eliminating double taxation on both sorts of
dividends, may allow pyramidal groups in the US again for the first time since the 1930s.



Randall Morck
Faculty of Business
University of Alberta
Edmonton, Canada T6G 2R6
and NBER
randall.morck@ualberta.ca
Why Some Double Taxation Might Make Sense: The Special Case
of Inter-corporate Dividends

Randall Morck

1.     Introduction

The double taxation of intercorporate dividends was introduced in the 1930s to render economically

unviable certain corporate structures which were believed to facilitate governance problems, tax

avoidance, and highly concentrated corporate control

       The structures in question are corporate groups, clusters of seemingly separate firms

connected by complicated networks of intercorporate equity ownership. The most common of these

structures is the pyramidal corporate group, in which a wealthy family or individual typically

controls a family firm, which controls majority voting blocks in several other firms, with public

shareholders holding the remaining shares. Each of these firms, in turn, holds majority voting

blocks of more companies, again with public investors holding the remaining shares. Each of these

controls yet more firms, and so on ad valorem.        Such structures can encompass hundreds of

nominally separate publicly traded and private firms, and can be more than a dozen layers deep.

Pyramidal corporate groups allow wealthy individuals or families to control corporate assets worth

vastly more than their actual wealth. They are the structures that permit a tiny elite to control the

greater parts of the corporate sectors in many countries.

       Pyramidal groups may serve useful purposes in countries with malfunctioning markets.

Group member firms can transact business with each other while avoiding the dysfunctional

institutions of countries in early stages of economic development. However, the social welfare value

of pyramidal groups in developed economies is uncertain at best.


                                                 1
          This is because pyramid group member firms have been shown to shift assets and income

among themselves, much as do the subsidiaries of multinational firms. This income shifting has two

probable objectives. First, pyramid group companies can use such intercorporate income shifting

techniques, such as the manipulation of transfer price, to enhance their income tax avoidance efforts.

The economic importance of this sort of income shifting in countries with extensive pyramidal

groups is little studied, though Congress apparently felt it to be a major problem in the 1930s.

Second, pyramid group firms can use such intercorporate income shifting to transfer income and

assets away from firms whose cash flows largely accrue to public investors and into firms whose

cash flow largely accrue to a controlling shareholder. Substantial empirical evidence now supports

the economic importance of this sort of income shifting in countries with extensive pyramidal

groups.

          Pyramidal corporate groups also allow highly concentrated corporate control.           The

shareholder who controls the apex firm in the pyramid indirectly controls all the other firms in the

pyramid. These can collectively be worth vastly more than her personal fortune. This feature of

pyramidal groups lets a handful of families control the greater part of the corporate sectors of many

developing countries.

          Dividends from firms low in such pyramidal structures must be relayed through a chain of to

the controlling shareholder. If dividend taxes accrue at the corporate level each time the dividend is

passed from one firm to the next, as US “double taxation” of dividends currently mandates, such

pyramidal structures are prohibitively expensive. However, pyramidal business group structures can

be assembled readily in countries that tax dividend income only once.

          An explicit purpose of President Roosevelt’s 1933 and 1934 tax reforms was the extension of

double taxation to intercorporate dividends to force the dismantling of pyramidal groups. The
                                                   2
reforms were successful, for such structures are currently unknown in the United States. However,

with the passage of time, the economic rational underlying this particular aspect of dividend double

taxation has also been forgotten.

       Other regulatory and legal constraints, such as the Public Utilities Holding Company Act,

might limit income shifting by pyramidal groups in the United States, should they reappear after the

elimination of all double taxation of dividend income. Additional diligence by tax authorities and

alertness by corporate governance watchdogs might well serve. However, both the efficacy of these

constraints and the potential costs of such added diligence to taxpayers and investors are difficult to

predict.

       Strong economic arguments suggest abolishing the double taxation of dividends paid to

individuals. However, these arguments have no application whatsoever to dividends paid by one

corporation to another. Nonetheless, the current tax reform proposal fails to distinguish dividends

paid to individuals from dividends paid by one firm to another.

       The purpose of this paper is to highlight this distinction. The original intent of Congress and

the White House in applying double taxation to intercorporate dividends may well remain

economically important, despite the validity of current arguments against double taxation of

dividends paid to individuals. Appreciating this distinction may allow nuanced reforms that

eliminate the problems of the current US dividend double taxation without recreating the problems

that led to the reforms of the 1930s.

       If the elimination of all dividend double taxation is enacted, and pyramidal groups form

again in the United States for the first time since the 1930s, economists will have a fascinating new

phenomenon to study. Moreover, the potentially deleterious social welfare consequences of such a

resurgence suggest an urgent need for additional study of this long-forgotten (in the U.S.)
                                                  3
phenomenon.

       The structure of the paper is as follows. Section 2 describes pyramidal corporate groups, the

structures of corporate ownership typical in most countries. Section 3 explains how the US tax code,

by subjecting intercorporate dividends to double taxation, renders such groups unviable. Section 4

describes how the US tax reforms of the 1930s introduced double taxation of intercorporate

dividends explicitly to undermine pyramidal groups, which until then had been important in that

country. Section 5 reviews the current literature on pyramidal corporate groups outside the United

States and assesses corporate governance, tax avoidance, and political economy implications of

these structures. Section 6 reviews arguments regarding the elimination of double dividend taxation,

and shows how these arguments apply only to dividends paid by firms to individuals, and have no

relevance to intercorporate dividends. Section 7 concludes.



2.     Examples of Pyramidal Corporate Groups

       Figure 1 illustrates a stylized pyramidal corporate group. A family firm owns 51% of firm A,

which owns 51% of Firm B, which owns 51% or firm C, and so on. In practice, the situation is

usually more complicated, with non-voting and multiple-voting shares, golden shares, cross-

holdings, and other additional ornaments. Figure 2 illustrates a part of an actual Canadian pyramidal

corporate group, the Hees-Edper Group. The full group cannot be graphed here, as it is sixteen

layers high and contains several hundred firms. This group is unusually large, but its structure is

typical of the pyramidal corporate groups that dominate the economies of most countries.

       It is possible to represent all the firms in smaller groups in other countries in a single

diagram. Thus, Figure 3 sketches the structure of the Anglo-American Group of South Africa as it


                                                 4
appeared in the mid 1990s. The group consists of a mixture of publicly traded controlled

corporations and private corporations, and deviates from a simple pyramidal structure in that many

controlled corporations own blocks of stock in the companies that control them, indirectly or

directly. Figure 4 sketches the Italian companies controlled by the Agnelli family via a pyramidal

group structure, and Figure 5 sketches the firms in the Deutsche Bank’s pyramidal group in

Germany. These structures are simpler than Anglo-American, and closer to the archetypal

pyramidal form of Figure 1 and Figure2.

        Note that, while the statistical evidence discussed below associates pyramidal corporate

groups with potential tax avoidance, corporate governance, and concentrated control problems, some

pyramidal groups show no evidence of such problems at all. For example, Daniels et al. (1995) find

no evidence whatsoever of poor corporate governance or any other problems in the Hees-Edper

pyramidal group. There is also no evidence of any problems in the Anglo-American Group, Agnelli

Group, or Deutsche Bank Group. These structures are displayed only to illustrate the general nature

of pyramidal groups, in order to set the stage for considering possible problems in other similarly

structured groups.

        While La Porta et al. (1999) show pyramidal corporate groups are the most common

ownership structure in most countries, they are not the only corporate group. For example, large

Japanese corporations are organized into keiretsu, corporate groups in which each member firm

owns a small equity stake in every other member firm. Although each individual intercorporate

equity stake is tiny, a majority of the stock in each keiretsu firm is held collectively by all the other

firms in its group. Morck and Nakamura (1999) discuss the historical transformation of family

controlled pyramids into keiretsu in Japan, and show how keiretsu engender corporate governance

problems.
                                                   5
         In contrast to all of the above structures, Figure 6 illustrates the much simpler structure

typical of the domestic operations of most large US corporations. The Minnesota based company

3M, formerly Minnesota Mining and Manufacturing Corporation, is more than 99% owned by public

shareholders, including individuals and investment funds. As of its most recent SEC proxy filing,

corporate insiders own about 1.5 million of 3M’s approximately 390 million outstanding shares – a

combined stake of less than one percent. The firm’s largest shareholder is State Street, an

investment management firm, which holds about 30 million shares, roughly 7.7%. The firm has no

publicly traded domestic subsidiaries. While Holderness et al. (1999) and others show that

moderately large shareholders have been and remain important in many U.S. firms; the widely

dispersed ownership structure of 3M is quite typical of the largest US firms. And multiple layers of

intercorporate ownership encompassing large numbers of publicly traded firms, such as those shown

in Figures 2 through 5, are essentially unknown in the US.1

         La Porta et al. (1999) show such that most large corporations in most countries are members

of pyramidal groups. Indeed, the United States (and United Kingdom) are highly unusual in that

their large corporations are mostly freestanding independent entities.



3.       How Double Taxation of Intercorporate Dividends Crumbles Pyramids

         The United States subjects dividends to ‘double taxation’, in the sense that ‘dividends

received’ are taxable income for recipients and ‘dividends paid’ are part of taxable income for the

payer. Where the dividends are paid by corporations to individuals, this has the effect of raising the


1
  The only U.S. exception I have discovered is a Massachusetts venture capital firm called Thermo Electron, which
retains stakes in publicly traded high tech firms as an intermediate step to spinning them off. This results in a two-tiered
pyramid, which is still much simpler than the structures typical in other countries. I am grateful to Martin Feldstein for
bringing Thermo Electron to my attention.

                                                             6
true rate of taxation on dividends, which combines the rates paid by the recipient and the payer.

This effect has received considerable attention, which is summarized in section 6.

         However, a second and lesser known aspect of US double dividend taxation is that it also

subjects dividends paid by one firm to another to double taxation – though at lower rates. This

taxation of intercorporate dividends makes pyramidal corporate groups financially unviable.

         To see this, compare the details of US tax law and the tax law of Canada, which does not

subject intercorporate dividends to double taxation. Table 1 shows that both countries tax dividends

when they are initially paid out by a company and when they are received by individuals. The

Canadian tax rate on dividend income, 31.34%, is lower than the tax rate on general income,

46.41%. This reflects a partial credit for taxes already paid by the corporation that initiated the

dividend.

         Where the tax codes of the two countries differ starkly is in their treatment of dividends paid

by one corporation to another. Although the United States tax rate on dividend income received by

corporations is substantially lower than that on dividend income received by individuals, it is

positive unless the intercorporate stake is 80% ownership or higher. In contrast, Canadian

intercorporate dividends are entirely tax-exempt if the intercorporate stake is 10% or more. When a

corporation receives a dividend from another corporation, in which it owns a common equity stake

of 10% or more, the Canadian tax authorities regards this as an internal transfer of funds in a

corporate group, not as taxable income paid by one legal person to another.2

         To see the importance of this difference, return to Figure 1. If the pyramidal group depicted


2
 There are two main exceptions to this rule. The first is a complex set of rules for preferred shares and the second
declares dividends paid to corporate investors that do not exercise control (stake < 10%) to be taxable income for those
investors.


                                                           7
in that figure were in the US, a dividend paid by firm F would be subject to a 35% tax as part of that

firm’s taxable income. As the dividend passed up through the pyramid, it would be subject to a

seven per cent tax at each level. Finally, the controlling shareholder of the apex firm would pay a

38.6% personal income tax on dividends received. Consequently, the effective tax rate on dividends

the family receives from the firms in level F of its pyramid is 1 – [(1 – 0.35) x (1 - .07)5 x (1 - .386)]

= 72.2%. The more layers in the pyramid, the higher is the effective tax on the controlling

shareholder’s final dividend income. If the dividend had been paid directly to an individual, the tax

rate would have been 1 – [(1 – 0.35) x (1 - .386)] = 60.1%. The penalty for the pyramidal structure

is an extra 12.1% added to the marginal tax rate on dividends received by the controlling

shareholder. In essence, double taxation becomes ‘multiple taxation’, with the dividend subjected to

taxation as it passes through each link in the chain of companies from firm F to the controlling

shareholder.

        In contrast, the same pyramid in Canada would subject the same dividend only to a corporate

income tax of 38.62% when paid out by Firm F and a 31.34% personal income tax when received by

the controlling shareholder.3        The combined rate is 1 – [(1 – 0.3862) x (1 – 0.3134)] = 57.86%.

This combined rate does not depend on how many layers the pyramid contains. There is no tax

penalty to the controlling shareholder in Canada for funneling the dividend through a long sequence

of corporations, and multilayered pyramidal corporate groups are consequently commonplace in that

country.

        Table 2 lists effective intercorporate dividend tax rates for 1997, along with a

characterization of the ownership structure of large firms in each country. The ownership structure


3 The precise rates depend on the province. Those shown are for Ontario. Rates are substantially lower in Alberta and
higher in Québec and the Atlantic provinces.

                                                         8
characterization variable is constructed as follows: For each country, the names of the top ten

businesses are obtained. The ownership structures of these businesses, beginning with the largest,

are tracked back through holding companies and other intermediate owners to the ultimate owners,

as in La Porta et al. (1999). As soon as one pyramidal structure is found, ‘yes’ is entered.

Pyramidal structures include those controlled by wealthy families, individuals, governments, and

widely held firms. In addition, if intercorporate cross holdings of the sort described above in

connection with Japanese keiretsu are found, ‘yes’ is also entered. If none of these structures are

found in connection with any top ten firm in the country, ‘no’ is entered.4

           Table 2 shows that of the 33 countries for which data are available, only the United States

levies a tax on intercorporate dividends. (India and Korea have statutory taxes on intercorporate

dividends, but exempt firms on special lists. These lists include all the firms in major established

pyramidal groups. These taxes may, however, deter the rise of new rival groups.) It also shows

corporate groups, pyramidal or otherwise, controlling top firms in every country except the United

States and the United Kingdom. The pattern in Table 2 is consistent with intercorporate dividend

taxation in the United States rendering pyramidal and other corporate groups economically

infeasible.

           The absence of corporate groups in the United Kingdom is perhaps a vestige of

intercorporate dividend taxation, which apparently prevailed in that country until 1973 – see King

(1977). However, Aganin and Volpin (1998) show that Italy also abolished the double taxation of

intercorporate dividends in 1977 and subsequently saw an increased use of pyramidal corporate

groups. A cross section of intercorporate dividend tax rates for 1983, the first year for which data

comparable to those in Table 2 are available, reveals Belgium, France, Greece, and Portugal also

4
    La Porta et al. (1999) kindly made their raw data available to us as a starting point for this exercise.
                                                             9
taxing intercorporate dividends.5 These countries subsequently ceased taxing intercorporate

dividend income, and currently have pyramidal corporate groups.

        Why pyramidal groups failed to resurge in the United Kingdom when double taxation of

intercorporate dividends ended, but rebounded in other countries that effected similar tax reforms is

puzzling.     LaPorta et al. (1999) propose that strong investor protection may limit controlling

shareholders’ ability to extract private benefits. The substantial legal rights British shareholders

enjoy might thus serve to render such groups less useful to rapacious insiders there than in Italy and

other countries with weaker investor protection. However, pyramids resurged in Italy after the 1977

despite a simultaneous tightening of securities rules. Another possibility is that vigorous

enforcement of the tax code in the UK prevents controlling shareholders from tunneling, and thus,

again, limits their ability to extract private benefits of control. This is consistent with Dyck and

Zinglales (2001) and Nenova (2000), who report relatively small private benefits of control in the

United Kingdom. However, other countries with strong investor protection rules and well-

functioning legal and tax collection systems, including Australia and Canada, have extensive

pyramidal corporate groups. It may be that other features of the United Kingdom’s legal and

regulatory system deter pyramidal groups in ways not currently understood.

        Further work on the relationship between intercorporate dividend taxation and the viability of

pyramidal groups in different countries at different points in time is clearly needed to inform current

tax reform discussion in the US.



4.      The History of Intercorporate Dividend Taxation in the United States

        Pyramidal corporate groups were commonplace in the United States in the 1920s. The


5 Though these countries may have exempted large established corporate groups.
                                                      10
largest US pyramids, which were built around power companies, encompassed hundreds of firms

and were as many as ten layers high.6 In 1928, the Federal Trade Commission issued a report on

abusive practices of pyramids. Noting widespread instances of tunneling, poor governance, and

monopolistic practices, the report stated that pyramidal groups were "frequently a menace to the

investor or the consumer or both." 7 Following the 1929 market crash, many of these pyramidal

groups defaulted on their debts.8

        Intercorporate dividends taxation was introduced in the United States in 1935 with the

explicit objective of breaking up pyramidal groups. Blakey and Blakey (1935) summarize the

Roosevelt tax reform of 1935, which proposed intercorporate dividend taxes at 15% of the normal

dividend tax rate as a measure to “prevent the evasion through affiliates” of the corporate income

tax. They note that “the tax would vary from 11/2 per cent to 25/8 per cent” for an individual

company, but that “[i]n the case of pyramided complex holding companies, such taxes might amount

to 8 or 10 per cent.”

        Robert Jackson, Assistant General Counsel to the Treasury Department, presenting the

reforms to the Senate Finance Committee, “stressed the secondary effects of such taxes on dividends

in discouraging undesirable practices of holding companies” (pyramidal groups), and discussed

some such problems in detail:

        “The tax problems arising out of systems of holding companies, subholding companies,
        operating companies, and mixed companies, are very serious. For example, one such system
        as of December 31, 1933, contained approximately 270 companies of which 128 were public
        utility operating companies located in several and widely separated states, and at least 31 of
        which would be classed as subholding companies. The corporation filed consolidated returns
        showing no tax due in any of the years 1929 through 1933. The system was not so modest
        about its profits in its reports to stockholders, and the Bureau began the task of audit. The
        auditing to date has required the services of 108 field agents for an aggregate period of

6 Abel (1999).
7 FTC, Utility Corporation, Senate Document No. 92, 70th Congress, 1st session. (1928).
8 Philips (1993) p. 239.

                                                       11
           11,488 days, the service of 16 auditors for a period of 2,640 days, as well as the services of
           the supervising staff. The task is not yet nearing satisfactory completion. The investigation is
           complicated by the great volume of security transactions among the different companies of
           the group. In some instances securities were transferred through as many as 10 intermediary
           companies on the way from starting point to destination. A dollar of earnings would likewise
           run through several companies before reaching a resting place.
                     “Some of these holding companies have imposed charges upon underlying operating
           utilities for the income-tax liability which the operating companies would have paid if they
           had filed a separate return. Then by eliminating the profit through the consolidated return, no
           tax was paid to the government. The holding company had collected the tax and kept it for
           itself. One company collected from its subsidiaries between 1926 and 1929 in excess of one
           and one-half million dollars on this basis. This particular device is probably now defeated by
           withdrawing the privilege of filing consolidated returns.
                     “Elimination of consolidated income-tax returns does not eliminate the necessity for
           auditing these gigantic systems, nor does it make the problem less difficult. Managements
           that are so disposed still find it possible to shift security transactions from one company to
           another for the purpose of allocating losses or profits so as to avoid taxes, and can still
           control and divert earnings from one to another unit in the form of service charges,
           accountancy tax consultant, and management fees, and by various other changes can so
           reduce taxable income of some units and increase net income of others that they can
           accomplish many of the results of consolidated returns.
                     “It is almost impossible, with systems of this magnitude and complexity, to
           determine the tax status of many companies. And, after an audit is made, the situation is
           easily and rapidly changed, to avoid its results.
                     “In 1929, a certain corporation recorded on its books a capital gain in security
           transactions of $18,000,000 which was eliminated through a consolidated return. The Bureau
           found, however, that there was no lawful basis for the consolidated return, and the resulting
           tax was about $2,000,000. However, it was then discovered that a letter, written in 1933,
           purported to confirm what was claimed to have been an oral agreement made in 1929,
           although it had for years been left unwritten. By its terms the two companies declared their
           transactions to be continuing and not to be finally fixed and determined until all taxes were
           finally paid. The object of the device was apparently to prevent the closing of the
           transactions in 1929 and to throw the profit in whatever year was found to be convenient.”9


           The House initially rejected the idea of taxing intercorporate dividends at 15% of the regular

rate, and the 1935 Act contained a compromise rate of 10%. Blakey and Blakey (1936) record that

the 15% figure was implemented in 1936.

           Blakey and Blakey (1935) sum up the Roosevelt administration’s taxation objectives thus:




9
    Senate Finance Committee Hearings, pp. 223-224.

                                                         12
       “There can be no denying that the President’s message was an attack upon wealth; he and his
       followers would say, not upon innocent wealth, but upon concentrated, monopolistic, tax-
       evading, unsocial wealth, and particularly upon that taken from the masses by the vicious,
       pyramided, consciousless holding companies.”


       That this accurately reflected the view from the White House is also clear. Roosevelt (1942)

writes in the America Economic Review,

       “Tax policies should be devised to give affirmative encouragement to competitive enterprise.
        Attention might be directed to increasing the intercorporate dividend tax to discourage
       holding companies …”.

Roosevelt (1942) clarifies his views:

       “Close financial control, through interlocking spheres of influence over channels of
       investment, and through the use of financial devices like holding companies and strategic
       minority interests, creates close control of the business policies of enterprises which
       masquerade as independent units.
                 “That heavy hand of integrated financial and management control lies upon large
       and strategic areas of American industry. The small-business man is unfortunately being
       driven into a less and less independent position in American life. You and I must admit that.
                 “Private enterprise is ceasing to be free enterprise and is becoming a cluster of
       private collectivisms; masking itself as a system of free enterprise after the American model,
       it is in fact becoming a concealed cartel system after the European model.
                 “We all want efficient industrial growth and the advantages of mass production. No
       one suggests that we return to the hand loom or hand forge. A series of processes involved in
       turning out a given manufactured product may well require one or more huge mass-
       production plants. Modern efficiency may call for this. But modern efficient mass production
       is not furthered by a central control which destroys competition between industrial plants
       each capable of efficient mass production while operating as separate units. Industrial
       efficiency does not have to mean industrial empire building.
                 “And industrial empire building, unfortunately, has evolved into banker control of
       industry. We oppose that.
                 “Such control does not offer safety for the investing public. Investment judgment
       requires the disinterested appraisal of other people’s management. It becomes blurred and
       distorted if it is combined with the conflicting duty of controlling the management it is
       supposed to judge.
                 “Interlocking financial controls have taken from American business much of its
       traditional virility, independence, adaptability, and daring–without compensating advantages.
       They have not given the stability they promised.
                 “Business enterprise needs new vitality and the flexibility that comes from the
       diversified efforts, independent judgments and vibrant energies of thousands upon thousands
       of independent businessmen.
                 “The individual must be encouraged to exercise his own judgment and to venture his
       own small savings, not in stock gambling but in new enterprise investment. Men will dare to
       compete against men but not against giants.”

                                                    13
       Blakey and Blakey (1935) concede that the diverting of taxation from the primary purpose of

raising revenue to other major purposes involves great hazards.” However, they justify the

Roosevelt tax reforms, noting that


              “Statesmanship requires that the Ship of State shall not be allowed to rot in a stagnant
       Sargasso Sea nor be rent asunder by explosions of dynamite in its hold nor be dashed upon
       the rocks by the tidal waves of radically revolutionary storms and earthquakes.”


       In summary, although the tax reforms of the 1930s were unquestionably populist measures

aimed at big business, the attack not without deliberation. A purpose of these reforms was to subject

dividends passed through layers of firms in pyramidal groups to multiple taxation, and thereby

render such groups unviable. As the writing style in the American Economic Review deteriorated

over the decades, so has this purposes been forgotten.



5.     Why Pyramidal Corporate Groups Are Probably Still Undesirable

       This section outlines three economic reasons why pyramidal corporate groups might be

undesirable. First, pyramidal groups are statistically associated with corporate governance problems

in many countries. Second, pyramidal groups create scope for tax avoidance strategies by

corporations. Third, pyramidal groups allow highly concentrated corporate control. Each is now

examined in turn.



Pyramids and Corporate Governance

       This section explains the two central agency problems that contribute to poor corporate



                                                 14
governance in many US firms, and how an absence of intercorporate dividend taxation magnifies

both of these genres of agency problems while simultaneously clearing ground for a third new genre.

These effects occur because, in the absence of intercorporate dividend taxation, corporations can

arrange their ownership into pyramidal corporate groups. It is these pyramidal group structures that

create scope for broader and deeper corporate governance problems.

       The US corporate finance literature considers two distinguishable, though related agency

problems that lead to corporate governance problems.

       The first, initially modeled by Jensen and Meckling (1976), occurs in widely held firms - that

is, firms owned by a large number of small shareholders. The top executive of such a firm makes

economically inefficient decisions because she runs the firm so as to maximize her utility, rather

firm value, as microeconomic theory requires. This is rational for her because she has little of her

own wealth invested in the firm she runs. A standard collective action problem prevents any

shareholder from spending resources on monitoring and control to prevent this. Such an agency

problem will be referred to as an “other people’s money” problem.

       The second genre of agency problem, initially modeled by Stulz (1988), occurs in narrowly

held firms – that is, firms whose top executive owns a large block of stock. This equity block gives

this executive continued control even if she becomes senile, or is no longer the most able person to

run the firm because technology or conditions change. The controlling shareholder/manager retains

control because she obtains private benefits of control for which a more able controlling

shareholder/manager could not compensate her. Poor corporate governance is thus ‘locked in’ by a

dominant equity block. For brevity, this second genre of agency problem will be called a

“management entrenchment” problem.

       Morck et al. (1988) and others present empirical evidence consistent with one or the other of
                                                15
these genres of agency problem being statistically and economically important corporate governance

problems in many large US firms.10

         Morck et al. (2000) and Bebchuk et al. (2000) argue that pyramidal corporate groups create

scope for agency problems similar to these, and for new sorts of agency problems.

         To see how “other people’s money” problems can arise in pyramidal groups, recall Figure 1.

In the absence of any taxes on intercorporate dividends, the family gets 51% of the dividends firm A

disburses, with the remaining 49% going to public shareholders. But the family only gets 0.51 x

0.51 = 26.01% of those paid by B, as 49% go to public shareholders directly, and 49% of the 51%

paid to firm A also ultimately go to public shareholders. At successively lower levels of the

pyramid, the fraction of dividends accruing to the controlling family falls geometrically.

         If firm F pays a $100 dividend, only 0.516 x $100 = $1.76 ends up with the controlling

family. The remaining $98.84 accrues, directly or indirectly, to public shareholders. Thus, firm F,

like a widely held firm in the United States, is subject to “other people’s money” agency problems of

the sort described by Jensen and Meckling (1976). The controlling shareholder only bears 1.76% of

the cost of poor wasted corporate resources. The situation is exactly as in a widely held firm where

the senior managers own only 1.76% of the stock.

         Despite this, firm F is fully controlled by the family. This is because the family controls 51%

of the votes in each of the firms above firm F in the chain connecting it to the family firm. Thus, the

family’s control over all the firms in the pyramidal group is “entrenched” in the sense of Stulz

(1988). The family cannot be dislodged via proxy fights, hostile takeovers, or other mechanisms

that oust inferior managers in free-standing widely held firms.


10
 . Although Himmelberg, Hubbard, and Palia (1999) question the interpretation of this finding, the event study results of
Fields and Mais (1994) are consistent only with agency problem explanations of the Morck et al. (1988) result.

                                                           16
         In an economy of free standing firms, like the United States, “other people’s money” agency

problems occur only in widely held firms, while “entrenchment” problems occur primarily in

narrowly held firms. However, in a country whose firms are organized into pyramids, both problems

can occur concurrently in firms low in the pyramid structure, while all the firms in the pyramid are

vulnerable to “entrenchment” problems. This suggests that agency problems in economies whose

firms are organized into pyramidal groups might be more severe than in economies of freestanding

firms.



Income Shifting, Corporate Governance and Tax Avoidance

         Finally, and perhaps most important, pyramid groups create scope for a third genre of agency

problem. This is because the group firms can transfer income and assets between themselves in

much the way the subsidiaries of a multinational firm do. Alworth (1989) and Gresik (2001)

summarize the abundance of evidence showing that transnational corporations conduct transactions

where one subsidiary provides goods, services, or capital to another at artificial prices that inflate the

income of one subsidiary and reduce that of the other. The objective of these transactions is the

shifting of income out of high tax jurisdictions and into low tax jurisdictions.

         Bebchuk et al. (2000), Morck et al. (2000), Johnson et al. (2000) and others describe how

groups of related companies such as the member firms of pyramidal corporate groups can undertake

analogous non-arm’s length transactions. The objective can be either avoiding taxes or transferring

income and assets out of firms whose profits must be shared with public investors and into firms

whose profits accrue primarily to the controlling shareholder – usually a wealthy family. Johnson et

al. (2000) christen income and asset shifting of this sort ‘tunneling’.

         Faccio and Lang (2001), Claessens et al. (2000), Claessens et al. (2002), Bertrand et al.
                                                   17
(2002), and others, in studies of East Asian and European pyramidal groups, report abnormally

lower incomes and dividends in group firms situated nearer the base of the pyramid in Figure 1.

This is consistent with the view that income is shifted away from firms near the base and towards

firms near the apex of the pyramid. The latter are the firms that are most directly related to the

wealth of the controlling family.

       Of course, income shifting can also be used to avoid taxes. Harris et al. (1993) and many

others present empirical evidence that such analogous shifting occurs among the subsidiaries of

multinational firms in ways consistent with tax avoidance. The Congress and Administration

responsible for the 1930s extension of double taxation to intercorporate dividends also believed that

such income shifting was a serious tax avoidance problem in the United States.

       When tax avoidance and appropriation of public shareholders’ wealth interact, simply

tunneling income upward in the pyramid may no longer be the controlling shareholders preferred

strategy. Note, however, that the goal of tunneling in this context is to maximize the utility of the

dominant shareholder.

       Critically, Johnson et al. (2000) note that such income shifting is not illegal in many countries

if the objective is merely to hide income or assets from public investors. While such transactions

might be objectionable to US investors, La Porta et al. (2000) show that they are unremarkable, and

perfectly legal, in many countries.



Political Economy and Pyramids

       Pyramidal corporate groups allow wealthy individuals or families to control corporate assets

worth vastly more than their actual wealth. These groups are thus mechanisms that facilitate the

concentration of corporate control in the hands of a small elite in many developing countries and in
                                                  18
continental Europe.

        To see how this comes about, return to Figure 1. Suppose each firm in the pyramid consists

of real assets worth $1billion plus financial assets consisting of 51% the stock in two firms in the

next lower level, down to firms in level F, which each contain only $1 billion in real assets each.

The firms in level E are each worth $1 billion plus 2 x 0.51 x $1 billion, or $2.02 billion each.

Those in level D are each worth $1 billion plus 2 x 0.51 x $2.02 billion, or $3.06 billion each. Those

in levels C, B, and A are similarly worth $4.12 billion, $5.20 billion and $6.31 billion, respectively.

The total value of the real assets contained in all the firms in the group is $1 billion times the number

of firms. Level A contains two firms, level B contains four, level C contains 8, and so on down to

level F, which contains 64 firms. The number of firms is thus 2 + 4 + 8 + 16 + 32 + 64 = 126, and

the total value of the corporate group is thus $126 billion. However, the family firm need only hold

51% of each of the firms in level A, or 2 x 0.51 x $6.31 billion = $6.43 billion worth of stock in

those firms, to control the $126 corporate group.

        The family thus leverages $6.43 billion of actual wealth into control over $126 billion in real

corporate assets. If the family firm also contains real assets, the family’s wealth requirement is

greater. If the family allows a minority participation in the family firm, its wealth requirement is

lower. If dual class shares, golden shares, or the like are used, the family’s actual wealth can be

much smaller.

        Of course, the fact that pyramidal groups allow highly concentrated control over a country’s

corporate section does not necessarily mean that they are social welfare destroying. Khanna and

Palepu (1997) point out that managerial talent and reputations for honesty may be scarce

commodities, and that pyramidal corporate groups allow families possessing these attributes to apply

them to the management more assets than would be the case if they had to own firms outright to
                                                   19
control them. They argue that such a scarcity is most pronounced in developing countries.

       Khanna and Palepu (1997) and Khanna (2002) also propose that pyramidal business groups

are substitutes for nonexistent or poorly functioning markets for goods, services, capital, and even

labor in countries with poor market institutions. Non-arm’s-length dealings between different firms

in a pyramidal group are essential for this circumvention of dysfunctional markets. Thus, in an

economy with weak institutional support for markets, business groups may be desirable as an

optimal ‘second best’ approach to organizing economic activity in the sense of Coase (1937) and

Williamson (1973).

       Hoshi et al. (1990, 1991) argue that such considerations continue to be a factor in Japan, and

that keiretsu corporate groups there provide financing for their member firms more efficiently than

would capital markets or unrelated financial institutions. However, Morck and Nakamura (1999)

present evidence that agency problems of the sort described above have come to characterize

keiretsu, and that this ownership structure is probably now an undesirable feature of Japanese

corporate finance. As noted above, there are many reasons for expecting pyramidal groups (and

other cross-holding arrangements such as keiretsu) to suffer such corporate governance problems,

and a growing body of evidence supports this view. It is also unclear how the tunneling detected by

Johnson et al. (2000), Faccio and Lang (2001), Claessens et al. (2000), Claessens et al. (2002),

Bertrand et al. (2002), and others might be construed as social welfare enhancing.

       In addition, Nenova (2002) and Dyck and Zingales (2002) present evidence consistent with

the view that dominant shareholders extract large private benefits of control in many economies –

especially those prone to extensive corruption problems, as measured by La Porta et al. (1996).

Nenova (2002) shows that voting stock trades at higher prices relative to non-voting stock in more

corrupt economies. Dyck and Zingales (2002) show that control blocks trade privately at prices
                                                20
more in excess of the public market price in countries with weaker institutions. Both studies can be

explained if controlling shareholders can extract benefits from firms that public shareholders cannot,

and can do so more readily in economies with weaker institutions. Most a propos, Dyck and

Zinglaes (2002) show that the measure of corruption most highly correlated with their estimate of

the magnitude of private benefits of control is slipshod enforcement of tax laws. Since more

vigorous enforcement of tax laws per se renders tunneling more difficult, this finding is consistent

with tunneling serving as a chief mechanism for the extraction of private benefits by the controlling

shareholder.

       Dyck and Zinglaes (2002) further show that countries in which private benefits of control are

higher have less developed financial sectors – especially stock markets. Since King and Levine

(1993) and others show that financial sector development is highly correlated with economic growth,

Dyck and Zingales argue that high private benefits of control are a social welfare problem, and

hence undesirable. The association between private benefits of control and tunneling implied by

their tax enforcement variable suggests, following the same line of reasoning, that pyramidal

corporate groups constitute a social welfare problem in countries with lax tax enforcement.

       In a widely accepted model of economic growth called creative destruction, Schumpeter

(1912) argues that the rise of innovative firms destroys stagnant firms. Morck and Yeung (2002)

argue that very large pyramids that concentrate corporate control in the hands of a few individuals

also retard growth by undermining the process of Schumpeterian creative destruction. This occurs if

the same shareholder controls both firms, and internalizes the cost the innovative firm inflicts upon

the stagnant firm when calculating the return to innovation.      Consistent with this, Morck et al.

(2000) find significantly lower private sector investment in innovation in countries with more

concentrated wealth.
                                                 21
       A second key determinant of economic growth is the importance of political rent-seeking.

Krueger (1974) and others argue that economic growth is inhibited by extensive government

intervention in the economy. This is because lobbying for government favors can easily become

more profitable than investment in productivity enhancement in such economies. The result is an

increasing flood of capital invested in political connections (corruption) and a dearth of capital in

research and development, capital spending, etc. Morck and Yeung (2003) argue that the highly

concentrated corporate control pyramids allow facilitates political rent seeking by limiting the

number of actors in the bargaining game between politicians and firms.



6.     The Current Discussion Regarding Dividend Taxation

       A large literature in corporate finance and public economies debates the extent to which the

U.S. double taxation of dividend income affects share values and distorts savings and investment

decisions. In general, the critical issue in this literature is the overall actual level of taxes on

dividend income, and eliminating double taxation is important only insofar as it lowers that level. A

full review is beyond the scope of this study.

       One set of arguments hinges on double dividend taxation raising the actual tax level on

dividends and hence depressing share prices, thereby making equity capital unduly expensive and

retarding corporate investment. For a discussion of issues regarding the theoretical validity of this

view, see Auerbach and Hassett (2002).

       Another set of arguments, deriving from Easterbrook (1984) argues that firms prove the high

quality of their governance to shareholders by paying large and growing dividends. Again, double

taxation deters firms from paying such dividends, making it harder for investors to distinguish well-

governed firms from poorly governed ones.
                                                 22
         The critical insight, as regards both sets of arguments, is that the current intercorporate

dividend double taxation regime can generate no revenue from free-standing firms – the sorts of

companies of which the US corporate sector is currently composed. This is because freestanding

firms pay no intercorporate dividends. This is the whole point, for the purpose of the tax is to

prevent pyramidal corporate groups by placing a heavier tax burden on them than on other

companies, not to raise money. Thus, intercorporate dividend taxes sufficient to prevent pyramiding

can have no effect on corporate valuation, investment policy, or payout policy of existing or new

firms.

         This reasoning implies that the double, or multiple taxation of intercorporate dividends be

viewed in an entirely different light from double taxation of dividends paid by companies to

individual shareholders. Nonetheless, the current proposals for ending the double taxation of

dividend income in the United States fail to make this distinction.

         The statement outlining the Bush administrations plans to end double taxation, as circulated

by the Treasury Department in 2003, reads


         Under the proposal, an excludable dividend received by a U.S. corporation will not
         be taxable. Excludable dividends received by a corporation will increase the recipient
         corporation's EDA (excludable dividend amount) and will, therefore, remain
         excludable when distributed by the recipient corporation.

                                                                        2003 Blue Book, p. 20.11

         That is, from now on in the United States, Company E in Figure 1can claim dividend income

received from Company F as “excludable dividend income”, on which Company E need pay no

corporate income tax. In turn, Company E can forward the dividend income to Company D without D


11 United States Department of the Treasury, General Explanations of the Administration’s Fiscal Year 2004 Revenue
Proposals (The 2003 Blue Book) is available on-line at http://www.ustreas.gov/offices/tax-policy/library/bluebk03.pdf.

                                                         23
incurring any tax liability, and so on, all the way up to the apex firm of the pyramid.

        Under the current US tax rules, pyramids like that in Figure 1 are prohibitively expensive

because of double intercorporate dividend taxation. Under the Treasury Department’s proposed

changes, the pyramidal structure in Figure 1 would appear to entail no additional taxes at all. This

section of the Tax Reform Proposal would seem to indicate that the Bush administration plans to end all

intercorporate dividend taxation. However, the administration’s position is rendered ambiguous in the

next paragraph.

        Returning to Table 1, current US law taxes dividends received at a statutory rate of 35%. For

intercorporate dividends, such as those paid by the firms in Figure 1, this rate is reduced to 7%. This

reduction is accomplished by allowing the recipient corporation a “dividends received deduction”

equal to 80% of the dividends it receives in cases where the recipient firm owns between twenty and

eighty percent of the dividend paying firm. As Table 1 shows, only if the recipient’s stake exceeds

eighty percent is a one hundred percent deduction allowed. The administration’s reform proposal

explains that

        Under current law, a corporation that receives a dividend from another corporation is
        entitled to a dividends received deduction. Under the proposal, the 100 percent
        deduction for dividends received from a corporation 80 percent or more of which is
        owned by another corporation will be retained. The 70 and 80 percent deductions for
        dividends received, however, will only be available for distributions of pre-2001
        earnings and profits that are distributed before January 1, 2006, with respect to stock
        issued before February 3, 2003.

                                                                2003 Blue Book p. 20.

        One reading of this paragraph is that the partial “dividends received deductions” will be

eliminated because the EDA rules allow the equivalent of a one hundred percent deduction in all

cases. Another is that the EDA will only be available to the recipient if its stake in the dividend-

paying firm exceeds eighty percent. The elimination of the partial deductions might then be read as

                                                   24
implying full double taxation of intercorporate dividends in all other cases.

        Resolution of this ambiguity may lie in a different paragraph outlining the overall objective

of the reforms as regards intercorporate dividend taxation. The Treasury Department seems aware

that these changes will allow pyramidal corporate groups in the United States, for the proposal states


        These additions to EDA will ensure that multiple levels of corporate ownership do
        not result in more than one level of tax on income that has been previously taxed at
        the corporate level.

                                                                              2003 Blue Book, p. 14.


        Although this phrasing does not explicitly address the ambiguity of the proposal in its current

form, an interpretation consistent with this philosophy favors the view that all intercorporate

dividends are to be exempted from double taxation.12                   This would align US taxation of

intercorporate dividends with that of other countries, such as Canada’s regime described in Table 1,

and would remove the current tax penalty on pyramidal groups.

        If intercorporate dividend taxes are the primary reason pyramidal groups do not exist in the

United States, this change opens the door to their establishment in that country. If such groups do

not form despite the absence of tax disincentives, economists will have an interesting puzzle to

analyze. Work on other countries suggests that the formation of pyramidal groups in the United

States would probably have deleterious effects on US corporate governance, corporate tax

compliance, and on the concentration of corporate control, though these effects are not certain.



7.      Conclusions



12 A private communication with Glen Hubbard, Chairman of the Council of Economic Advisors to President George W.
Bush while the tax reform plans were drawn up confirms this interpretation.

                                                       25
This paper neither promotes nor criticizes any particular policy agenda. Its purpose is to emphasize

that the economic arguments surrounding the double or multiple taxation of intercorporate dividends

differ starkly from those surrounding the double taxation of dividends paid to individuals, and that

the current US dividend tax reform proposals do not make this distinction.

         In the 1930s, the Congress and President that originally extended double (and multiple)

taxation to intercorporate dividends believed that pyramidal groups wrought problems of corporate

governance, tax avoidance, and concentrated corporate control. The current discussion about

eliminating the double taxation of dividend income should be informed by a historical understanding

of why the double (and multiple) taxation of intercorporate dividends was initiated.

       Pyramidal corporate groups exist in virtually all countries that do not tax intercorporate

dividends. Empirical research on the financial systems of such countries indicates that these groups

create scope for the abuse of public shareholders. The US experience prior to the 1930s reforms and

empirical work on multinational firms with similar structures to those of pyramidal groups suggests

that pyramidal groups offer considerable potential for corporate tax avoidance. And pyramidal

corporate groups allow an extreme concentration of economic power. These are the structures that

allow tiny elites to control the greater parts of the corporate sectors of many Latin American, Asian,

and European countries.

       It is not clear that abolishing the double (and multiple) taxation of intercorporate dividends

would lead to such outcomes in the United States. Vigorous actions by the Internal Revenue Service

to prevent transfer pricing and income shifting in related-party intercorporate transactions might

prevent effective tunneling. Shareholder activism in the United States could also prevent controlling

shareholders in corporate groups from extracting private benefits of control. And the depth of

democracy in the US might mitigate problems associated with excessive concentration of corporate
                                                 26
control in the hands of a small elite.

        Moreover, other restrictions on pyramiding remain. For example, the Public Utilities

Holding Company Act (PUHCA) of 1935 restricts large pyramidal groups holdings of public utilities

such as power or water companies. Starting in 1920, the number of electric power firms declined

dramatically because of pyramiding.13 Utilities throughout the country came under the control of a

small number of holding companies, which themselves were owned by other holding companies. As

many as ten layers separated the top and bottom of some pyramids. By 1932, three groups controlled

45% of the electricity generated in the United States. Responding to evidence of tunneling, poor

governance, monopolistic pricing, and the failure of many highly levered pyramids subsequent to

1929, Congress enacted PUHCA, subjecting utilities to federal regulation and banning pyramids

more than two layers high in that industry.14

        Nonetheless, the strength of these other factors vis à vis intercorporate dividend taxation is

unknown. Utility companies are important elements of some pyramidal groups in other countries,

but pyramids can certainly exist without encompassing utilities. Moreover, most public utilities in

the US are now exempt from PUHCA because they operate within a single state. Vigorous tax

enforcement, corporate governance activism, and grassroots democracy might also prevent

pyramiding, or limit its impact. But this is far from certain. The full consequences of abolishing

double and multiple intercorporate dividend taxation in the United States are ill understood at best.

        While substantive economic arguments support the abolition of double taxation on dividends

paid to individual investors, there is no compelling reason to end the double taxation of

intercorporate dividends. Nonetheless, the current US proposal for eliminating double taxation does


13 Abel (1999).



                                                 27
not distinguish double taxation of intercorporate dividends from double dividend taxation in general.



        Abolishing the double (and multiple) taxation of intercorporate dividends could have

sweeping consequences for corporate governance, corporate taxation, and corporate control. If the

Treasury Department intends to permit pyramidal corporate groups in the United States, research on

the desirability of this reform should be an urgent priority. If pyramidal groups are deemed

undesirable, more nuanced tax reforms can readily be envisioned that continue subjecting

intercorporate dividends to double and multiple taxation while eliminating the double taxation of

dividends paid by free-standing corporations to individuals.




14 Title I §11b (the "Death Sentence Clause") forbids holding companies more than twice removed from an operating
subsidiary. Deregulation of the power industry in the 1990s left the pyramiding

                                                       28
References

Abel, Amy. 1999. Electricity Restructuring Background: Public Utility Holding Company Act of

       1935 (PUHCA). Congressional Research Service, Environment and Natural Resources

       Policy Division, Library of Congress, Report for Congress RS20015 (January 7, 1999).

Aganin, Alexander and Paolo Volpin. 1998. On the Origin and Evolution of Pyramidal Groups: An

       Empirical Evaluation. Harvard University working paper.

Auerbach, Alan and Kevin Hassett. 2002. On the marginal source of investment funds. Journal of

       Public Economics 87 205–232

Bali, Rakesh and Gailen L. Hite. 1998. Ex-Dividend Day Stock Price Behavior: Discreteness or

       Tax-Induced Clienteles? Journal of Financial Economics 47 127-159.

Barclay, Michael. 1987. Dividends, Taxes, and Common Stock Prices: The Ex-Dividend Day

       Behavior of Common Stock Prices Before the Income Tax. Journal of Financial Economics

       19 31-43.

Bebchuk, Lucien, Reinier Kraakman, and George Triantis. 2000. Stock Pyramids, Cross Ownership

       and Dual Class equity: The Mechanisms Aand Agency Costs of Separating Control from

       Cash Flow Rights. In R. Morck ed. Concentrated Corporate Ownership. National Bureau of

       Economic Research Conference Volume. University of Chicago Press.

Bernheim, B. Douglas. 1991. Tax Policy and the Dividend Puzzle. RAND Journal of Economics 22

       455-476.

Bernheim, B Douglas and Adam Wantz. 1995. A tax-based test of the dividend signaling hypothesis.

       American Economic Review 85(3) 532-52.

Bertrand, Marianne, Paras Mehta, and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2002. Ferreting out tunneling: An

       application to Indian business groups. Quarterly Journal of Economics 117(1) 121-148.
                                              29
Black, Fischer, and Myron Scholes. 1974. The Effects of Dividend Yield and Dividend Policy on

       Common Stock Prices and Returns. Journal of Financial Economics 1 1-22.

Blakey, Roy and Gladys Blakey. 1935. The Revenue Act of 1935. American Economic Review 25(4)

       673-690.

Blakey, Roy and Gladys Blakey. 1936. The Revenue Act of 1936. American Economic Review 26(3)

       466-482.

Bradford, David. 1981. The Incidence and Allocation Effects of a Tax on Corporate Distributions.

       Journal of Public Economics 15 1-22.

Brittain, John. 1964. The Tax Structure and Corporate Dividend Policy. American Economic

       Review 54(3) 272-287.

Chen, Nai-Fu, Bruce Grundy, and Robert F. Stambaugh. 1990. Changing Risk, Changing Risk

       Premiums and the Dividend Yield Effect. Journal of Business 63 178-206.

Claessens Stijn, Simeon Djankov, Larry H.P. Lang. 2000. The separation of ownership and control

       in East Asian Corporations, Journal of Financial Economics (58)1-2 81-112.

Claessens, Stjin, Simeon Djankov, Joseph Fan, and Larry Lang. 2002. Expropriation of minority

       shareholders in East Asia. Journal of Finance, forthcoming.

Coase, Ronald. 1937. The Nature of the Firm. Economica Nov. 386-405.

Collins, Julie, and Deen Kemsley. 1998. Capital Gains Taxation in Firm Valuation and Dividend

       Policy. University of North Carolina working paper.

Collins, Julie H. and Deen Kemsley. 2000. Capital gains and dividend taxes in firm valuation:

       Evidence of triple taxation. Accounting Review 75(4) 405-427.

Daniels, Ron, Randall Morck and David Stangeland. 1995. High Gear: A Case Study of the Hees-

       Edper Corporate Group. In R. Daniels and R. Morck, eds. Corporate Decision Making in
                                              30
       Canada. Industry Canada and the University of Calgary Press. Calgary.

Dyck, Alexander and Luigi Zingales. 2001. Why Are Private Benefits of Control so Large in Certain

       Countries and What Effects Does This Have on Their Financial Development? Unpublished

       manuscript.

Eades, Kenneth M., Patrick J. Hess, and E. Han Kim. 1984. On Interpreting Security Returns During

       the Ex-Dividend Period. Journal of Financial Economics 13 3-34.

Easterbrook, Frank. 1984. Two Agency-Cost Explanations of Dividends. American Economic

       Review 78 650-659.

Elton, Edward, and Martin Gruber. 1970. Marginal Stockholder Tax Rates and the Clientele Effect.

       Review of Economics and Statistics 52 68-74.

Faccio, Mara and Larry Lang. 2001. The Separation of Ownership and Control: An Analysis of

       Ultimate Ownership in Western European Countries. Working paper.

Faccio, Mara, Larry Lang and Leslie Young. 2001. Dividends and expropriation. American

       Economic Review 91(1) 54-78.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1998. Taxes, Financing Decisions, and Firm Value.

       Journal of Finance 53 819-843.

Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French. 1998. Dividend Yields and Expected Stock Returns.

       Journal of Financial Economics 22(1) 3-26.

Feenberg, Daniel. 1981. Does the investment interest limitation explain the existence of dividends?

       Journal of Financial Economics 9(3) 265-269.

Feldstein, Martin. 1970. Corporate Taxation and Dividend Behavior. Review of Economic Studies 37

       57-72.

Fields, L Paige, and Eric Mais. 1994. Managerial voting rights and seasoned public equity issues.
                                                31
       Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 29(3) 445-58.

Gentry, William, and R. Glenn Hubbard. 1998. Fundamental Tax Reform and Corporate Financial

       Policy. In James Poterba, ed., Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 12. Cambridge: MIT Press.

Gordon, Roger and David Bradford. 1980. Taxation and the Stock Market Valuation of Capital

       Gains and Dividends: Theory and Empirical Results. Journal of Public Economics 14 109-

       136.

Gresik, Thomas A. 2001. The taxing task of taxing transnationals. Journal of Economic Literature

       39(3) 800-838.

Harris, Trevor, R Glenn Hubbard, and Deen Kemsley. 1999. The share price effects of dividend

       taxes and tax imputation credits. Journal of Public Economics 79(3) 569-596.

Harris, Trevor S., and Deen Kemsley. 1999. Dividend Taxation in Firm Valuation: New Evidence.

       Journal of Accounting Research 37 275-292.

Harris, David, Randall Morck, Joel Slemrod and Bernard Yeung. 1993. Income Shifting in U.S.

       Multinational Corporations. In J. Slemrod et al., eds. International Aspects of Taxation,

       National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume, University of Chicago Press.

Himmelberg, Charles, R. Glenn Hubbard, and Darius Palia. 1999. Understanding Determinants of

       Managerial Ownership and the Link Between Ownership and Performance. Journal of

       Financial Economics 37

Holderness, Clifford, Randall Kroszner, and Dennis Sheehan. 1999. Were the Good Old Days That

       Good?: Changes in Managerial Stock Ownership Since the Great Depression. Journal of

       Finance 54(1).

Hoshi, Takeo, Anil Kashyap and David Scharfstein. 1990. The role of banks in reducing the costs of

       financial distress in Japan. Journal of Financial Economics, 27, 67-88.
                                               32
Jensen, Michael and William Meckling 1976. The Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior,

       Agency Costs and Ownership Structure. Journal of Financial Economics. 3 305-360.

Jensen, Michael. 1986. Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers.

       American Economic Review 76 323-329.

Johnson, Simon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000.

       Tunneling. American Economic Review 90(2) May 22-27.

Kalay, Avner. 1982. The Ex-Dividend Day Behavior of Stock Prices: A Reexamination of the

       Clientele Effect. Journal of Finance 37 1059-1070.

Khanna, T., and Palepu, K. 1997. Why Focused Strategies May be Wrong for Emerging Markets.

       Harvard Business Review, July-August.

Khanna, Tarun. 2002. Business Groups and Social Welfare in Emerging Markets: Existing Evidence

       and Unanswered Questions. European Economic Review forthcoming.

King, Mervyn.1977. Public Policy and the Corporation. Chapman and Hall, London.

King, Robert G. and Ross Levine, 1993. Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right.

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 108:3, 717–737.

King, Mervyn. 1977. Public Policy and the Corporation. London: Chapman and Hall.

Krueger, Anne. 1974. The Political Economy of the Rent-Seeking Society. American Economic

       Review 64 June 291-303.

Lamdin, Douglas J., and Craig Hiemstra. 1993. Ex-Dividend-Day Share Price Behavior: Effects of

       the Tax Reform Act of 1986.” Review of Economics and Statistics 75 778-783.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Salines, and Andrei Shleifer. 1999. Corporate Ownership

       Around the World. Journal of Finance 54(2) 471-517.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Salines, and Andrei Shleifer. 2000. Investor Protection and
                                               33
       Corporate Governance. Jounral of Financial Economics 59 (1-2) 3-27.

Lasfer, M. Ameziane. 1995. Ex-Day Behavior: Tax or Short-Term Trading Effects. Journal of

       Finance 50 875-897.

Litzenberger, Robert and Krishna Ramaswamy. 1979. The Effect of Personal Taxes and Dividends

       on Capital Asset Prices: Theory and Empirical Evidence. Journal of Financial Economics 7

       163-195.

Litzenberger, Robert and Krishna Ramaswamy. 1982. The Effects of Dividends on Common Stock

       Prices: Tax Effects or Information Effects? Journal of Finance 37 429-443.

Miller, Merton and Myron Scholes. 1982. Dividends and Taxes: Some Empirical Evidence. Journal

       of Political Economy 90(6) 1118-42.

Miller, Merton and Myron Scholes. 1978. Dividends and Taxes. Journal of Financial Economics

       6(4) 333-53.

Morck, Randall, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny. 1988. Management Ownership and Market

       Valuation: An Empirical Analysis. Journal of Financial Economics, Vol. 20, No. ½,

       Jan./Mar. 293-315.

Morck, Randall and Masao Nakamura. 1999. Banks and corporate control in Japan. Journal of

       Finance. Feb. 54(1) 319-340.

Morck, Randall, David A. Stangeland, and Bernard Yeung. 2000. Inherited Wealth, Corporate

       Control, and Economic Growth: The Canadian Disease. In R. Morck ed. Concentrated

       Corporate Ownership. National Bureau of Economic Research Conference Volume.

       University of Chicago Press.

Morck, Randall and Bernard Yeung. 2003. Family Control and the Rent-Seeking Society. New

       York University working paper.
                                              34
Morck, Randall and Yeung, Bernard. 2002. The Political Economy of the Family Firm.

       Entrepreneurship Theory and Practice. Forthcoming.

Nenova, Tatiana. 2000. The Value of Corporate Votes and Control Benefits: A Cross-Country

       Analysis. Harvard University Economics Working Paper

Phillips, Charles. 1993. The Regulation of Public Utilities, Theory and Practice. Public Utilities

       Reports, Inc. Arlington, VA.

Poterba, James. 1987. Tax Policy and Corporate Saving.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity

       1987(2) 455-575.

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers. 1983. Dividend Taxes, Corporate Investment, and 'Q'.

       Journal of Public Economics 22(2) 135-68.

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers. 1984. New Evidence That Taxes Affect the Valuation of

       Dividends. Journal of Finance 39(5) 1397-1415.

Poterba, James and Lawrence Summers. 1985. The Economic Effects of Dividend Taxation. In

       Edward Altman and Marti Subrahmanyan, eds. Recent Advances in Corporate Finance.

       Homewood: R.D. Irwin.

Roosevelt, Franklin D. 1942. Appendix A: Message from the President of the United States

       Transmitting Recommendations Relative to the Strengthening and Enforcement of Anti-trust

       Laws. American Economic Review 32(2) Supplement, Papers Relating to the Temporary

       National Economic Committee 119-128.

Schumpeter, Joseph A. 1912. Theorie der Wirtschaftlichen Entwichlung, Leipzig, Dunker und

       Humbolt. Translation by R. Opie (1934), The Theory of Economic Development: An Inquiry

       into Profits, Capital, Credit, Interest, and the Business Cycle. Cambridge Mass: Harvard

       University Press.
                                               35
Shaw, Wayne. 1991. An Examination of Ex-Dividend Day Stock Price Movements: The Case of

       Nontaxable Master Limited Partnership Distributions.” Journal of Finance 46 755-771.

Sinn, Hans-Werner. 1985. Capital Income Taxation and Resource Allocation. Amsterdam: North

       Holland.

Sinn, Hans-Werner. 1991. Taxation and the Cost of Capital: The ‘Old View,’ the ‘New View,’ and

       Another View. In David F. Bradford, ed. Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 5. Cambridge:

       MIT Press.

Stulz, René. 1988. On Takeover Resistance, Managerial Discretion and Shareholder Wealth.

       Journal of Financial Economics 20(1/2) Jan./Mar. 25-54.

Summers, Lawrence. 1981. Taxation and Corporate Investment: A q-theory Approach.” Brookings

       Papers on Economic Activity 1981(1) 67-127.

Williamson, Oliver. 1973. Markets and hierarchies: Some Elementary Considerations. American

       Economic Review May 316-325.

Zodrow, George. 1991. On the ‘Traditional’ and ‘New’ Views of Dividend Taxation.” National Tax

       Journal 44 497-509.




                                             36
Table 1. Top Personal and Corporate Federal Tax Rates Payable on Dividend Income
in the United States and Canada, as of 2002

                         United States                                 Canada
 recipient’s
 ownership     initial payer          recipient is          initial payer           recipient is
  of payer     corporationa    individuala corporation      corporationb    individualb,c corporation
   0 - 10%          35%          38.6%          10.5%          38.62%         31.34%         38.62%
  10 - 20%          35%          38.6%          10.5%          38.62%         31.34%            0%
  20 - 80%          35%          38.6%            7%           38.62%         31.34%            0%
    80% +           35%          38.6%            0%           38.62%         31.34%            0%

   a. Top marginal rate, federal taxes only
   b. Combined federal and Ontario rates. Ontario is chosen as a representative provincial tax system.
      Provincial taxes are a larger fraction of the total in Canada and meaningful comparisons with other
      countries cannot exclude them.
   c. After grossing up and dividend tax credit provisions are included.




                                                  37
Table 2. Tax Rates on Intercorporate Dividend Income From Controlled Publicly
Traded Firms Effective in Various Countries in 1982 and 1997 and Existence of
Pyramiding
                                          Intercorporate dividend              Pyramidal or other group
Country                                            tax rate                  members among top 10 firms
Argentina                                             0%                                    yes
Australia                                             0%                                    yes
Austria                                               0%                                    yes
Belgium                                               0%                                    yes
Brazil                                                0%                                    yes
Canada                                                0%                                    yes
Chile                                                 0%                                    yes
Denmark                                               0%                                    yes
Finland                                               0%                                    yes
France                                                0%                                    yes
Germany                                               0%                                    yes
Greece                                                0%                                    yes
Hong Kong                                             0%                                    yes
India*                                                0%                                    yes
Indonesia                                             0%                                    yes
Ireland                                               0%                                    yes
Italy                                                 0%                                    yes
Japan                                                 0%                                    yes
Korea**                                               0%*                                   yes
Malaysia                                              0%                                    yes
Mexico                                                0%                                    yes
Netherlands                                           0%                                    yes
New Zealand                                           0%                                    yes
Norway                                                0%                                    yes
Portugal                                              0%                                    yes
Singapore                                             0%                                    yes
Spain                                                 0%                                    yes
Sweden                                                0%                                    yes
Switzerland                                           0%                                    yes
Thailand                                              0%                                    yes
United Kingdom                                        0%                                     no
United States                                        7.0%                                    no
Sources: Tax rate information is from International Bureau of Fiscal Documentation tax code summaries, Price
Waterhouse Tax Information booklets, and telephone and other discussions with accountants in various countries.
Group structure information is based on data provided by Rafael La Porta, annual reports, and telephone and other
discussions with bankers and finance academics from various countries.

* Intercorporate dividends are exempted for firms on special lists in India.
** Intercorporate dividends are tax exempt in Korea for officially recognized Chaebol member firms only. Other firms
  are subject to a 33% to 40% tax on intercorporate dividends.




                                                        38
Figure 1. A Stylized Representation of a Pyramidal Corporate Group

                                                                  Family Firm

                                                            51%
                                                         Firm A

                                                  51%
                                            Firm B

                                    51%
                                 Firm C

                         51%
                      Firm D

               51%
            Firm E

     51%
 Firm F


      49%       49%        49%        49%          49%        49%


                       Public Shareholders




                                             39
Figure 2. Typical Large Publicly Traded Corporations Outside the US: A Part of the Hees-Edper Corporate Group in Canada


                                                                  EDWARD & PETER BRONFMAN GROUP

                                                                             0.0
                                                                 EDWARD BRONFMAN TRUST


                                                                   50.1                                       47 A
                                              BRASCAN HOLDINGS INC.                         HEES INTERNATIONAL BANCORP
                                                                            49.9
                                                                   50.1
                                                    BRASCAN LIMITED
                                                                                                                         49.9
                                                                   49.9 A
                                               BRASPOWER HOLDINGS


                                    46.3                           49.3
                                               GREAT LAKES POWER                                                                   PUBLIC
                                                                                                                         4.4    SHAREHOLDERS
                                                                   100
                                           FIRST TORONTO INVESTMENT


                           75                  25                                           75
                                   TRILON HOLDINGS                          FIRST TORONTO FINANCIAL
                                                                                            25
                                               45.8 A
                                   TRILON FINANCIAL
                                                                                                                         54.2
                                               51           49
                                GREAT LAKES HOLDINGS

Note: Firms not controlled via majority equity blocks are controlled via director interlock, dual class shares, or other means.
Source: Directory of Intercorporate Ownership, Statistics Canada, 1997.




                                                                                      41
Figure 3. Typical Large Publicly Traded Corporations Outside the US: The Anglo-American Group in South Africa

                                                                                                                             De Beers
              81 Main       Oppenheimer                   Foreign                                          29.4%             Centenary             50.0%         Debswana
              St Nom          Family                    shareholders                                                                                             Diamond
                                                                                                                         52.0%           23.4%
                                              8.0%             6.3%
                     5.2%                                                                SA Mutual
                                                                          8.8%                                   13.1%
                                                                                                                            Anamint                                5.3%
                            44.5%                                                                        10.2%
             West DP                                ANGLO
                                                                            8.5%
                                                                                                                          23.7% 10.0%
                                                     49.7%       8.3%
                            35.8%                                         38.4%
             Amplats                                           6.9%
                                                                                                                  De Beers
                                            50.0%                                                                                                   6.5%
                                                     Amic                  Std Bank                11.1%                                                                  8.2%
                            32.0%
            Vaal RFS                                                       Nom Tvl
                                                     14.5%                                                                                       Sanlam
                                                                                                                                  5.7%
                            51.7%                                                                                                                        5.5%
              Amcoal                         Afex                                                 24.8%
                                                                43.6%
                                                                        Tongaat                                                                   First
                                             50.0%           51.0%
                            8.8%                                                                                            20.4%
                Kloof                                                                                                                            National
                                            AECI                Highveld                   Gencor                                                28.6%
                  39.4%
                                                                                                                                                           24.5%
                            26.0%                                                                 27.6%
                GFSA                                                                                                             40.2%
                                                                                                                                            Southern
                                                                                 50.0%
                  35.2%                                                                                                                       Life
                                                                           Premsab                         Liberty
                            9.5%                                                                 36.3%                              50.0%
                 Dries
                                                                         26.8%           20.6%                    28.3%
                                              JCI
                                    39.6%                                                                                                                35.0%
                  5.1%                                                                                                              Johnnic                      NEC
                                                                           Bevcon                    Premier
                            50.5%
              Amgold                        22.6%            27.5%       30.0%

                                   Freegold            Samancor          SA Brews

           Source: Financial Mail




                                                                                  42
Figure 4. Typical Large Publicly Traded Corporations Outside the US: Firms Controlled by the Agnelli Family in Italy

                                                                                                                                     Agnelli family



                                                                                                                           Giovanni Agnelli & C. S.A.p.A.
                                                                                                                                   (100% O&C)


                                                                                                                                       IFI S.p.A.
                                                                                                                                 (41.23% O; 82.45% C)



                                                                                        Fiat S.p.A.                                                                                                  CARFIN S.r.l.
                                                                                  (14.85% O; 28.17% C)                                                                                               (100% O&C)


                                                                                                                                                                                                                               (7.97% O; 14.6% C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                    IFIL S.p.A.
                                            Comau S.p.A.                                                                         SICIND S.p.A.                                                 (20.55% O; 37.64% C)       
                                           (69.37% O&C)                                                                           (100% O&C)

                                        Magneti Marelli S.p.A.                                                                                                                                               Eufin S.A.
                                        (58.98%O; 59.88% C)               (10.1%O;          SNIA BPD S.p.A.                                         IPI S.p.A.                                             (100% O&C)
                                                                          11.26%C)       (43.85%O; 48.87% C)                                    (51.13% O&C)
                                         Fiat Impresit S.p.A.
             Lodigiani family               (100% O&C)                                                                                                                                                  La Rinascente S.p.A.
                                                                           SNIA Fibre S.p.A.                 Caffaro S.p.A.                                                                             (32.8% O; 40.51% C)
             (15.38%O; 15.72%C)                                            (83.47% O&C)                 (49.16%O; 59.84% C)
                                          Impreglio S.p.A.
             (14.53%O; 14.85%C)                                                                                                                                                                    Unicem S.p.A.          
                                        (23.88% O; 24.41% C)             Sorin Biomedica S.p.A.                                                                                                (19.42% O; 32.83% C)            (8.76% O; 14.81% C)
                                                                              (75% O&C)
              Girola family

                                                                                              Gemina S.p.A.                                 Toro Assicurazioni S.p.A.           Cementeria di Augusta            Cementeria di Barletta
                                Mediobanca S.p.A.                                        (22.16%O; 23.05% C)                                (33.11%O; 62.35% C)
                                                                (11.96%O; 12.45%C)                                                                                                (68.81% O&C)                   (75.05%O; 83.46% C)
                                                                                                                                                                                          
                                                                                                                                                                                        (10% O&C)
                                              (14.02%O; 14.16%C)           Cartiere Burgo S.p.A.         Gemina Partic. S.A.
                                                                         (20.77%O; 20.97% C)              (100% O&C)                                                              T.I.M.E. S.p.A.


                                              (11.14%O; 11.82%C)                                         Pirelli & C. S.A.p.A.         (11.73%O; 12.45%C)          Tronchetti Provera
                                                                                                        (5.03%O; 5.34% C)                                             family


                                                     Anfossi family            (9.49%O; 15.88%C)                                       (10.73%O; 17.96%C)
                                                                                                   Acquedotto de Ferrari S.p.A.                                 Idioma S.A.
                                                                                                        (4.89%O; 8.18%C)         
                                                      IMI S.p.A.                                                                                 (9.37%O;
                                                                                                                                                 15.68%C)
                                                                                      (21.89% O&C)                                                                    Compagnie
                                                    Com.Part. S.p.A. (23.76% O&C)
                                                                                                     Acquedotto Nicolai S.p.A: (24.59% O&C)
                                                                                                         (23.98% O&C)                                            Generale des Eaux



Source: Faccio and Lang (2001).


                                                                                                                            43
Figure 5. Typical Large Publicly Traded Corporations Outside the US: The Deutsche Bank Group in Germany
                                                                                Deutsche Bank AG                 (5.03% O&C)
                                                                                                                                                      (10% O&C)

                                                                         (25% O&C)                                                  (25%O&C)            
                                 Münchener Rückversicherungs-ges AG                                                                                                  Allianz AG
                                            (10% O&C)                                                                                                              (10% O&C)                                            
            (4.92%O;                                                    (10% O&C)          (30% O&C)
            5.21% C)            (10% O&C)                                                                     (6.2% O&C)                                                    (10% O&C)                                                  (62.11% O&C)
                                                                                                            
                 Bayerische Vereinsbank AG            Berlinische Lebensversicherung           IKB Deutsche Industriebank AG                     DLW AG                                   Bayer AG                       RWE Aktiengesellschaft
            
                     (4.16%O; 4.4% C)                          (64.6% O&C)                             (12% O&C)                              (12.86% O&C)                              (5.01% O&C)                        (4.93%O; 8.1% C)

                       Forst Ebnath AG                 Bayerische Hypotheken-ünd               Hermes Kreditversicherungs AG                     Schering AG                      Monachia Grundstücks AG                    Rheinelektra AG      
                        (96.7% O&C)                   Wechsel-Bank (2.8%O; 5.8%C)                     (75.3% O&C)                               (10.6% O&C)                           (45.22% O&C)                            (10.7% O&C)

                ERGO-Versicherungsgruppe AG                  Victoria Holding                  Allianz Lebensverischerungs AG           Allianz Versicherungs AG                  Vereinte Versicherung AG                    Beiersdorf AG
                       (50% O&C)                              (18.3% O&C)                               (46.5% O&C)                           (100% O&C)                                (98.7% O&C)                           (37.7% O&C)
                                                                                           
                                                                                        (44.4% O&C)
               Deutscher Lloyd Versicherungs AG
                        (29.76% O&C)                                                                     Basf AG
                                                                                                       (10.6% O&C)
                                                                                                                                           (10.06% O&C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                    
                                                                                                    Dresdner Bank AG
                                                  (7.55%O; 11.33% C)                                (11.16%O; 21.97%C)                                              
                                                                                                                                                  
                               WMF Württemberische Metallwarenfab. AG                                                                                               Leifheit AG
                                        (6.05%O; 9.07% C)                                                                                                           (11% O&C)
                                                                                                                            (17.94%O; 20.5% C)
                               Eurohypo AG Europeische Hypothekebank                                                                                          Heidelberger Zement AG
                                           (95.1% O&C)                                                                                                           (8.84%O; 10.1% C)
                                                                                                                            (12.15%O; 14.6%C)
                                      Deutsche Beteiligungs AG                                                                                                 Metallgesellschaft AG
                                            (20% O&C)                                                                                                           (13.82%O; 16.6% C)


                                             Transtec AG                                                                                                 MG Vermoegensverwaltungs AG
                                             (12% O&C)                                                                                                          (99.4% O&C)
                                                                                                                                 (6.5% O&C)
                                                                                                                                                                                                      (5.03% O&C)
                                      Hindrichs Auffermann AG                                                                                                      Continental AG                
                                           (24.96% O&C)                                                                                                             (10.2% O&C)

                                             Deutz AG                                                                                                              Südzucker AG
                                           (38.2% O&C)                                                                                                          (10.23%O; 12.8% C)


                                      Maschinenfabrik Fahr AG                                                                                                       KWS Saat AG
                                           (99.8% O&C)                                                                                                             (24.99% O&C)
              (25.11% O&C)                                                                                                                                                                              (13.09% O&C)
                                         BHS Tabletop AG                                                                                                            Linde AG                    
                                            (32% O&C)                                                                                                              (10.1% O&C)

                                           Verseidag AG                                                                                                    Nürnberger Beteligungs AG
                                           (10.4% O&C)                                                                                                          (7.60%; 10% C)

                                             Phoenix AG                                                                                                           Daimler Benz AG
                                             (10% O&C)                                                                                                             (22.6% O&C)


Source: Faccio and Lang (2001).




                                                                                                                                44
Figure 6. Typical Large Publicly Traded Corporations in the US: 3M Corporation


                            3M Corporation                                  US subsidiaries
                                Listed                                         Not listed


     Public shareholders            Officers, directors & related parties
     Combined stake > 99%                    Combined stake < 1%




                                                        45
