                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              THE CROSS BORDER MERGERS AND
                            ACQUISITIONS WAVE OF THE LATE 1990s

                                              Simon J. Evenett

                                           Working Paper 9655
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9655


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2003




I am grateful to Benno Ferrarini for his tenacious efforts to obtain data for this paper. Thanks also to seminar
participants at INSEAD for some tough questions and constructive suggestions. Joshua Aizenman, Robert
Baldwin, Jean Dermine, Rod Falvey, Rachel McCulloch, Matt Slaughter, Daniel Traca, Tony Venables,
Xavier Vives and Alan Winters provided many much appreciated pointers and suggestions. This paper was
presented at both meetings of the International Seminar on International Trade, jointly organized by the
Centre for Economic Policy Research and the National Bureau of Economic Research. This chapter will be
published in a book titled Challenges to Globalization and edited by Robert E. Baldwin and L. Alan Winters,
sometime later in 2003. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Simon J. Evenett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
The Cross Border Mergers and Acquisitions Wave of the Late 1990s
Simon J. Evenett
NBER Working Paper No. 9655
April 2003
JEL No. F2, L4

                                                ABSTRACT

To establish a benchmark, the cross border mergers and acquisitions wave of the late 1990s is compared to

its predecessor in the late 1980s. It is found to be at least five times larger (in real terms), to involve firms

from more OECD nations, and to include many more service sector transactions. However, in comparison

to the size of national stock market capitalizations, foreign mergers with and acquisitions of domestic firms

during this latest wave were small, especially in the Group of Seven leading industrial economies. The effect

of cross border mergers and acquisitions on performance in one important service sector, banking, is also

examined. Specifically, the relative importance of cross border mergers and acquisitions, domestic mergers

and acquisitions, domestic entry and exit, and strategic alliances and joint ventures for interest rate spreads

was estimated for 13 industrial nations. The principal findings suggest that the effects of these firm-driven

changes in banking market structure differ markedly between EU member states and non-EU industrialized

economies. This highlights the importance of differentiating between types of cross border inter-firm

agreements and the pitfalls of generalising about the effects of the latest wave of cross border mergers and

acquisitions—as many of the harshest critics of globalization do.




Simon J. Evenett
World Trade Institute
University of Bern and CEPR
Hallerstrasse 6
Bern
Switzerland
simon.evenett@worldtradeinstitute.ch
1.    Introduction


         As nations’ markets continue to become more closely integrated through the process
commonly referred to as globalization, a concern has arisen both popularly and among policy
makers about the consequences for the degree of competition between firms. Critics of
globalization often charge that it extends the reach of abusive oligopolies and monopolies1, and
policy makers in developing countries worry whether increased openness to trade and foreign direct
investment flows makes then more vulnerable to “exploitation” by multinational firms.2 Such




1
  See, for example, the following remarks by Mr. Martin Khor, Director of the Third World Network to the
opening session of the UN’s Millennium Forum on 22 May 2000:
    “Our age is also defined by the process of globalisation. There are different approaches to this
    phenomenon. Some say it is inevitable and basically good, you just have to adjust to it and learn to reap
    the benefits. Others worry about the costs and advocate some safety nets to catch the losers as they fall. In
    truth, the essence of globalisation is the push by big companies and financial institutions to have more
    power, to grow bigger through taking over others, and make more profits. They have lobbied their
    governments, of the rich countries, to break down the national barriers that prevent them from totally free
    access to markets across the world, especially in the developing countries.”
The text of this speech can be downloaded from http://www.twnside.org.sg/title/mk7.htm.
2
  See, for example, the following statement in a November 1998 submission by the Government of India to
the WTO’s Working Group on the Interaction Between Trade and Competition Policy:
    “In contributions of intergovernmental organizations, a dominant theme along with the issue of mergers
    and acquisitions is the issue of contestability of markets. Although not clearly defined, an impression is
    created that every aspect of domestic government policy, economic and social - would, in one way or the
    other, affect fair trade and the contestability of markets. In a more concrete sense this debate on
    contestability of markets has been witnessed during the so-called Structural Impediments Initiative in the
    US-Japan context. With developing countries, the dangers of the doctrine of contestability of markets
    eroding their ability to take domestic social and economic action are even greater. Moreover, in the name
    of contestability, an increase in market access for MNCs may be sought by suggesting that all sectors of
    WTO, in one way or another, be put to the test of contestability. This may have implications for services,
    intellectual property rights, subsidies and a host of other areas, not to mention investment. It will,
    therefore, be necessary to define it clearly and narrowly in relation to specific issues and disciplines that
    we wish to address in the WTO regime. Some issues to be addressed would be market allocation, refusal
    to deal (boycott), price fixing, collusive dealing, and differential pricing (all of which are vertical RBPs).
    All of these practices distort or restrict trade and affect the international contestability of markets. This
    action is particularly called for as developing country markets and their commercial entities are more
    vulnerable to the effects of such RBPs and at their receiving end. Experiences with RBPs encountered by
    developing country firms in developed country markets illustrate how RBPs by the large MNCs put these
    firms at a competitive disadvantage. Instances of other so-called privately led restrictive business
    practices such as debarring Indian participation in the Dutch Flower Auction or the Basle Jewellery and
    Watch Fair are also relevant.”
MNC and RBP are abbreviations for multinational corporations and restrictive business practices,
respectively. This text was taken from paragraph two of WTO document number WT/WGTCP/W/111,
which can be downloaded from the WTO’s website (www.wto.org). See also the examples described in
Mehta and Nanda (2003).


                                                                                                                2
policymakers wonder if they have—or can ever have—the national tools to tackle private anti-
competitive practices.3


         There is also a vibrant debate about the potential for international accords on competition
law and enforcement. Policy makers worldwide are engaged in discussions about the desirability
and viability of a multilateral framework on competition policy under the auspices of the World
Trade Organization (WTO).4 Proponents of such a framework have called for disciplines on so-
called hard core cartels, so-called core principles for competition law and enforcement, modalities
for voluntary cooperation, and for the progressive strengthening of competition policy-related
institutions in developing countries.5 Others argue for the development of best practices for
competition law and enforcement in fora such as the International Competition Network and the
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development.6 And, others have called on
industrialized economies to tackle the alleged anti-competitive practices of their multinational firms
in developing economies. This proposal would involve antitrust enforcement officials expanding
their traditional concern about harm done within their jurisdiction to harm done abroad. It is argued
that such an approach would reduce the outlays on antitrust enforcement by developing economies.7


         In principle, integrating national markets both reduces and enhances the opportunities and
viability of anti-competitive conduct by private firms. On the one hand, as countries open up their
domestic markets to foreign competition by reducing their tariffs and other trade-distorting policies,

3
  A recent study of the experience in implementing competition law in seven developing countries offered the
following remark about the ability of these countries’ antitrust enforcers to address international mergers and
acquisitions and anti-competitive practices:
    “Whether countries have special provisions for extra-territorial jurisdiction or apply the ‘effects’ doctrine
    is not important when they have no means to enforce their decisions. Often the companies involved are
    beyond the reach of the competition agencies, which also causes problems in obtaining the information
    necessary to make a decision.” (CUTS 2003, page 75).
4
  For an excellent overview of the discussions within the WTO’s Working Group on the Interaction Between
Trade and Competition Policy, see that Working Group’s Annual Report for 2002 (WTO, 2002).
5
  The European Commission is one of the leading proponents of such a framework. It’s proposals can be
downloaded from the WTO’s website. The Commission has further clarified its proposals in discussions at
the WTO’s Working Group, see WTO (2002). The doubts of critics and sceptics are also reported in WTO
(2002). For an analysis of the implications of such a framework for the design and implementation of national
competition law, for industrial policy and development policy options, and for the resource costs faced by
developing countries, see Evenett (2003a).
6
  For several proposals on best practices in the merger enforcement area, see the contributions to Rowley
(2002). More generally, discussions on best practices in competition law and enforcement are undertaken
often in the OECD’s Competition Committee. Many of the relevant documents can be found at
http://www.oecd.org/EN/document/0,,EN-document-768-nodirectorate-no-22-20233-768,00.html. A number
of interesting and informative documents on best practices in merger review can be found on the website of
the      mergers       working       group       of      the      International      Competition        network,
http://www.internationalcompetitionnetwork.org/wg1.html.
7
  See Hoekman and Mavroidis (2002).


                                                                                                               3
domestic incumbents that have been protected from international competition by these trade
barriers are now more likely to be forced to abandon their price-raising and anti-competitive
practices.8 Moreover, the increased opportunities for international mergers and acquisitions can
bring cost-reducing efficiencies that may be passed on to customers, be they private consumers,
firms, or governments. On the other hand, globalization also presents new opportunities for firms
to form hard core cartels9 with international reach and other various anti-competitive arrangements.
Thus, whether globalization promotes or reduces competitive behavior on balance is largely an
empirical rather than theoretical issue.


        In this chapter, I first describe in considerable detail the nature of the wave of cross border
mergers and acquisitions (M&A) that occurred during the period of rapid globalization in the 1990s
and then focus on one particular service sector, namely banking, to investigate if there is evidence
that cross-border M&A in this industry resulted in greater spreads between the interest rates paid by
borrowers and those rates paid to depositors. Of course, there are limits to what can be learned
from a single sector study, but hopefully this analysis will contribute to the factual record, to the
literature on consolidation in the banking sector, as well as shedding light on the importance of a
number of factors that should be considered when coming to a view on the welfare consequences of
the latest wave of cross-border mergers and acquisitions.


        My analysis yields several findings. First, the recent cross border M&A wave is in real
terms at least five times larger than its predecessor in the 1980s. Even after correcting for the rising
price of financial assets10, in this latest wave cross border M&A is much much larger. Second,
although the latest wave involved firms from more countries than in the 1980s, the overwhelming
bulk of such M&A still took place among the members of the OECD. Third, despite its greater
scale in real terms, the latest wave of cross border M&A represents purchases of only a small
fraction of the publicly-traded corporate assets in industrial economies, especially in the Group of
Seven leading industrial economies. Foreigners are, therefore, not taking over large tranches of
national economies through cross border M&A. Fourth, the preponderance of cross border M&A in
the late 1990s were in service sectors, many of which are pretty much immune to import
competition.




8
  For a classic statement of this perspective, see Bhagwati (1968).
9
  For evidence on private international cartels see Evenett (2003a), Levenstein and Suslow (2001), and OECD
(2003).
10
   As proxied for by national stock market indices, see below.


                                                                                                         4
           Fifth, in one important service sector—banking—estimating the effects of cross border
mergers and acquisitions requires paying careful attention to sample composition. Furthermore,
controlling for changes in regulatory regimes and other changes in market structure in banking are
important. Of the thirteen OECD nations’ banking sectors considered here, eight are members of
the European Union. The determinants of the latters’ banking spreads during the 1990s is found to
be much different from those in non-EU economies. In the banking sectors of EU member states,
domestic M&A and strategic alliances are found to have no net effect on bank spreads. Cross
border mergers and acquisitions are found to depress spreads, suggesting that substantial
efficiencies resulted from such consolidation. In contrast, the evidence suggests that cross border
strategic alliances result in higher spreads—a finding that is consistent with the view that some such
alliances have been formed to forestall further market integration and to preserve the independence
of banks in Europe.


           The parameters in the non-EU sample are less precisely estimated, reflecting in large part a
smaller number of observations. Only cross border strategic alliances are found to influence bank
spreads in a statistically significant manner—in this case depressing them (which is the opposite of
my finding in the EU sample.) Nevertheless, taken together this chapter’s results for the banking
section imply that it is hazardous to make sweeping generalizations about the net effect of cross
border transactions, especially as the latter can have both pro-competitive and anti-competitive
effects.


           Sixth, the estimated parameters are used to forecast the net effect of all of these domestic
and cross border inter-firm agreements on bank spreads in each of the thirteen countries considered
in my EU and non-EU samples. In each EU member state, the combined effect of cross border
inter-firm agreements on interest rate spreads is an order of magnitude larger than for domestic
inter-firm agreements. Moreover, the overall beneficial effect of cross-border M&A in banking11 in
the EU has, in all of the eight EU members considered here, been completed reversed by the harm
done by cross-border strategic alliances. This implies that the combined effect of the latter may not
be as benign or as inconsequential as they first appear.12 Moreover, as the number of cross-border
strategic alliances in banking in the EU appears to have increased considerably after the cross-
border M&A spurt began, my findings are consistent with the explanation that banks eventually


11
   This is not to say that every cross-border merger or acquisition in the banking sector generates enough
efficiencies that bank customers benefit.
12
   This is not say that every cross-border strategic alliance detrimentally affects the welfare of bank
customers.


                                                                                                        5
took rearguard actions to increase their market power after the spread-reducing effects of
efficiency-enhancing cross-border mergers and acquisitions were felt. If this view is correct, then
regulators in the banking sector and competition policy officials should not focus solely on the
potential consequences of mergers and acquisitions and should keep a beady eye on perhaps more
innocently-looking public announcements of strategic alliances.


        This paper is organised as follows. The next section describes the recent wave of cross
border mergers and acquisitions. The third section focuses on the consolidation in the banking
system in 13 industrialized economies, establishing the factual record first and then conducting
econometric analyses. The final section contains some concluding remarks.


        2.      The cross border mergers and acquisitions wave of the late 1990s

        Preliminaries

        Before turning to the factual record it may be helpful to clarify the terms used in this
chapter. An important distinction is between foreign direct investment (FDI) and cross border
mergers and acquisitions. As the principal source of data on cross border M&A used here is the
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development’s (UNCTAD’s) annual World Investment
Report, I reproduce below UNCTAD’s description of the difference between cross border M&A
and FDI:

“A firm can undertake FDI in a host country in either one of two ways: greenfield investment in a
new facility or acquiring or merging with an existing local firm. The local firm may be privately or
state owned: privatisations involving foreign investors count as cross border M&As, which entails a
change in the control of the merged or acquired firm. In a cross border merger, the assets and
operation of the two firms belonging to two different countries are combined to establish a new
legal entity. In a cross border acquisition, the control of assets and operations is transferred from a
local to a foreign company, the former becoming an affiliate of the latter.” (UNCTAD, 2000, page
99)

        Although this quotation clarifies the distinction between investments in new productive
entities and investments in existing entities it would be incorrect to infer that, in practice, the
reported value of cross border M&A transactions is always less than the reported amount of foreign
direct investment. In fact, measured cross border M&A received by a nation is taken to be the sum
of (i) foreign investments in existing domestic firms which result in equity stakes greater than ten
percent, (ii) foreign investments in existing domestic firms which result in equity stakes less than
ten percent, and (iii) foreign investments in existing domestic firms that are paid for using capital or



                                                                                                      6
funds raised in the nation of the acquiring firm. In contrast, the reported amount of FDI received by
a nation includes (i), (iii), plus the value of overseas investments paid for by reinvested earnings of
foreign firms already resident in the nation. Consequently, as UNCTAD (1996) notes:


“It is, therefore, possible to witness a large increase in M&As that is not fully reflected in FDI
flows...[and]…movements in FDI flows can take place independently of movements in M&A. In
practice, however, there is a close relationship between movements in M&As and FDI flows.” (Box
I.1, UNCTAD, 1996).

        To underscore the differences between measured cross border M&A and FDI into industrial
countries, Table 1 reports the ratio of the former to the latter in 13 OECD nations during 1995-
1999. In some countries (Australia, France, Spain, and Japan) the ratio is far from one—suggesting
that recorded cross border M&A and FDI differ markedly.


        In collecting data on cross border M&A UNCTAD attempts, whenever possible, to
establish the location of the “ultimate” corporate owner of a given firm, not an “intermediate”
owner that too may be owned by another firm. This is done by examining newspaper
announcements of actual and proposed transactions complemented by the use of databases that
identify which firms own other firms. By locating the headquarters of an ultimate corporate owner,
one can assign a “nationality” to the owner. This, of course, sidesteps the fact that a publicly traded
company may have shareholders/stockholders who are resident in more than one country—a
wrinkle that is easy (and important) to state but is difficult to address adequately.


        Factual record13

        Turning now to the data, using 1987 constant dollars, Table 2 and Figure 1 report the extent
of cross border mergers and acquisitions activity from 1987 to 2000, the peak year of the latest
boom. (In 2001, reports suggest that cross border M&A fell 40 percent in nominal terms.) As
Figure 1 makes clear, the recent wave of cross border M&A accelerated after 1996 and reached a
peak of $828 billion in 2000 (which is equivalent to $1.1 trillion dollars in year 2000 dollars). The
previous wave of cross border M&A, which took place from 1987 to 1990, reached a peak of $135
billion in 1990—less than a fifth of the peak in the latest wave. Furthermore, developing economies
played next to no role in the 1980s wave and a modest in the most recent wave.14 Perhaps for this

13
   For two descriptions of the factual record that include more discussion than is presented here of mergers
and acquisitions in selected sectors, see Kang and Johansson (2000) and OECD (2001). For a recent account
and analysis of foreign mergers and acquisitions in the United States, see Feliciano and Lipsey (2002).
14
   Having said that, see Mody and Negishi (2000) for an account of the growing role of cross border M&A in
overseas investments in the East Asia in the late 1990s.


                                                                                                          7
reason, it might be more accurate to call the latest wave an “international” wave rather than a
“global” wave of cross border M&A.


        For further perspective on the growth of cross border M&A in the 1990s, see Figure 2. This
shows that the real growth of cross border M&A dwarfs that of world GDP and of world
merchandise trade, the latter of which almost doubled in real terms in the 1990s. In Figure 2 I
deflated current values of total cross border M&A by the same GDP deflator that I used to compute
real World GDP—a procedure which can be objected to on the grounds that stock markets soared in
the 1990s, raising the possibility that the price of financial capital has grown more quickly than the
GDP deflator. To examine this matter further I deflated country-by-country values of nominal
inward cross border M&A by the changes in the value of each country’s major stock market
index15, and normalised the amount of cross border M&A received in 1990 at 100. (The year 1990
was the peak of the wave of cross border M&A that started in the late 1980s.) Figures 3a and 3b
report this new calculation of the real value of cross border M&A received by the ten industrialized
economies throughout the 1990s. In all but two economies, real inward M&A is much lower in
1990 than in 2000, confirming that for the major markets in the world economy the latest cross
border M&A wave was on a much larger scale than its predecessor in the 1980s.

        Having said that, the growth of cross border M&A is from a relatively small base and when
the level of cross border M&A that a nation received in the late 1990s is compared to its stock
market’s capitalization, the amount of assets acquired by foreign firms tends to be quite small (see
Table 3). Only the smaller—and relatively more open—industrial economies saw the total value of
foreign mergers and acquisitions exceed five percent of their total stock market capitalizations. For
the Group of Seven leading industrial economies the inflows of cross border M&A are even smaller
relative to the size of their stock markets. The image of aggressive foreign executives snapping up
large shares of productive domestic assets conjured up during the contentious merger of Vodafone
and Mannesmann AG in 2000, for example, finds little support in the data.


        Figures 4 and 5 provide further indications of the broader participation in the latest wave of
cross border M&A, compared to its predecessor in the 1980s. The latter was essentially an
American and British affair, with some French firms making acquisitions towards the end of the
boom (principally in 1990). In contrast, the current wave involved considerable transactions by


15
  For nine of the ten industrialized economies choosing the major stock market index was straightforward.
For the United States, however, one could choose either the S&P 500 index or the Dow Jones Industrial
Index. I chose the latter index, but note that both indicies rose by similar percentages throughout the 1990s.


                                                                                                            8
German, French, Spanish, and Nordic firms—joining the long standing Anglo-American interest in
cross border M&A. Figure 5 compares the cumulative distribution of cross border M&A across
OECD nations in both waves, confirming the less skewed nature of the latest wave.


           Another critical feature of the latest cross border M&A wave is the important role played
by so-called mega deals, those transactions whose value exceeded one billion U.S. dollars. The
number of such deals nearly quadrupled from 1996 to 2000 (see Figure 6); and the (constant dollar)
value of such transactions more than quadrupled (see Figure 7). In Appendix Table One, I have
listed the mega deals that were announced in 2000. It is evident that the majority of such deals
involved the service sector, notably the financial and telecommunications sectors. Few
manufacturing firms can be found on this list, a point I shall return to below.


           An examination of the sectoral breakdown of cross border M&A during the 1980s and
1990s waves is revealing too (see Table 4 and Figures 8a and 8b). One striking finding is the
relatively smaller importance of manufacturing cross border M&A in the late 1990s, accounting for
only 35.1 percent of the total value of such transactions. In the previous wave, such transactions
accounted for 62.2 percent of the total. What is more, just three service sectors (transport, storage,
and communications; finance; and business services) account for just under a half of total cross
border M&A in the late 1990s.


           Policy regimes facing cross border mergers and acquisitions

           Much has been made in the literature and in the reports of international organizations16 of
the falling barriers to greenfield FDI during the 1990s. UNCTAD goes so far as to tally up, on an
annual basis, the number of economies that have relaxed or tightened their FDI regimes.17
However, in industralized economies (and in some developing economies too) cross border mergers
and acquisitions are typically influenced by two different policy regimes: merger review policies
(which are described in some detail below) and sectoral regulations. The latter can involve reviews
of M&A deals (both domestic and cross border) that occur within a given sector. Regulators in
financial services, banking, telecommunications, and air transportation have been active in the
1990s reviewing proposals to merge or acquire firms. What is more, some jurisdictions allow for
M&As in some sectors to be reviewed both by the relevant sectoral regulator and by the national



16
     See, for example, World Bank (2000) and the annual World Investment Reports published by UNCTAD.
17
     See UNCTAD’s annual World Investment Reports for details.


                                                                                                        9
competition enforcement agency.18 This raises the question of the extent to which observed levels
of cross border M&A are affected by the potential for multiple official reviews within the same
jurisdiction.


        In contrast to policies towards greenfield FDI it is quite possible that, as a general
proposition, policies towards M&As have become more stringent throughout the 1990s. For
starters, the number of jurisdictions with merger review regimes rose sharply in the 1990s (see
Figure 9).19 According to White & Case (2001), a publication of an international law firm that
conducts an annual survey of merger enforcement around the world, sixty five economies had
merger review laws in 2000 (plus the European Commission’s supranational merger enforcement
regime.) Thirty of these merger review laws have been enacted since 1990. It is also noteworthy
that merger review laws are a relatively new phenomenon in some industrial economies—in other
words, the spread in the last twenty years is not just a phenomenon found in developing countries.
For instance, the European Commission’s Merger Regulation only came into force in 1990, Italy’s
merger review regime was enacted in 1990, Denmark’s and the Netherlands’ in 1997, and France’s
antitrust authority only celebrated its fifteenth birthday in 2002. Finally these remarks suggest that,
when studying cross border flows associated with corporate investments abroad, it is important to
locate which policy regime or regimes has the greatest bearing on the flows being examined. In
many cases, measures of (or proxies for) the strength of the policy regime towards greenfield
investments may provide a misleading guide to the strength of the merger review regime or of the
sectoral regulatory regime.


        Commentary and related literature

        This change in sectoral composition reflects a number of factors. First, lower trade barriers
and more intense competition in world markets for manufactures are likely to reduce the incentive
to engage in cross border M&A so as to accumulate market power or to jump tariffs. Indeed, any

18
  For examples, see the case studies in Evenett, Lehmann, and Steil (2000).
19
   Figure 9 reports not only the total number of merger review laws enacted since 1970 but also the total
number of such laws requiring notification of proposed mergers and acquisitions before deals are completed.
Among legal practitioners and scholars the latter type of merger review regime are, by and large, regarded as
the most stringent form of merger review law (see ICPAC, 2000, for a statement of what might be called
conventional legal wisdom in this regard. See, also, Evenett (2002) which confirms that of the three main
types of merger review laws, those requiring mandatory pre-notification curtail cross border M&A the most.)
In the light of these remarks, it is noteworthy that a growing proportion of the merger review laws enacted in
the 1980s and 1990s are of the mandatory pre-notification type (see Figure 9). This is further evidence in
favor of the proposition that worldwide the policy regime towards M&A has become stricter over time. (It
may well be the case that the policy regimes towards M&A in individual countries have been relaxed
throughout the 1990s.)


                                                                                                           10
increments in market power are likely to result in greater supplies from competitors located at home
and abroad. This suggests the following hypothesis: in those industries where international
competition is fiercest, M&A is more likely to be motivated by cost-cutting rationales. Second, the
increase in service sector M&A reflects deregulation, privatization, and the relaxation on
restrictions on foreign ownership in many industrial economies. Although such reforms began in
the 1980s in a few industrial economies (notably Britain, New Zealand, and the United States), in
many other countries they were not implemented on a wider scale until the 1990s. This is not to say
that the all the major service sectors are deregulated, but rather that the pace of deregulation picked
up in the 1990s and that this presented opportunities for foreign investors. In many continental
European economies the pace gathered in response to the Single Market Programme and the
liberalization initiatives that ensued.


        Although the corporate finance literature on the causes and financial effects of mergers and
acquisitions is quite voluminous, there are relatively few papers on the determinants and
consequences of cross border M&A20 and on economic analyses of the policy regimes governing
such cross border transactions.21 Black (2000a,b) describes a number of political and economic
factors that, in his opinion, account for the recent surge in cross border M&A. He points to the
“breakdown of the old antitakeover coalition” (Black, 2000a, page 10). Unions have weakened and
managers own more stock options, which ties their remuneration more closely to corporate
performance—reducing, he claims, the incentive to defend against the takeover of a poorly
performing firm. Lower inflation and a surging stock markets, it is argued, have reduced the costs
of financing M&A (although this explanation surely applies to domestic M&A as well as to cross
border M&A.) Finally, Black notes that there is now less opposition to concentrations of wealth and
that integrating national markets have encouraged firms to aspire to activities on a worldwide scale.
Pryor’s (2001) focus, in contrast, is on documenting the consequences for the United States of the
recent boom in domestic and cross border M&A. He argues that such transactions have increased
the concentration of manufacturing industries in the 1990s and, in his opinion, can be expected to
continue to do so in the future.


        An econometric approach was taken in Evenett (2002, 2003b). Employing a gravity
equation approach in both studies, Evenett estimated the contribution of different factors to the


20
   This paucity of studies on cross border M&A is to be contrasted with the voluminous literature on FDI,
which the earlier discussion suggests is a distinct but related phenomenon.
21
   There are a number of legal analyses of the policy regimes influencing cross-border mergers and
acquisitions.


                                                                                                      11
value of American outward M&A that 49 foreign economies received in 1999, including the effect
of national merger review regimes. In both studies, several nation-specific factors are found to be
important determinants of cross border M&A including the recipient nation’s gross domestic
product, the distance from the United States, the recipient nation’s corporate tax rate and average
tariff rate, and whether or not the recipient nation was once a British colony (and is, therefore, more
likely to use English as the language of business and to have a common law system, which the
United States has too.) Evenett (2003b) also found that the presence of merger review laws tend to
cut in half the amount of American M&A received. This constitutes a substantial barrier to the
international trade in corporate assets, and is especially important given the 1990s saw more and
more developing economies adopt merger review laws—in particular those developing nations that
hoped to join the European Union at some point in the future.


        Evenett (2002) also found that the combined effect of merger enforcement by national
authorities in the European Union and by the European Commission curtailed American overseas
M&A by the same percentage22 as comparable non-European merger enforcement agencies. This
finding may be of interest in the light of the sharp transatlantic dispute over the proposed merger
between General Electric and Honeywell in 2001, where accusations were made that the European
merger authorities discriminated against proposed American mergers.23

        The economic impact of cross border M&A depends on a number of considerations which
make it unlikely that sweeping claims can be made with any confidence about the desirability (or
otherwise) of such international trade in corporate assets. By reducing the number of firms that
supply a market, cross border M&As may enhance the market power of the surviving firms.
However, such changes in ownership may also result in the combined entity attaining greater
economies of scale and scope which, in turn, may benefit consumers in the form of lower prices, a
wider range of services offered, or higher quality goods and services. One often-mentioned
mechanism is that foreign firms transfer so-called cutting edge technologies and better managerial
practices to domestic firms that they have merged with or acquired—suggesting that the beneficial
effects of mergers and acquisitions could be greater in the cross border case, compared to a




22
  In this case, fifty percent.
23
  Note that this finding in Evenett (2002) does not speak to the issue as to whether EC merger enforcement
procedures tends to discriminate more against transactions involving American firms than transactions
involving non-American firms.


                                                                                                       12
domestic transaction. However, there are no guarantees that these pro-competitive aspects of cross
border M&As will necessarily completely offset any anticompetitive effects of such transactions.24


         The strength of each of these considerations is likely to vary from industry to industry. For
example, as noted above, those sectors that face aggressive import competition are ceterius paribus
less likely to see cross border M&A result in higher prices. Sectors, such as banking, where firms
increasingly offer a wide range of financial products to customers, are especially likely to gain from
merging or acquiring a financial institution that sells complementary products. Another sector,
telecommunications, has seen rapid technological progress in the 1990s and cross border M&As are
often mentioned as one of the conduits by which such innovations are diffused across national
borders—along with the managerial practices that are needed to make good the profitable
opportunities created by these technological improvements. In terms of general findings, therefore,
a sector-by-sector evaluation of the effects of cross border M&A is probably the most one can ever
realistically expect, and in the next section I attempt such an evaluation of the recent consolidation
in the banking system in 13 OECD nations.


         A final point, whose implications tend to be thought through in many other international
economic policy matters but which has, until now, received less attention in discussions of
international antitrust matters, is that cross border M&A may well have economic effects that spill
across national borders and that national antitrust or competition authorities tend to focus only on
the effects within their own jurisdictions. Therefore, no government entity exists to aggregate the
effects of a proposed transaction across all the affected national markets.25 This may lead to
situations where a transaction is vetoed in some jurisdictions (where the economic consequences
are thought to be adverse) even though there is a positive effect on net across all the affected
markets.




24
   One important—and contentious—issue is to what extent ownership changes are needed to secure the pro-
competitive benefits of mergers and acquisitions. Direct contracting and collaborative (or so-called strategic)
alliances may provide the means by which a domestic firm can market a foreign firm’s range of products, or
by which a domestic firm can expand its output (potentially reaping economies of scale) by producing goods
under contract for a foreign firm. This raises the possibility that all the resource allocation benefits of cross
border M&As can be obtained by signing inter-firm agreements which do not involve reducing the number of
suppliers. However, the point need not to be taken too far as transactions costs arguments often point to the
need for cross-holding of equity to attenuate incentive problems. Furthermore members of an inter-firm
alliance or contracting, that starts off with pro-competitive effects, may well soon figure out how to turn their
collaboration to price-raising ends.
25
   Within the European Union, for example, the European Commission could play such an aggregating role.
This is not to say that it does play such a role!


                                                                                                              13
          Essentially, the absence of any compensation mechanism between states implies that
multiple national vetoes can lead to suboptimal enforcement of cross border mergers and
acquisitions. In recent years, a leading antitrust American official has given attention to the issue of
multiple national vetoes (see Muris 2001), but the importance of the lack of any compensation
mechanism for resource misallocation has yet to receive much attention in legal and economic
discourse on merger reviews. Indeed, the absence of such a mechanism is one of the key
characteristics that differentiates the international effects of the national antitrust enforcement from
trade policy negotiations. In the latter, it has long been understood that any losses to a nation in one
sector are compensated for by concessions in other sectors by trading partners. Without suggesting
that cross-sectoral tradeoffs are the optimal means to conduct multi-jurisdictional merger reviews,
there is probably some value in thinking through the implications of compensation mechanisms
across merger cases that prevent a proposed merger or acquisition whose total effects worldwide
are welfare improving from being blocked by a single jurisdiction in which it is thought that the
transaction’s effects are adverse.26


          3.     Consolidation of the banking systems in thirteen industrial nations

          I now turn to an econometric evaluation of the effects of cross border mergers and
acquisitions in the banking systems of 13 industrial economies. When conducting such evaluations
the importance of controlling for changes in regulatory structure, for sample composition, and for
other determinants of market structure in the banking sector—such as domestic M&As, domestic
entry and exit of banking, and the formation of joint ventures and strategic alliances between
banks—will become evident. But, first, I review the facts on banking consolidation as presented in
Tables 5 and 6, which were assembled from a detailed report on bank consolidation during the
1990s that was published by the Bank of International Settlements (BIS, 2001). This report referred
to consolidation in thirteen OECD nations, namely, Australia, Belgium, Canada, France, Germany,
Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, the United Kingdom, and the United
States.


          During the 1990s these thirteen OECD economies experienced 3563 mergers and
acquisitions that involved a domestic bank and another domestic bank. This domestic consolidation
dwarfed in number (and in value) the amount of cross border M&A in banks (which totalled 338
transactions worth in current dollars approximately $73 billion (see Table 5). What is more, many

26
  For more discussion on the potential for resource misallocation in multi-jurisdictional merger review see
Evenett (2003c) and Neven and Roller (2001).


                                                                                                        14
banks engaged in joint ventures and in strategic alliances during this period, in particular in the
United States, Japan, and Canada (Table 6). In short, cross border M&A was not the only factor
influencing the concentration and the market structure of these nations’ banking systems.


        Research on banking mergers points to a number of rationales for this observed
consolidation. Carow and Kane (2001), for example, point to the following potential benefits of
mergers and acquisitions: cost-based economies of scale, brand-based economies of scale, revenue-
based economies of scale, safety net-based economies of scale, revenue-based economies of scope,
X-inefficiency, market power, and managerial agency costs (Table 1, Carow and Kane 2001).
Dermine (1999), whose analysis Carow and Kane developed, noted that the following attractions to
bank M&As has been asserted in the literature: that size can bring “defense based economies of
scale” (that is “achieving size…that acts as a defensive measure against takeovers” (Dermine, 1999,
page 16), and the long standing “quiet life” hypothesis. Moreover, to the extent that strategic
alliances between banks enable them to enhance the range of products that they supply (and in so
doing market their partners’ products too), and to the extent that alliance partners can share costs in
supplying products (perhaps by reducing any duplication in distribution networks), then such
alliances can generate cost efficiencies too.

        My interest here is in the market power and efficiency-related aspects of bank mergers and
acquisitions. In particular, I focus on the effects on one important observable variable, the interest
rate spread; that is, the difference between the interest rates paid by borrowers and those paid to
depositors. Part of that spread will be determined by the costs associated with collecting deposits,
but more importantly by the costs associated with locating and screening potential borrowers.
Another determinant of the spread is market power, and this depends on the number of options
available to both depositors and the borrowers. If potential depositors have few choices as to where
to place their savings, then incumbent banks can offer lower deposit rates which ceterius paribus
raises spreads. Likewise, if potential borrowers have few alternatives to seeking funds from the
incumbent banks, then the interest rate paid by the former will be higher, raising spreads.


        In the absence of efficiencies, bank M&As can be expected to raise spreads as the number
of banking options facing depositors and borrowers declines. Only if there is sufficient rivalry
between banks after a merger takes place will any efficiencies created by the merger be passed onto
consumers in the form of lower spreads.27 It is an empirical question whether market power or

27
  For a more sophisticated overview of the causes and consequences of market power in banking, see Vives
(2001), section III.


                                                                                                     15
efficiencies dominates. To date, the empirical literature on bank mergers is mixed on the relative
importance of these two factors (see the discussions in Berger, DeYoung, Genay, and Udell, 2000,
Calomiris and Karceski, 2000, and Vives, 2001.)


        To estimate the effects on interest rate spreads of the changes in the national banking
sectors documented in Tables 5 and 6, I assembled from BIS (2001) and the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators (WDI) an unbalanced panel comprising the thirteen nations in the BIS
study. The unbalanced nature of the panel resulted from the fact that in some countries the five firm
concentration ratios in the banking sectors were not reported in the BIS study for every year from
1990 to 1999. The BIS study provided annual data on the number of banks in each country, the
number and types of strategic alliances, and the number and types of M&A.


        The dependent variable for this study—the interest rate spread—was taken from the WDI
CD-ROM. This source defines the interest spread as


“the interest rate charged by banks on loans to prime customers minus the interest paid to by
commercial or similar banks for demand, time, or savings deposits.” (WDI CD-ROM)28

        The mean value of this spread for each economy is reported in Table 7, which sorts the
economies according to the annual average number of cross border mergers and acquisitions. The
highest mean spread (6.35 percent) is in Germany and the lowest spread is in Canada (1.34
percent). Data on three macroeconomic series—gross domestic products, GDP price deflators, and
stock market capitalization—used to form control variables (which are described later) was also
assembled from the WDI. Both GDP growth and the inflation rate are intended to proxy for the
stage of the business cycle, whereas the size a nation’s stock market is supposed to proxy for the
extent to which financial markets can act as an alternative source of finance for borrowers and as an
alternative destination for personal savings.


        The objective of the econometric strategy is to discern—after stripping out the variation
created by the business cycle and any competition for funds created by the stock market and by the
impact of regulatory changes—whether interest rate spreads in the 1990s have been influenced by
the formation of the numerous strategic alliances and the consummation of bank M&As. Of
especial interest is whether cross border M&A and cross border strategic alliances have different

28
  Some seminar participants have questioned the accuracy of the WDI data on bank spreads. I checked other
available series on bank spreads—specifically, those from the International Monetary Fund and the
comprehensive DATASTREAM financial database—and found that these confirmed the data on spreads
reported in the WDI.


                                                                                                      16
effects from their domestic counterparts. So that my econometric estimates are not determined
entirely by the boom years of cross border M&A (1997-2000), the dataset used covers as much of
the 1990s as the data sources employed here would allow.


        I proceed from a parsimonious specification to richer ones. The first specification purges
the variation in bank spreads of variation associated with a set of macroeconomic controls and
includes country-specific fixed effects. The estimation equation is as follows:


                                                   1 + Lit   
                                      (1)      ln            = ai + b ln (M it ) + ε it
                                                   1 + Dit    

        where


                                        GDPit                               
                     ln (M it ) = b1 ln                 + b2 ln Pit          + b3 ln (SM it ) + b4 ln (t ) + ...
                                        GDP                    P            
                                           i ( t −1)            i ( t −1)   

and

        i=1,…..,N, N=13
        t=1990,… ,1999.
        ai      is a country-specific fixed effect for economy i.
        Lit     is the prime rate paid to borrowers from banks in economy i in year t.
        Dit     is the interest paid to depositors in banks in economy i in year t.
        GDPit is the gross domestic product of economy i in year t.
        Pit     is the GDP deflator in economy i in year t.
        SMit is the total stock market capitalization of economy i in year t as a percentage
                of GDPit.

        The vector Mit includes the four macroeconomic controls outlined above plus the (six) two-
way interaction between these four controls. The parameter estimates, obtained by confronting
specification 1 with the data from my unbalanced panel of thirteen economies, account for 6.43
percent of the within variation, see Table 8. The estimation procedure used weighted least squares
to take account of any country-specific (or group wise) heteroskedacity.29

        Specifications 2 and 3 (in Table 8) include parsimonious controls for changes in market
structure. Specification 2 includes the logarithm of the five firm concentration ratio as an

29
   Specifically, the weight applied to each country’s data in a second stage regression is the estimate of the
standard deviation of the residuals that were recovered from an unweighted first stage regression using
ordinary least squares.


                                                                                                                       17
independent variable. Specification 3 goes further and introduces as two additional distinct
independent variables the logarithms of (one plus) the number of annual strategic alliances and (one
plus) the number of annual M&As consummated since 1990. Both specification yield the traditional
finding that increases in the concentration ratio raises interest rate spreads. Specification 3 provides
the first evidence that strategic alliances appear to raise interest rate spreads, whereas M&As tend to
have no statistically significant effect on them.


         One objection to specification 3 is that the observed concentration ratio in a given year may
well, in turn, be influenced by the number of strategic alliances and mergers and acquisitions that
have occurred in the past or are taking place currently. Consequently, in addition to allowing for
time invariant country-specific determinants of concentration, I also purged the variation of the five
firm concentration ratio of the observed levels of strategic alliances and M&As.30 This purged
concentration ratio was used in specification 4 instead of the actual concentration ratio in
specification 3. The upshot: precious little changes.31


         Another objection to specifications 1-4 is that they do not take into account the entry and
exit of domestic banks that is independent of M&A. Specification 5 includes as an independent
variable the logarithm of the number of banks in an economy. With this additional explanatory
variable, the effect of the concentration ratio on interest rate spreads still has the correct sign and
the parameter estimate on the strategic alliance variable remains little changed. Entry of banks is
found to depress spreads, but not in a statistically insignificant manner.

         As the BIS data source enables me to differentiate between domestic and cross border
strategic alliances and between domestic and cross border M&A, I entered them as separate
independent variables in specification 6. Interestingly, domestic M&A and domestic strategic
alliances are found to raise spreads, with the estimated parameter on the former 50 percent larger
than on the latter. In contrast, cross border M&A does appear to reduce spreads. However, in

30
   Specifically, in specification 4 I regressed the concentration ratio on country-specific dummies and the
logarithm of one plus the total number of strategic alliances and the total number of mergers and acquisitions.
Following standard procedures, the estimate of the “purged” concentration ratio is the estimated residual of
the regression described above in this footnote.
31
   Note that in specifications 4-7 I purged the concentration ratio of country-specific fixed effects plus each of
the M&A and strategic alliance variables included in a given specification. Moreover, in specifications 5-7 I
also purged the concentration ratio of the logarithm of the number of banks. In specification 7, I also purged
the concentration ration of the explanatory power of the dummies picking up changes in bank regulatory
regimes. In each specification, the goal of this “purging” procedure is to identify that component of the
concentration ratio that cannot be attributed to the changes in national market structures in the banking sector,
to national regulatory changes, or to other national characteristics that do not vary over the years of data in the
sample (1990-1999).


                                                                                                                18
specification 6 these findings do not survive the inclusion of controls for regulatory changes in the
thirteen OECD nations during the 1990s.32 Specification 7 includes these controls and the parameter
on the cross border M&A variable loses its significance. Nonetheless, the estimated parameters do
suggest that domestic consolidation and strategic alliances in the banking system have raised
spreads—whereas their cross border counterparts do not.


           The next step was to examine whether these qualitative findings held up to changes in
sample composition. First, I eliminated each country one at a time from the sample and re-estimated
the parameters. The new parameter estimates varied little from previously. Second, I eliminated the
North American economies (Canada and the United States) from the sample—again with little
effect. Third, I eliminated Japan and Australia from the sample and found not much changed. This
seemingly robust set of regression findings was overturned when I split the thirteen nation sample
into a sample comprising of European Union (EU) members and a sample comprising the rest.
Arguably, the former’s banking sectors have been affected by the implementation of two European
Banking Directives (and other measures to enhance the integration of European markets). Such
considerations may result in banking consolidation in Europe having different effects than in other
parts of the industrialized world. Table 9 and 10, which report the parameters estimated in Table 8
for the eight nation EU sample and the five nation non-EU sample respectively, confirm that
differences do exist between these samples.


           In the EU sample, cross border strategic alliances are found to increase spreads. Perhaps
such alliances in Europe were formed to frustrate entry and segment markets, rather than to enhance
economies of scale and scope. Interestingly, where EU banks have gone beyond such alliances and
have actually merged with banks located in another EU member, the evidence suggests that spreads
do fall (see specification 7, Table 9). In contrast, domestic inter-bank alliances in EU member states
appear to have no effects on bank spreads—suggesting that any economies reaped are probably
offset by a diminution in competition.


           The performance of the specifications in the non-EU sample is rather mixed. For sure, with
the inclusion of the regulatory controls (in specification 7, Table 10), over half of the variation in
the dependant variable is explained. However, few of the market structure variables—such as the
purged concentration ratio—are found to have had a statistically significant effect on interest rate
spreads. This may reflect the fact that the degrees of freedom in the sample is quite small (less than


32
     Appendix Table 2 lists the major banking sector-related changed identified in Annex II.3 of BIS (2001).


                                                                                                               19
30). Even so, outside the EU cross-border strategic alliances were found to depress interest rate
spreads, suggesting that such corporate agreements generate efficiencies.


         The parameter estimates from specification 7 (in both Tables 9 and 10) can be used to
quantify the total effect of the observed domestic and cross border consolidation in the banking
sectors that occurred in the 1990s, as well as the total effect of the formation of strategic alliances.
Table 11 reports country-by-country the point estimates of the total effect on interest rate spreads of
the domestic and cross border banking changes observed throughout the 1990s. In every non-EU
country considered here, the combined effect of the domestic banking changes was to raise spreads,
but this was offset by the beneficial effects created by cross border strategic alliances and M&A. In
each EU economy the net effect of domestic banking changes on spreads is almost zero and is
dominated by the spread-increasing effects of cross-border strategic alliances. Indeed, had those
cross border strategic alliances not occurred in the 1990s, bank spreads (as measured by the
dependent variable) in each EU country considered here would have been at least two whole
percentage points lower in 1999. In contrast, in the five non-EU economies cross border strategic
alliances and mergers have helped reduce spreads by between 1.3 and 3 percentage points.


         These findings suggest that inter-bank agreements and consolidation in the 1990s had
important effects on interest rates and, therefore, on the welfare of lenders or borrowers. What is
doubtful, however, is that sweeping statements about the effects of cross-border inter-bank
agreements can be made with any confidence. Indeed, the emphasis in much commentary on
globalization on the role of cross-border M&A is somewhat misplaced, at least in banking, as it
appears that the consequences of cross-border strategic alliances are a more important part of the
story.


         4.     Concluding remarks

         The cross border mergers and acquisitions wave of the 1990s was on a different scale than
its predecessor in the late 1990s: it included more firms from more countries, it saw a greater
number of transactions many of which were mega deals; and it was dominated by service sector
transactions—in fact, three sectors (namely, transportation and communication; finance; and
business services) accounted for just under half of the value of all M&A from 1997 to 2000. An
evaluation of this recent cross border mergers and acquisitions wave is, thus, in large part an
evaluation of its effects on these three sectors. What is more, in each case there are good reasons
for suspecting that cross border M&A was not the only major change in their market structures in



                                                                                                     20
the 1990s. The telecommunications sector saw much deregulation and technological advances, as
did business services. In banking, whose consolidation was studied in more detail in this chapter,
strategic alliances and domestic M&As were consummated in large numbers in the 1990s.
Correcting for these other developments was found to be important when accurately gauging the
effect of cross border mergers and acquisitions in the banking sector.


        My empirical analysis of thirteen OECD economies’ banking sectors points to a
discernable impact of openness to foreign banking activities on bank spreads. In eight EU
economies the beneficial consequences of cross border M&As was more than offset by the
deleterious impact of cross border strategic alliances. In contrast, the net effect of openness to
foreign banking activities has been to benefit customers in non-European industrialized economies.


        This chapter speaks to a number of themes discussed throughout this book. First, by
documenting the factual record on cross-border mergers and acquisitions, a better sense of the scale
of this phenomenon emerged. Facts replace assertions. For sure, cross border mergers and
acquisitions in the late 1990s were greater than in the late 1980s. However, the former still only
represent a small fraction of the stock market capitalizations of all but the smallest industrialized
economies. Indeed, in almost every industrial country foreigners are hardly snapping up domestic
assets at a rate that some might find alarming.


        The second important finding of this chapter relates to the concern that changes in the
global economy in recent years have sought to reinforce the market power of corporations. The
sectoral study of banking presented here points to the importance of correctly identifying all of the
changes in a given sector’s structure and its regulations before drawing any inferences about the
effects of consolidation on customers. In the banking sector in the EU the evidence suggests that
cross-border M&As has actually benefited bank customers rather than harming them. In contrast,
cross-border strategic alliances have probably hurt customers in the EU; suggesting that not all
cross-border corporate acts have the same effects. More nuance is clearly needed in policy debates
so that cross-border inter-firm measures are not automatically branded as bad or anti-consumer.




                                                                                                  21
References

Bank of International Settlements (BIS). (2001). Report On Consolidation In The Financial Sector.
Basle.

Berger, Allen N., Robert DeYoung, Hensa Genay, and Gregory F. Udell. (2000). “Globalization of
Financial Institutions: Evidence from Cross-Border Banking Performance,” Brookings-Wharton
Papers on Financial Services, volume 3.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1968), The Theory and Practice of Commercial Policy. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.

Black, Bernard S. (2000a). “Is This the First International Merger Wave?” M&A Lawyer,
July/August 2000: 20-26.

Black, Bernard S. (2000b). “The First International Merger Wave (and the Fifth and Last U.S.
Wave,” University of Miami Law Review: 799-818.

Calomiris, Charles W., and Jason Karceski. (2000). “Is the Bank Merger Wave of the 1990s
Efficient? Lessons from Nine Case Studies.” In Steven N. Kaplan (ed.) Mergers and Productivity.
National Bureau of Economic Research.

Carow, Kenneth A., and Edward J. Kane. (2001). “Event-Study Evidence On The Value Of
Relaxing Longstanding Regulatory Restraints on Banks, 1970-2000.” Mimeo. Boston College.

Consumer Union Trust Society (CUTS) (2003). Pulling Up Our Socks: A Study of Competition
Regimes of Seven Developing Countries of Africa and Asia. Jaipur, India.

Dermine, Jean. (1999). “The Economics of Bank Mergers in the European Union, a Review of the
Public Policy Issues.” Mimeo. INSEAD.

Evenett, Simon J., Alexander Lehmann, and Benn Steil (editors). (2000). Antitrust Goes Global:
What Future for Transatlantic Cooperation? Washington, D.C.: The Brookings Institution Press.

Evenett, Simon J. (2002). “How Much Have Merger Review Laws Reduced Cross Border Mergers
and Acquisitions? In William K. Rowley (ed.) International Merger Control: Prescriptions for
Convergence, September 2002.

Evenett, Simon J. (2003a). A Study on Issues Relating to a Possible Multilateral Framework on
Competition Policy, commissioned by the Secretariat of the World Trade Organization. 23 February
2003.

Evenett, Simon J. (2003b). “Do all networks facilitate international commerce? US law firms and
the international market for corporate control.” Available at www.wti.org and www.nber.org.

Evenett, Simon J. (2003c). “What Future for Regional Competition Policy in Latin America?”
forthcoming in Robert Devlin and Antoni Estevadeordal (eds.) in Trade and Regional Integration
in the Development Agenda, Washington, D.C.: The InterAmerican Development Bank.




                                                                                              22
Feliciano, Zadia, and Robert E. Lipsey. (2002). “Foreign Entry in U.S. Manufacturing by
Takeovers and the Creation of New Firms.” Mimeo. Queens College and the Graduate Center,
CUNY. New York.

Hoekman, Bernard M., and Petros C. Mavroidis. (2002). “Economic Development, Competition
Policy and The WTO.” Paper presented at a research conference on the Doha Round organized by
the World Bank in Cairo. May 2002.

International Competition Policy Advisory Committee (ICPAC). (2000). Final Report. Washington,
D.C.: Government Printing Office.

Kang, Nam-Hoon, and Sara Johansson. (2000). “Cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions: Their
Role in Industrial Globalisation.” STI Working paper number 2000/1. OECD. Paris.


Levenstein, Margaret C., and Valerie Y. Suslow. (2001). “Private International Cartels and The
Effect on Developing Countries.” Background Paper to the World Development Report 2001.
Washington, D.C.

Mehta, Pradeep, and Nitya Nanda. (2003). “Competition Issues with International Dimensions:
How do developing countries deal with them?” Consumer Union Trust Society Centre on
Competition, Investment and Economic Regulation, Jaipur, India.

Mody, Ashoka, and Shoko Negishi. (2000). “Cross-border mergers and acquisitions in East Asia:
trends and implications,” Finance and Development, 38(1): 6-9.

Muris, Timothy J. (2001). “Merger Enforcement in a World of Multiple Arbiters.” Paper presented
at the Brookings Roundtable on Trade and Investment Policy, Washington, D.C. December 2001.

Neven, Damien, and Lans Henrik Roller. (2001). “The scope for conflict in international merger
review.” European Economic Review.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (2001). New Patterns of
Industrial Globalisation: Cross-Border Mergers and Acquisitions and Strategic Alliances. Paris.

Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD). (2003). Second Report by the
Competition Committee on Effective Action Against Hard Core Cartels. Paris.

Pryor, Frederic M. (2001). “Dimensions Of The Worldwide Merger Boom,” forthcoming in the
Journal of Economic Issues.

Rowley, William K. (2002). (ed.) International Merger Control: Prescriptions for Convergence,
September 2002.

United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). Various Years. World
Investment Report. Geneva.

Vives, Xavier. (2001). “Competition in the changing world of banking,” Oxford Review of
Economic Policy, 17(4): 535-547.




                                                                                            23
White & Case. (2001). Survey of Worldwide Antitrust Merger Notification Requirements.
Washington, D.C.

World Bank. (2000). The World Development Report 1999/2000, Entering the 21st Century: The
Changing Development Landscape. Washington, DC: World Bank.

World Trade Organization (WTO) (2002). Report (2002) of the Working Group on the Interaction
Between Trade and Competition Policy to the General Council. WTO document WT/WGTCP/6. 9
December 2002.




                                                                                         24
         Table 1: Ratio of Inward M&A flows to Inward FDI flows for 13 OECD economies

                                                          Year
           Economy                                                                   Mean ratio
                                   1995       1996        1997     1998     1999
             Spain                 20.40      22.22       63.91    48.05    56.14       42.14
             France                31.81      61.82       76.59    57.25    59.02       57.30
            Sweden                 65.39      76.19       30.35    56.71    99.42       65.61
          Netherlands              29.52      23.51       131.73   46.44    113.95      69.03
    Belgium and Luxembourg         18.62      63.82       78.65    30.41    153.98      69.10
         United States             90.58      80.60       77.46    112.47   84.57       89.14
            Canada                124.95     112.48       72.36    75.71    99.07       96.92
          Switzerland             166.08     143.18       53.42    71.25    120.54    110.89
            Germany                62.34     181.44       106.84   90.00    156.36    119.39
              Italy                84.72      77.95       90.86    146.17   225.24    124.99
        United Kingdom            182.24     127.98       119.50   143.10   152.59    145.08
            Australia             140.27     213.79       191.33   232.26   192.77    194.09
             Japan                1387.18    859.50       96.34    126.00   124.46    518.70
    Weighted mean (across
                                   84.60      87.16       86.75    96.89    102.75
         economies)
     Coefficient of variation      4.32       2.51         0.47     0.58     0.48

Source: Appendices of the World Investment Report 2000.




                                                                                            25
                                                Table 2: Total cross border mergers and acquisitions 1987-2000, Constant 1987 US dollars

                                                                                                        Year
   Class of economies
                                1987        1988       1989       1990      1991      1992      1993        1994      1995      1996        1997     1998     1999     2000
           All                  74.51      111.81     130.76     135.00     69.84     66.95     68.50      102.65    147.44    175.89      232.06   400.02   567.59   828.43
   Developed countries          71.87      109.67     126.47     128.40     67.18     62.86     59.79       94.16    137.27    153.61      207.08   384.81   523.48   792.38
   Developing countries         2.61        2.11       3.72       6.31      2.65      4.08       8.61       8.21     10.10      21.79      24.77     14.45   42.75     30.52

Note: Figures refer to billions of US dollars
Source: World Investment Reports.




                                                                                                                                                               26
   Figure 1: The latest wave of cross border M&A (1997-2000) is
           much larger than its predecessor (1987-1990)


  900
  800
  700
  600
  500
  400
  300
  200
  100
    0
       1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

             Total      Industrial economies     Developing economies




   Figure 2: The real increase in cross border M&A throughout
          the 1990s dwarfs that of world trade and GDP

1200
1100
1000
 900
 800
 700
 600
 500
 400
 300
 200
 100
   0
   1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

         Cross border M&A       World GDP       World merchandise trade




                                                                               27
                                                          Figure 3a: Comparing inward M&A across booms:
                                                            economies with relatively moderate increases

                                         800

                                         700
Real inward M&A (1990=100)




                                         600
                                         500

                                         400

                                         300

                                         200
                                         100

                                           0
                                                   1988   1989   1990    1991   1992   1993   1994      1995   1996   1997   1998   1999   2000


                                                                 Japan          Sweden          United States            France




                                                          Figure 3b: Comparing inward M&A across booms:
                                                                   economies with large increases

                                          1500
            Real inward M&A (1990=100)




                                          1250

                                          1000

                                           750

                                           500

                                           250

                                               0
                                                    1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000

                                                                 Netherlands             Sw itzerland             Spain
                                                                 Germ any                Canada                   United Kingdom




                                                                                                                                                  28
                                          Table 3:

                        Total value of annual cross border M&A deals as a percentage of stock market
                                                        capitalization
              Economy
                                    1980s wave                              1990s wave
                        1988      1989     1990      Mean       1997      1996      1999      Mean
Luxembourg               0.01     0.00      5.08      1.70      10.30     0.10      20.48     10.29
Sweden                   0.19     1.55      4.58      2.11      1.22      3.98      15.99        7.06
Belgium                  1.35     1.08      6.83      3.08      4.34      2.79      13.51        6.88
Norway                   1.67     2.38      2.56      2.20      4.00      2.10      13.66        6.59
New Zealand             10.03     5.00     41.92     18.98      4.41      9.28      5.64         6.44
Austria                  2.85     0.14      1.65      1.55      6.32      10.41     1.15         5.96
Netherlands              1.04     2.51      1.24      1.60      4.06      3.21      5.61         4.30
Australia                3.17     3.34      2.34      2.95      5.00      4.48      2.80         4.10
United Kingdom           2.58     3.21      3.43      3.07      1.99      3.84      4.52         3.45
Denmark                  0.72     0.56      1.27      0.85      0.60      3.85      4.38         2.94
Canada                   3.61     3.57      2.37      3.19      1.50      3.02      2.99         2.50
France                   1.23     0.91      2.60      1.58      2.63      1.70      1.62         1.98
Germany                  0.52     1.18      1.75      1.15      1.44      1.74      2.76         1.98
Finland                  0.27     0.75      0.22      0.41      1.00      3.09      0.90         1.67
Spain                    0.79     1.30      3.44      1.84      1.40      1.42      1.35         1.39
United States            2.29     1.96      1.79      2.01      0.72      1.56      1.51         1.26
Italy                    2.29     1.77      1.46      1.84      0.98      0.79      1.54         1.10
Switzerland              1.67     0.57      2.85      1.70      0.62      0.78      0.59         0.66
Portugal                 0.15     7.23      2.31      3.23      0.22      0.68      0.32         0.41
Japan                    0.00     0.04      0.01      0.01      0.14      0.16      0.36         0.22
Greece                   0.51     0.00      0.76      0.42      0.29      0.03      0.09         0.14




                                                                                            29
                             Figure 4: Cumulative distribution of cross border M&A in 1987-
                                                   90 and 1997-2000

                     1
                   0.9
Cumulative share




                   0.8
                   0.7
                   0.6
                   0.5
                   0.4
                   0.3
                   0.2
                   0.1
                     0
                             0         25        50        75          100        125        150    175
                                                      Number of jurisdictions

                                                 1987-1990 wave        1997-2000 wave




                             Figure 5: The latest M&A wave involved more OECD nations

                             1.0
Cumulative distribution of




                             0.9
   cross border M&A




                             0.8
                             0.7
                             0.6
                             0.5
                             0.4
                             0.3
                             0.2
                             0.1
                             0.0
                                   0        5         10          15         20         25         30

                                                   Number of OECD members

                                                1987-1990 wave         1997-2000 wave




                                                                                                        30
Number of M&A deals worth more than         Figure 6: The growing number of billion dollar-plus M&A deals
                                                                                                                      175
                                          180

                                          160

                                          140

                                          120                                                      109
            US 1 billion




                                          100                                       89
                                           80
                                                                       58
                                           60          45
                                           40

                                           20

                                            0
                                                      1996             1997        1998           1999            2000




                                           Figure 7: Mega deals drove the latest wave of cross border M&A
 (1987 constant US dollars in billions)




                                          900
 Total value of each category of M&A




                                                                                                                        828

                                          800
                                          700
                                                                                                    568
                                          600
                                                                                                                        627
                                          500                                     400
                                          400
                                          300                    232                                371
                                                176                               304
                                          200
                                          100                    180

                                            0 73
                                            1996                1997             1998              1999                 2000

                                                  Total cross border M&A      Mega deals (valued in excess of $1bn)




                                                                                                                       31
Figure 8a: Manufacturing dominated the 1987-1990 wave
                                     5%




             32%




                                              63%




                   Primary   Manufacturing   Tertiary




Figure 8b: ...but services dominated the 1997-2000 wave
                                1%




                                                 35%




            64%




                   Primary   Manufacturing   Tertiary




                                                          32
                            Table 4: Sectoral composition of cross border M&A


                                                                                Share of total cross border
                                                                                         M&A in
 Sector                                  Industy
                                                                                 1987-1990     1997-2000
Primary                                                                             5.04          1.43
         Agriculture, hunting, forestry, and fishing                                0.72          0.38
         Mining, quarrying and petroleum                                            4.32          1.04
Manufacturing                                                                      62.24         35.11
         Food, beverages and tobacco                                                8.16          4.28
         Textiles, clothing and leather                                             0.95          0.41
         Wood and wood products                                                    3.93           1.72
         Publishing, printing, and reproduction of recorded media                   5.89          1.11
         Coke, petroleum and nuclear fuel                                           9.38          5.33
         Chemicals and chemical products                                           12.17          6.70
         Rubber and plastic products                                                2.03          0.48
         Non-metallic mineral products                                              2.30          1.39
         Metal and metal products                                                   2.86          1.67
         Machinery and equipment                                                    1.75          1.69
         Electrical and electronic equipment                                        8.14          5.44
         Precision instruments                                                      2.20          1.21
         Motor vehicles and other transport equipment                               1.94          3.60
         Other manufacturing                                                        0.53          0.11
Tertiary                                                                           32.72         63.46
         Electric, gas, and water                                                   0.36          5.44
         Construction                                                              0.46           0.38
         Trade                                                                      8.08          5.07
         Hotels and restaurants                                                     3.77          0.82
         Transport, storage and communications                                      1.84         21.94
         Finance                                                                   11.03         16.19
         Business services                                                          4.39          9.44
         Public administration and defence                                          0.00          0.08
         Education                                                                  0.00          0.02
         Health and social services                                                 0.17          0.20
         Community, social and personal service activities                          2.62          3.87
         Other services                                                             0.01          0.01
Unknown                                                                             0.00          0.00




                                                                                                     33
                              Figure 9: The spread of merger review laws 1970-2000
                                                                                   20
                         20                                        19
                                                                                        17
Number of laws enacted


                         15                                             14


                         10                        8
                                                        5
                          5     4
                                       1
                          0
                               1970-9              1980-9           1990-4        1995-2000

                                    All types of merger review regime   Pre-merger regimes




                                                                                             34
                                                                           Table 5:
                                  Mergers and acquisitions in the banking sector in thirteen OECD nations during the 1990s
                                                     Deals classified by country and sector of selling firm
 Type of transaction           Characteristics          1990     1991    1992     1993     1994      1995        1996    1997     1998     1999     Total
        Within                   Number                 139      244      318      390      433      435          395     425      417      367      3563
        border/                 Total value            16.77    27.74    23.65    26.68    31.02    122.35       38.92   172.04   257.25   241.11   957.53
        within                  Mean value             0.18     0.22     0.14     0.10     0.10      0.43        0.15     0.53     0.78     0.98     0.39
       industry
        Within                   Number                  37       39       40      45       59        58          53       71       62       79      543
        border/                 Total value            10.66     3.00     0.92    1.44     1.54      4.79        1.65     4.21    99.53     8.27    136.03
         cross                  Mean value              0.48     1.36     0.05    0.06     0.06      0.17        0.06     0.11     2.21     0.16     0.44
       industry
        Cross-                   Number                  14       18       14      19       24        30          21       30       36       29      235
        border/                 Total value             2.34     0.56     0.23    1.16     1.85      8.51        3.17     5.70    13.48    13.79    50.80
        within                  Mean value              0.39     0.07     0.08    0.17     0.15      0.47        0.29     0.34     0.75     0.77     0.43
       industry
        Cross-                   Number                  9        10       9       7        9         9           11       8        18       13      103
        border/                 Total value             1.27     0.23     1.85    0.42     0.15      0.59        2.63     5.12     2.77     7.10    22.14
         cross                  Mean value              0.32     0.05     0.26    0.11     0.03      0.10        0.44     0.64     0.21     0.65    0.32
       industry
                                                      Deals classified by country and sector of acquiring firm

 Type of transaction           Characteristics          1990     1991    1992     1993     1994      1995        1996    1997     1998     1999     Total

        Within                    Number                 139      244     318      390       433       435        395     425      417      367      3563
        border/                 Total value             16.77 27.74 23.65 26.68 31.02 122.35                     38.92   172.04   257.25   241.11   957.53
        within                  Mean value               0.18     0.22    0.14     0.10     0.10       0.43      0.15     0.53     0.78     0.98     0.39
       industry
        Within                    Number                  13       25      22       35        36         52       60       49       45       72      409
        border/                 Total value              0.25     1.13    0.52     4.49     0.77       2.09      5.06    20.34     5.67     9.71    50.02
         cross                  Mean value               0.04     0.16    0.09     0.20     0.04       0.09      0.16     0.60     0.20     0.19    2.20
       industry
        Cross-                    Number                  22       20      19       22        25         44       34       42       51       50      329
        border/                 Total value              2.83     0.37    0.99     1.28     1.65      10.25      5.12    10.70    15.50    20.26    68.95
        within                  Mean value               0.28     0.06    0.20     0.14     0.15       0.38      0.30     0.51     0.60     0.61     0.42
       industry
        Cross-                    Number                   6        8       7        7         9         21       15       17       15       17      122
        border/                 Total value              0.18     0.19    0.27     0.13     0.75       0.65      1.06     1.22     0.85     3.59     8.89
         cross                  Mean value               0.06     0.05    0.14     0.04     0.75       0.13      0.21     0.17     0.09     0.33     0.18
       industry
Note: Total value and mean value are in billions of US dollars. These magnitudes are in current dollars.
                                                                                                                                                      35
                                                                      Table 6:
                      Joint ventures and strategic alliances in the banking sector in thirteen OECD nations during the 1990s

 Economy      Characteristics                 1990      1991      1992      1993      1994       1995      1996      1997      1998   1999   Total
  United      Within border                    22        25        36        48        85        134        67       160       318    241    1136
  States      Cross border                     25        32        12        11        24         33        28        42        75     57    339
              Total                            47        57        48        59        109       167        95       202       393    298    1475
  Canada      Within border                    5         5         0          1         3          7         3        11        21     28     84
              Cross border                      3         5         1         4          3         5         6         9        29     16      81
              Total                            8         10        1          5         6         12         9        20        50     44    165
  Japan       Within border                     4         2         5         4          5         4         1         4        20     47      96
              Cross border                      7         9         2         5          4         6         4        17        64     65    183
              Total                            11        11        7          9         9         10         5        21        84    112    279
 Australia    Within border                     0        3         3          5        12         21         5        11        33     52     145
              Cross border                      2         1         2         4          7        18         9        12        21     42    118
              Total                            2         4         5          9        19         39        14        23        54     94    263
 Belgium      Within border                     0         0         0         0         1          I         1         1         1      1      6
              Cross border                      1         1         2         1          3         1         1         0         2      3      15
              Total                            1         1         2          1         4          2         2         1         3     4      21
  France      Within border                     2         2        4          1         4          3         2         4         1      4      27
              Cross border                      9         3         7         4          3         5         3         6        12     11      63
              Total                            11        5         11         5         7          8         5        10        13     15     90
 Germany      Within border                     2         4         4         8          2         3         0         5         8      4      40
              Cross border                      3         7         1         6          5         6         2         4        16      6      56
              Total                            5         11        5         14         7          9         2         9        24     10     96
   Italy      Within border                    1         2         13         2         2          2         0         1         1      3     27
              Cross border                      4         2         9         4          2         4         1        10         8      8      52
              Total                            5         4         22         6         4          6         1        11         9     11      79
Netherlands   Within border                     0        2         2          2         1          3         1         1         1      2     15
              Cross border                      1         4         2         1          1         2         1         1         7      6      26
              Total                            1         6         4          3         2          5         2         2         8     8      41
  Spain       Within border                     0         0         2         2          2         0         0         0         1      2      9
              Cross border                      4         8         5         2          5         2         2         2         5      5      40
              Total                            4         8         7          4         7          2         2         2         6     7      49
 Sweden       Within border                     2         0         0         0          0         0         1         0         0      0      3
              Cross border                      1         2         0         0          1         0         1         0         4      4      13
              Total                            3         2         0          0         1          0         2         0         4     4      16
Switzerland   Within border                     I        1         1          1         5          3         0         0         0     4      16
              Cross border                      2         1         0         0          3         0         0         2         3      3      14
              Total                            3         2         1          1         8          3         0         2         3     7      30
  United      Within border                     7        13        3          8        11         39        11        25        29     47    193
 Kingdom      Cross border                     11        15         7         5         17        24        15        16        38     60    208
              Total                            18        28        10        13        28         63        26        41        67    107    401




                                                                                                                                                     36
                                      Table 7: Summary statistics for the unbalanced panel dataset


                                                                   Mean value of annual observations of...
                     Years in         Five firm
   Economy                                          Number of      Strategic alliances           Mergers and acquisitions    Interest rate
                 unbalanced panel   concentration
                                                      banks   Within border Cross border      Within border   Cross border    spread (%)
                                        ratio
    Canada           1990-99            70.9          61.0           8.4            8.1              9.8           0.4           1.34
    Japan            1990-98            30.6          161.1          5.4           13.1              6.1           0.4           2.59
   Sweden            1990-98            80.2          196.3          0.3            1.0              5.0           0.6           5.85
 Netherlands         1990-99            77.8          172.4          1.5            2.6              3.2           1.2           5.03
     Italy           1992-99            32.3          280.9          3.0            5.8            23.6            1.5           5.62
    Spain            1990-97            45.8          317.4          0.8            3.8              6.4           1.9           3.16
   Belgium           1990-98            58.9          321.0          0.8            2.2              2.4           2.1           5.14
   Australia         1991-98            71.8          40.1          11.6            9.3              7.8           2.4           4.19
   Germany           1990-98            17.4         3969.7          4.0            5.6            16.6            2.8           6.15
  Switzerland        1990-97            53.5          418.4          2.1            2.1              9.1           3.1           2.21
    France           1990-97            66.2         1520.5          2.8            5.0            16.1            3.9           4.33
United Kingdom    1990, 1995-8          44.3          466.8         26.0           23.3            22.5            6.0           2.79
 United States       1990-99            18.3         12392.1       113.6           33.9           283.6            7.5           2.73




                                                                                                                                             37
                                                         Table 8: Estimating the determinants of bank spreads in all 13 OECD nations from 1990 to 1999


                                                                                                                     Specifications
                                                                  2                         3                        4                          5                          6                         7
               Independent variable
                                            1         Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                  Parameter                 Parameter
                                                                      t ratio                   t ratio                   t ratio                    t ratio                   t ratio                    t ratio
                                                       estimate                  estimate                  estimate                  estimate                   estimate                  estimate
                  Macroeconomic
                                         Included           Included                  Included                  Included                   Included                  Included                  Included
                       controls
               Five firm concentration
                                                       0.0070         2.8769     0.0088         3.2230
                         ratio
               Five firm concentration
                   ratio after being
               purged of the variation
                                                                                                           0.0088         3.2230      0.0085         3.0664     0.0098         4.1962     0.0072          2.4183
                 associated with the
               following independent
                       variables:
                  Total number of
                                                                                 0.0028         1.9024     0.0026         1.8099      0.0030         2.0314
                 strategic alliances
                  Total number of
                    mergers and                                                  -0.0011        -1.0396    -0.0006        -0.5964     -0.0010        -0.9484
                    acquisitions

                     Domestic                                                                                                                                   0.0045         2.0285     0.0041          1.8390




Strategic
Alliances
                   Cross border                                                                                                                                 0.0020         0.7445     0.0002          0.0902


                     Domestic                                                                                                                                   0.0030         1.7634     0.0039          2.0781


                   Cross border                                                                                                                                 -0.0028        -1.8473    -0.0012         -0.7583




acquisitions
Mergers and
               Total number of banks                                                                                                  -0.0067        -1.5067    -0.0049        -1.1542    -0.0054         -1.1480

               Controls for regulatory
                                       Not included       Not included              Not included              Not included               Not included              Not included                Included
                     changes


                 Within R squared        0.0643             0.0609                    0.0780                    0.0780                     0.0881                    0.1144                     0.2597
                    Number of
                                           97                   97                         97                        97                         97                        97                         97
                  observations




                                                                                                                                                                                                            38
                                                         Table 9: Estimating the determinants of bank spreads in 8 EU nations nations from 1990 to 1999


                                                                                                                    Specifications
                                                                  2                         3                       4                          5                          6                         7
               Independent variable
                                            1         Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                Parameter                  Parameter                 Parameter
                                                                      t ratio                   t ratio                  t ratio                    t ratio                   t ratio                    t ratio
                                                       estimate                  estimate                  estimate                 estimate                   estimate                  estimate
                  Macroeconomic
                                         Included           Included                  Included                  Included                  Included                  Included                  Included
                       controls
               Five firm concentration
                                                       0.0050         1.4113     0.0106         2.6792
                         ratio
               Five firm concentration
                   ratio after being
               purged of the variation
                                                                                                           0.0106        2.6792      0.0108         2.8411     0.0087         2.3710     0.0057          1.3474
                 associated with the
               following independent
                       variables:
                  Total number of
                                                                                 0.0049         1.4210     0.0044        1.3188      0.0046         1.3871
                 strategic alliances
                  Total number of
                    mergers and                                                  0.0002         0.0760     0.0010        0.4133      0.0005         0.1727
                    acquisitions

                     Domestic                                                                                                                                  0.0065         1.6049     0.0012          0.2677




Strategic
Alliances
                   Cross border                                                                                                                                0.0018         0.3823     0.0132          2.3059


                     Domestic                                                                                                                                  0.0039         1.2051     -0.0008         -0.2424


                   Cross border                                                                                                                                -0.0077        -2.0304    -0.0056         -1.7620




acquisitions
Mergers and
               Total number of banks                                                                                                 -0.0115        -1.1340    -0.0125        -1.2596    -0.0159         -1.8156

               Controls for regulatory
                                       Not included       Not included              Not included              Not included              Not included              Not included                Included
                     changes


                 Within R squared        0.1943             0.1903                    0.2361                    0.2361                    0.2973                    0.4403                     0.4796
                    Number of
                                           65                   65                        65                        65                         65                        65                         65
                  observations



                                                                                                                                                                                                          39
                                                          Table 10: Estimating the determinants of bank spreads in 5 non-EU nations from 1990 to 1999


                                                                                                                     Specifications
                                                                  2                         3                        4                          5                          6                         7
               Independent variable
                                            1         Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                  Parameter                 Parameter
                                                                      t ratio                   t ratio                   t ratio                    t ratio                   t ratio                    t ratio
                                                       estimate                  estimate                  estimate                  estimate                   estimate                  estimate
                  Macroeconomic
                                         Included           Included                  Included                  Included                   Included                  Included                  Included
                       controls
               Five firm concentration
                                                       0.0002         0.0313     0.0036         0.4322
                         ratio
               Five firm concentration
                   ratio after being
               purged of the variation
                                                                                                           0.0036         0.4322      0.0040         0.4394     0.0042         0.4248     0.0066          0.9658
                 associated with the
               following independent
                       variables:
                  Total number of
                                                                                 -0.0024        -1.0534    -0.0023        -1.0408     -0.0025        -1.0602
                 strategic alliances
                  Total number of
                    mergers and                                                  -0.0003        -0.1793    -0.0003        -0.1632     -0.0004        -0.2014
                    acquisitions

                     Domestic                                                                                                                                   0.0005         0.1141     0.0018          0.4205




Strategic
Alliances
                   Cross border                                                                                                                                 -0.0069        -1.2936    -0.0092         -2.0054


                     Domestic                                                                                                                                   0.0010         0.1666     0.0027          0.4390


                   Cross border                                                                                                                                 -0.0004        -0.1628    -0.0011         -0.4429




acquisitions
Mergers and
               Total number of banks                                                                                                  0.0006         0.0464     0.0085         0.5437     0.0082          0.5488

               Controls for regulatory
                                       Not included       Not included              Not included              Not included               Not included              Not included                Included
                     changes


                 Within R squared        0.1633             0.1611                    0.2896                    0.2896                     0.3357                    0.3214                     0.5322
                    Number of
                                           45                   45                         45                        45                         45                        45                         45
                  observations




                                                                                                                                                                                                           40
                  Table 11: Contribution of within border and cross border transactions to changing spreads throughout the 1990s

Members of the European Union.


                                 Within border transactions 1990-1999                  Cross border transactions 1990-1999            Combined effect
                                                                                                                                        of within and
                                                  Point estimate of effect on                           Point estimate of effect on     cross border
     Economy                    Number                                                Number
                                               interest rate spreads (percent)                       interest rate spreads (percent)  transactions on
                                                                                                                                        interest rate
                        Strategic             Strategic             Combined Strategic              Strategic               Combined
                                     M&A                    M&A                            M&A                     M&A               spreads (percent)
                        alliances             alliances               effect alliances              alliances                 effect
      Belgium              5             21     0.215      -0.247       -0.032   15            21    3.728      -1.716       1.948        1.915

      Sweden               3             47     0.166      -0.309       -0.143   13            7     3.545      -1.158       2.346        2.200

    Netherlands            15            32     0.333      -0.279       0.053    26            12    4.447      -1.426       2.957        3.012

       Spain               9             68     0.277      -0.338       -0.062   40            21    5.024      -1.716       3.222        3.157

       France              27         150       0.401      -0.401       -0.002   63            50    5.643      -2.178       3.343        3.341

      Germany              40         186       0.447      -0.418       0.027    56            32    5.482      -1.939       3.437        3.465

        Italy              27         212       0.401      -0.428       -0.029   52            16    5.381      -1.574       3.722        3.692

  United Kingdom          193         200       0.634      -0.423       0.208    208           44    7.306      -2.109       5.043        5.262

Economies that are not members of the European Union.


                                 Within border transactions 1990-1999                  Cross border transactions 1990-1999            Combined effect
                                                                                                                                        of within and
                                                  Point estimate of effect on                           Point estimate of effect on     cross border
     Economy                    Number                                                Number
                                               interest rate spreads (percent)                       interest rate spreads (percent)  transactions on
                                                                                                                                        interest rate
                        Strategic             Strategic             Combined Strategic              Strategic               Combined
                                     M&A                    M&A                            M&A                     M&A               spreads (percent)
                        alliances             alliances               effect alliances              alliances                 effect
       Japan               96         102       0.827      1.259        2.096    183           6     -4.684     -0.214       -4.888       -2.894

      Australia           145            75     0.901      1.176        2.088    118           22    -4.302     -0.344       -4.631       -2.640

    United States        1136        2836       1.275      2.170        3.472    339           75    -5.221     -0.475       -5.672       -2.397

      Canada               84            98     0.803      1.248        2.061    81            4     -3.973     -0.177       -4.143       -2.167

    Switzerland            15            79     0.500      1.190        1.696    14            28    -2.461     -0.370       -2.821       -1.173


                                                                                                                                                         41
                                                       Appendix Table 1: Mega Mergers and Acquisitions in 2000

        Value of
     cross border                   Acquiring company                                           Acquired company                         Location of headquarters of...
Rank
      transaction
       ($ billion)
                              Name                       Industry                    Name                       Industry               acquiring firm     acquired firm

                                                      Radiotelephone                                         Radiotelephone
  1      202.8       Vodafone AirTouch PLC                                      Mannesmann AG                                          United Kingdom        Germany
                                                      communications                                         communications
                                                       Telephone
                                                                                  Orange PLC           Telephone communications,
  2      46.0           France Telecom SA         communications, except                                                                   France        United Kingdom
                                                                                (Mannesmann AG)           except radiotelephone
                                                     radiotelephone
                                                                                                      Motion picture and video tape
  3      40.4               Vivendi SA                 Water supply              Seagram Cc Ltd                                            France             Canada
                                                                                                               production

  4      27.2            BP Amoco PLC                Petroleum refining              ARCO                   Petroleum refining         United Kingdom      United States

                                                                                                       Dried fruits, vegetables and
  5      25.1              Unilever PLC               Creamery butter               Bestfoods                                          United Kingdom      United States
                                                                                                               soup mixes

  6      19.4            Zurich Allied AG              Life insurance           Allied Zurich PLC             Life insurance             Switzerland     United Kingdom

                                                                                                       Security brokers, dealers and
  7      16.5                UBS AG               Banks, non-US chartered PaineWebber Group Inc                                          Switzerland       United States
                                                                                                           flotation companies
                                                      Radiotelephone                                         Radiotelephone
  8      14.4        Vodafone AirTouch PLC                                          Airtel SA                                          United Kingdom          Spain
                                                      communications                                         communications
                                                  Security brokers, dealers    Donaldson Lufkin &      Commodity contracts brokers
  9      13.5        Credit Suisse First Boston                                                                                         United States      United States
                                                  and flotation companies           Jenrette                 and dealers
                                                    Business consulting          Ernst & Young-        Business consulting services,
 10      11.8             Cap Gemini SA                                                                                                    France          United States
                                                       services, nec             Consulting Bus.                   nec
                                                                              Credit Commercial de
 11      11.1          HSBC Holdings PLC          Banks, non-US chartered                                Banks, non-US chartered       United Kingdom         France
                                                                                     France
                                                    Cable and other pay                                Telephone communications,
 12      11.0                NTL Inc                                           CWC ConsumerCo                                           United States    United Kingdom
                                                     television services                                  except radiotelephone
                                                       Telephone
                                                                              Telecom municacoes de    Telephone communications,
 13      10.2             Telefonica SA           communications, except                                                                   Spain              Brazil
                                                                                    Sao Paulo             except radiotelephone
                                                     radiotelephone


                                                                                                                                                                           42
                                              Telephone
            BellSouth GmbH (KPN,                                E-Plus Mobilfunk GmbH                    Radiotelephone
14   9.4                                 communications, except                                                                      Netherlands        Germany
                  BellSouth)                                            (Otelo)                          communications
                                            radiotelephone
                                                                         AOL Europe, AOL
15   8.3      America Online Inc          Prepackaged Software                                     Information retrieval services    United States      Germany
                                                                            Australia
                                          National commercial         Robert Fleming Holdings Security brokers, dealers and
16   7.7   Chase Manhattan Corp, NY                                                                                                  United States   United Kingdom
                                                 banks                          Ltd.              flotation companies
                                                                      Aetna-Fin' I Svcs & Int' I     Security and commodity
17   7.6        ING Groep NV                  Life insurance                                                                         Netherlands      United States
                                                                                Bus.                      services, nec
           British American Tobacco
18   7.1                                        Cigarettes                   Imasco Ltd                    Eating places            United Kingdom      Canada
                     PLC
                                        Telephone and telegraph        Newbridge Networks            Telephone and telegraph
19   7.1          Alcatel SA                                                                                                            France          Canada
                                               apparatus                      Corp                         apparatus
                                        Telephone and telegraph
20   7.1     Nortel Networks Corp                                      Afeon Websystems Inc         Electronic components, nec         Canada         United States
                                               apparatus
           DaimlerChryslerAerospace
21   6.7                                Aircraft parts,equipment         Aerospatiale Matra                   Aircraft                 Germany           France
                     AG
                                        Electric and other services
22   6.3           RWE AG                                               Thames Water PLC                   Water supply                Germany       United Kingdom
                                                 combined
           Terra Networks (Telefonica     Information retrieval
23   6.2                                                                     Lycos Inc             Information retrieval services       Spain         United States
                     SA)                        services

24   6.0        ING Groep NV                  Life insurance          ReliaStar Financial Corp            Life insurance             Netherlands      United States

                                        Telephone
25   5.7   NTT Communications Corp communications, except                     Verio Inc              Data processing services           Japan         United States
                                      radiotelephone

26   5.4        PowerGen PLC                 Electric services          LG&E Energy Corp                 Electric services          United Kingdom    United States

                CLT-UFA (Cie               Radio broadcasting            Pearson Television          Television broadcasting
27   5.3                                                                                                                             Luxembourg      United Kingdom
               Luxembourgeoise)                 stations                     (Pearson)                       stations
                                                                                                      Land subdividers and
28   5.2       Leconport Estates              Investors, nec                MEPC PLC                                                Multi-National   United Kingdom
                                                                                                   developers, except cemeteries
                                              Telephone
                                                                AT&T-Worldwide Assets, Telephone communications,
29   5.0   British Telecommurications    communications, except                                                                     United Kingdom    United States
                                                                       Ops                except radiotelephone
                                            radiotelephone


                                                                                                                                                                      43
30   5.0      WPP Group PLC            Advertising agencies     Young & Rubicam Inc           Advertising agencies          United Kingdom   United States


31   4.9       Stora Enso Oyj              Paper mills          Consolidated Papers Inc         Paperboard mills               Finland       United States

                                          Telephone
                                                                     World Online
32   4.9         Tiscali SpA         communications, except                               Information retrieval services         Italy       Netherlands
                                                                   International NV
                                        radiotelephone
                                        Offices of holding
33   4.8   Nordbanken Holding AB                                      Media Oy              Banks, non-US chartered            Sweden          Finland
                                         companies, nec
                                                                Alusuisse Lonza Group      Packaging paper & plastics
34   4.8     Alcan Aluminum Ltd        Aluminum foundries                                                                      Canada        Switzerland
                                                                          Ltd               flm, coated & laminated
                                          Telephone
                                                                Endemol Entertainment Motion picture and video tape
35   4.6        Telefonica SA        communications, except                                                                     Spain        Netherlands
                                                                        NV                     production
                                        radiotelephone

36   4.4      MeritaNordbanken       Banks, non-US chartered       Unidanmark A/S           Banks, non-US chartered            Finland         Denmark

                                        General industrial                                In vitro and in vivo diagnostic
37   4.4    Tyco International Ltd                                 Mallinckrodt Inc                                            Bermuda       United States
                                     machinery and equipment                                        substances
                                          Telephone
                                                                                          Telephone communications,
38   4.3     France Telecom SA       communications, except         Global One Cc                                               France       United States
                                                                                             except radiotelephone
                                        radiotelephone
                                        Computer related                                     Computer programming
39   4.3      Same Group PLC                                        LHS Group Inc                                           United Kingdom   United States
                                          services,nec                                             services
                                                                                                 Radiotelephone
40   4.3       Investor Group             Investors, nec                TPSA                                                    France          Poland
                                                                                                 communications
                                                                 New England Electric
41   4.2   National Grid Group PLC       Electric services                                       Electric services          United Kingdom   United States
                                                                      System
               Alliance Capital                                Sanford C Bernstein & Co
42   4.0                                Investment advice                                       Investment advice            United States   United States
                Management                                               Inc
                                        Industrial organic     American Cyanamid Agri       Pesticides & agricultural
43   3.9         BASF AG                                                                                                       Germany       United States
                                          chemicals, nec              Product                    chemicals, nec

                                       Cable and other pay                                     Cable and other pay
44   3.7          NTL Inc                                       Cablecom Holding AG                                          United States   Switzerland
                                        television services                                     television services
                                          Telephone
                                                                                          Telephone communications,
45   3.6     France Telecom SA       communications, except         MobilCom AG                                                 France         Germany
                                                                                             except radiotelephone
                                        radiotelephone


                                                                                                                                                             44
46   3.6     Koninkfjke Ahold NV           Grocery stores          US Foodservice Inc          Groceries, general line        Netherlands      United States

                 NTT Mobile                 Telephone
                                                                    KPN Mobile (KPN         Telephone communications,
47   3.6        Communications         communications, except                                                                    Japan         Netherlands
                                                                      Telecom NV)              except radiotelephone
                 Network Inc              radiotelephone

                                       Telephone and telegraph      Pirelli SpA-Optical       Drawing & insulating of
48   3.6          Corning Inc                                                                                                 United States        Italy
                                              apparatus                Components                nonferrous wire

49   3.5             AXA                    Life insurance        Sun Life and Provincial          Life insurance                France       United Kingdom

                                                                    Bass PLC-Brewing
50   3.5          Interbrew SA             Malt beverages                                          Malt beverages               Belgium       United Kingdom
                                                                       Operations

51   3.4       WPD Holdings UK             Electric services           Hyder PLC                Engineering services         United Kingdom   United Kingdom

                                        Real estate investment   Urban Shopping Centers
52   3.4   Rodamco North America NV                                                     Real estate investment trusts         Netherlands      United States
                                                trusts                    Inc
                                       Telephone and telegraph                                Telephone and telegraph
53   3.3     Nortel Networks Corp                                        Xros Inc                                               Canada         United States
                                              apparatus                                             apparatus
                                       Telephone and telegraph                                Telephone and telegraph
54   3.3     Nortel Networks Corp                                       Qtera Corp                                              Canada         United States
                                              apparatus                                             apparatus
                                        Bottled & canned soft                               Bottled & canned soft drinks
55   2.9     Hellenic Bottling Cc SA    drinks and carbonated    Coca-Cola Beverages PLC                and                      Greece       United Kingdom
                                                waters                                           carbonated waters

56   2.8             Cemex                Cement, hydraulic           Southdown Inc              Cement, hydraulic              Mexico         United States

                                            Telephone
                                                                   IPC Communications
57   2.8      Global Crossing Ltd      communications, except                               Information retrieval services      Bermuda        United States
                                                                        (Citicorp)
                                          radiotelephone
                                                                                            Telephone communications,
                                                                  Deutsche Telekom AG-
58   2.8         Investor Group             Investors, nec                                            except                  United States      Germany
                                                                          North
                                                                                                  radiotelephone

59   2.8       MeritaNordbanken        Banks, non-US chartered       Christiania Bank         Banks, non-US chartered           Finland          Norway

                                                                 Snyder Communications
60   2.8     Havas Advertising SA       Advertising agencies                                   Business services, nec            France        United States
                                                                          Inc
                                                                  Thomson Travel Group
61   2.7          Preussag AG              Travel agencies                                         Tour operators               Germany       United Kingdom
                                                                         PLC


                                                                                                                                                               45
62   2.7    Norske Skogindustrier AS              Pulp mills            Fletcher Challenge Paper            Pulp mills               Norway         New Zealand

                                              Motor vehicles and                                    Motor vehicles & passenger
63   2.7          Ford Motor Co                                           Land Rover (BMW)                                         United States   United Kingdom
                                             passenger car bodies                                           car bodies

64   2.6   Flextronics International Ltd    Printed circuit boards             DII Group            Electronic components, nec      Singapore       United States

               General Sekiyu (Esso                                       Tonen Corp (Exxon
65   2.6                                      Petroleum refining                                        Petroleum refining            Japan         United States
                    Eastern)                                                   Mobil)
                                           Men' s footwear, except
66   2.5           Hanson PLC                                           Pioneer International Ltd     Ready-mixed concrete        United Kingdom      Australia
                                                   athletic
                                           Security brokers, dealers    Finl Security Assurance
67   2.5          Dexia Belgium                                                                          Surety insurance            Belgium        United States
                                           and flotation companies               Hldgs
                                            Books: publishing, or          National Computer           Computer peripheral
68   2.5           Pearson PLC                                                                                                    United Kingdom    United States
                                            publishing & printing             Systems Inc                equipment, nec
                                              General industrial   Lucent Tech Inc-Power
69   2.5      Tyco International Ltd                                                                Electronic components, nec       Bermuda        United States
                                           machinery and equipment        Sys Unit
                                                                            Gruppo GS SpA
70   2.5           Carrefour SA                 Grocery stores                                            Variety stores              France            Italy
                                                                           (Schemaventuno)
                                           Medicinal chemicals and
                                                                   Lyondell Chemical-Polyfs     Petroleum refining
71   2.5             Bayer AG                botanical products                                                                      Germany        United States
                                                                             Bus                    production
                                               radiotelephone
                                                 Telephone
                                                                                            Telephone communications,
72   2.4          Telefonica SA            communications, except    Telesudeste Celular                                              Spain            Brazil
                                                                                               except radiotelephone
                                               radiotelephone
                                              Motor vehicles and                                    Motor vehicles & passenger
73   2.4       General Motors Corp                                      Fiat Auto SpA (Fiat SpA)                                   United States        Italy
                                             passenger car bodies                                           car bodies

                                           Computer programming Origin (Philips Electronics
74   2.3             Atos SA                                                                          Prepackaged Software            France        Netherlands
                                                 services                  NV)
                                             Information retrieval      Club Internet (Lagardere
75   2.3    T-Online International AG                                                            Information retrieval services      Germany           France
                                                   services                     Group)

76   2.3   General Electric Capital Corp Personal credit institutions      Toho Mutual Life               Life insurance           United States       Japan


77   2.3           Unilever NV                 Creamery butter            Slim-Fast Foods Cc          Food preparations, nec       Netherlands      United States

                                                                              EPON NV
78   2.2          Investor Group                Investors, nec                                           Electric services           Belgium        Netherlands
                                                                            (EDON,NUON)
                                                                                                                                                                    46
                                                                     ETSA Utilities,ETSA
79   2.2         Investor Group             Investors, nec                                            Electric services         Hong Kong, China      Australia
                                                                          Power
                                            Telephone
                                                                      CEI Citicorp Equity            Offices of holding
80   2.2   Telefonica Internacional SA communications, except                                                                        Spain           Argentina
                                                                          Holdings                    companies, nec
                                          radiotelephone
             Salomon Smith Barney      Security brokers, dealers     Schroders-Worldwide        Security brokers, dealers and
81   2.2                                                                                                                          United States    United Kingdom
                   Holdings            and flotation companies            Investment                flotation companies
            CDC Asset Management       Management investment
82   2.2                                                                  NVEST LP                Investment offices, nec            France         United States
                  Europe                 offices, open-end
                                                                                                Rubber and plastics hose and
83   2.2         Investor Group             Investors, nec          Mark IV Industries Inc                                      United Kingdom      United States
                                                                                                          belting
                                       Guided missile and space
84   2.2         Thomson-CSF                                         Racal Electronics PLC         Electronic computers              France        United Kingdom
                                          vehicle parts, nec
                                            Telephone
                                                                                                 Communications services,
85   2.2       BT Hawthorn Ltd         communications, except Esat Telecom Group PLC                                            United Kingdom         Ireland
                                                                                                         nec
                                          radiotelephone
                                         Computer peripheral           Pirelli-Fibre Optic        Optical instruments and
86   2.1       Cisco Systems Inc                                                                                                  United States         Italy
                                           equipment, nec                  Operations                      lenses

87   2.1        Metsa-Seria Oy               Paper mills               MoDo Paper AB                    Paper mills                 Finland           Sweden


88   2.1         Rio Tinto Ltd                Iron ores                    North Ltd                     Gold ores              United Kingdom        Australia

                                          Communications            Shared Medical Systems          Computer facilities
89   2.1   Siemens Corp (Siemens AG)                                                                                              United States     United States
                                           equipment, nec                   Corp                   management services
                                                                                                Lumber, plywood, millwork
90   2.0     Cie de Saint-Gobain SA       Abrasive products        Meyer International PLC                                           France        United Kingdom
                                                                                                    and wood panels
                                                                   United Biscuits (Holdings)
91   2.0           Finalrealm           Food preparations, nec                                     Frozen specialties, nec           France        United Kingdom
                                                                             PLC
                                                                    American National Can
92   2.0          Rexam PLC            Sanitary paper products                                           Metal cans             United Kingdom      United States
                                                                           Group
                                                                    Ado Wiggins Appleton
93   2.0         Worms et Cie               Life insurance                                              Paper mills                  France        United Kingdom
                                                                           PLC
                                                                      Nippon Dantai Life
94   2.0             AXA                    Life insurance                                             Life insurance                France            Japan
                                                                          Insurance
                                                                       PIMCO Advisors
95   1.9          Allianz AG                Life insurance                                           Investment advice              Germany         United States
                                                                         Holdings LP
                                                                                                                                                                    47
                                            Motor vehicles and                                Motor vehicles & passenger
96    1.9      DaimlerChrysler AG                                    Mitsubishi Motors Corp                                      Germany           Japan
                                           passenger car bodies                                       car bodies
                                         Telephone and telegraph                                Telephone and telegraph
97    1.9      Nodal Networks Corp                                         CoreTek Inc                                            Canada        United States
                                                apparatus                                             apparatus
                                              Telephone
                                                                                              Telephone communications,
98    1.9          Telenor AS            communications, except              Sonofon                                             Norway           Denmark
                                                                                                 except radiotelephone
                                            radiotelephone
                                         Telephone and telegraph
99    1.9      Nortel Networks Corp                                        Clarify Inc           Prepackaged Software             Canada        United States
                                                apparatus
                                                                     United Water Resources
100   1.8   Suez Lyonnaise des Eaux SA         Water supply                                          Water supply                 France        United States
                                                                              Inc
            British Telecommunications Communications services,                                     Radiotelephone
101   1.8                                                                    Telfort                                          United Kingdom    Netherlands
                        PLC                    nec                                                  communications
                                              Telephone
                                                                        Hutchison 3G UK       Telephone communications,
102   1.8       NTT DoCoMo Inc           communications, except                                                                   Japan        United Kingdom
                                                                          Holdings Ltd           except radiotelephone
                                            radiotelephone
                                         Communications services,     Societe Europeenne de   Telephone communications,
103   1.8          Netcom AB                                                                                                     Sweden         Luxembourg
                                                 nec                         Commun              except radiotelephone

                                         Telephone and telegraph      Genesys Telecommun
104   1.8           Alcatel SA                                                                   Prepackaged Software             France        United States
                                                apparatus                    Labs
                                            Dry, condensed &
                                                                                              Pharmaceutical preparations
105   1.8     Koninklijke Numico NV      evaporated dairy products     Rexall Sundown Inc                                      Netherlands      United States
                                                                                                     production
                                              radiotelephone
                                                                                              Security brokers, dealers and
106   1.8         Amvescap PLC              Investment advice        Trimark Financial Corp                                   United Kingdom      Canada
                                                                                                  flotation companies
                                                                                                  Industrial inorganic
107   1.7          Clariant AG             Alkalies and chlorine            BTP PLC                                             Switzerland    United Kingdom
                                                                                                    chemicals, nec
                                                                         Shoppers Drug        Drug stores and proprietary
108   1.7         Investor Group              Investors, nec                                                                   United States      Canada
                                                                        Mart(Imasco Ltd)                stores

109   1.7          Publicis SA             Advertising agencies       Saatchi & Saatchi PLC       Advertising agencies            France       United Kingdom

                                              Pharmaceutical
110   1.7         Elan Corp PLC                                      Dura Pharmaceuticals Inc Pharmaceutical preparations         Ireland       United States
                                               preparations
              Skandinaviska Enskilda                                       Bank fur
111   1.7                                Banks, non-US chartered                                Banks, non-US chartered          Sweden           Germany
                     Banken                                           Gemeinwirtschaft AG



                                                                                                                                                                48
               BAE SYSTEMS North           Aircraft engines and         Lockheed Martin-           Search, detection, and
112   1.7                                                                                                                         United States    United States
                    America                    engine parts                Aerospace               navigation equipment
                                                                      CA La Electricidad de
113   1.7            AES Corp                Electric services                                         Electric services          United States     Venezuela
                                                                            Caracas
            Nationwide Mutual Insurance Fire, marine, and casualty     Gartmore Investment
114   1.6                                                                                          Investment offices, nec        United States   United Kingdom
                        Co                      insurance                  Managemen
             EM.TV & Merchandising       Motion picture and video                                     Offices of holding
115   1.6                                                              SLEC Holdings Ltd                                            Germany       United Kingdom
                     AG                      tape distribution                                         companies, nec
                                                                       Banque Generale du
116   1.6         Fortis (NQ NV               Life insurance                                      Banks, non-US chartered         Netherlands      Luxembourg
                                                                          Luxembourg
                                            Motor vehicles and
117   1.6         Volkswagen AG                                      Scania AB (Investor AB)        Truck and bus bodies            Germany          Sweden
                                           passenger car bodies
                                                                                                Crude petroleum and natural
118   1.6         BP Amoco PLC              Petroleum refining         Vastar Resources Inc                                      United Kingdom    United States
                                                                                                            gas

119   1.6       US Foodservice Inc        Groceries, general line       PYA/Monarch Inc            Groceries, general line        United States    United States

                                          Electronic components,
120   1.6           Spirent PLC                                         Hekimian Labs Inc       Electrical apparatus and equip United Kingdom      United States
                                                    nec
              Banco Santander Central      National commercial
121   1.6                                                             Cia de Seguros Mundial            Life insurance               Spain           Portugal
                     Hispan                       banks
              Banco Santander Central      National commercial       Grupo Financiero Serfin
122   1.5                                                                                         Banks, non-US chartered            Spain           Mexico
                     Hispan                       banks                      SA de
                                            Motor vehicles and       Renault VI/Mack (Renault     Industrial trucks, tractors,
123   1.5            Volvo AB                                                                                                       Sweden            France
                                           passenger car bodies                SA)                   trailers and stackers
              British Sky Broadcasting     Cable and other pay         KirchPayTV GmbH               Cable and other pay
124   1.5                                                                                                                        United Kingdom      Germany
                       Group                television services          (Kirch Gruppe)               television services

                                               Telephone
             Saudi Telecommunications                            FLAG Telecom Holdings Telegraph and other message
125   1.5                                 communications, except                                                                  Saudi Arabia       Bermuda
                        Cc                                                Ltd                communications
                                             radiotelephone

126   1.5           Adecco SA              Employment agencies             Olsten Corp              Help supply services           Switzerland     United States

                                                                     United Asset Management
127   1.5         Old Mutual PLC              Life insurance                                          Investment advice           South Africa     United States
                                                                               Corp



                                                                                                                                                                   49
                                               Candy and other          Snapple Beverage Group Bottled & canned soft drinks
128   1.5    Cadbury Schweppes PLC                                                                                                United Kingdom       United States
                                            confectionery products                Inc             and carbonated waters
                                                                         Beringer Wine Estates       Wines, brandy, and brandy
129   1.4   Foster' s Brewing Group Ltd         Malt beverages                                                                        Australia        United States
                                                                               Holdings                        spirits
                                            Savings institutions, not                                 State banks,member fed
130   1.4   Citizens Financial Group,Rl                                  UST Corp,Boston,MA                                         United States      United States
                                              federally chartered                                             reserve
                                           Telephone and telegraph        Siemens AG-Optical         Drawing and insulating of
131   1.4           Corning Inc                                                                                                     United States        Germany
                                                  apparatus                   Fiber,Cable                nonferrous wire
                                               Computer related           AsiaNet(Linkage On-
132   1.4   Littauer Technologies Cc Ltd                                                            Information retrieval services Republic of Korea Hong Kong, China
                                                 services,nec                    Line)
                                                                           Powercor Australia
133   1.4         Investor Group                 Investors, nec                                           Electric services       Hong Kong, China       Australia
                                                                              (PacifCorp)
              Smurfit-Stone Container
134   1.4                                      Paperboard mills         St Laurent Paperboard Inc        Paperboard mills           United States        Canada
                       Corp

135   1.4         BNP Paribas SA           Banks, non-US chartered Cie Benelux Paribas SA               Misc business credit           France            Belgium

                                           Telephone
            Koninklijke PTT Nederland                                      Hutchison 3G UK          Telephone communications,
136   1.4                             communications, except                                                                        Netherlands      United Kingdom
                       NV                                                    Holdings Ltd              except radiotelephone
                                         radiotelephone
             Dimension Data Holdings                                        Comparex-Eur              Computer programming
137   1.3                                   Prepackaged Software                                                                    South Africa         Germany
                      PLC                                                   Networking Ops                  services

138   1.3     Standard Chartered PLC           Investment advice        ANZ Grindlays Bank Ltd       Banks, non-US chartered      United Kingdom         Australia

                                                                          Chase Manhattan-HK
139   1.3     Standard Chartered PLC           Investment advice                                     Banks, non-US chartered      United Kingdom     Hong Kong, China
                                                                                Banking
                                                 Telephone
140   1.3            Telia AB               communications, except           NetCom ASA                    Investors, nec             Sweden             Norway
                                               radiotelephone

141   1.3            AES Corp                  Electric services               Gener SA                   Electric services         United States         Chile

                                             Crude petroleum and                                    Crude petroleum and natural
142   1.3        BT Bumi Modern                                               Gallo Oil Ltd                                          Indonesia         United States
                                           natural gas radiotelephone                                     gas production
                                                                        Elektrim Telekomunikacja Telephone communications,
143   1.3           Vivendi SA                   Water supply                                                                          France             Poland
                                                                                   Sp               except radiotelephone

144   1.3     Singapore Power Pte Ltd          Electric services         GPU PowerNet Pty Ltd        Combination utilities, nec      Singapore           Australia

                                                                                                                                                                       50
                                           Crude petroleum and       British Borneo Oil & Gas Crude petroleum and natural
145   1.3            Eni SpA                                                                                                          Italy       United Kingdom
                                               natural gas                     PLC                        gas
                                           Semiconductors and
146   1.3           Intel Corp                                       Giga A/S (NKT Holding) Electronic components, nec            United States      Denmark
                                             related devices
                                              Telephone
147   1.2           Telia AB             communications, except           NetCom ASA                   Investors, nec               Sweden           Norway
                                            radiotelephone
                                           Information retrieval
148   1.2        Infosources SA                                        Belgacom Skynet SA       Information retrieval services       France          Belgium
                                                 services

149   1.2        Assa Abloy AB                Hardware, nec          Williams PLC-Yale Locks           Hardware, nec                Sweden        United Kingdom

                                                                      Energieproduktiebedrijf
150   1.2        Reliant Energy              Electric services                                        Electric services           United States    Netherlands
                                                                            UNA NV

151   1.2       Unicredito Italiano      Banks, non-US chartered        Pioneer Group Inc            Investment advice                Italy        United States

                                                                         Cimenteries CBR
152   1.2    Heidelberger Zement AG         Cement, hydraulic                                        Cement, hydraulic              Germany          Belgium
                                                                          (Heidelberger)

153   1.2        Investor Group               Investors, nec         Fairchild Aerospace Corp             Aircraft                  Germany        United States

                                         Radio & TV broadcasting                                  Measuring&controlling
154   1.2      GN Store Nord A/S                                          Photonetics SA                                            Denmark           France
                                         and communications equi                                         devices
                                          Real estate investment     Fonspa-Non-Performing
155   1.2   Morgan Stanley Real Estate                                                           Personal credit institutions     United States        Italy
                                                  trusts                     Loans
                                                                      Laporte-Non Speciality
156   1.2    K-L Holdings Inc (KKR)           Investors, nec                                         Inorganic pigments           United States   United Kingdom
                                                                             Organic
                                                                     Long Term Credit Bank of
157   1.1        Investor Group               Investors, nec                                      Banks, non-US chartered         United States       Japan
                                                                              Japan
                                             Arrangement of                                          Arrangement of
                                                                     Air Express International
158   1.1      Danzas Holding AG         transportation of freight                             transportation of freight and       Switzerland     United States
                                                                              Corp
                                                and cargo                                                  cargo

159   1.1          Allianz AG                 Life insurance           PIMCO Advisors LP             Investment advice              Germany        United States

                                             Radiotelephone          Polska Telefonia Cyfrowa    Communications services,
160   1.1     Deutsche Telekom AG                                                                                                   Germany           Poland
                                             communications                     Sp                       nec
                                         Miscellaneous metal ores,                               Uranium-radium-vanadium
161   1.1          Billiton PLC                                           Rio Algom Ltd                                          United Kingdom      Canada
                                                   nec                                                     ores
                                                                                                                                                                   51
                                                                                              Bottled & canned soft drinks
                                                                  McKesson Water Products
162   1.1        Danone Group                Fluid milk                                                   and                     France        United States
                                                                           Cc
                                                                                                   carbonated waters
                                      Newspapers: publishing or
163   1.1        Thomson Corp                                          Primark Corp           Computer related services,nec      Canada         United States
                                       publishing and printing

164   1.1     Thames Water PLC              Water supply                E' town Corp                  Water supply            United Kingdom    United States

                                        Detective, guard and       Group 4 Securitas (Intl) Detective, guard and armored
165   1.1      Falck Holding A/S                                                                                                 Denmark        Netherlands
                                        armored car services                BV                      car services
              Diamond Technology       Management consulting                                  Business consulting services,
166   1.1                                                            Cluster Consulting                                        United States       Spain
                   Partners                  services                                                     nec
            United Pan-Europe Comm Communications services,                                       Cable and other pay
167   1.1                                                               Eneco C&T                                              Netherlands      Netherlands
                      NV                   nec                                                     television services
                                         Motor vehicles and                                   Motor vehicles and passenger
168   1.1     General Motors Corp                                 Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd                                    United States       Japan
                                        passenger car bodies                                          car bodies
                                                                   Entrium Direct Bankers
169   1.1         Bipop-Carire        Banks, non-US chartered                             Information retrieval services           Italy          Germany
                                                                            AG
               Koninklijke Philips      Household audio and
170   1.0                                                              MedQuist Inc             Data processing services       Netherlands      United States
                  Electronic             video equipment
                                       Computer programming
171   1.0         Amdocs Ltd                                Solect Technology Group              Prepackaged Software         United Kingdom      Canada
                                             services
                                                                                                 Motor vehicle parts and
172   1.0   Wengen Acquisition PLC         Investors, nec               Wassail PLC                                            United States   United Kingdom
                                                                                                      accessories
                                                                     Cia Energetica de
173   1.0        Investor Group            Investors, nec                                           Electric services             Spain            Brazil
                                                                       Pernambuco
                                        Semiconductors and          QUALCOMM-Land-                  Radiotelephone
174   1.0        Kyocera Corp                                                                                                     Japan         United States
                                          related devices             Based Wirele                  communications
            Banco Santander Central     National commercial       Banco Bozano Simonsen
175   1.0                                                                                       Banks, non-US chartered           Spain            Brazil
                   Hispan                      banks                       SA




                                                                                                                                                                52
  Appendix Table 2: Major regulatory changes affecting the banking sectors of the
  13 OECD nations considered in this paper.

OECD nation        Year        Short description of regulatory change
United States      1994        Implementation of the Reigle Neal Interstate Act
United States      1999        Implementation of the Gramm-Leach-Billey Act
Canada             1992        Phasing out of banking reserve requirements
Canada             1999        Relaxation of rules allowing establishment of foreign
                               banks
Australia          1992        Relaxation of rules allowing establishment of foreign
                               banks
Australia          1997        End of the so-called Six Pillars policy
France             1993        Privatization of some banks
France             1995        Implementation of a deposit insurance directive
Germany            1992        Implementation of second European Banking Directive
Italy              1993        Implementation of second European Banking Directive
Italy              1994        Privatization of some banks
United             1998        Financial Services Authority takes on some bank
Kingdom                        regulatory powers

Source: Annex II.3, BIS (2001).

Note : This table is not supposed to summarize all of the regulatory changes in the 13
OECD nations during the years 1990 to 1999. Rather, using BIS (2001), it identifies
that major regulatory changes that affected a nation’s banking sector during the years
that it was in the unbalanced panel. Therefore, if a nation was in the unbalanced panel
from 1990 to 1993, changes in the regulatory regime for banks after 1993 would not be
reported.




                                                                                     53
