NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

PAYOUT POLICY IN THE 21ST CENTURY
Alon Brav
John R. Graham
Campbell R. Harvey
Roni Michaely
Working Paper 9657
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9657
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
April 2003

We thank the following people for suggestions about survey and interview design: Chris Allen, Dan
Bernhardt, Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo, Amy Dittmar, Gene Fama, Ron Gallant, Dave Ikenberry, Brad
Jordan, Jennifer Koski, Owen Lamont, Erik Lie, Beta Mannix, John McConnell, Kathleen O’Connor, Pamela
Peterson, Jim Poterba, Hersh Shefrin, David Robinson, Frank Ryan, Theo Vermaelen, Ivo Welch, and Luigi
Zingales. Also thanks to CFO focus group participants who helped us refine and clarify the survey
instrument: Victor Cohen, Tim Creech, Michelle Spencer, Tom Wayne, Phil Livingston, and an anonymous
executive at Thomson Financial. A special thanks to Sanjai Bhagat, Dave Ikenberry, Bob Markley, and Bill
McGrath, who helped us administer the survey and interviews. Amy Couch, Anne Higgs, Mark Leary and
especially Si Li provided excellent research support. We thank seminar participants at Columbia, Emory, and
SMU , and the University of Florida for helpful comments. Finally, we thank the financial executives who
generously allowed us to interview them or who took the time to fill out the survey. This research is partially
sponsored by Financial Executives International (FEI), although the views expressed herein do not necessarily
represent those of FEI. We acknowledge financial support from the Capital Markets Center at Duk e and
Graham acknowledges financial support from an Alfred P. Sloan Research Fellowship. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Alon Brav, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including ©notice, is given to the source.

Payout Policy in the 21st Century
Alon Brav, John R. Graham, Campbell R. Harvey, and Roni Michaely
NBER Working Paper No. 9657
April 2003
JEL No. G35, G32, G34
ABSTRACT
We survey 384 CFOs and Treasurers, and conduct in-depth interviews with an additional two dozen,
to determine the key factors that drive dividend and share repurchase policies. We find that
managers are very reluctant to cut dividends, that dividends are smoothed through time, and that
dividend increases are tied to long-run sustainable earnings but much less so than in the past. Rather
than increasing dividends, many firms now use repurchases as an alternative. Paying out with
repurchases is viewed by managers as being more flexible than using dividends, permitting a better
opportunity to optimize investment. Managers like to repurchase shares when they feel their stock
is undervalued and in an effort to affect EPS. Dividend increases and the level of share repurchases
are generally paid out of residual cash flow, after investment and liquidity needs are met.
Financial executives believe that retail investors have a strong preference for dividends, in spite of
the tax disadvantage relative to repurchases. In contrast, executives believe that institutional
investors as a class have no strong preference between dividends and repurchases. In general,
management views provide at most moderate support for agency, signaling, and clientele hypotheses
of payout policy. Tax considerations play only a secondary role. By highlighting where the theory
and practice of corporate payout policy are consistent and where they are not, we attempt to shed
new light on important unresolved issues related to payout policy in the 21st century.
John R. Graham

Alon Brav
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
brav@mail.duke.edu

Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
john.graham@duke.edu

Campbell R. Harvey
Fuqua School of Business
Duke University
Durham, NC 27708
and NBER
cam.harvey@duke.edu

Roni Michaely
Johnson Graduate School of Management
Cornell University
Ithaca, NY 14853
and The Inter-Disciplanary Center, Herzelia, Israel
rm34@cornell.edu

1

Payout policy in the 21st century
1. Introduction
In 1956 John Lintner laid the foundation for the modern understanding of dividend policy. Lintner
(1956) interviewed managers from 28 companies and concluded that dividends are sticky, tied to
long-term sustainable earnings, paid by mature companies, smoothed from year to year, and that
managers target a long-term payout ratio when determining dividend policy. The world has changed
since the 1950s, and dividend policy is no exception. In this paper, we survey and interview financial
executives to better understand how payout policies are determined almost 50 years after Lintner’s
study. Given the nature of the changes and the development in the field, we expand our analysis
beyond dividends and investigate repurchases as well. Moreover, unlike Lintner, we have 40 years of
theoretical work to guide our analysis, so our paper is able to shed some light on managers’ motives to
pay out as well as on payout theories.
Despite extensive empirical work on payout policy and dividend policy in particular, the motives
behind what is reported in many studies are still not well understood. For example, despite the
growing popularity of repurchases (Grullon and Michaely, 2002) and the fact that dividends are being
paid by fewer firms, some companies still pay substantial dividends (Allen and Michaely, 2002;
DeAngelo, DeAngelo, and Skinner (2002)). Why do some firms substitute repurchases for dividends
and others do not? And at the same time, why have many public companies never paid dividends
(Fama and French, 2001), and will they ever start? At the present time, academia does not fully
understand total payout, let alone the recent shifts in the form of payout. In light of this, it is not
surprising that Brealey and Myers (2002) list the “dividend controversy” as one of the ten most
important unsolve d problems in finance.
We investigate these questions using a combination of field interviews and traditional surveys. By
using these methods, we are able to address issues that traditional empirical work based on large
archival data sources cannot. Another unique aspect of our survey is that we ask many identical
questions about both dividends and repurchases, which allows us to compare and contrast the
important factors for each form of payout. Overall, our field interviews and surveys provide a
benchmark describing where academic research and real-world dividend policy are consistent and
where they differ.
Our analysis indicates that maintaining the dividend level is a priority on par with investment
decisions. Thus, along this dimension, our results parallel Lintner’s in that managers express a strong
desire to avoid dividends cuts, except in extraordinary circumstances. For firms that currently pay
dividends, hesitancy to cut leads to dividends that are sticky, smoothed from year to year, and linked
to permanent changes in profitability. Beyond maintaining the level of dividend per share, payout
policy is a second-order concern for modern corporations, and is considered after investment and

2

liquidity needs are met. In contrast to Lintner’s era, managers are more reluctant to increase dividends
in tandem with earnings increases and they no longer view the target percentage of earnings paid out
as dividends as the primary decision variable. Also in contrast to Lintner’s time, repurchases are now
used extensively.
Managers view repurchase policy to be more flexible than dividend policy and make repurchase
decision after investment decisions have been made. In addition to the desire for flexibility, there are
several other factors that stand out as influencing repurchase policy. Some executives believe that
they can time the market with their repurchase decisions, so they accelerate repurchases when they
believe their stock price is low. CFOs also are very conscious of how repurchases affect earnings per
share (consistent with the findings of Bens, Nagar, and Skinner (2002)). Finally, companies are likely
to repurchase out of temporary earnings increases or when good investments are hard to find.
We also learn about when, if ever, firms that do not currently pay dividends or repurchase shares
might begin to do so. Surprisingly, among firms that do not currently pay out, 70 percent say they
never plan to initiate dividends, and more than half say they do not plan to repurchase shares. Among
those that say they w ill pay out eventually, the overwhelming majority say they will use repurchases.
The most important factors influencing the decision to eventually pay out are equity undervaluation
and extra cash (repurchases) and sustainable increases in earnings (dividends).
Executives also tell us that they believe that dividends and repurchases convey information to
investors. However, as we document below, this information conveyance does not appear to be
consciously related to signaling in the academic sense. Managers strongly reject the notion that they
pay dividends as a costly signal to convey their firm’s true worth. They also do not believe that their
dividend policy can be used to separate their firm from the competition. Overall, we find little support
for both the assumptions and resulting predictions of signaling theories that are designed to explain
payout policy, at least not in terms of the conscious decisions executives make about payout.
While there is some evidence that repurchases are being used to reduce excess cash holdings
(consistent with Jensen’s (1986) free cash flow hypothesis), there is no evidence that managers use
payout policy to attract a particular investor clientele that may monitor their actions (as in Allen,
Bernardo and Welch, 2000). Executives believe that dividends are attractive to individual investors
but that dividends and repurchases are equally attractive to institutions. In general, executives make
no effort to use payout policy as a tool to alter the proportion of institutional investors among their
investors. Thus, it is unlikely that dividend policy can be explained as a means of attracting
institutional investors.
We find that the role played by taxes in determining payout policy is only of second-order
importance. Managers are aware of the tax advantage of repurchases relative to dividends, especially
for individual investors. Yet, they maintain that this is not an important factor in their decision about
whether to pay dividends, to increase dividends, or even in the decisio n between payout in the form of
repurchases or in dividends. A follow-up survey conducted in February 2003, after the Bush

3

administration proposed to eliminate dividend taxation, reinforces the second order importance of
differential taxation on payout policy. More than two-thirds of the executives on that survey say that
elimination of dividend taxation would definitely not or probably not affect their dividend decisions.
The rest of the paper proceeds as follows. Section 2 describes the survey and interview method
and presents summary statistics about our sample firms. Section 3 describes how dividend and share
repurchase decisions are made and their interaction with investment decisions. Section 4 compares the
current practice of payout policy to dividend decisions 50 years ago, when John Lintner (1956)
performed his analysis. Section 5 analyzes how modern executives’ views about payout policy match
up with the various theories that have been proposed to explain dividends and share repurchases.
Section 6 discusses the factors that CFOs and Treasurers of non-payout firms say might eventually
encourage their firms to initiate dividends or repurchases. Section 7 concludes and highlights
directions for future research, including our summary of the “rules of the game” that affect the
corporate and behavioral decision-making process.

2. Method
Our main survey contains responses from 384 financial executives. The survey analysis is based
on a moderately large sample and a broad cross-section of firms, which allows us to perform standard
statistical tests. At the same time, the survey accommodates very specific and qualitative questions.
One advantage of the survey is that we can ask a large number of questions. In total, we gather
information on approximately 125 questions.
In addition to the survey, we separately conduct 23 one-on-one interviews. The interviews
complement the survey information along several dimensions. Interviews allow us to ask open-ended
questions, so the respondent’s answers can dictate the direction of the interview (versus pre-chosen
questions in the survey). Interviews also allow for give-and-take and clarifications, which are not
possible with a traditional survey. Using the combination of the surveys and interviews, we are able to
ask many questions, while at the same time gain a deep understanding of the factors that are most
important to payout policy from the perspective of corporate financial managers.
The field study approach is not without potential problems. Surveys and interviews measure
beliefs and not necessarily actions. In addition, field studies may face the objection that market
participants do not have to understand the reason they do things for economic models to be valid
(Friedman’s (1953) “as if” thesis). This may be particularly acute in our study because we ask
corporate managers about both the assumptions and predictions of specific theories.
Friedman’s “as if” thesis basically says that it is unimportant whether the assumptions of a
particular economic model are valid, or whether economic agents understand why they take certain
actions, as long as the theory can predict the agents’ actions. The “as if” approach has been criticized

4

by philosophers (Hausman (1992) and Rosenberg (1976)) because Friedman’s focus on prediction
makes it impossible to provide explanations for the economic phenomena under study. That is, the “as
if” approach cannot address issues of cause and effect. One goal of our paper is to better understand
why certain actions are taken, and therefore part of our analysis scrutinizes the “realism of the
assumptions” that underpins many academic models.
Furthermore, the existing empirical evidence does not offer strong support for the current dividend
theories (see Allen and Michaely (2002) for a survey of this literature). Hence, scrutiny of stated
assumptions is important to theorists for two reasons. First, following Friedman, our results can
potentially provide for an even wider range of assumptions than have been used so far, some of which
might lead to improved predictability. Second, for those who favor more realistic assumptions, our
ability to distill which assumptions are deemed important by managers, and thus relevant to their
decisions, has the potential to lead to better explanatory models.

2.1 Survey design and delivery
Based on existing theoretical and empirical work about dividend and share repurchase decisions,
we developed an initial set of questions. These questions covered a range of topics, from Lintner -type
questions (e.g., are dividends smoothed from year to year?) to questions tied to specific theories (e.g.,
do firms pay dividends to separate themselves from competitors?). Given the nature of the questions,
we solicited feedback from academics on the initial version of the survey, incorporated many of their
suggestions, and revised the survey. We then sought the advice of marketing research experts on the
survey design and execution. We made changes to the format of the questions and overall survey
design with the goal of maximizing the response rate and minimizing biases induced by the
questionnaire.
The survey project is a joint effort with the Financial Executives International (FEI). FEI has
approximately 8,000 members throughout the U.S. and Canada that hold senior executive positions
such as CFO, treasurer, and controller. Every quarter, Duke University and FEI poll these financial
officers with a one-page survey on important topical issues (Graham, 2002). The usual response rate
for the quarterly survey is 7 percent or 8 percent.
Using the penultimate version of the survey, we conducted beta tests at both FEI and Duke
University. This involved having executive MBA students and financial executives fill out the survey,
note the required time, and provide feedback. Our beta testers took 15-20 minutes to complete the
survey. Based on this and other feedback, we made final changes to the wording on some questions
and deleted about one-fourth of the content. The final version of the survey contained 11 questions,
most with subsections, and the paper version was four pages long. One section collected demographic

5

information

about

the

sample

firms.

The

survey

is

posted

on

the

Internet

at

http://faculty.fuqua.duke.edu/~jgraham/FEI/payout/survey1.htm
We used two different versions of the survey, with the ordering reversed on the non-demographic
questions. We were concerned that the respondents might “burn out” as they filled out the questions
that had many subparts. If this were the case, we would expect to see a higher proportion of
respondents answering the subparts that appear at the beginning of any given question, or the answers
differing depending on the version of the survey. We find no evidence that the response rate or quality
of responses differs depending on ordering of the questions.
We used three mechanisms to deliver the survey. First, we administered a paper version at the
Financial Executives Summit that was held on April 23, 2002 in Colorado Springs, CO. This
conference was attended by CFOs and Treasurers from a wide variety of companies (both public and
private). At the start of a general interest session, we asked the executives to take 15 minutes to fill
out the paper version of the survey that we had placed on their chairs.1 We used this approach to
ensure a large response rate, and in fact approximately two-thirds of the conference attendees filled
out the survey –these respondents make up approximately one-half of our final sample.
The second mechanism for administering the survey occurred in conjunction with the National
Forum on Corporate Finance (NFCF), held in Austin, Texas on May 3, 2002. 2 Twelve NFCF firms
filled out the paper version of the survey, and an additional 15 later responded to the Internet version
of the survey (described next), for a response rate of more than 50 percent.
The third method of administering the survey consisted of a mass emailing on April 24, 2002 to
the 2,200 members of FEI that work for public companies and have a job title of CFO, Treasurer,
assistant treasurer, or vice president (VP), senior VP, or executive VP of Finance. To encourage the
executives to respond, we offered an advanced copy of the results to interested parties. We also
offered a $500 cash reward to two randomly chosen respondents. A reminder email was sent out on
May 1, 2002, which was planned in advance to improve the response rate. 169 of this group
responded to the Internet survey, for a response rate of approximately 8 percent.
Averaged across all three mechanisms of administering the survey, the response rate was 16
percent, which compares favorably with recent surveys of financial executives. For example, Trahan
and Gitman (1995) obtain a 12 percent response rate in a survey mailed to 700 CFOs, and Graham
and Harvey (2001) obtain a nine percent response rate for 4400 faxed surveys. Aggregating the three
forms of the survey, our final sample includes 256 public companies and 128 private firms. Most of
our analysis is based on the public firms, though we separately analyze the responses of the private
firms in Section 5.5.5.
1

We are indebted to Sanjai Bhagat and Bill McGrath, who attended the Summit and volunteered their help in
passing out and collecting the surveys.
2
We thank Dave Ikenberry for suggesting this audience and for helping administer the survey.

6

The Internet version of the survey was handled by a third-party data vendor, StatPak, Inc. The
output from the Internet survey was an electronic spreadsheet. The paper version of the survey was
hand-entered by two separate data-entry specialists and cross-checked for accuracy. Because we used
different mechanisms for administering the survey, we compared the responses based on the paper
survey to matched Internet respondents (matching based on firm size, industry, and whether they pay
dividends and/or repurchase shares). Unreported analysis indicates that the responses from the
different forms of the survey are not statistically different. Therefore, we present the combined results.

2.2 Interview design and delivery
The interview part of our paper was designed to add another dimension to our understanding of
payout policy. In the spirit of Lintner (1956), we chose firms in different industries and with different
payout policies for our potential sample of interviewees. These firms were not randomly chosen
because we purposely attempted to obtain some cross-sectional differences in firm characteristics and
payout practices. For example, we sought out two firms that had recently decreased their dividends,
and we interviewed other executives who had considered cutting but had not done so. Because
dividend cuts are rare, given our sample size we, in a sense, over-sampled these firms. In general, our
method of selecting firms is similar to that used by Lintner.
Three of the interviews were conducted in person, with the remainder via telephone. The
interviews were arranged with the understanding that the identity of the firms and executives will
remain anonymous, and with their permission, we were able to tape record all but one of the
interviews. At the beginning of each interview, we asked the executive (typically the CFO or
Treasurer) to describe the dividend and repurchase policy of his or her firm. We attempted to conduct
the interviews so as not to influence the answers or the initial direction of the interviews with a pre-set
agenda. Rather, we allowed the executive to tell us what is important at his or her firm about payout
policy and then we followed up with clarifying questions. Many of the clarifying questions were
similar to those that appear in the survey, to link the two sources of information.
The interviews varied in length from 40 minutes to over two hours. The executives were
remarkably frank and straightforward. We integrate their insights with the survey evidence, usually to
reinforce and clarify the survey responses but occasionally to provide a counterpoint.

2.3 Summary statistics and data issues
Figure 1 presents summary information about the firms in our sample. 3 For example, the
companies range from very small (10 percent of the sample firms have sales of less than $100 million)

3

The histograms are based on non-missing values for any particular characteristic.

7

to very large (60 percent have sales of at least $1 billion) (see Fig. 1A). We also gather information
about chief executive officers (thereby implicitly assuming that the CFOs we survey act as agents for
the CEOs).
[Insert Figure 1]
Table 1 compares summary information about the 23 firms that we interviewed and surveyed to
Compustat information for the following variables: sales, debt-to-assets, dividend yield, earnings per
share, credit rating, book to market, P/E ratio. For each variable, in each panel, we report the sample
average and median, and compare these values to those for the universe of Compustat firms broken
down by quintile as of April 2002 (the month we conducted the survey and interviewed many of the
23 firms). In panel A (panel B) the percentage of the interviewed (surveyed) firms that are allocated
into the five sorts determined by the quintile breakpoints. The reported percentages can then be
compared to the benchmark 20 percent, which allows us to infer whether our samples are
representative of Compusat firms and in which dimensions.
[Insert Table 1]
Table 1, panel A, indicates that the interviewed firms are large with an average of $36 billion in
sales, all falling in the top quintile of sales among Compustat firms. Interviewed firms have
disproportionally high credit ratings (average of ‘A’ rating) even though their leverage ratios are also
high (average ratio of 21 percent). As we pointed out earlier, this sample of firms was not randomly
selected and these features are therefore not surprising. Furthermore, by construction, interviewed
firms overly represent dividend-paying firms as seen from the “Div yield” row in Table 1 and the
relatively high average quarterly dividend yield of 1.7 percent.
Panel B provides similar statistics for the sample of surveyed firms. In general, we employ data
gathered from the demographic information reported by the firms on the survey. For each firm
characteristic, we report the percentage of the surveyed firms that are allocated into the five
Compustat quintiles. The main message is that our survey sample is representative for most of the
dimensions we explore. The two characteristics that are not representative are firm size, as measured
by sales, and credit rating. Surveyed firms represent, disproportionally, large firms (60 percent in the
top quintile rather than 20 percent under the null), while credit rating is higher than anticipated under
random sampling. 4

4

Although not in the table, the fact that we have large firms affects some of the other firm characteristics. For
example, large firms have better credit ratings on average, so given that our firms are large, it is not surprising
that they also have good credit ratings. In unreported analysis, we recalculate Table 1 basing the quintile cutoffs
using the largest 40 percent of Compustat firms (rather than using the whole distribution as we do in Table 1). In
this analysis, credit ratings, EPS and debt ratios are much closer to the center of the distribution for the largest
40% of Compustat firms. The implication is that conditional on firm size, our firms are representative of
Compustat firms for other characteristics.

8

Table 2 presents correlations for the demographic variables. Not surprisingly, small companies
have lower credit ratings, a higher proportion of management ownership, and a lower incidence of
paying dividends and repurchasing shares. Notice also that the caption to Table 2 describes the
“breakpoints” we use to categorize firms, based on various firm characteristics (small vs. large, high
vs. low growth, etc.). For example, in subsequent analysis, we refer to firms with revenues greater
than $1 billion as “large” and firms with a P/E ratio greater than 16 (the median for our sample) as
“growth firms.” Overall, the substantial variation in firm and CEO characteristics permits a rich
description of the practice of corporate finance and allows us to infer which corporate actions are
consistent with academic theories.
[Insert Table 2]

3. General information about the practice of payout policy
3.1 Logistics
Payout decisions are part of the finance function of corporations. Typically, the CFO or Treasurer
forms a dividend recommendation that is passed along to the CEO for approval. The recommendation
that emerges from the CEO’s office is presented to the Board of Directors, usually for quick approval.
To some extent this indicates minimal boar d involvement in dividend decisions. This is reasonable
because, as we describe below, corporations rarely make the type of aggressive or surprising changes
in payout policy that would require board scrutiny.
Repurchases follow a similar approval process. One difference is that the board typically gives
annual or semi-annual approval for the maximum amount of repurchases that can be made in the
coming quarters or years. (Occasionally, under unusual market conditions, the board will give quick
approval to raise this ceiling.) The actual implementation of the repurchases on a daily basis usually
occurs through the treasury department. Sometimes the implementation is delegated to a third party
company.
During the interviews, most managers indicate that their firms employ a mechanical open market
repurchase strategy combined with a certain amount of judgment. At the start of a quarter, a company
will typically divide their target amount of repurchases for a coming quarter by the number of “non
blacked out business days” and repurchase rather evenly on these days. 5 (They might also repurchase
on “blacked out days” but in this case they use a pre-arranged strategy implemented by a third-party
in order to comply with legal requirements.) There are exceptions to this mechanical process
5

A "blackout period" is the time during which a public company's directors, officers, and specified employees
are prevented from trading the company's stock either on their behalf or on behalf of the company itself. It
occurs prior to the release of material information such as annual or quarterly financial earnings information and
may extend to a certain period beyond the release of the earnings information. The company, not the SEC, sets
the blackout period.

9

(described below), like when the executive thinks the company’s stock price is particularly low or
liquidity dries up, in which case repurchases might be accelerated or delayed.
About one-half of the CFOs we interviewed say that they think they can time the market with their
repurchases. Moreover, most firms keep track of whether their firm “beats the market” over the longterm (e.g., annual) and short-term (i.e., daily). Many firms claim that their repurchase timing beats the
market by $1 or $2 per share over the course of the year, and also that their decisions within a given
day beat the market on average. While repurchases are not thought of as a “profit center,” in some
firms, the persons implementing the repurchase policy are rewarded financially for beating the
market.

3.2 How important are payout decisions relative to investment and financing decisions?
It is clear from the interviews that most aspects of payout decisions are of second-order importance
relative to the operating decisions of the firm. Though they would not phrase it this way, the
executives feel that Modigliani and Miller (1958) and Miller and Modigliani (1961) were not far off
in emphasizing that firm value is largely driven by operating decisions. Moreover, this viewpoint is
apparently long-standing. On the survey, we asked the executives whether payout was as important
today to the valuation of their companies, relative to 15 or 20 years ago. On a scale from –2 to +2,
their answers averaged almost exactly zero, indicating no change in importance (see Table 3, row 4
for the dividend response and Table 4, row 3 for the repurchase response).
[Insert Tables 3 and 4]
We also explicitly ask where payout decisions fit into the hierarchy of the investment and capital
struc ture planning process. Financial executives view their chief objective as providing adequate
capital and liquidity to allow their companies to make opportune and strategic investments. To fund
these investments, they use a combination of profits and external capital. After these investments and
external financing decisions are made, and adequate cash is preserved to handle future contingencies,
the companies then return capital to investors via dividends or repurchases. This depiction implies that
payout decisions are of second or third order importance. However, there is one important exception.
The executives consider the continuation of the existing level of dividends as (nearly) untouchable,
considering the preservation of dividends equal to, and in some cases more important than, investment
decisions. 6 Finally, for some firms, particularly those with financial operations, there is an important
feedback from payout policy to investment decisions. Executives feel that if they pay out too much
they can jeopardize their credit rating, which in turn can reduce investment opportunities by
restricting access to external capital.

6

In this section, our goal is to establish where payout fits into the corporate decision process. In later sections we
explore more fully the reluctance of firms to cut dividends and other issues identified in this section.

10

The survey evidence confirms these implications. First, the average rating is –0.25 that investment
decisions are made before dividend decisions (Table 3, row 6) but the rating is 1.02 that investment
decisions are made before repurchases (Table 4, row 2). This indicates that at least some aspects of
the dividend decision are made at the same time as investment decisions but repurchase decisions are
made later. Repurchase decisions are particularly secondary to investment decisions for high-debt
firms (84.7 percent of high debt firms give a rating of 1 or 2 vs. 72.9 percent of low-debt firms).
Second, we ask whether companies would raise external funds, rather than reduce payout, to
finance investment. Sixty-five percent of dividend-payers strongly (rating of +1) or very strongly
(rating of +2) agree that external funds would be raised before cutting dividends (Table 3, row 3). In
contras t, only 19 percent of repurchasers strongly or very strongly agree (Table 4, row 7) that external
funds would be raised before reducing repurchases. We also ask whether the cost of raising external
funds is lower than the cost of cutting dividends. The res ponse indicates that the cost of cutting
dividends is somewhat higher than the cost of external funds (mean rating of 0.21 in Table 5, row 6),
though the costs of dividends are deemed significantly higher for firms for which we would expect the
costs of raising external funds to be low: NYSE firms with better prospects for the future.
[Insert Table 5]
We also ask the CFOs whether investment opportunities affect payout decisions. Nearly half of the
executives tell us that the availability of good investment opportunities is an important or very
important factor affecting dividend decisions (Table 6, row 6). In contrast, four-fifths of the CFOs
report that the availability of good investment projects for their firm to pursue is an important or very
important (Table 7, row 2) factor affecting repurchases decisions. The difference of the influence of
this factor on dividend versus repurchases is statistically significant and indicates that dividend
decisions, unlike repurchases, are as important as investment dec isions in many cases.
[Insert Tables 6 and 7]
Finally, two out of five CFOs report that their merger and acquisition strategy is an important or
very important factor affecting their dividend payout decisions (Table 6, row 8). This is consistent
with divid ends being fixed even when a firm is contemplating acquisitions. In contrast, nearly twice
as many executives (72.7 percent) say that mergers and acquisition strategy is an important or very
important factor affecting repurchase decisions (Table 7, row 3), presumably because repurchase
decisions are made after acquisition decisions, or because shares are sometimes accumulated prior to
acquisitions. M&A is particularly important to repurchase decisions among large, high growth firms
with good credit ratings.
The relation between payout (dividends and/or repurchases) and investment and financing
strategies is summarized in Fig. 2. There is a difference in the pecking order depending whether the
payout is in the form of dividends or repurchase of shares. Repurchase decisions are done after

11

investment decisions have been made (see Fig 2B, row 4). The order is more ambiguous with
dividends. When facing profitable projects, firms are more hesitant to cut dividends than to reduce
share repurchase. In the same vein, repurchases are more sensitive to the firm’s M&A strategy. (Fig.
2B, row 5). Relative to dividends, repurchases give more flexibility to pursue investment strategies.
[Insert Figs. 2A, 2B]

3.3 Are dividends and repurchases substitutes, complements, or neither?
In the interviews, executives indicate that they do not think—in a direct and conscious way—
about whether repurchases substitute for dividends. For one thing, the possibility of cutting the level
of dividends to increase repurchases is not even contemplated. For another, as we indicate below,
dividends are thought of as primarily being paid from permanent cash flows, while repurchases might
also emanate from temporary excess cash flows. It is also true, however, that many companies do not
attempt to increase dividends at the same rate earnings growth, and the money that could have been
dedicated to dividend increases is often instead used to repurchase shares. Therefore, repurchases are
substituted for forgone increases in dividends, and in this sense the two forms of payout are
substitutes.
This “repurchases in place of forgone dividends” substitution is to some extent confirmed by
survey evidence. On the survey we ask what firms would do with the extra funds they would have if
they cut dividends. The most popular answer, chosen by approximately one-third of the respondents,
is that they would pay down debt (see Fig. 3A). The second most popular answer was to repurchase
shares (followed by invest more and perform mergers and acquisitions), which is consistent with the
substitution of repurchases for dividends. However, this is a “one-way substitution.” When we ask
what they would do with the extra funds from reducing repurchases, very few firms would choose to
pay dividends (see Fig. 3B), so there is alm ost no evidence of substitution away from repurchases
towards dividends.
[insert Fig. 3]
Finally, we ask firms what form of payout they would choose if they were hypothetically paying
out for the first time. In the interviews, it was clear: once free of the tradition of paying dividends,
most firms would emphasize repurchasing shares. That is, once all constraints are removed, they
would substitute repurchases for dividends (i.e., many firms would replace existing dividends with
repurchases if they felt th ey could). To preview the important factors behind dividends and
repurchases (discussed more fully in Sections 4 and 5), the primary reason that repurchases would be
preferred is that they are much more flexible than dividends.
The survey evidence also reveals that repurchases would be the most popular choice among firms
initiating payout for the first time. Among firms that do not currently pay out, two-thirds say that if
they were beginning to pay out they would use repurchases only, and another seven percent said they

12

would repurchase and pay dividends (see Fig. 3C). Another 27 percent of nonpayers say that they
would pay dividends and not repurchase if they were just now paying out for the first time. The
answers are a bit different among firms that currently pay dividends or that currently repurchase.
While repurchases would be relatively important if firms were hypothetically starting over, a fair
number of dividend-paying firms state that they would start over with dividends. We interpret this to
mean that many firms that currently pay dividends believe that it is the appropriate form of payout for
their firm.
We analyze the responses of “cash cows” for these three questions. We define a cash cow as a
firm that is profitable, has a credit rating of A or better, and a P/E lower than the median P/E among
profitable firms with credit rating of A or higher. The results for cash cows are similar to other firms
except that cash cows are not as concerned as the typical firm about paying down debt.

4. Benchmarking to Lintner (1956)
There are two key results from Lintner’s (1956) interviews with 28 industrial firms. First, in the
middle of the 20th century, the starting point for most payout decisions was the payout ratio (i.e.,
dividends as a proportion of earnings). Corporations would first decide what portion of earnings they
wanted to pay out in the long-run. As earnings increased (and to a lesser extent, as earnings
decreased), the target dividend payment would move in tandem. Lintner’s second key finding was that
corporate dividend decisions were made very conservatively. This boils down to reluctance on the
part of management to reduce dividends. Combining these two key features, Lintner’s empirical
model of dividend policy was simple: Dividends per share equal a coefficient times the difference
between the target dividend payout and lagged dividends per share. The coefficient should be less
than one because it is a “partial adjustment factor” – dividend conservatism implies that dividends per
share do not move completely to the target in a single year.7
We benchmark our findings to Lintner’s in several steps. First, we present our findings about
whether companies are still conservative in their dividend decisions. Second, we examine whether the
primary target of dividend decisions is still the dividend payout ratio. Third, we compare and contrast
the dividend results in these two subsections to corporate share repurchase decisions. Overall, we find
that in one of these three dimensions payout decisions ar e similar to those depicted by Lintner

7

There is one element in Lintner’s (1956) paper that we do not address. He concludes that target dividends per
share and partial adjustment factors are functions of firm characteristics. This implies that dividends per share
vary with firm characteristics, which results in cross-sectionally differing dividend targets and partial adjustment
factors. A list of factors that Lintner (1956, p. 104) says affect dividends via their effect on the target and partial
adjustment factor include growth opportunities in a firm’s industry, growth and earnings prospects for the firm,
cyclicality of earnings, working capital requirements, degree of stockholders’ preference for stable dividend
rates (and any premia the market might put on such), payouts and adjustment factors of peers, financial strength
of the company, and management confidence in the soundness of earnings numbers produced by the accounting
department.

13

(dividends are still conservatively chosen). In the other two (targeting dividend payout, and using
repurchases), the payout process has changed dramatically. 8

4.1 Are dividend decisions still made conservatively?
At the heart of the conservative nature of dividend policy is the extreme reluctance on the part of
management to cut dividends. This was true in the 1950s when Lintner conducted his study and it is
true today. Executives tell us that cutting dividends is a “last resort.” This phenomenon might be
stronger today than it was during Lintner’s time. 9 In the 1950s, Lintner (1956) says that dividends
would be reduced to reflect any “substantial or continued decline in earnings” (p. 101). Today, some
executives tell stories of selling assets, laying off a large portion of employees, borrowing heavily, all
before slaying the sacred cow by cutting dividends.
On the survey, 94 percent of dividend-payers strongly (rating of 1.0) or very strongly (rating of
2.0) agree that they try to avoid reducing dividends. This is the highest score of any question on the
entire survey, with an average rating of 1.58 in Table 5 (row 1). This is especially true when the CEO
is mature (97.3 percent) and/or the firm’s prospects are poor (100 percent). Eighty-seven percent of
executives strongly or very strongly agree that there are negative consequences to reducing dividends
(Table 3, row 1). Eighty-five percent list maintaining consistency with historic dividend policy as an
important or very important factor determining dividend policy (Table 6, row 1). Eighty-seven percent
strongly or very strongly agree that they consider the level of dividends per share paid in recent
quarters when choosing today’s dividend policy (Table 5, row 3), especially when the CEO is mature
and/or prospects are poor.
The reluctance to cut dividends also shows up in different ways. As indicated in Table 5, row 2, 90
percent of firms strongly or very strongly agree that they smooth dividends from year to year. Lint ner
(1956, p. 99) notes that there is “an inertia and conservatism … shareholders prefer stable (payout
rates) and markets put a premium” on dividend decisions that do not have to be reversed. We
similarly find that 79 percent of dividend-payers say that ht ey are reluctant to make a dividend
decision that might need to be reversed (Table 5, row 4).
Most firms essentially take lagged dividends per share as given (like a fixed cost of doing
business). Therefore, among payers, the most common dividend decision is really about whether a
firm should increase dividends (not whether or not they should pay dividends). Two-thirds of survey
respondents strongly or very strongly agree that the change in dividends is the decision variable
(Table 5, row 5).
8

Our paper differs from Lintner (1956) is that we also investigate issues related to firms that do not currently
pay out (Section 6), which Lintner ignores, and consider numerous market imperfections that might make
dividend decisions relevant (Section 5).
9
For additional historical perspective on dividend policy, see Brittain (1966) and Dhrymes and Kurz (1964).

14

There are several interesting issues about the conservative nature of dividends that emerge from
the interviews. First, financial executives perceive a large asymmetry between dividend increases and
decreases: there is not much reward in increasing dividends but there is perceived to be large penalty
for reductions. Second, dividends per share can be thought of as “path dependent” with the level of
dividends for a given firm in a given year being greatly affected by how the firm got there (i.e., by the
past level of dividends and to some extent by past dividend growth); otherwise similar firms might
have current dividend policies that differ solely because of past dividend decisions, not the firm’s
current situation. Third, many firms would like to cut dividends but fee l constrained by their historic
policy. Some of these firms look for opportunities for a “stealth cut” in dividends, which they might
“sneak by” the market. One executive told us that his firm waited to reduce dividends until “air cover”
was provided by competitors reducing dividends. Others said that when they split their stock they
would increase dividends somewhat less than the split ratio, to reduce total dividend payout. Finally,
the only acceptable reasons to cut dividends are that “you are in deep trouble and have no other
choice” or that “you have a tremendous investment opportunity and need the funds.” In other words,
only cut in extreme situations.
Even though dividend policy is rigid downward, it is interesting to note that (most) executives do
not feel that their firm’s stock will be penalized if they hold dividends constant. If stock prices
gradually increase, a flat dividend reduces yield over time. This is not perceived to be a problem at
most firms. The one exception is firms that earn large, stable profits every year. For such cash cows,
the executives focus on the growth in dividends. These executives believe that their firms are not
punished as long as the growth in dividends does not shrink.
This all leads to an interesting question: what makes dividend cuts so bad? Though not always
particularly lucid on this point, the executives were almost universal in saying that “because firms that
cut dividends are usually in trouble, the market assumes that firms that cut dividends are in trouble.”
When probed, the executives agree that in principal they could communicate directly to the market to
explain the dividend cut. But they also said “why take the chance that the market will
misunderstand?” or “the market sells first and asks questions later,” indicating that executives believe
that it is very likely that their firms will get punished even if they have meritorious reasons for cutting
the dividend.

4.2 Is the payout ratio still the target for dividend decisions ?
The results in the previous section suggest that current payout decisions involve more than
gradually working towards a target dividend payout ratio. In the interviews, executives mention a
number of potential targets that affect dividend decisions. For many firms, their “target” is to maintain
a constant level of dividends per share. For most firms, any target they may set is considered flexible
(except of course they are inflexible about reducing dividends per share).

15

On the survey, we asked dividend-payers about dividend targets. Nearly 40 percent of the
respondents said that they target dividends per share (see Fig. 4A). Only 28 percent target dividend
payout, and another 27 percent target growth in dividends per share. Thirteen percent tell us they
target dividend yield, although we know from the interviews that many companies keep an eye on
dividend yield, to make sure it does not get too far out of line with their competitors’ yields. Finally,
six percent of dividend-payers claim not to target at all. Contrary to the typical firm’s targeting of the
current level of dividends per share, cash cows primarily target the growth in dividends per share or
dividend payout. Apparently cash cows feel that they are under pressure to return capital to investors
when earnings growth is robust, a view consistent with Jensen’s Free Cash Flow hypothesis.
[insert Fig. 4]
While only a minority of firms see payout ratio as the target, most firms state that they have some
dividend target in mind. Fig. 4B reports whether managers consider the targets to be strict or flexible.
Forty one percent say that they are flexible in pursuing their target, and another 12 percent say the
target is not really a goal at all. In contrast, 29 percent say that their target is somewhat strict, and
another 10 percent say it is very strict.
The above results can be directly compared to Lintner’s findings. First, Lintner finds that dividend
policy is not determined “de novo” each period, but rather that the previous period’s level of
dividends is the benchmark. The fact that the majority of the respondents take current dividend policy
as the starting point implies that this notion still holds. On the other hand, Lintner (1956) states that in
the mid-20th century one of the most important aspects of dividend policy (after the firm had
determined its earnings) was choosing the “dividend rate,” that is, the payout ratio. It seems that the
number of potential targets and the degree to which firms adhere to these targets has changed in the
last 50 years. This might help explain the lack of support for a target dividend payout ratio in Fama
and French (2002). In fact, the lack of a clear target has important implications for statistical modeling
of dividend policy. It is not immediately clear what the dependent variable should be in such models.

4.3 What about repurchases?
In Lintner’s time, management thought “fiduciary responsibilities and standard of fairness required
them to distribute part of any substantial increase in earnings to stockholders in dividends” (p. 101).
The increased amount that firms spend on repurchases (Grullon and Michaely, 2002) and the decline
in the number of firms that pay dividends (Fama and French, 2001) indicates that corporate payout
policies have changed over the past 50 years. Repurchases are now an important part of the payout
landscape. Repurchases were scarce in the first half of the 20th century and it is not surprising that
Lintner (1956) ignored them altogether. In contrast, the managers we interviewed pay considerable
attention to repurchases. It is a decision variable that they re-evaluate frequently.

16

We asked firms that repurchased at some point during the last three years how they determine their
repurchase policies. Specifically, do they have a targeted repurchase policy or are repurchases not
guided by a target and are simply the residual? The response to the question “what do you target when
you make your repurchase decision?” are presented in Fig. 4C. More than 40 percent of these firms
target the dollar value of repurchases. Twenty-two percent do not target repurchases at all. Only four
percent target the “repurchases payout ratio,” that is, repurchases as a proportion of earnings. Finally,
20 percent use repurchases to target some other variable or policy (the three most popular choices are
the number of shares needed for employee stock option exercises, the debt ratio, and the amount of
excess cash).
As shown in Fig. 4D, even among firms that target repurchases, 51 percent say the target is a
flexible goal (compared to around 40 percent for dividends) and another 18 percent say it is not really
a goal (compared to 13 percent for dividends). Only 26 percent say that their repurchase target is
either strict or somewhat strict target. Overall, repurchases are more flexible than dividends – but
managers do not think of them strictly as a residual. The interviews produce the same implication:
repurchase policy is less rigid than dividend policy.
The interviews also indicate that managers believe that the market more willingly accepts a
reduction in repurchases than in dividends, which allows them to be less conservative in their
repurchase policy (because potential future reductions in repurchases are less costly). Indeed, from the
survey, we learn that only 22.5 percent of executives believe that there are negative consequences to
reducing repurchases (Table 4, row 6), and only 24 percent say that maintaining consistency with
historic repurchase policy is important or very important (Table 7, row 13). Recall that the response
for dividends was vastly different: almost 90 percent think that reducing dividends has negative
consequences. The different response is reflected graphically in Fig. 2A (row 1). Only 21.3 percent of
survey respondents strongly or very strongly agree that they are reluctant to make repurchase changes
that might have to be reversed in the future (Table 8, row 7). From the interviews, as mentioned
earlier, the flexibility of repurchase policy (relative to dividend policy) is the most important factor
contributing to the rapid growth of repurchases in the past decade. Overall, repurchases are not
managed as conservatively as are dividends.
[insert Table 8]

4.4 How do earnings affect payout (among firms that currently pay out)?
Similar to Lintner’s argument, Jagannathan, Stephens and Weisbach (2000) find that at the margin,
dividends tend to be paid from permanent increases in cash flow, while share repurchases can also be
made from temporary increases in cash flow or temporary surpluses of cash on the balance sheet. Our
survey evidenc e is generally consistent with these arguments. More than two-thirds of dividendpayers state that the stability of future earnings is an important or very important factor affecting

17

dividend decisions (Table 6, row 2). This is particularly important to highly rated firms with mature
CEOs. Similarly, 65.9 percent of executives report that stability of future cash flows is an important
factor affecting repurchase decisions (Table 7, row 4). Likewise, two-thirds of CFOs say that a
sustainable change in earnings is important or very important (Table 6, row 3) for dividends, and 65.5
percent say the same for repurchases (Table 7, row 5 and Figure 2A, row 4).
There are greater differences between the forms of payout when we ask whether a temporary
increase in earnings affects payout (Figure 2B, row 7). About one-third of repurchasers say that a
temporary increase in earnings is an important or very important factor (Table 7, row 9). In contrast,
only 8.1 percent say that a temporary increase in earnings is important to dividend decisions (Table 6,
row 17).10
Likewise, excess cash on the balance sheet (Fig. 2B, row 6) is more important to repurchase
decisions than it is to dividend decisions. Only 30.2 percent of CFOs state that having extra cash or
liquid assets is an important or very important factor affecting dividend decisions (Table 6, row 12).
This lack of importance is especially the case for large, high-debt firms. In contrast, twice as many
CFOs (60.6 percent) say that temporary excess cash or liquid assets are an important or very
important factor affecting repurchase decisions. See Lie (2000) for large-scale evidence that
repurchases vary with cash on the balance sheet.
The interviews confirm these survey findings and also reveal some subtle points. Profitable firms
with stable earnings feel compelled to link their growth in dividend payout to earnings growth. These
firms strive to develop a reputation of increasing payout lock-step with earnings and maintain a
relatively inflexible dividend payout goal. In this sense, cash cows still live close to the “Lintner
world.” Interestingly, in conglomerates, executives often view one division (with stable profits) as
producing the stream of cash flows that leads to dividends, while another (growth) division is viewed
as not generating any current payout. This type of behavior does not seem to be motivated by
signaling, but rather by the desire not to leave too much cash at management’s disposal when
investment opportunities are limited.

4.5 Summary comparing modern payout policy to Lintner (1956)
One thing that has not changed in the past 50 years is the conservative nature of dividend policy.
This leads to stickiness in dividends and a strong reluctance to ever cut dividend payments. This is a
very strong force that affects the payout landscape in many ways. First, because they are flexible,
repurchases have increased dramatically in response to the inflexibility of dividend policy. Second,
10

These results are consistent with those in Dittmar and Dittmar (2002), who break aggregate earnings into
temporary and permanent components and show that aggregate dividends move with permanent (but not
temporary) earnings but aggregate repurchases move with both.

18

the inflexibility of dividends, once a company starts paying them, acts as a strong deterrent to
dividend initiation. In interviews and unreported survey analysis, we find that non-dividend paying
firms agree that dividends are inflexible, and that this makes them very hesitant to begin paying
dividends in the first place. In this sense, dividend conservatism is a force that affects the actions of
all firms, payers and nonpayers alike.

5. Factors affecting payout policy
Our study has one significant (and unfair) advantage over Lintner’s. Namely, we can use the
insights the profession has gained from 40 years of related theory and empirical work. Since Miller
and Modigliani (1961) showed that corporate value is invariant to payout policy in perfect and
frictionless capital markets, numerous theories have been put forth that demonstrate how payout
policy can affect firm value if one or more of the Miller and Modigliani assumptions is violated. In
this section, we present our findings within the context of these theories, to determine which are most
consistent with management views in the 21st century. Within each theory, we discuss how various
factors affect payout practice in general, and highlight when the implications differ between dividends
and repurchases.

5.1 Taxes
The relative tax disadvantage of dividends relative to repurchases is often cited as an explanation
for the recent growth in the share of payout dedicated to repurchases (e.g., Grullon and Michaely,
2002). The executives we interviewed frequently cite tax inefficiency as a factor that causes them to
favor repurchases over dividends. However, when we ask dividend-payers why they do not reduce
dividends (or increase them less) because of tax inefficiency, it becomes clear that investor-level taxes
are not a dominant factor. Several executives mention that despite the tax-disadvantage of dividends,
for whatever reason, individual investors nonetheless prefer dividends. In addition, certain situations
can exist for which dividends are not tax disadvantaged. In one case, the firm we interviewed was
more than 80 percent owned by another public corporation, in which case dividends are not tax
disadvantaged thanks to the dividends received deduction. In other cases, the primary investors in a
company’s stock are taxed equally between dividends and capital gains.
The survey evidence is consistent with the executives’ views expressed in the interviews. When
we mention personal taxes paid by investors (without highlighting that dividends are tax
disadvantaged relative to capital gains), only 21.4 percent of dividend-payers cite this as an important
or very important factor (Table 6, row 13). Likewise, only 28.6 percent of repurchasing firms cite
personal taxes as an important factor affecting the number of shares repurchased (Table 7, row 12).
When we are more explicit and ask repurchasers whether the tax advantage that repurchases have over

19

dividends affects their decision to repurchase, 42.4 percent agree that it does (Table 8, row 5).
Overall, executives indicate that differential taxes are a consideration, but not a first-order concern in
payout policy decisions.

5.1.1 The 2003 dividend tax cut proposal
The second-order importance of taxes in payout decisions is confirmed in a February 2003
quarterly survey of FEI executives that examines the effects of President Bush’s proposal to reduce or
eliminate investor taxation of dividends. Among 105 CFOs whose firms currently pay dividends, onefourth say that the elimination of dividend taxation would probably lead to their firm increasing
dividends and six percent say it definitely would. The other 69 percent say that elimination of
dividend taxation would definitely not or probably not affect their dividend decisions. Among 99
firms that do not currently pay dividends, 16 say that their firm probably would, and only one CFO
says that his firm definitely would, initiate dividends if dividend taxation were eliminated. The other
82 CFOs say that the elimination of dividend taxation probably or definitely would not lead to
dividend initiation for their firm. Overall, the results are consistent with dividend taxation affecting
payout policy – but not in a first-order manner. The results also imply that the overall payout
landscape would not change if dividend taxation were eliminated, so the primary factors that we
identify as affecting pa yout policy would most likely still dominate a tax-free dividend environment,
should the President’s proposal be approved.

5.2 Clienteles
As just mentioned, executives acknowledge that dividends are tax disadvantaged relative to capital
gains for retail investors. At the same time, executives believe that if there is any class of investors
that prefer dividends as the form of payout, it is retail investors. Some CFOs state that dividendloving retail investors are the “gray-haired set,” or “mom and pop” investors who presumably have
low dividend tax rates. More common, however, is the belief that retail investors prefer dividends in
spite of the tax disadvantage. Retail investors prefer dividends over retained earnings, and they prefer
dividends over repurchases. When we further ask the executives we interviewed what, in their
opinion, is the reason that individual investors prefer dividends, some of them reply that retail
investors (at least the elderly) consume directly from their dividend receipts.11

11

We asked several follow-up questions, such as “do elderly retail investors represent a significant portion of
your shareholders?” While admitting that they do not make up a big constituency, and that consumption plans of
investors is not a first-order factor driving their firm’s overall payout policy, we were not able to obtain a more
concrete explanation. At this point we can only speculate about what causes individual investors to prefer
dividends. First, maybe they are of the opinion that until they have the cash in hand, it does not really exist. This
is consistent with many agency and asymmetric information stories (discussed below). Especially for small
investors who cannot monitor firms too closely, this may be a reason why they “want to see the cash.” Second, it

20

The CFOs also indicated during the interviews that, by and large, institutions prefer repurchases,
though many also said that some small dividend payout is needed to attract certain types of
institutions. One CFO said that his firm maintains a dividend level of two cents per share so that
institutions subject to a constraint of investing only in dividend-paying stocks will be able to invest in
his company. 12 This particular executive added that all other payout is done in the “more efficient”
form of share repurchases. Many firms rule out cutting dividends to zero because it would eliminate
some investment funds and other institutions that cannot hold zero dividend stocks. In the survey we
also ask whether companies pay dividends to attract investors subject to “prudent man” investment
restrictions. When we use this exact wording on the survey, we find modest support (41.7 percent
strongly or very strongly agree with this motive in Table 5, row 7).
At the same time, many executives emphasize that payout policy is not a first-order factor in
attracting institutions, and that there are many other considerations that will cause institutions to
invest or not invest in a company.
Most executives are well aware of the specific retail/institutional shareholder breakdown in the
stock ownership of their firm. Most also believe that their stock price will suffer if they do not
maintain some balance between the two groups. Institutions are needed because “they have the
money.” Retail investors are desired because they help inc rease the number of shareholders (with the
implication that executives believe that the demand curve for their stock is downward sloping) and
because they are “more loyal” and add stability to the investor base.
The survey evidence confirms that CFOs thin k retail investors prefer dividends and institutions
prefer repurchases. Approximately half of executives believe that paying dividends is an important or
very important factor that attracts retail investors to their stock (Table 6, row 7), while only one-fifth
believe that repurchasing shares attracts retail investors (Table 7, row 14). A direct comparison is
presented in Fig. 2A, row 8. The difference is greatest in low growth firms with better prospects for
the future. In contrast, the survey evidence indicates that approximately half of CFOs believe that
paying dividends attracts institutions (Table 6, row 4), which is statistically indistinguishable from the
percentage who feel repurchases attract institutions (Table 7, row 8 and Fig. 2A, row 6). Thus the
relative importance of dividends is stronger for retail investors.
Contrary to the assumptions of several dividend payout theories (e.g., Allen, Bernardo and Welch,
2000) our evidence does not indicate that institutions prefer dividends, or more precisely, that
executives believe that institutions have a stronger preference for dividends than do individual
investors. Given management beliefs, it seems unlikely that firms pay dividends to attract institutional
is possible that because of behavioral reasons (Shefrin and Statman, 1984) or for transaction cost considerations,
individual investors find dividends more efficient then capital gains, despite the tax disadvantage.
12
This anecdotal evidence is consistent with Grinstein and Michaely (2002) who find that institutions avoid
firms that do not pay any dividends, but have no preference about the size of the dividend (as long as it is
nonzero).

21

investors. This result is consistent with the empirical results of Grinstein and Michaely (2002) who
find no relation between the level of dividends firms pay and the extent of the institutional holdings.
Moreover, in the interviews, most managers disagree with the statement that firms pay dividends to
attract institutions and not a single manager agrees with the assertion that firms pay dividends so that
institutions will come and monitor them. They argue that many institutions prefer repurchases over
dividends, and (most) managers are not even conv inced that institutions rigorously monitor corporate
actions in the first place. 13 We find evidence consistent with this on the survey. Only 32.9 percent of
dividend-payers do so to attract institutions because institutions monitor their stock (Table 6, row 11).
A statistically similar percentage (34.5 percent) says that the monitoring service provided by
institutions is an important or very important factor affecting repurchasing decisions (Fig. 2B, row 8
and Table 7, row 10).
From management’s perspective, institutions attempt to influence dividend decisions as much as
they try to influence repurchase decisions (Fig. 2A, row 7). 53.2 percent of respondents report that the
influence of institutional shareholders affects dividend decisions (Table 6, row 5).14 This is
indistinguishable from the 51.5 percent who report that institutions influence repurchase decisions
(Table 7, row 7).
The empirical evidence, the survey evidence, and the feedback from the interviews are consistent
on this point: Management does not believe that dividend payments are a significant factor affecting
institutions’ decisions about which firms to hold. Institutions are interested in repurchases at least as
much as they are interested in dividends, and management does not consciously use payout policy to
attract institutional monitoring.

5.3 Agency conflicts and self -imposed discipline via payout policy
Payout can be used to self-impose discipline. Easterbrook (1984), Jensen (1986) and others
suggest that equityholders can minimize the cash that management controls, and thereby reduce the
opportunity for management to go on (unmonitored) spending sprees. The less discretionary cash that
management has, the harder it is for them to invest in negative NPV projects. One way to take
unnecessary cash from the firm is to increase the level of payout. Thus the level of payout, and
dividends in particular, may be related to the need to control and monitor management.
Most companies’ executives are adamant that discipline is not imposed via payout policy. They
argue that management integrity or discipline imposed by the “bottom line” ensures that free cash
13

In the interviews, some managers acknowledge that institutions dump a stock more quickly than do retail
investors if there is evidence of trouble at the firm, so nontrivial institutional holdings of a stock might perform
a certification role (that there is no evidence of forthcoming trouble).
14
From the interviews we know that retail investors sometimes communicate with companies in hopes of
obtaining a higher dividend payout – but that the companies’ decisions are not influenced unless the retail
investor is very large or perhaps part of the founding family.

22

flow is not wasted on negative NPV projects.15 This view is supported by survey evidence. Almost 88
percent of executives think that the disciplin ary role of dividends is not an important factor affecting
dividends (Table 6, row 15). About 79 percent believe that discipline imposed by repurchases is not
important (Table 7, row 16 and Fig. 2B, row 12).
Interestingly, a notable minority of the interview firms admit that “money can burn a hole in their
pocket.” Past history is clear for some firms that when cash is flush, management makes ill-advised or
expensive acquisitions. These companies agree that committing to pay out can reduce this excess free
cash flow problem. Surprisingly, though, many of these companies believe that dividends are no
better at imposing discipline than are repurchases (even though, as mentioned earlier, they all agree
that dividends are much less flexible). This is consistent with the survey evidence of the relative lack
of importance of the disciplinary role of dividends and repurchases.
Cash cows might be more likely to experience agency costs, and their CFO’s views are consistent
with agency considerations affecting their dividend policies in terms of these firms being more
committed to paying out to shareholders in the form of dividends. In particular, cash cows are
statistically more likely than other firms to agree or strongly agree that (i) there are negative
consequences to cutting dividends (Table 3, row 1), (ii) rather than reducing dividends, they would
consider raising external capital to undertake a profitable investment (Table 3, row 3), (iii) they try to
maintain a smooth dividend stream (Table 5, row 2), (iv) they are reluctant to make changes that they
might have to reverse in the future (Table 5, row 4), (v) they focus on growth or change in dividend
per share (Table 5, row 5), (vi) they consider the change or growth in dividends per share, and (vii)
they try to maintain consistency with historic dividend policy (Table 6, row 1). Recall also that cash
cows target the growth in dividends per share, rather than targeting the level of dividends like other
firms. In general, our cash cow results are consistent with DeAngelo et al. (2002) who find that a
small subset of firms (which we call cash cows) pay the bulk of aggregate dividends and in fact are
responsible for aggregate payout increasing steadily in recent decades.
5.4 Information, signaling, and stock prices
Miller and Modigliani (1961) assume complete and perfect capital markets and that all investors
have the same knowledge. If insiders have better information about the firm’s future cash flows, many
researchers suggest that dividends might convey information about the firm’s prospects. The first
possibility is that dividends may simply convey information not previously known to the market; for
example through the sources and uses of funds identity (e.g., Miller and Rock (1985)). Managers do
not necessarily have an intention to signal – their action simply conveys information. Alternatively,
according to several models, dividends can also be used explicitly and deliberately as a costly signal
15

We recognize that managers might not admit, even to themselves, that at times they may need someone to
monitor, or impose discipline on, their actions, so these results should be interpreted accordingly.

23

to change market perceptions concerning future earnings prospects (e.g., Bhattacharya (1979), Miller
and Rock (1985), John and Williams (1985), Allen et. al. (2000)).
The questions we ask the survey participants address both types of issues. We ask CFOs whether
they think there is some association between dividend changes (or repurchases) and information. We
then further investigate whether they use dividends (or repurchases) as a signaling device.

5.4.1 Does payout policy convey information?
Almost every executive we interviewed volunteered that dividend payout and share repurchases
convey management’s confidence about the future. 16 Somewhat surprisingly, repurchases are thought
to convey at least as much information as dividends. Survey evidence confirms this strong view about
payout conveying information. First, four-fifths of financial executives believe that dividend decisions
convey information about their company to investors (Table 3, row 2). Though not statistically so, this
is higher for firms that believe they have positive prospects relative to those that do not. An even
higher 84.5 percent feel that repurchase decisions convey information to the marketplace (Table 4,
row 1 and Fig. 2B, row 2). Though not reported in the table, this rating is statistically higher for
companies that feel their stock is valued correctly or overvalued, relative to those who feel their stock
is undervalued.
One interesting issue is that some mangers view their information conveyance as being about the
mean of the distribution of future earnings, while others believe that information conveyance
primarily helps resolve uncertainty and so is about the second moment of the distribution. This is
consistent with the evidence presented in Grullon et al. (2002). The survey evidence (Fig. 2A, row 9)
indicates that around 35% believe that dividends make the stock less risky and only 23% believe that
repurchases make the stock of the firm less risky.
The interviews make it clear, however, that any conveyance of information is viewed as one part
of an overall communication with the investor community. Earnings announcements and direct
communication with the investor community (such as conversations with analysts and investors) are
thought to convey the majority of information to outsiders. It is helpful for payout policy to be
consistent with these oth er forms of communication. As one executive put it, payout policy is a
“punctuation mark” at the end of the sentence communicating with outsiders, not the meat of the
sentence.
A priori it can also be argued that paying dividends and repurchases could convey negative
information. For example, the investment community may infer that a firm does not have ample
investment opportunities if it pays more dividends or repurchases more of its shares. This negative
16

The executives generally use the word “signal” instead of “convey.” In the text, we use “convey” to indicate
any form of sharing information with outsiders and reserve “signal” for the academic sense of the word (i.e.,
costly self -imposed action).

24

form of information conveyance received meager support on the survey. Less than one-fifth of
respondents think that an important or very important factor affecting payout policy is the possibility
that paying dividends might indicate to investors that their company is running low on profitable
investments (Table 6, row 14). Though still only modest support, a statistically larger 30.3 percent
believe that repurchasing might indicate a lack of investment opportunities (Table 7, row 11 and Fig.
2B, row 3).

5.4.2 Payout policy and signaling
We ask a series of questions to determine whether this general support for payout conveying
information is consistent with some of the most cited signaling models. First, we inquire whether
payout is used to separate a given firm from its competitors (saving for later more specific questions
about whether payout separates because it is a self-imposed cost). Inconsistent with the notion that
payout can be used to separate a firm from its peer group, only one-fourth of executives strongly or
very strongly agree that they use dividend policy to make their firm look better than their competitors
(Table 3, row 7). Similarly, only 17.6 percent view repurchase policy as a means to look better than
competitors (Table 4, row 8 and Fig. 2A, row 10).
Second, we ask whether companies use payout policy to show that their firm can bear costs, in the
self-imposed academic sense, to make their company look better than competitors. 17 The vast majority
of executives did not agree with this premise. Only 4.2 percent of companies agree or strongly agree
with this premise with respect to dividend policy, which is the least support for any dividend question
on the entire survey (average rating of –1.16 in Table 3, row 9). Even lower, only 2.5 percent agree or
strongly agree that they use repurchases to signal that their firm can bear self-imposed costs, the
lowest score on the entire survey (rating of –1.23 in Table 4, row 9. See also Fig. 2A, row 11.). The
replies to this question clearly indicate that managers do not consciously use, and do not believe that
others use, payout as a costly signal. Thus, if we take the models literally, and managers are conscious
of their actions, and are aware of the meaning and reasoning of their actions, then this notion is flatly
rejected by managers. As we discuss in the Section 2, it is possible to invoke the “as if” assumption in
which managers do not know what they do, they do not know it is a costly signal, but they still act as
if they intentionally self-impose a cost to signal.
To further explore the dividend signaling theories, we also asked specific questions about some of
the particular signaling costs underlying those theories. Bhattacharya (1979) asserts that the signaling
cost is the cost of external financing. If a firm pays dividends to signal but things do not go well
(which is more likely for low quality firms) then they will have to resort to external capital, which is
costly. Among dividend-payers, only 19.1 percent of companies agree or strongly agree that they use
17

The exact statement on the survey was: “We use dividends/repurchases to show we can bear costs such as
borrowing costly external funds or passing up investment, to make us look better than our competitors.”

25

dividends to show that they are strong enough to bear the cost of external capital if needed (Table 5,
row 8). Sixty percent of companies disagreed with this assertion. The John and Williams (1985)
model centers on the higher taxation of dividends relative to capital gains as the cost. Only 17.1
percent agree that they use dividends to show that their stock is valuable enough that investors buy it
even though they have to pay relatively costly dividend taxes (Table 5, row 9). Finally, Miller and
Rock (1985) argue that the cost of dividend is that “good” firms shave investments to pay the
dividend (and only good firms will find it valuable enough to do so). Only 8.6 percent agree that they
pay dividends to show that their firm is strong enough to pass up profitable investments (Table 5, row
10). As low as these three signaling scores are, it is interesting that the scores are even lower among
growth firms, which is opposite what one would think if growth firms are subject to informational
asymmetry and signaling is a dominant force affecting payout policies. Though the absolute scores are
low for cash cows and non cash cow firms, the former provide relatively more support for the
signaling hypotheses in rows 8 and 9 of Table 5.
With the exception of the John and Williams’ model, the signaling theories hold for repurchases as
well as dividends. As indicated in Fig. 2A, row 11, the endorsement of the repurchase signaling
theories is rather meager. Less than 5% of companies say that they repurchase to show they can bear
the cost of external financing or pass up investment opportunities to show that they are better than
their competitors.

5.4.3 Repurchases and adverse selection models
When informed investors have better knowledge of the firm than uninformed investors, the use of
repurchases may lead to an advantage for informed investors. Barclay and Smith (1988) and Brennan
and Thakor (1990) argue that when a firm announces a repurchase program, the cost to the
uninformed investors of adverse selection increases. Informed investors will bid for stock when it is
undervalued, but will not bid when it is overvalued. The uninformed do not have the information to
act strategically, which puts them at a disadvantage in a share repurchase. When money is paid out in
the form of dividends, the informed and the uninformed receive a pro rata amount, so there is no
adverse selection. As a result, uninformed shareholders prefer dividends to repurchases and the
informed prefer repurchases because this allows them to profit at the expense of the uninformed.
The adverse selection story is not supported in the interviews. Instead, the executives were likely
to respond that “stock price goes up on average following repurchases, so the remaining shareholders,
uninformed or not, benefit from the program.” Moreover, executives argue that at least some informed
agents (directors and management) rarely sell during a repurchase program. We acknowledge that the
adverse selection story described above may apply best to tender offers, rather than to open market
repurchases. But, at least over the last two decades, the vast majority of repurchases have been open
market repurchases and not tender offers (Grullon and Ikenberry (2000)).

26

On the survey we ask whether the executives hesitate to use open market repurchases because the
selling shareholders cash out and take the benefits of the repurchase program with them. The surveys
do not support this notion. Only 12.7 percent of the survey respondents think that this is an important
or very important factor affecting repurchase decisions (Table 8, row 9).

5.4.4 Stock price
The executives tell us that they accelerate (or initiate) share repurchases when their stock price is
“low” by recent historical patterns. The most popular response for all the repurchase questions on the
entire survey is that firms repurchase when their stock is a good value, relative to its true value: 86.6
percent of all firms agree or strongly agree with this supposition (Table 7, row 1). 18 This viewpoint is
especially true for small firms (90.4 percent vs. 84. 5 percent for large firms). In contrast, dividend
policy is not greatly affected by stock price (35.1 percent in Table 6, row 10 and Fig. 2B, row 1). The
fact that managers believe that they repurchase more when their stock is underpriced, combined with
the evidence in Ikenberry, Lakonishok and Vermaelen (1995), is consistent with the notion that share
repurchases contain information about future prices. Moreover, it is consistent with managers feeling
that their view of their stock’s underlying value is at times more informed than is the market price.
Repurchasing when the share price is low is a conditional objective. The Treasurer’s first priority
is to provide the liquidity needed for the firm to meet its operational needs. Repurchases are made
with remaining funds. Some executives lament that “just when it is the best time to repurchase, you
cannot. And when you have funds to amply repurchase, your share price is often high.” We know
from Section 3, however, that companies argue that they successfully t ime the market to some extent
with their repurchases, so the correlation between liquidity and stock price tempers but does not
eliminate repurchasing when the price is low.
Interestingly, the link between funds committed towards buybacks and the extent of
undervaluation is similar to the “limits of arbitrage” arguments made by Shleifer and Vishny (1997).
These authors argue that arbitrageurs may be unable to keep funds fully committed during times in
which assets are mispriced. In their framework arbitrageurs can identify irrationally-induced
mispricing. However, the nonstationarity and high dimensionality of the data prevents them from fully
convincing their investors that prices reflect mispricing. Thus, they may be unable to obtain and retain
funds during times of mispricing. The role of arbitrageurs in our setup can be viewed as being played
by managers and their attempt to purchase their undervalued shares. The limit on their “arbitrage”
activity arises from the fact that managers often do not have the necessary funds to execute these
transactions precisely when their shares are undervalued. For example, as we discuss below, several
managers said that they are reluctant to repurchase shares because the use of cash for repurchases

27

might lead to lower debt ratings. Thus, outside rating agencies play the role of rational investors in
Shleifer and Vishny’s approach: Due to complexity and information asymmetry, rating agencies are
unable to deduce that the firm could use the cash to conduct positive net present value share
repurchases.

5.4.5 Information summary
The survey indicates strong support for the notion that dividends and share repurchases convey
information about a company’s future prospects to the market. It is notable, however, that most
managers do not believe that changes in dividend policy convey information over and above what
they explicitly tell analysts and investors.
The survey evidence about managers’ views on academic signaling is quite different. We spent
hours in the interviews discussing the ideas behind signaling models with financial executives and a
clear pattern emerges: Payout policy conveys information; however, it rarely is thought of as a tool to
separate a company from competitors, and there is no evidence that payout is viewed consciously as a
self-imposed cost to reveal a strong firm’s private information about its ability.
In fact, the interviews reveal a different pattern. One important managerial objective is to stay
within their peer group’s dividend policy, which they generally perceive to be the appropriate payout
policy for firms in their situation/industry. 19 This benchmark group usually consists of a few firms in
the same industry with similar characteristics (e.g., same size, same product, etc.) or even dissimilar
firms that are trying to attract the same group of investors. Indeed, managers align (or if necessary
adjust) their payout policy to fall within the range of this group. When we talked with managers of
firms that cut their dividends, or with managers of firms in industries in which firms have cut their
dividends, they indicate that a reduction in dividends by peers makes the possibility of their cutting
dividends more feasible. Even with respect to cuts, however, the executives view proper management
of liquidity and investment as their first-order priorities and any information conveyance to be
second-order if at all. For example, when market uncertainty is at its highest, and costly signaling
might have its greatest value, most firms hoard cash and get even more conservative rather than
purposefully taking costly actions such as, for example, increasing dividends. All of this indicates that
management views, in which firms consciously choose to separate themselves, are not consistent with

18

Closely linking repurchase decisions to stock price valuation is consistent with the evidence in Graham and
Harvey (2001) that equity valuation is one of the most important factors affecting management decisions about
issuing equity.
19
Even though the interviews indicate that benchmarking own-firm payout practices, especially dividend policy,
to the policies of competitors’ payout is common practice, the survey reveals only moderate support for this
position: 38.5 percent of companies say that the dividend policies of competitors are an important or very
important factor affecting own-firm dividend policy (Table 6, row 9) and a smaller 15.5 percent feel this is the
case with repurchases (Table 7, row 17).

28

the traditional signaling equilibrium. Managers do not try to signal their “true worth” and separate
themselves from their peers through (painful) dividend payments or repurchases.
There are three caveats to the conclusion that payout policy decisions are not made in a manner
consistent with academic signaling models. First, there is some indication from the interviews that one
reason that firms are hesitant to cut dividends is related to signaling. Consider a firm that is
experiencing a liquidity crisis that also affects other firms in its industry. If a competitor reduces its
dividend, the firm might be tempted to follow suit. However, in the interviews, several executives told
us that they would try to avoid reducing their dividend if possible, especially if they thought that their
own firm would only be affected temporarily by the liquidity crisis. The reasoning is that the market
thinks that only firms experiencing long-lasting and severe liquidity crises cut dividends, and the firm
would not want to give the market the misim pression that they expect their own liquidity crisis to be
long-lasting. It would not be possible, or at least it would be extremely costly, for “bad” competitors
to mimic the “good firm” policy of not cutting dividends. Therefore, by not cutting their div idend a
good firm might be able to separate itself from bad competitors. Even if there is some truth to this
scenario, it can not explain dividend policy in general because dividend cuts (by competitors) are very
rare, so there are infrequent opportunities to separate oneself by not cutting. Moreover, this argument
is insufficient to explain why dividends exist in the first place: No interview or direct survey response
argues that firms initiate dividends so that at some point in the future there is a chanc e they might get
an opportunity to separate themselves by not cutting.
Second, we know that there is a severe penalty for reducing dividends (even if the reasons for the
severity of this penalty are not universally understood). One could argue that only executives who are
very confident about their firm’s future earnings will initiate (or increase) dividends. The expected
cost of future cuts is very small for these firms but it would be costly for a bad competitor to mimic
this strategy. However, when we ex plicitly ask executives about this possible explanation for
dividends, it receives very little support. Our conclusion is that executives do not implement dividend
policy according to this signaling argument in a conscious way, if at all.
Third, continuing the “as if” discussion from Section 2, our failure to find that the assumptions that
underlie many signaling models are “realistic” (in the sense that they reflect managers’ intentions and
realistic market structure) does not automatically refute these models if the ultimate test is whether
these models predict actual dividend behavior. Allen and Michaely (2002) summarize the empirical
evidence as indicating that signaling models fail in the predictive dimension. Combined with our
finding that the assumptions and causal factors within these models are not supported, we conclude
that the evidence does not support the signaling models.

29

5.5 Other factors affecting payout decisions

5.5.1 Earnings per share
Concerns about earnings per share (EPS) are very important to repurchase decisions.20 Threefourths of survey respondents indicate that increasing EPS is an important or very important factor
affecting share repurchase decisions (Table 8, row 2).21 This is particularly important for low growth
firms (92.7 percent), and when the CEO has an MBA (83 percent, not in table). Like the survey
respondents, the interviewees express great concern about the effects of repurchases on EPS – quite a
few could cite precise numerical estimates of EPS given their repurchase program and what EPS
would be without such a program. However, the CFOs were split on the reasoning behind
repurchasing to increase EPS. A notable portion of executives express the view that repurchasing
shares reduces the total number of shares and therefore automatically increases EPS. Another faction
understands that only if repurchases are carried out using funds that would otherwise not earn the cost
of capital, are they accretive to earnings. Conversely, this same faction notes that if the funds could
alternatively be used to invest in positive NPV projects, then repurchasing would reduce EPS, at least
in the long run.
Many companies implement a plan whereby the magnitude of their repurchases is (at least in part)
determined by the amount necessary to eliminate earnings dilution by stock option compensation
plans or employee stock plans: two-thirds feel that offsetting dilution is an important or very
important factor affecting their repurchase decisions (Table 8, row 3). This is especially true for large
firms with good credit ratings. In contrast, there is virtually no support for the idea that companies
repurchase rather than use dividends because employee stock options are not dividend-protected (only
9.9 percent in Table 8, row 10). Our results are thus inconsistent with those in Fenn and Liang (2000)
and Weisbenner (2000). These authors report a negative relation between stock option plans and
dividends and argue that this is consistent with the notion that managerial incentive plans reduce
managers’ incentive to pay dividends because executive options are not dividend protected.

5.5.2 Float, liquidity and issuance costs
In Section 3 we note that many firms feel that their stock price would fall if they had a less diverse
investor base. A related view is that the stock price will decrease if the float or overall liquidity of the
stock were to fall. The executives feel that this will occur because demand for a stock falls if investors
think that their trades will move the stock price. A company will restr ict repurchases if it feels that
doing so will reduce float below some critical level: One half of firms feel that the float or overall
20

The importance of EPS to share repurchase decisions is consistent with the evidence in Graham and Harvey
(2001) that concerns about EPS are the most important factor affecting management decisions to issue equity.
21

This is consistent with findings in Bens, Nagar, and Skinner (2002) that firms use repurchases to manage
diluted EPS, when earnings are otherwise below the level required to achieve desired EPS growth and when the
dilutative effect of stock options increases.

30

liquidity of their stock is an important or very important factor affecting their repurchase decisions
(Table 8, row 4). Though not statistically significant, concern about float is particularly important for
small companies and when insider ownership is high, two situations where float might be an acute
issue.
There is less support for the idea that payout decisions are linked to issuance costs. Only one-fifth
of executives list flotation costs to issuing additional equity as an important or very important factor
affecting repurchase decisions (Table 7, row 15). Only one-tenth say that dividend decisions are
affected by issuance costs (Table 6, row 16).

5.5.3 Credit ratings and capital structure
An emerging trend identified from the interviews, but not documented by Lintner (1956), is that
many firms pay close attention to the rating agencies and to their debt rating when they make payout
decisions. Firms are reluctant to increase dividends or repurchase shares if that would reduce their
debt ratings. In fact, some firms even consider cutting their dividend to prevent a rating downgrade.
This is especially true for companies with a financial division because a reduced rating might
eliminate them from certain kinds of business or the CP market, as well as substantially increase their
cost of capital. This also factors into why companies might not repurchase shares when the price is
low: At that very moment they hoard cash in part to convince rating agencies that they can weather a
negative spell.
One piece of survey evidence strongly supports the importance of managing debt (which in turn
affects credit ratings) with payout policy. Figures 3A and 3B show that “pay down debt” is the most
popular use of funds that would otherwise be used to repurchase or pay dividends. However managers
do not claim to actively use repurchases or dividends to manage debt ratios. Approximately 25
percent of respondents say that they use dividends (Table 3, row 8) or repurchases (Table 4, row 4) as
a tool to manage credit ratings. Notably, however, high debt firms are significantly more likely to use
payout to manage credit ratings. Similarly, only 30.3 percent of firms say that they use repurchases to
move their debt-to-equity ratio close to their desired ratio (Table 8, row 6). This response is relatively
more popular among large, highly-levered firms.

5.5.4 Resisting a takeover
Only 13.8 percent of CFOs feel that accumulating shares to resist a potential takeover bid is an
important or very important factor affecting repurchase decisions (Table 8, row 8). However, it is
interesting to note that firms might be more likely subject to a takeover threat (e.g., small firms, worse
future prospects) are more likely to list resisting takeover threats as an important factor.

31

5.5.5 Public versus private
Most payout theories are motivated by the notion that asymmetric information and agency
considerations are very important rationales behind payout policies.22 Asymmetric information
explanations and agency considerations are likely to be more severe in public than in private firms.
Public firms have more disperse ownership, more of an arms-length relationship between principals
(outside public shareholders) and agents (managers) and hence are more likely to suffer from agency
problems (e.g., Jensen and Meckling, 1976), or from asymmetric information problems where insiders
know more than outside shareholders. The same logic, though likely to a lesser extent, applies to
publicly traded firms with differential insiders holdings.
While conditioning the analysis on whether the firm is publicly traded or on the percent held by
insiders cannot distinguish between asymmetric information and signaling theories, it can shed some
light on the importance of these theories combined. For example, we would expect that public firms
would be more reluctant to reduce dividends. As a privately held firm it would be easier to transmit
information through other vehicles, and it would be easier to monitor managers and prevent them
from excess spending. Hence the consequences of reducing dividends may be more severe for public
firms. Similarly, private firms should be less reluctant to cut dividends when they face profitable
investment opportunities.
In general the different responses between public and private firms support the notion that
information and agency problems are two determinants of payout policy. We find that private firms
view the negative consequences of cutting dividends as less severe (Table 3, row 1; and Table 5, row
1). Private firms also view dividend policy to contain less information (Table 3, row 2), though the
difference is not significant. They also view repurchases to convey less information (Table 4, row 1
and Table 10, row 3). Private firms are also less likely to pay dividends in lieu of investing (Table 3,
row 3), and they are more likely to pay dividends in response to temporary changes in earnings (Table
6, row 17). As can be seen in those tables, however, it is important to note that the responses to most
of the survey’s questions were not different between the private and public firms, and there are many
points of agreement between private and public managers about the motives behind payout policies.
Similarly, we find that firms with larger insider holdings are less reluctant to reduce dividends if
they have to raise additional funds for the dividend payments (Table 3, row 3); and they are less
concerned about dividend smoothing (Table 5, rows 2 and 4 and Table 6, row 1).
6. When and why will nonpayers initiate payout?
Fama and French (2001) note that the proportion of firms paying dividends has fallen dramatically
in recent years. Therefore it is important to understand what might eventually lead to payout initiation.
22

See Allen and Michaely (2002) for a review of asymmetric information models (signaling and adverse
selection) and agency models and how they are related to payout theories.

32

In this section, we investigate when and why firms that do not currently pay dividends or repurchase
shares might begin doing so. One important thing to note is that the results discussed in the section
represent the views of the firms that do not currently pay out (and are related to what causes them to
eventually begin paying out). The results discussed thus far in the paper represent the views of firms
that already pay out (and are related to the factors that affect their existing payout policies). The fact
that the important factors in this section are largely consistent with those in earlier sections indicates
the pervasiveness of management views about the important factors that drive payo ut policy.
Table 9 summarizes the dividends/repurchases initiation plans of firms that do not pay dividends
and/or repurchase. In the first row, we summarize the plans of firms that neither pay dividends nor
repurchase shares. Most non-dividend companies are in no hurry to begin paying out. More than 70
percent of firms that do not currently pay dividends say that they may never initiate. Seven percent
say that they will not pay dividends for 20 years. About one-tenth of non-dividend-paying firms plan
on starting to pay dividends in the next five years and another three percent say that they will begin
within two years.
[Insert Table 9]
Non-repurchasers are not in a hurry to initiate either, though the stance is not so pronounced. Fiftyfive percent of companies that do not currently repurchase say that they may never begin to do so
(Second row). Another seven percent say that it will be another 20 years before they will start. A full
one-fifth of CFOs say that their firms will begin to repurchase shares within 5 years and another 12
percent say that they will begin within two years.
In the third row of Table 9 we summarize the plans of firms that neither pay dividends nor
repurchase shares. More than half of these CFOs say that they may never pay dividends or repurchase
shares; another 10 percent of these firms say that it will be at least 20 years before they begin to pay
out in any form.23 These views hold even among nonpayers that we classify as cash cows (profitable,
credit rating of A or higher, prospects at median or better).
[Insert Table 10]
6.1 Factors that affect the decisions to initiate
We asked about the impact of several factors on the decision to start to pay out or to repurchase.
The most important factor affecting repurchase initiation is stoc k price. Three-fourths of CFOs report
that market undervaluation of their stock might get them to initiate repurchasing shares (Table 10, row
1). This is particularly true for low -P/E stocks (88.0 percent). In sharp contrast, only 38.7 percent of
executives report that market undervaluation of their stock will lead to dividend initiation (Table 11,
row 6). Market undervaluation is more likely to affect dividend initiation for small, highly rated firms.

33

[Insert Table 11]
In order to convey information to investors, 59.7 percent of executives say that they might begin to
repurchase if the market is not fairly valuing their stock (Table 10, row 3). In contrast, only 39.2
percent say that they would initiate dividends to convey information (Table 11, row 5). This is
consistent with what we found about conveying information discussed in Section 5.4.1, and surprising
because the flexibility of repurchases would seem to make them a less viable means to convey
information to outsiders.
One half of CFOs told us that they might initiate repurchases in an attempt to increase EPS (Table
10, row 8), and an even larger proportion of firms that feel their prospects are good say so. Similarly,
half of the firms say that they might initiate repurchases to offset earnings dilution (Table 10, row 7).
Having extra cash or marketable securities is the second-most important factor affecting payout
initiation. Three-in-five firms tell us that excess liquidity is an important or very important factor that
might lead to repurchase initiation (Table 10, row 2). A statistically smaller 45 percent say that extra
cash might lead to dividend initiation (Table 11, row 4). The effect of cash on repurchases is more
important for low growth firms. One-half of executives report that having fewer profitable
investments is an important or very important factor that might lead their firm to begin to repurchase
(Table 10, row 6). Similarly, half of CFOs report that having fewer profitable investments might lead
to dividend initiations (Table 11, row 3).
These results are consistent with firms planning to initiate payout to avoid possible agency
problems that could occur in the future when free cash flows will accumulate. However, when we
directly ask about this possibility, very few companies (9.3 percent) report that they might initiate
dividends to reduce cash and instill discipline into their firm’s decision-making (Table 11, row 11).
Likewise, only 14.5 percent state that they might initiate a repurchase program as a form of selfimposed discipline (Table 10, row 14).
Nearly 60 percent of CFOs report that a sustainable increase in earnings might lead to dividend
initiation, the most popular dividend initiation factor (Table 11, row 1). This view is particularly
prominent among new CEOs at low -growth firms. In contrast, though not statistically different, a
smaller 46.8 percent report that a sustainable increase in earnings might lead to a firm starting
repurchases (Table 10, row 9). Conversely, a temporary increase in earnings is not likely to lead to
dividend (17.1 percent in Table 11, row 12) or repurchase (9.3 percent in Table 10, row 13)
initiations. These initiation results are consistent with our Lintner discussion in Section 4 (that section
analyzes payout policy among firms that already pay out).

23

When one of the CFOs we interviewed saw these results, he suggested that CFOs generally have a five-year
horizon, and that answers longer than five years should not be interpreted literally but rather to indicate that
initiating payout is not in the CFO’s five-year plan.

34

Institutional shareholders are viewed as having an important influence on payout initiation. 56.6
percent of executives say that institutions are important or very important in terms of possibly leading
to the establishment of a repurchase program (Table 10, row 4). A similar 56 percent say the same
about dividend initiations (Table 11, row 2), particularly at firms with mature CEOs. Only 29.3
percent of CFOs report that retail investors might influence their firm to initiate dividends (Table 11,
row 10). These findings about initiation are consistent with the clientele discussion in Section 5.2,
namely that institutional investors affect repurchase and dividend decisions – but institutions are not
believed to prefer one form of payout over the other.
T he influence of competitor payout ratios is larger than the influence of retail investors but smaller
than that of institutional investors. Thirty percent of executives tell us that the policies of peer firms
might influence their repurchase decisions (Table 10, row 11), while one-third say that competitors
might influence dividend decisions (Table 11, row 8).
There are additional initiation results that parallel the clientele discussion in Section 5.2. Among
questions we ask of firms that do not pay dividends, one-third report that attracting investors subject
to “prudent man” investor restrictions is an important or very important factor that might lead to
dividend initiations (Table 11, row 7). This is quite a bit more important for highly rated firms (60
percent) in comparison to low -rated firms (18.8 percent). Perhaps paying a dividend is the final piece
of the puzzle for highly rated firms to attract investors concerned about prudent man restrictions,
while low-rated stocks either cannot afford to pay a dividend or would not be considered a prudent
investment even if they did. Only 32 percent of CFOs tells us that they might initiate dividends to
attract investors who will monitor or verify their decisions (Table 11, row 9).
Finally, among questions we ask about factors potentially leading to a firm beginning to
repurchase shares, 52 percent of executives say that a change in the float or overall liquidity of their
stock might open the door to repurchases (Table 10, row 5). Recall that a lack of float inhibits
repurchases in general, as discussed in Section 5.5.2.

7. Summary and discussion
By asking managers about their opinions and motives underlying their firms’ payout policies, this
paper is able to provide a different perspective on corporate dividend and repurchase policies. We
believe the evidence gathered through surveying a wide number of CFOs and interviewing two dozen
contributes to our understanding of these policies along three dimensions: First, in line with Lintner
(1956), we document stylized facts concerning dividend policy. In addition, we gather parallel
information on repurchase policies, as well as the views of firms that do not pay dividends and do not
repurchase shares. This information enables us to identify the context within which management
makes corporate decisions. Second, given the wealth of payout theories, we are also able to explore

35

the underpinnings of academic payout theories. Our hope is that this exploration will enable
researchers to come up with theories that encompass a wider array of the motives for dividend and
repurchase policies. Finally, we identify the “rules of the game” that determine the context within
which management makes corporate decisions. Table 12 summarizes our key findings regarding
dividends, repurchases and total payout.
With respect to dividend policy, one of Lintner’s key findings still holds: dividend policy is very
conservative. Dividend conservatism emanates primarily from the severe asymmetric penalty the
market assigns for cutting dividends. Firms therefore are very reluctant to cut dividends, and the
current level of dividend payments is taken as given (except in extreme cases). Some managers report
that, if needed, external funds will be raised before dividends are cut.
The focus of the market and management is on changes in dividends per share. Dividends are
sticky, smoothed from year to year, and companies are reluctant to increase dividends if this increase
might have to be rescinded in the future. Moreover, managers indicate that they do not see much
upside to raising dividends. Dividend conservatism affects nonpayers and they are reluctant to initiate
dividends because once they do, they must operate in the dividend-payers’ world just described. But
we also find that many of those firms that do pay dividends wish they did not, saying that if they had
to start all over again, they would not pay as much in dividends as they currently do. Firms with stable
and sustainable increases in earnings are for the most part the only firms that consider increasing or
initiating dividends. But even such firms would generally prefer to pay out in the form of repurchases.
This can partially explain the findings of Fama and French (2001) and Grullon and Michaely (2002)
that the number of firms paying dividends has been decreasing.
Two other stylized facts from Lintner’s time no longer hold. First, unlike Lintner (1956), our
evidence indicates that few firms target the dividend payout ratio, but rather they now target the
current level of dividends or dividend growth. These targets are reported to be somewhat flexible.
Second, unlike the 1950s, share repurchases are now a very important form of payout. Perhaps the
most important reason that repurchases are now important is that they are viewed by managers, and
apparently also by the market, as being much more flexible than are dividends. Undoubtedly,
managers speak about flexibility in the positive sense of the word. It gives them an ability to scale
back investment when needed (e.g., not enough positive NPV projects) and instead pay out more. But
when good investment opportunities abound, they can scale back on payout and invest.
With dividends, managers would consider raising external capital or delaying investment so that
they can maintain their (inflexible) level of dividends per share. In contrast, repurchase programs
would be cut before external funds would be raised. The baseline dollar amount for repurchase
programs is effectively zero, rather than historical levels of share repurchases (though most firms do
try to eventually complete their announced repurchase programs). Indeed, managers report that cutting
repurchases over previous year levels is not viewed negatively by the market and that even when a

36

target repurchase level exists it is very flexible. Executives also say that the extent to which their
stock is undervalued affects the repurchase decision, as does the desire to increase EPS, the extent to
which the firm uses stock options, and the level of cash on the balance sheet. Executives indicate that
they do not often use, or think that other firms use, open market repurchases to prevent potential
takeovers. Generally speaking, management considers substituting share repurchases in place of
increasing dividends per share – but not the other way arou nd. Interestingly, firms that do not pay out
express similar views to those who do pay out, which indicates the pervasiveness of management
views about payout policy.
Beyond documenting stylized facts, the second dimension of this paper is that it allows us to shed
light on dividend and repurchase theories that were developed over the last 40 years. Overall, we find
that repurchase policy is better explained by the Miller and Modigliani (1961) framework than is
dividend policy. That is, managers clearly indicate that operational and investment decisions are more
important than share repurchases. In contrast, for dividends, the level of payout is viewed as being on
par with incremental investment. Even with dividends, however, increasing the level of dividends per
share is secondary to investment decisions. Consistent with Miller and Modigliani, payout decisions
may also convey information. Managers believe that both dividend and repurchase decisions, in
conjunction with other information the firm provides, he lp disseminate information to the market.
Managers also generally accept that share repurchases are a more tax efficient means of returning
capital to investors than are dividends – but taxes are not a dominant factor affecting payout choices.
Payout clien tele stories do not receive a strong endorsement from managers. While executives
acknowledge that dividends are tax disadvantaged relative to repurchases for most individual
investors, they do not view this issue as an important factor in their payout decision. Most executive
even indicate that the Bush administration’s proposed reduction in dividend taxation will not
substantially affect their payout policy if it passes. Moreover, unlike assumptions and implications
from several theories, executives believe that repurchases are as equally attractive as dividends to
most institutions, and much more attractive to institutions than to individual investors. Overall, even
firms that want to attract institutional investors do not view their payout policy as an important tool to
persuade institutions to hold their stock.
Our evidence has implications concerning the free cash flow explanation to payout policy. Many
managers “regret” their firm’s dividend level – they view the current dividend level as an undesired
anchor that prevents their firm from having the desired level of intertemporal flexibility in cash
payout. Agency advocates might interpret this evidence as support for the disciplinary role of
dividends. When asked directly, managers do not agree that the y purposely set dividends to disgorge
cash flow and instill discipline. To the extent that they agree that having less cash would force them to
run a tight ship, executives feel that repurchases would work equally as well as dividends to disgorge

37

cash, which, given the flexibility of repurchase programs, is not consistent with firms committing to
self-imposed discipline for the long-run.
Finally, managers reject the notion that dividends are used as a costly signaling device. There are
elements of payout policy that could be construed to be consistent with signaling. However, not a
single interviewed executive told us that their firm had ever thought of payout policy as a costly
means of separating themselves from competitors. The survey evidence in support of signaling is also
sparse.
When it is all said and done, we have learned a lot about payout policy but we still do not have
answers for some of the most fundamental issues: Why do both dividends and repurchases exist? Why
is there such a large penalty for dividend cuts but not an analogous penalty for not completing a
repurchase program? While we can not provide definitive answers to these questions, surveying and
interviewing hundreds of financial executives suggests that executives tend to employ decision rules
that are fairly straightforward (rules of thumb), in response to a handful of widely held beliefs about
how outsiders and stakeholders will react. We call these beliefs the "rules of the game" and believe
that they determine the playing field for many corporate decisions.
With respect to payout policy, the rules of the game include the following: there is a severe penalty
for cutting dividends, do not deviate far from competitors, maintain a good credit rating, it is good to
have a broad and diverse investor base, maintain flexibility, and an important portion of investors
price stocks using earnings multiples, so do not take actions that reduce earnings. These rules of the
game are consistent with the informal rules that Graham and Harvey (2001) find most affect debt
policy, such as the desire for flexibility and a good credit rating, and equity policy, such as earnings
per share and stock price appreciation. We believe that future research that models the manner in
which such rules are selected, and the resulting policies that they lead to, can contribute to our
understanding of the interaction between corporations and investors, and also shed light on many
corporate decisions, including payout policy.

38

References
Aharony, Joseph and Itzhak Swary, 1980, “Quarterly Dividend And Earnings Announcements and
Stockholders’ Returns: An Empirical Analysis,” Journal of Finance, 35 (1), 1-12.
Allen, Franklin, and Roni Michaely, 2002, “Payout Policy” North-Holland Handbook of Economics edited by
George Constantinides, Milton Harris, and Rene Stulz; North-Holland.
Allen, Franklin, Antonio Bernardo and Ivo Welch, 2000, “A theory of dividends based on tax clientele,”
Journal of Finance, 55(6), 2499-2536.
Amihud, Yakov and Maurizio Murgia, 1997, “Dividends, taxes, and signaling: Evidence from Germany,”
Journal of Finance 52 (1), 397-408.
Asquith, Paul and David W. Mullins, Jr., 1983, “The Impact Of Initiating Dividend Payments On Shareholders’
Wealth,” Journal of Business, 56 (1), 77-96.
Benartzi, Shlomo, Roni Michaely and Richard Thaler, 1997, “Do changes in dividends signal the future or the
past?” Journal of Finance 52 (3), 1007-1043.
Bens, Daniel, Venky Nagar, and Douglas Skinner, 2002, Employee stock options, EPS dilution, and stock
repurchases, Working paper, University of Michigan.
Bhattacharya, Sudipto, 1979, “Imperfect Information, Dividend Policy, and `The Bird in the Hand’ Fallacy,”
Bell Journal of Economics, 10 (1), 259-270.
Black, Fischer, 1976, “The Dividend Puzzle,” Journal of Portfolio Management, 2 , 5-8.
Brealey, Richard and Stuart Myers, 2002, Principles of Corporate Finance, McGraw-Hill Irwin
Brennan, Michael J. and Anjan V. Thakor, 1990, “Shareholder Preferences and Dividend Policy,” Journal of
Finance, 45 (4), 993 -1019.
Brittain, John, 1966, Corporate dividend policy, studies of government finance, (Washington, DC: The
Brooking Institution).
Chowdhry, Bhagwan, and Vikram Nanda, 1994, “Repurchase premia as a reason for dividends: A dynamic
model of corporate payout policies,” Review of Financial Studies 7, 321-350.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas Skinner, 1996, “Reversal of fortune, dividend signaling and
the disappearance of sustained earnings growth,” Journal of Financial Economics, 40, 341-371.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas Skinner, 2000, “Special dividends and the evolution of
dividend signaling,” Journal of Financial Economics, 57, 309 -354.
DeAngelo, Harry, Linda DeAngelo, and Douglas Skinner, 2002, Are dividends disappearing? Dividend
concentration and the consolidation of earnings, Working Paper, University of Southern California.
Dhrymes, Phoebus J. and Mordecai Kurz, 1964, On the dividend policy of electrical utilities, Review of
Economics and Statistics, 46, 76 -81
Dittmar, Amy, and Robert Dittmar, 2002, Stock repurchase waves: An explanation of the trends in aggregate
corporate payout policy, Working Paper, Indiana University.
Easterbrook, Frank H., 1984, “Two Agency-Cost Explanations of Dividends,” American Economic Review, 74
(4), 650 -659.
Fama, Eugene F. and Harvey Babiak, 1968, Dividend Policy: An Empirical Analysis, Journal of the American
Statistical Association, 63(324), 1132 -1161.

39

Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2001, Disappearing dividends: Changing firm characteristics or lower
propensity to pay?, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 3-43.
Fama, Eugene, and Kenneth French, 2002, Testing Trade-off and Pecking Order Predictions about Dividends
and Debt, The Review of Financial Studies 15, 1-35.
Friedman, Milton, 1953, The Methodo logy of Positive Economics, in Essays in Positive Economics, The
University of Chicago Press.
Graham, John R., and Campbell Harvey, 2001, The Theory and Practice of Corporate Finance: Evidence from
the Field, Journal of Financial Economics 60, 187 -243.
Grinstein, Yaniv and Roni Michaely, 2002, Institutional Holdings and Payout Policy, Working Paper, Cornell
University, Ithaca, NY.
Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart, 1980, “Takeover bids, the free-rider problem, and the theory of the
corporation”, Bell Journal of Economics 11, 42-54.
Grullon, Gustavo and Roni Michaely, 2002, “Dividends, share repurchases and the substitution hypothesis,”
Journal of Finance 62 (4).
Grullon, Gustavo and David Ikenberry, 2000, “What do know about stock repurchase?” Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance, 13, 31-51.
Grullon, Gustavo, Roni Michaely and Bhaskaran Swaminathan, 2002, “Are dividend changes a sign of firm
maturity?,” The Journal of Business, forthcoming.
Hausman, Daniel, M., 1992, The inexact and separate science of economics, Cambridge University Press.
Ikenberry, David, Josef Lakonishok and Theo Vermaelen, 1995, “Market Underreaction to Open Market Share
Repurchases,” Journal of Financial Economics 39, 181-208.
Jagannathan, M., and C. P. Stephens, 2001, “Motives for Open Market Share Repurchases: Under-valuation,
Earnings Signaling or Free Cash Flow,” Working paper, University of Missouri-Columbia.
Jagannathan, Murray, Clifford P. Stephens, and Michael S. Weisbach, 2000, “Financial flexibility and the
choice between dividends and stock repurchases”, Journal of Financial Economics 57, 355-384.
Jensen, Michael C., 1986, “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and Takeovers,” American
Economic Review, 76 (2), 323-329.
Jensen, Michael C. and William H. Meckling, 1976, “Theory of the Firm: Managerial Behavior, Agency Costs
and Ownership Structure,” Journal of Financial Economics, 3 (4), 305-360.
John, Kose and Joseph Williams, 1985, “Dividends, Dilution, and Taxes: A Signaling Equilibrium,” Journal of
Finance, 40 (4), 1053-1070.
Lie, Eric, 2000, “Excess funds and the agency problems: An empirical study of incremental disbursements,”
Review of Financial Studies 13 (1), 219-248.
Lie, Eric, 2001, “Financial flexibility and the corporate payout policy,” Working paper, College of William and
Mary, VA.
Lintner, John, 1956, “Distribution of Incomes of Corporations Among Dividends, Retained Earnings, and
Taxes,” American Economic Review, 46(2) , 97 -113.
Lucas, Deborah J. and Robert L. McDonald, 1998, “ Shareholder Heterogeneity, Adverse Selection, and Payout
Policy, “ Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis , 33(2).

40

Masulis, Ronald W. and Ashok N. Korwar, 1986, “Seasoned Equity Offerings: An Empirical Investigation,”
Journal of Financial Economics, 15 (1/2), 91-118.
Michaely, Roni, Richard H. Thaler and Kent Womack, 1995, “Price Reactions to Dividend Initiations and
Omissions: Overreaction or Drift?,” Journal of Finance 50 (2), 573-608.
Miller, Merton., 1987, “The information content of dividends,” J. Bossons, R. Dornbush and S. Fischer, (eds.)
Macroeconomics: Essays in Honor of Franco Modigliani (MIT press: Cambridge MA) 37-61.
Miller, Merton and Franco Modigliani, 1961, “Dividend Policy, Growth and the Valuation of Shares,” Journal
of Business, 34, 411-433.
Miller, Merton and Kevin Rock, 1985, “Dividend Policy Under Asymmetric Information,” Journal of Finance,
40 (4), 1031-1051.
Modigliani Franco, and Merton Miller, 1958, The cost of capital, corporate finance and the theory of
investment, American Economic Review 48, No. 3, pp. 261 -297.
Myers, Stewart C. and Nicholas S. Majluf, 1984, “Corporate Financing and Investment Decisions when Firms
Have Information that Investors Do Not Have,” Journal of Financial Economics, 13 (2), 187-221.
Nohel, T. and V. Tarhan, 1998, Share Repurchases and Firm Performance: New Evidence on the Agency Costs
of Free Cash Flow,” Journal of Financial Economics, 49, 187 -222.
Rosenberg, Alexander, 1992, Economics – mathematical politics or science of diminishing returns?, The
University of Chicago Press.
Shefrin, Hersh M. and Meir Statman, 1984, “Explaining Investor Preference for Cash Dividends,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 13 (2), 253-282.
Shleifer Andrei and Robert Vishny, 1986, “Large shareholders and corporate control,” Journal of Political
Economy94 (3), 461-488.
Stephens, Clifford, and Michael Weisbach, 1988, “Actual share reacquisitions in open market repurchases
programs,” Journal of Finance, 53 (1), 313-333.
Trahan, Emery A. and Lawerence J. Gitman, 1995, “Bridging the theory-practice gap in corporate finance: A
survey of Chief Financial Officers”, Quarterly Review of Economics and Finance 35, 73-87.
Vermaelen, Theo, 1981, “Common Stock Repurchases and Market Signaling: An Empirical Study,” Journal of
Financial Economics, 9 (2), 138-183.
Vermaelen, T., 1984, “Repurchase Tender Offers, Signalling and Managerial Incentives,” Journal of Financial
and Quantitative Analysis, 19, 163 -181.
Watts, Ross, 1973, “The Information Content of Dividends,” Journal of Business, 46 (2), 191-211.
Weisbenner, Scott, 2000, “Corporate share repurchase in the mid-1990s: What role do stock options play,”
Working paper, University of Illinois, Champaign -Urbana.

Fig. 1A: Revenues($ millions)

Fig. 1B: Industry

40%

500999

0%

Other

Utility/Trans.
/Energy

>4999

Manufacturing

<100

100499

Sales

10%

Financial

20%
10004999

Tech

20%

Mining/Construct.

30%

Communi./Media/
Consulting/Service

40%

0%

Fig. 1D: Debt/Assets Ratio (%)

Fig. 1C: Credit Rating
50%

30%

40%
20%

10%

0%

AA,
AAA

B,
CCC
A

CC,C

BB

BBB

no rating

30%
20%
10%
0
0%

Fig. 1E: Dividends per Share
40%

1-24

25-49

50-74

>75

Fig. 1F: EPS
30%

30%
20%
20%
10%

10%
0
0%

40%

00.24

0.250.49

0.50.74

0.750.99

<0

0-1

2-3
1-2

>1

>3

0%

Fig. 1G: Price/Earnings Ratio
(%)

40%

Fig. 1H: Common Stock Price

30%
30%
20%
20%
10%
10%
0%

<10

10-15

15-20

20-25

>=25

0%

<10

10-24

25-49

50-99

>100

Fig. 1I: Company Future
Prospects(0=worst, 100=best)
30%

Fig. 1J: Company Ownership
70%

20%
35%
10%

5059
<50

6069

0%

7079

8084

8589

9094

95100

Public:
Nasdaq/A
mex

Public:
NYSE
0%

Fig. 1L: CEO time in job (years)

Fig. 1K: CEO Age

50%

60%

40%
40%

30%
20%

20%

50-59

40-49

<=39

>=60

10%
<4

Fig. 1M: CEO Education

>=10

4-9

0%

0%

Fig. 1N: Insider holdings

50%

40%

40%

30%

30%
20%
20%
10%

Some
College

0%

40%

College
degree

non-MBA
masters
MBA

10%
>Masters
0%

Fig. 1O: Number of Employees
60%

30%

1,0004,999

20%

100499

10%
<100
0%

500999

5,0009,999

<5%

5-10%

11-20%

20%

Fig. 1P: Pay Divs / Repur.
shares

50%
>=
10,000

40%
30%
20%
10%
0%

Both

Only
repur.
Shrs

Only
paid
Divs

Neither

Fig 2A: Some of the most important factors for dividend policy
(***, **, *: The difference is significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively)

0
There are negative consequences to reducing payout (1)

10

20

30

40

Repurchases

50

60

70

80

90

Difference
***

Dividends
Maintaining consistency with our historic payout policy (2)

***

Stability of future earnings (3)
A sustainable change in earnings (4)
Rather than reducing payout, we would raise new funds to
undertake a profitable project (5)

***

Attracting institutional investors to purchase our stock (6)
The influence of our institutional shareholders (7)
Attracting retail investors to purchase our stock (8)

***

Payout makes the stock of a firm less risky (vs. retaining earnings)
(9)
We use our payout policy to make us look better than our
competitors (10)
We use payout to show we can bear costs such as borrowing costly
external funds or passing up investment, to make us look better

**

% who answer 1 or 2 on the scale from -2 to +2

Fig 2B: Some of the most important factors for repurchase policy
(***, **, *: The difference is significantly different from zero at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively)

0

Market price of our stock (if our stock is a good investment,
relative to its true value) (1)
Payout decisions convey information about our company to
investors (2)
The availability of good investment opportunities for our firm to
pursue (3)
We make payout decisions after our investment plans are
determined (4)

10

20

30

40

Dividends

50

60

70

80

Difference

***

Repurchases

***
***

Merger and acquisition strategy (5)

***

Having extra cash/liquid assets, relative to our desired cashholdings
(6)

**

A temporary change in earnings (7)

***

Attracting institutional investors because they monitor management
decisions (8)
The possibility that payout => we are running low on profitable
investments (9)

**

Personal taxes our stockholders pay when receiving payout (10)
Flotation costs to issuing additional equity (11)
Paying out to reduce cash, thereby disciplining our firm to make
efficient decisions (12)

90

***
**
% who answer 1 or 2 on the scale from -2 to +2

Pay down debt
Repurchase shares
Mergers/Acquisitions
Invest more
Retain as cash
Other
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

Fig. 3A: The most likely alternative use of funds that could be used to
pay dividends. (Current dividend payers only.)

Pay down debt
Mergers/Acquisitions
Invest more
Retain as cash
Pay more dividends
Other
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

80%

Fig. 3B: The most likely alternative use of funds that could be used to
repurchase shares. (Current share repurchasers only.)

dividends only

Dividends Payers
Only

Repurchasers Only
share repurchases only

Non-payers

some combination of dividends
and repurchases

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

70%

Fig. 3C: What would your first payout be if you were hypothetically
deciding to pay out capital for the first time?

80%

Level of dividends per share
Dividend as a % of earnings
Growth in dividends per share
Dividend yield
Do not target at all
Other

0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Fig. 4A: For those that paid dividends within the past 3 years, what do you target when you
make your dividend decisions?

A flexible goal
A somewhat strict goal
Not really a goal
A strict goal
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Fig. 4B: For those that paid dividends within the past 3 years, is the target part of a strict goal or a
flexible goal?

Level of repurchases
Do not target at all
Other
Repurchases as a % of earnings
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

60%

Fig. 4C: For those that repurchased shares within the past 3 years, when choosing the number of
shares to repurchase in a given year, what do you target?

A flexible goal
Not really a goal
A somewhat strict goal
A strict goal
0%

10%

20%

30%

40%

50%

Fig. 4D: For those that repurchased shares within the past 3 years, is the target part of a strict goal or
a flexible goal?

60%

Table 1
Representativeness of Surveyed and Interviewd Firms
The table reports summary statistics on the representativeness of both the interviewed (panel A) and surveyed firms (panel B) relative to the universe of firms
listed on the NYSE, AMEX, and NASDAQ. Comparison is based on the following variables: 1) Sales, Compustat Data12-Sales(net)); 2) Debt-to-asset, denoted
D/A, based on Compustat Data9-long term debt divided by Compustat Data6-total assets); 3) Dividend yield, denoted div yield, and calculated as the ratio of
Compustat Data26 divided by firm’s price, Compustat Data24; 4) Earnings per share, denoted, EPS, is Compustat Data58-EPS (basic) excluding extraordinary
items; 5) Credit rating, denoted credit, is the Compustat variable SPDRC: S&P long term domestic issuer credit rating; 6) Book to market, denoted BM, is total
stockholders’ equity, Compustat Data216, divided by size, where size is computed as the product of price, Compustat Data24 and common shares outstanding,
Compustat Data25; 7) P/E, The ratio of Compustat Data24 to Data58. P/E>0 (based on positive P/Es for both the universe and the sample). For each such
variable we identify all candidate firms listed on the major three exchanges with valid data on Compustat and share codes 10 and 11 on CRSP as of April 2002,
the time at which we conducted the FEI survey and interviewed most of the 23 firms. We then sort all firms with valid data into quintiles and record the
corresponding breakpoints. For each quintile we then report in panel A (panel B) the percentage of the interviewed (surveyed) firms that are allocated into these
five sorts. Since surveyed firms were not asked to report BM information it is possible to calculate this characteristic only for those firms which we were able to
identify and link with Compustat information. The reported percentages can then be compared to the benchmark 20% and thus allow us to infer whether our
samples are representative or not and on which dimensions. In addition, because a bit more than 60% of firms in the universe have zero dividend yield, the first
three quintiles of the universe all have zero dividend yield and therefore what is listed as Quintiles 1, 2, and 3 for dividend yield is actually only one group
representing the 60% of the Compustat universe with dividend yield of zero. Thus we calculate the percentage of zero dividend yield firms in the sample and
put it into the second quintile column, which actually represents the aggregated bottom three quintiles in the div yield case.
Panel A: Representativeness of 23 interviewed firms
Sample
Sample
Variable
Average
Median
Universe Avg
36077
19423
Sales
Sample Avg
Sample %

1
4
N.A.
0.0%

2
30
N.A.
0.0%

Quintiles
3
113
N.A.
0.0%

4
468
N.A.
0.0%

5
8262
36077
100.0%

0.0
N.A.
0.0%

0.0
0.0
4.3%

0.1
0.1
34.8%

0.3
0.3
56.5%

2.1
0.5
4.3%

0.000

0.000
0.000
17.4%

0.000

0.007
0.010
43.5%

0.121
0.033
39.1%

D/A

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

0.21

0.23

Div yield

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

0.017

0.01

EPS

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

1.09

1.42

-3.9
-6.4
8.7%

-0.4
-0.3
8.7%

0.1
0.2
4.3%

0.8
1.0
21.7%

19.9
2.6
56.5%

Credit

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

8.43 (A)

8 (A)

18.7(CCC+)
N.A.
0.0%

14.4(BB)
13.7 (BB)
13.0%

11.7(BBB-)
11.7 (BBB-)
13.0%

9.8 (BBB+)
9.8 (BBB+)
21.7%

6.7(A+)
5.8 (AA-)
52.2%

BM

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

0.44

0.39

-15.1
0.1
21.7%

0.3
0.3
39.1%

0.6
0.6
21.7%

0.9
0.8
13.0%

4.8
1.6
4.3%

PE

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

19.89

18.49

-52.4
-100.5
13.0%

-2.1
-2.0
4.3%

4.2
9.7
4.3%

15.4
16.6
30.4%

81.0
57.7
47.8%

PE (>0)

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

40.05

27.30

7.0
9.7
5.3%

12.6
N.A.
0.0%

17.2
16.6
36.8%

26.4
28.4
26.3%

131.9
82.2
31.6%

1
4
N.A.
0.0%

2
30
50
10%

4
468
461
30%

5
8262
3951
60%

0.0
0.0
11.4%

0.0
0.0
6.7%

0.1
0.1
14.0%

0.3
0.3
31.6%

2.1
0.6
36.3%

0.000

0.000
0.000
36.4%

0.000

0.007
0.011
37.9%

0.121
0.054
25.7%

Panel B: Representativeness of surveyed public firms
Sample
Sample
Variable
Average
Median
Universe Avg
2525
3000
Sales
Sample Avg
Sample %

Quintiles
3
113
N.A.
0%

D/A

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

0.31

0.28

Div yield

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

0.018

0.009

EPS

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

1.00

1.00

-3.9
-3.3
9.3%

-0.4
-0.5
9.8%

0.1
0.1
11.2%

0.8
0.8
28.3%

19.9
2.7
41.5%

Credit

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

9.48 (A-)

9(A-)

18.7(CCC+)
19.5 (CCC)
5.1%

14.4(BB)
14.7 (BB-)
8.2%

11.7(BBB-)
12.4(BBB-)
9.5%

9.8 (BBB+)
10.6 (BBB)
25.9%

6.7(A+)
6.5 (A+)
51.3%

BM

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

0.73

0.47

-15.1
0.1
17.3%

0.3
0.3
25.0%

0.6
0.5
29.8%

0.9
0.8
16.1%

4.8
2.8
11.9%

PE

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

19.10

16.00

-52.4
N.A.
0.0%

-2.1
N.A.
0.0%

4.2
8.2
16.4%

15.4
16.1
61.4%

81.0
35.4
22.2%

PE (>0)

Universe Avg
Sample Avg
Sample %

19.10

16.00

7.0
8.2
16.4%

12.6
13.1
21.6%

17.2
17.5
36.8%

26.4
26.8
18.1%

131.9
51.5
7.0%

Table 2
Correlation of control variables (Survey)
This table provides estimates of correlation coefficients for ordered groups of attributes. Cross tabulations are conducted by surveyed firms’ reported characteristics. These are
Size, where large firms are defined as those companies with reported revenues exceeding $1 billion; Number of employees, where a large firm employs at least 5000; P/E,
where P/E greater than 16, the median P/E in the sample, marks a growth firm; Debt/total assets ratio, where a high ratio is defined as exceeding 0.25; Profitability, where a
profitable firm is defined having EPS>0; Credit rating, where Investment grade is one when the firm has debt rated BBB or above; Tech, reflecting technology-related
industries versus all other industries; Insider holdings, where high holdings are defined as exceeding 5 percent; Stock valuation, where possible ranks are either correctly
valued, somewhat overvalued and greatly overvalued, versus somewhat and greatly undervalued; Cash cow, where a cash cow firm has a debt rating of A or higher, profits
greater than zero, and P/E less than the median P/E of profitable firms with debt ratings of A or higher and a non-cash cow firm is the complement; CEO tenure, where, a long
tenure is defined as ten or more years on the job; CEO education, defined as whether the CEO has an MBA; The variable Survey reflecting the possibility that the survey is
either Internet based versus survey gathered in person; The variable Ownership denoting whether the firm is private or public; Dividends, denoting whether the firm has been
paying a dividend in the past three years; Finally, Share repurchases, denotes whether the firm has repurchased shares in the past three years. ***, **, * denote a significant
difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Size
Ordering of
variable:

small to
large

# of
Employees
small to
large

P/E

D/A

low to high low to high

Profitability

Rating

Tech

Insider

Cash cow CEO tenure CEO edu'

no to yes

low to high

others to
tech
Industry

Stock
valuation

low to high

others to
underval'

no to yes

# of Employees

0.73 ***

P/E

0.19 **

0.21 ***

D/A

0.24 ***

0.27 ***

0.01

Profitability

0.18 **

0.12 *

0.16 **

-0.09

Rating

0.21 ***

0.27 ***

0.20 **

-0.10

Tech

0.01

0.04

0.19 **

0.05

0.01

0.01

Insider

0.02

-0.11

0.01

0.05

0.02

0.02

-0.08

-0.10

0.10

0.06

-0.11

0.03

-0.12 *

Stability

-0.01

-0.02

0.12

-0.25 ***

0.35 ***

0.27 ***

-0.10

0.00

0.00

CEO tenure

-0.08

-0.06

0.05

-0.13 *

0.16 **

0.05

-0.04

0.19 ***

0.02

0.01

0.02

0.01

0.08

-0.04

0.11

-0.05

-0.22 ***

0.02

0.04

0.12

0.06

0.01

-0.16 *

-0.11

0.16 *

0.22 **

-0.10

-0.04

CEO edu'

0.12 *

Survey

0.00

-0.02

0.00

0.05

Ownership

0.00

0.00

0.14

-0.11

Dividends

0.29 ***

0.28 ***

0.04

Share Rep

0.17 ***

0.14 **

0.06

0.15 **
-0.08

others to
MBA

Ownership

Dividends

Internet to
paper

private to
public

no to yes

0.31 ***

-0.08

Stock Valuation

-0.20 ***

short to
long

Survey

-0.21 **

-0.11

-0.15 **
0.04

-0.03

0.05

-0.02

-0.05

0.33 ***

0.41 ***

-0.48 ***

-0.03

-0.03

0.02

0.03

0.01

0.00

0.00

0.28 ***

0.07

-0.16 **

0.02

0.05

0.03

0.09

-0.01

0.00

0.00

0.28 ***

Table 3
Survey responses to the question: Do these statements agree with your company's views? (Dividend payers only)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that answered 1
(agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that the average
response equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides p-values for the comparison of the responses of dividend payers to those of repurchasers that are analyzed in Table 4. Column
(5) provides the median response for each question while in column (6) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel B provides average response sorted
firm characteristics. These are Size, where large firms are defined as those companies with reported revenues exceeding $1 billion; P/E, where P/E greater than 16, the median P/E in the sample,
is a taken as a high ratio; Debt/total assets ratio, where a high ratio is defined as exceeding 0.25; Cash cow, where a cash cow firm has a debt rating of A or higher, profits greater than zero, and
P/E less than the median P/E of profitable firms with debt ratings of A or higher and a non-cash cow firm is the complement; Credit rating, where Investment grade is one when the firm has debt
rated BBB or above; Tech industry, reflecting firms in a technology related industry versus all other industries; Insider holdings, where high holdings are defined as exceeding 5 percent;
Exchange, in which NYSE listed firms are compared to AMEX and NASDAQ listed firms; Prospects, a variable ranging from zero to 100 where “better” is defined as exceeding 70; CEO age is
assumed “young” if age is lower than 59 and “Mature” otherwise. The variable Ownership denotes whether the firm is private or public. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5%
and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% agree or
Average rating
strongly agree
Question
(1) There are negative consequences to reducing dividends (d)
(2) Dividend decisions convey information about our company to investors (b)
(3) Rather than reducing dividends, we would raise new funds to undertake a profitable project (e)
(4) Dividends are as important now to the valuation of common stocks in our industry as they were 15 or 20 years ago (f)
(5) Paying dividends makes the stock of a firm less risky (vs. retaining earnings) (c)
(6) We make dividend decisions after our investment plans are determined (a)
(7) We use our dividend policy to make us look better than our competitors (h)
(8) We use our dividend policy as one tool to attain a desired credit rating (g)
(9) We use dividends, to show we can bear costs such as borrowing costly external funds or passing up investment, to make us
look better than our competitors (i)

H0: Average
rating=0

(1)
87.3
80.2
65.1
41.0
36.5
33.5
24.8
24.7

(2)
1.3
1.0
0.7
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.4

**
***
***

4.2

-1.2

***

H0: Dividend
rating=Repurcha
ses rating

(3)
***
***
***

(4)
***
***
**
***

Median rating

H0: Median
rating=0

(5)
2.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0

(6)
***
***
***

*
***
***

-1.0

***

Panel B: Conditional averages
Question:
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
(7)
(8)
(9)

% agree or % disagree or
strongly
obs
strongly
agree
disagree
87.3
80.2
65.1
41.0
36.5
33.5
24.8
24.7
4.2

3.6
6.6
23.5
36.7
31.7
46.7
41.8
46.4
75.3

166.0
167.0
166.0
166.0
167.0
167.0
165.0
166.0
166.0

Size
Small Large
89.1
82.6
67.4
43.5
37.0
34.8
24.4
13.0
2.2

P/E
Low High

89.2
89.2
82.0
81.5
65.8
64.6
38.7
50.8
36.0
40.0
34.2
36.9
27.0
29.7
28.8 *** 21.5
5.4
7.7

87.1
82.3
67.7
33.9 *
35.5
33.9
22.6
25.8
1.6

D/A
Low High
87.2
78.7
70.2
38.3
40.4
40.4
23.4
8.5
8.5

Cash Cow
No

Yes

Credit Rating
Low High

89.0
87.8 85.7 *** 63.6 90.9 **
82.9
79.5 82.9
90.9 81.8
63.4
62.6 74.3 ** 45.5 66.4
37.8
39.7 45.7
45.5 40.9
34.1
34.1 45.7
18.2 38.2
28.0
34.8 28.6
45.5 33.6
28.0 ** 22.1 35.3
18.2 22.9
9.1 29.1
34.1 *** 24.4 25.7
2.4
2.3 11.4
0.0 4.5

Tech Industry
Other Tech
88.3 100.0
81.2 100.0
64.9 66.7
40.3
0.0
35.7 33.3
35.1
0.0
26.1 33.3
26.0
0.0 *
4.5
0.0

Insider

Exchange

Prospects

Low High

Other NYSE

Worse Better

92.9
82.8
71.7
44.4
43.4
28.3
28.6
25.3
5.1

82.5
78.9
54.4
33.3
24.6
47.4
22.8
26.3
3.5

84.8
72.7
*** 57.6
33.3
** 21.2
** 45.5
*
21.9
15.2
6.1

89.1
82.7
68.2
38.2
40.0
31.8
27.3
27.3 **
3.6

85.7
72.4
53.6
42.9
34.5
27.6
21.4
25.0
7.1

87.7
81.9
67.4
40.6
37.0
34.8
25.5
24.6
3.6

CEO age
Young Mature
88.0
81.2
63.2
37.6
35.0
35.9
24.8
29.1
6.0

92.3 *
82.1
71.8
43.6
38.5
33.3
26.3
15.4 **
0.0

Ownership
Private Public
73.1
69.2
52.0
24.0
15.4
46.2
8.0
26.9
15.4

96.3
77.8
77.8
44.4
33.3
29.6
22.2
18.5
3.7

***
*

*

*

Table 4
Survey responses to the question: Do these statements agree with your company's views? (Repurchasers only)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that answered 1 (agree)
and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that the average response equals zero is
given in column (3). Column (4) provides p-values for the comparison of the responses of repurchasers to those of dividend payers that are analyzed in Table 3. Column (5) provides the median response
for each question while in column (6) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel B provides average response sorted firm characteristics. These are Size,
where large firms are defined as those companies with reported revenues exceeding $1 billion; P/E, where P/E greater than 16, the median P/E in the sample, is a taken as a high ratio; Debt/total assets
ratio, where a high ratio is defined as exceeding 0.25; Cash cow, where a cash cow firm has a debt rating of A or higher, profits greater than zero, and P/E less than the median P/E of profitable firms
with debt ratings of A or higher and a non-cash cow firm is the complement; Credit rating, where Investment grade is one when the firm has debt rated BBB or above; Tech industry, reflecting firms in a
technology related industry versus all other industries; Insider holdings, where high holdings are defined as exceeding 5 percent; Exchange, in which NYSE listed firms are compared to AMEX and
NASDAQ listed firms; Prospects, a variable ranging from zero to 100 where “better” is defined as exceeding 70; CEO age is assumed “young” if age is lower than 59 and “Mature” otherwise. The
variable Ownership denotes whether the firm is private or public. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% agree or
Average rating
strongly agree
Question:
(1) Repurchase decisions convey information about our company to investors (b)
(2) We make repurchase decisions after our investment plans are determined (a)
(3) Repurchases are as important now to the valuation of common stocks in our industry as they were 15 or 20 years ago (f)
(4) We use our repurchase policy as one tool to attain a desired credit rating (g)
(5) Repurchasing makes the stock of a firm less risky (vs. retaining earnings) (c)
(6) There are negative consequences to reducing repurchases (d)
(7) Rather than reducing repurchases, we would raise new funds to undertake a profitable project (e)
(8) We use our repurchase policy to make us look better than our competitors (h)
(9) We use repurchases, to show we can bear costs such as borrowing costly external funds or passing up investment, to make
us look better than our competitors (i)
Panel B: Conditional averages
% agree or % disagree or
Question:
strongly
strongly
disagree
agree
(1)
2.5
84.5
(2)
8.7
78.9
(3)
33.8
36.3
(4)
51.3
24.4
(5)
38.5
24.2
(6)
48.1
22.5
(7)
64.6
18.6
(8)
46.5
17.6
(9)
78.6
2.5

obs
161.0
161.0
160.0
160.0
161.0
160.0
161.0
159.0
159.0

Size
Small Large
Low
90.4 82.5
82.1
75.0 82.5
80.4
36.5 35.3
35.7
5.8 32.4 *** 21.4
25.0 23.3
26.8
19.2 25.5
14.3
21.2 16.5
21.4
9.8 22.5 ** 20.0
1.9 3.0
3.6

P/E
High
86.2
81.5
39.1
25.0
23.1
30.8
10.8
20.3
3.2

D/A
Low
83.1
72.9
37.9
13.6
23.7
20.3
15.3
11.9
3.4

Cash Cow

High
No Yes
88.9
84.4 84.8
84.7 ** 82.0 66.7
36.1
37.0 33.3
31.0 *** 26.8 15.2
27.8
24.2 24.2
25.0
22.8 21.2
19.4
15.6 30.3
25.4 ** 18.9 12.5
2.9
2.4 3.0

**

Credit Rating
Low
84.2
73.7
42.1
21.1
15.8
5.3
15.8
21.1
0.0

High
82.3
79.2
35.8
27.4
27.1
31.3
14.6
19.1
4.3

(1)
84.5
78.9
36.3
24.4
24.2
22.5
18.6
17.6
2.5

Tech Industry

(2)
1.1
1.0
0.0
-0.5
-0.3
-0.4
-0.8
-0.5
-1.2

(3)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

Insider

Low
Other Tech
85.6 71.4 * 87.4
81.3 57.1 ** 80.0
38.4 14.3 *** 35.1
26.1
0.0
27.7
25.9
7.1 ** 28.4
21.7 35.7
24.5
19.4
7.1
21.1
19.0 14.3
21.5
2.2
7.1
1.1

H0: Average
rating=0

High
82.8
79.3
37.9
17.2
17.2
19.0
13.8
13.8 *
5.2

Exchange

H0: Dividend
rating=Repurcha
ses rating
(4)
***

**
***
***

Median rating
(5)
1.0
1.0
0.0
-1.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0
0.0
-1.0

Prospects

Other NYSE
Worse Better
86.0 83.5
86.2 84.1
76.7 81.4
79.3 78.8
25.6 38.5
48.3 33.6
7.0 29.2 *** 31.0 22.9
20.9 23.7
37.9 21.2
20.9 24.7
37.9 19.1
9.3 19.6 *
17.2 18.9
7.1 24.0 ** 20.7 16.9
4.7
2.1
6.9
1.5

CEO age
Young Mature
85.3 88.9
79.3 83.3
37.9 31.4
21.7 30.6
25.0 19.4
24.1 22.9
16.4 25.0
18.3 17.1
3.5
0.0

H0: Median
rating=0
(6)
***
***
***
**
***
***
***
***

Ownership
Private Public
54.5 85.7 *
72.7 76.2
18.2 47.6 **
13.6
0.0
13.6 28.6
40.9 19.0 **
19.0 19.0
9.1
9.5
0.0
0.0

Table 5
Survey responses to the question: Do these statements describe factors that affect your company's dividend decisions?
(Dividend payers only)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that answered
1 (agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that the average
response equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides the median response for each question while in column (5) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is
different from zero. Panel B provides average response sorted firm characteristics. These are Size, where large firms are defined as those companies with reported revenues exceeding $1 billion;
P/E, where P/E greater than 16, the median P/E in the sample, is a taken as a high ratio; Debt/total assets ratio, where a high ratio is defined as exceeding 0.25; Cash cow, where a cash cow firm
has a debt rating of A or higher, profits greater than zero, and P/E less than the median P/E of profitable firms with debt ratings of A or higher and a non-cash cow firm is the complement;
Credit rating, where Investment grade is one when the firm has debt rated BBB or above; Tech industry, reflecting firms in a technology related industry versus all other industries; Insider
holdings, where high holdings are defined as exceeding 5 percent; Exchange, in which NYSE listed firms are compared to AMEX and NASDAQ listed firms; Prospects, a variable ranging from
zero to 100 where “better” is defined as exceeding 70; CEO age is assumed “young” if age is lower than 59 and “Mature” otherwise. The variable Ownership denotes whether the firm is private
or public. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% agree or
Average rating
strongly agree
Question:
(1) We try avoid reducing dividends per share (d)
(2) We try to maintain a smooth dividend stream from year-to-year (c)
(3) We consider the level of dividends per share that we have paid in recent quarters (a)
(4) We are reluctant to make dividend changes that might have to be reversed in the future (j)
(5) We consider the change or growth in dividends per share (b)
(6) The cost of raising external capital is smaller than the cost of cutting dividends (f)
(7) We pay dividends to attract investors subject to "prudent man" investment restrictions (e)
(8) We pay dividends to show that our firm is strong enough to raise costly external capital if needed (g)
(9) We pay dividends to show that our stock is valuable enough that investors buy it even though they have to pay relatively costly dividend taxes
(h) We pay dividends to show that our firm is strong enough to pass up some profitable investments (i)
(10)
Panel B: Conditional averages
% agree or % disagree or
Question:
strongly
strongly
disagree
agree
(1)
2.6
94.0
(2)
2.6
90.1
(3)
4.0
87.4
(4)
7.2
78.9
(5)
15.9
66.9
(6)
30.9
44.1
(7)
21.2
41.7
(8)
59.9
19.1
(9)
57.2
17.1
(10)
73.0
8.6

obs
151.0
151.0
151.0
152.0
151.0
152.0
151.0
152.0
152.0
152.0

Size
Small Large
93.3 94.2
82.2 93.3
86.7 87.5
82.2 79.0
62.2 68.3
40.0 46.7
33.3 46.2
20.0 19.0
17.8 17.1
8.9 8.6

P/E
Low
96.7
90.0
90.0
82.0
61.7
44.3
43.3
19.7
19.7
6.6

High
93.4
93.4
88.5
80.3
72.1
44.3
41.0
14.8
9.8
9.8

D/A
Low
93.3
88.9
88.9
84.4
71.1
37.8
42.2
20.0
17.8
4.4

High
93.7
89.9
87.3
79.7
60.8
49.4
39.2
16.5
16.5
7.6

Cash Cow
No
93.3
88.2
88.2
75.8
63.9
43.3
40.3
16.7
14.2
10.8

Yes
96.9
96.9
84.4
90.6
78.1
46.9
46.9
28.1
28.1
0.0

Credit Rating

Low
* 90.9
*** 90.9
90.9
* 63.6
*** 36.4
45.5
27.3
*
0.0
** 9.1
9.1

High
93.4
89.6
87.7
77.6
69.8 *
41.1
46.2
16.8
16.8
8.4

Tech Industry
Other
93.9
89.9
87.8
79.1
66.9
44.6
42.6
18.9
16.9
8.8

Tech
100.0
100.0
50.0 *
100.0
50.0
50.0
0.0
50.0
50.0
0.0

(1)
94.0
90.1
87.4
78.9
66.9
44.1
41.7
19.1

(2)
1.6
1.3
1.2
1.0
0.8
0.2
0.2
-0.6

H0: Average
rating=0

Median rating

H0: Median
rating=0

(3)
***
***
***
***
***
**
**
***

(4)
2.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0

(5)
***
***
***
***
***
*
***
***

17.1

-0.6

***

-1.0

***

8.6

-1.0

***

-1.0

***

Exchange

Prospects

Insider
Low
95.7
92.6
88.3
85.1
68.1
46.8
46.8
20.2
21.3
8.5

CEO age

Ownership

High
Other NYSE
Worse Better
Young Mature
Private Public
90.7
86.7 95.4 * 100.0 93.1 *** 92.8 97.3 *
77.3 96.3 ***
85.2 *
86.7 90.8 *
90.5 90.0
89.2 91.9
68.2 85.2
85.2
83.3 90.8 *
90.5 86.9 *
86.5 91.9 ** 68.2 85.2
69.1 *** 60.0 84.4 *
81.0 78.6
77.7 83.8
57.1 85.2
63.0
70.0 66.1
52.4 69.2 ** 63.1 78.4 *** 63.6 66.7
38.2
26.7 49.5 ** 33.3 45.8 *
42.9 48.6
35.0 44.4
33.3
26.7 45.9
38.1 42.3
36.9 51.4
18.2 33.3 *
16.4
16.7 17.4
19.0 19.1
18.8 21.6 *
4.8 22.2
10.9
13.3 16.5
14.3 17.6
17.0 18.9
9.5 18.5
9.1
0.0 10.1
9.5
8.4
7.1 13.5
0.0
7.4

Table 6
Survey responses to the question: How important are the following factors to your company's dividend decision? (Dividend payers only)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that answered 1
(agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that the average response
equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides p-values for the comparison of the responses of dividend payers to those of repurchasers that are analyzed in Table 7. Column (5) provides
the median response for each question while in column (6) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel B provides average response sorted firm
characteristics. These are Size, P/E, Debt/total assets ratio, Cash cow, Credit rating, Tech industry, Insider holdings, Exchange, Prospects, CEO age, and Ownership. These variables are described in
detail in Table 3. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages

Question

(1) Maintaining consistency with our historic dividend policy (l)
(2) Stability of future earnings (c)
(3) A sustainable change in earnings (b)
(4) Attracting institutional investors to purchase our stock (o)
(5) The influence of our institutional shareholders (i)
(6) The availability of good investment opportunities for our firm to pursue (h)
(7) Attracting retail investors to purchase our stock (n)
(8) Merger and acquisition strategy (j)
(9) The dividend policies of competitors or other companies in our industry (e)
(10) Market price of our stock (if our stock is a good investment, relative to its true value) (q)
(11) Attracting institutional investors because they monitor management decisions (p)
(12) Having extra cash/liquid assets, relative to our desired cashholdings (d)
(13) Personal taxes our stockholders pay when receiving dividends (g)
(14) The possibility that paying dividends indicates we are running low on profitable investments (m)
(15) Paying out to reduce cash, thereby disciplining our firm to make efficient decisions (f)
(16) Flotation costs to issuing additional equity (k)
(17) A temporary change in earnings (a)
Panel B: Conditional averages
% not
%
important or important or
Question:
not at all
very
important
important
(1)
7.6
84.8
(2)
9.8
70.7
(3)
12.6
66.7
(4)
20.1
53.3
(5)
18.1
53.2
(6)
30.1
47.4
(7)
29.2
45.6
(8)
30.0
40.0
(9)
39.1
38.5
(10)
36.3
35.1
(11)
30.6
32.9
(12)
40.1
30.2
(13)
46.8
21.4
(14)
52.4
18.2
(15)
66.1
12.6
(16)
54.8
9.5
(17)
75.1
8.1

Size

obs

Small Large
171.0
174.0
174.0
169.0
171.0
173.0
171.0
170.0
174.0
171.0
170.0
172.0
173.0
170.0
174.0
168.0
173.0

80.4
65.2
65.2
55.6
47.8
46.7
52.2
47.8
26.1
34.8
37.0
34.8
13.0
17.4
13.0
8.7
11.1

P/E
Low High

88.3
86.2 85.5
73.9
66.2 69.4
69.4
64.6 66.1
55.5
55.4 52.5
58.6
53.8 50.0
46.8
43.1 48.4
46.8
56.9 46.8 *
37.3
41.5 32.8 *
44.1 ** 33.8 45.2
35.1
43.1 27.4
34.5
37.5 30.6
28.4 * 27.7 25.0
24.3 ** 21.5 21.0 *
19.1
15.4 18.0
13.5
12.3 17.7
10.1
12.5 8.1 **
5.4
7.8 3.2

D/A
Low High
91.5
63.8
55.3
38.3
42.6
52.2
44.7
34.0
27.7
27.7
21.7
34.0
17.0
17.0
14.9
10.9
8.5

85.4
69.5
69.5
66.7
57.3
45.1
48.8
40.7
42.7
37.8
41.5
18.8
24.4
18.5
12.2
9.8
6.2

Cash Cow
No
82.4
74.1
69.1
*** 53.3
54.4
48.9
41.2
38.5
* 36.7
* 34.6
** 32.4
** 31.4
24.6
20.0
13.7
9.7
8.0

Yes

H0: Dividend
H0: Average
rating=Repurcha
rating=0
ses rating

% important
or very
important

Average rating

(1)
84.8
70.7
66.7
53.3
53.2
47.4
45.6
40.0
38.5
35.1
32.9
30.2
21.4
18.2
12.6
9.5
8.1

(2)
1.2
0.9
0.8
0.3
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.1
-0.2
0.0
-0.1
-0.2
-0.5
-0.5
-0.9
-0.8
-1.1

(3)
***
***
***
***
***
**
*

(4)
***

**
***
***
***
***
***

***

Credit Rating

Tech Industry

Insider

Low High

94.3 ** 81.8 87.3
57.1
54.5 68.2 *
57.1
63.6 62.7
52.9
54.5 55.0
48.6
54.5 53.6
41.2
54.5 45.0
62.9 *** 27.3 47.3
45.7
30.0 38.2
45.7
27.3 40.0
37.1
45.5 32.7
35.3
36.4 34.9
25.7
45.5 24.1
8.6
36.4 24.5
11.4
9.1 20.2
8.6
9.1 15.5
8.8 *
0.0 13.0
8.6
9.1 4.6

Other Tech
86.4 100.0
72.7 33.3
68.8 66.7
55.9 33.3
55.8 66.7
49.0
0.0 *
48.1 33.3
41.8
0.0
40.3
0.0
35.7
0.0 **
35.3
0.0
30.1 50.0
22.1
0.0
18.8
0.0
13.0
0.0
10.5
0.0
7.2
0.0

Low High
89.9
73.7
72.7
55.1
59.6
48.0
54.5
40.8
47.5
38.4
37.8
28.6
22.2
18.2
12.1
8.2
6.1

78.9
68.4
59.6
53.6
47.4
49.1
36.8
40.4
22.8
29.8
29.8
33.3
21.1
19.3
15.8
14.0
7.1

Median rating

H0: Median
rating=0
(6)
***
***
***
***
***
**
**

***
**
***
***

(5)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0
-1.0
-1.0
-1.0

Exchange

Prospects

CEO age

Other NYSE

Worse Better

***
***
***
***
***

*** 72.7
84.8
** 75.8
37.5
42.4
54.5
** 63.6
48.5
*** 21.2
33.3
27.3
39.4
12.1
9.1
15.2
15.2
15.6

89.1
65.5
63.6
60.6
59.1
44.0
44.5
37.3
44.5
35.5
36.7
25.0
23.6
18.3
12.7
9.3
4.5

*

*
*
*

*

*
**

78.8
69.4
63.9
48.5
42.4
44.4
33.3
27.3
25.0
42.4
18.2
36.1
25.7
18.2
8.3
6.3
11.1

86.2
71.0
67.4
54.4
55.8
48.2
48.6 *
43.1
42.0 **
33.3
36.5 *
28.7
20.3
18.2
13.8
10.3
7.3

***
***
***
***
***

Young Mature
86.3
65.8
69.2
54.8
53.0
44.0
41.9
42.2
40.2
35.0
32.8
33.0
20.5
18.1
12.8
10.4
5.2

87.2
87.2 *
64.1
51.3
61.5
59.0
61.5 **
33.3
35.9
35.9
41.0
20.5
25.6
17.9
15.4
7.7
7.7

Ownership
Private Public
74.1
88.5
85.2
34.6
32.0
70.4
34.6
55.6
29.6
38.5
34.6
40.7
55.6
7.7
18.5
25.9
48.1

77.8
77.8
77.8
46.2
48.1
65.4
51.9
55.6
29.6
40.7
25.9
33.3
14.8
22.2
18.5
11.1
7.7

*
*

**

***

Table 7
Survey responses to the question: How important are the following factors to your company's repurchase decision? (Repurchasers only)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that
answered 1 (agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that
the average response equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides p-values for the comparison of the responses of dividend payers to those of repurchasers that are analyzed in
Table 6. Column (5) provides the median response for each question while in column (6) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel B
provides average response sorted firm characteristics. These are Size, P/E, Debt/total assets ratio, Cash cow, Credit rating, Tech industry, Insider holdings, Exchange, Prospects, CEO
age, and Ownership. These variables are described in detail in Table 3. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
Average rating

(1)
86.6
79.6
72.7
65.9
65.5
60.6
51.5
46.0
34.7
34.5
30.3
28.6
23.9
21.8
21.5
20.2
15.5

(2)
1.3
1.1
0.9
0.7
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.2
-0.1
0.0
-0.2
-0.3
-0.3
-0.5
-0.4
-0.6
-0.7

**
***
***
***
***
***
***

Credit Rating

Tech Industry

Insider

Question
(1) Market price of our stock (if our stock is a good investment, relative to its true value) (q)
(2) The availability of good investment opportunities for our firm to pursue (h)
(3) Merger and acquisition strategy (j)
(4) Stability of future earnings (c)
(5) A sustainable change in earnings (b)
(6) Having extra cash/liquid assets, relative to our desired cashholdings (d)
(7) The influence of our institutional shareholders (i)
(8) Attracting institutional investors to purchase our stock (o)
(9) A temporary change in earnings (a)
(10) Attracting institutional investors because they monitor management decisions (p)
(11) The possibility that repurchasing indicates we are running low on profitable investments (m)
(12) Personal taxes our stockholders pay when receiving repurchases (g)
(13) Maintaining consistency with our historic repurchase policy (l)
(14) Attracting retail investors to purchase our stock (n)
(15) Flotation costs to issuing additional equity (k)
(16) Paying out to reduce cash, thereby disciplining our firm to make efficient decisions (f)
(17) The repurchase policies of competitors or other companies in our industry (e)
Panel B: Conditional averages
% not
%
important or important or
Question:
not at all
very
important
important
(1)
3.7
86.6
(2)
7.8
79.6
(3)
7.9
72.7
(4)
13.2
65.9
(5)
14.9
65.5
(6)
13.9
60.6
(7)
15.3
51.5
(8)
23.9
46.0
(9)
39.5
34.7
29.1
34.5
(10)
(11)
38.8
30.3
(12)
42.3
28.6
(13)
41.1
23.9
(14)
48.5
21.8
(15)
41.1
21.5
(16)
56.5
20.2
(17)
56.0
15.5

obs
164.0
167.0
165.0
167.0
168.0
165.0
163.0
163.0
167.0
165.0
165.0
168.0
163.0
165.0
163.0
168.0
168.0

Size
Small Large
90.4 84.5 **
80.8 77.7
50.0 81.7 **
56.9 71.2
63.5 69.2
62.7 61.8
51.9 52.9
47.1 44.7
39.2 32.7
30.8 36.5
26.9 30.8
19.2 33.7 **
15.7 26.2 **
25.0 20.2
22.0 23.1
21.2 19.2
11.5 19.2 **

P/E
Low High
86.0
75.4
64.9
60.7
70.2
56.1
56.1
42.1
42.9
31.6
35.1
29.8
19.6
22.8
26.8
21.1
12.3

84.4
78.1
72.3 *
73.8
72.3
63.5
47.6
50.0
24.6
40.0
27.7
26.2
27.7
23.1
18.5 **
23.1
16.9

D/A
Low
86.4
75.9
67.8
60.3
59.3
72.4
52.5
44.8
33.9
25.4
28.8
25.4
25.9
16.9
22.4
25.4
16.9

High
87.3
81.9 *
72.2
69.4
73.6
57.1
55.7
47.9
38.0
38.9
33.3
33.3
22.5
23.6
23.9
18.1
13.9

Cash Cow
No

Yes

87.8
81.3
73.5
70.1
67.4
64.7
52.3
47.3
32.1
36.4
31.8
31.9
23.5
22.0
20.6
20.7
15.6

81.8
72.7
69.7
48.5 *
57.6
43.8 *
48.5
40.6
45.5
27.3
24.2
15.2 *
25.8
21.2
25.0
18.2
15.2

H0: Dividend
H0: Average
rating=Repurcha
rating=0
ses rating

% important
or very
important

Low
84.2
73.7
47.4
63.2
68.4
68.4
61.1
44.4
31.6
21.1
26.3
31.6
10.5
21.1
10.5
10.5
15.8

(3)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
**

(4)
***
***
***

Median rating

H0: Median
rating=0

***
***
***
**
***

(5)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0
-1.0

**
***
***
***
***
***

Exchange

Prospects

CEO age

***

***
***

(6)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

Ownership

High
Other Tech
Low High
Other NYSE
Worse Better
Young Mature
Private Public
85.4
86.2 92.9
87.2 86.4
88.4 86.5
90.6 85.6
87.2 82.9
59.1 85.7 **
78.1
80.4 64.3 ** 80.9 76.3
76.7 79.2
88.2 77.4
78.4 77.8
63.6 85.7 **
74.2 *
70.5 85.7
70.5 72.9
74.4 68.0
78.1 71.4
68.4 77.8
54.5 71.4
65.6
65.2 85.7
67.0 64.4
60.5 67.7
65.7 65.9
69.0 55.6
76.2 60.0
67.0
64.7 92.9
68.4 62.7
67.4 67.0
62.9 66.2
66.7 63.9
68.2 66.7
55.8
62.0 76.9
63.4 59.3
67.4 57.4
57.1 61.5
64.0 50.0
59.1 75.0
51.0
54.7 42.9
60.6 41.4 ** 46.5 55.2
50.0 51.9
50.4 58.3 *
36.4 61.9
44.8
46.4 30.8 * 49.5 40.7
45.2 49.0
50.0 45.0
44.3 52.8
31.8 45.0
31.3
34.1 42.9
42.1 24.1 ** 41.9 31.3
40.0 33.3
36.2 27.8
27.3 40.0
35.1
36.0 21.4 ** 37.9 30.5
25.6 39.2
31.3 35.3
31.6 44.4
27.3 28.6
33.0
28.1 42.9
34.7 22.0
30.2 32.0
40.6 27.8
29.9 27.8
9.1 33.3
29.9
30.2 14.3 ** 30.5 27.1
23.3 30.9 *
34.3 27.1 *
29.1 30.6
36.4 28.6
26.0 **
22.6 28.6
24.7 18.6
25.6 24.2
15.6 26.0
19.8 34.3 *
27.3 19.0
20.6
23.7
7.1
26.3 15.3
23.3 21.6
21.9 21.8
17.9 30.6
22.7 14.3
24.0
24.1 14.3
20.2 27.6
32.6 16.8 ** 21.9 21.4
26.1 13.9
33.3 21.1
21.6
20.9
7.1
15.8 27.1
25.6 17.5
25.7 18.8
19.7 22.2
13.6 23.8
12.4
16.5 21.4
18.9 11.9 **
9.3 17.5
8.6 17.3
17.9 13.9
13.6 23.8

Table 8
Survey responses to the question: How important are the following factors to your company's share repurchase decisions?
(Repurchasers only)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that answered 1
(agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that the average response
equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides the median response for each question while in column (5) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel
B provides average response sorted firm characteristics. These are Size, P/E, Debt/total assets ratio, Cash cow, Credit rating, Tech industry, Insider holdings, Exchange, Prospects, CEO age, and
Ownership. These variables are described in detail in Table 3. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% important or
Average rating
very important
Question
(1) Whether our stock is a good investment relative to other available investments (e)
(2) Increasing earnings per share (b)
(3) Offsetting the dilutionary effect of stock option plans or other stock programs (f)
(4) The float or overall liquidity of our stock (i)
(5) Investors paying lower taxes on repurchases relative to dividends (a)
(6) Changing our debt-to-equity ratio so it is closer to our desired debt ratio (d)
(7) The belief that well-informed investors benefit more from a repurchase program than do less-informed investors (j)
(8) Accumulating shares to increase the chance of resisting a takeover bid (c)
(9) Selling stockholders cashing out and taking some benefits of the repurchase program with them (h)
(10) Using repurchases rather than dividends because stock options are not dividend protected (g)

Panel B: Conditional averages
% not
%
important or important or
Question:
not at all
very
important
important
(1)
9.2
77.0
(2)
9.2
75.0
(3)
14.5
67.1
(4)
24.3
50.7
(5)
31.8
42.4
(6)
46.7
30.3
(7)
34.7
21.3
(8)
63.2
13.8
(9)
53.3
12.7
(10)
50.0
9.9

Size

obs

Small Large
152.0
152.0
152.0
152.0
151.0
152.0
150.0
152.0
150.0
152.0

83.0
69.8
52.8
56.6
34.0
22.6
20.8
18.9
17.0
17.0

73.7
77.8
74.7
47.5
46.9
34.3
21.6
11.1
10.3
6.1

P/E
Low High
** 83.6
87.3
*** 63.6
58.2
38.2
** 36.4
29.6
* 10.9
16.4
14.5

D/A

Cash Cow

Low High
No Yes
69.5 84.5 ** 74.6 85.3
68.8
74.6 76.5
71.9 *** 67.8 81.7
69.5 58.8
76.6 * 61.0 69.0
45.8 67.6 **
61.0 47.9
43.8
47.9 23.5
39.7 46.5
46.0
18.6 42.3 *** 32.2 23.5
32.8
19.8 26.5
20.7 24.3
17.5
12.7 17.6
11.9 14.1
10.9
12.1 11.3 ** 12.1 14.7
6.3
9.3 11.8
6.8 11.3
7.8

(1)
77.0
75.0
67.1
50.7
42.4
30.3
21.3
13.8
12.7
9.9

Credit Rating
Low High
77.8
61.1
44.4
27.8
38.9
22.2
11.1
0.0
5.6
5.6

75.5
77.7
76.6 **
54.3
47.3
36.2
22.8
8.5
10.8
10.6

(2)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.2
0.1
-0.3
-0.2
-0.8
-0.7
-0.6

Tech Industry
Other Tech
78.5
77.0
65.2
50.4
40.3
33.3
21.1
14.8
13.5
10.4

H0: Average
rating=0

Median rating

(3)
***
***
***
**

(4)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-1.0
-1.0
-0.5

**
***
***
***
***

(5)
***
***
***
***
**
**
***
***
***

Insider

Exchange

Prospects

Low High

Other NYSE

Worse Better

71.4
75.0 81.0 *
50.0
77.2 70.7
92.9 *** 67.4 65.5
42.9
46.7 56.9
57.1
40.7 44.8
7.1 *** 33.7 24.1
14.3
17.8 27.6
7.1
13.0 15.5
7.1
12.1 14.0
7.1
7.6 13.8

82.9
65.9
63.4
58.5
43.9
22.0
24.4
14.6
17.1
17.1

74.0
79.2
66.7
49.0
42.1
34.4 **
22.3
12.5
10.5
7.3

83.3
83.3
66.7
41.7
54.2
20.8
20.8
16.7
12.5
4.2

H0: Median
rating=0

75.8
73.4
67.2
52.3
40.2 *
32.0
21.4
13.3 *
12.7 *
10.9

CEO age
Young Mature
80.5
77.9
64.6
49.6
40.7
29.2
21.4
13.3
14.3
12.4

65.7
68.6
74.3
51.4
50.0
37.1
20.6
14.3
8.8
2.9

Ownership
Private Public
47.4
31.6
5.3
31.6
36.8
21.1
26.3
52.6
47.4
21.1

81.8
72.7
63.6
40.9
31.8
18.2
13.6
13.6
13.6
9.1

***
***
***

**
**

Table 9
Dividends / Repurchases Initiation Horizon
Frequency

Possibly never

50 years

20 years

5 years

2 years

For those that have not paid dividends within
the last 3 years, within how many years will
you anticipate initiating dividends?

77.03%

1.35%

6.76%

12.16%

2.70%

For those that have not repurchased shares
within the last 3 years, within how many
years will you anticipate repurchasing
shares?

55.71%

1.43%

7.14%

21.43%

14.29%

For those that have neither paid dividends
nor repurchased shares within the last 3
years, within how many years will you
anticipate initiating some form of payout?

58.44%

2.60%

9.09%

19.48%

10.39%

Table 10
Survey responses to the question: What factors might get your company to seriously consider repurchasing shares in the future?
(Only firms that have not repurchased shares within the past three years)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents
that answered 1 (agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null
hypothesis is that the average response equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides p-values for the comparison of the responses to those analyzed in Table 10. Column
(5) provides the median response for each question while in column (6) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel B provides average
response sorted firm characteristics. These are Size, P/E, Debt/total assets ratio, Cash cow, Credit rating, Tech industry, Insider holdings, Exchange, Prospects, CEO age, and
Ownership. These variables are described in detail in Table 3. ***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. n.a. in Panel A means that there
is no corresponding dividend question in Table 10.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% important
or very
important

Average rating

(1)
75.0
61.0
59.7
56.6
52.0
50.6
50.6
50.6
46.8
35.1
30.3
21.1
17.1
14.5

(2)
1.1
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.2
-0.1
-0.1
-0.4
-1.0
-0.9

Question
(1) Market undervaluation of our stock (i)
(2) Our company having extra cash/marketable securities (c)
(3) To convey info about our stock to investors (if the market is not fairly valuing our firm) (m)
(4) The influence of our institutional shareholders (g)
(5) A change in the float or overall liquidity of our stock (n)
(6) Having fewer profitable investments available (e.g., as our industry matures) (h)
(7) Offsetting the dilutionary effect of stock option plans or other stock programs (l)
(8) Increasing earnings per share (j)
(9) A sustainable increase in earnings (b)
(10) Accumulating shares to increase the chance of resisting a takeover bid (k)
(11) The share repurchase policies of competitors or other companies in our industry (d)
(12) The relatively low taxes investors pay when selling shares (relative to receiving dividends) (f)
(13) A temporary increase in earnings (a)
(14) Repurchasing shares to reduce cash, thereby disciplining our firm to make efficient decisions (e)
Panel B: Conditional averages
% not
%
important or important or
Question:
not at all
very
important
important
(1)
6.6
75.0
(2)
20.8
61.0
(3)
16.9
59.7
(4)
18.4
56.6
(5)
20.0
52.0
(6)
23.4
50.6
(7)
22.1
50.6
(8)
15.6
50.6
(9)
32.5
46.8
(10)
37.7
35.1
(11)
34.2
30.3
(12)
38.2
21.1
(13)
67.1
17.1
(14)
60.5
14.5

Size

obs

Small Large
76.0
77.0
77.0
76.0
75.0
77.0
77.0
77.0
77.0
77.0
76.0
76.0
76.0
76.0

76.3
65.8
65.8
60.5
59.5
47.4
47.4
50.0
50.0
39.5
26.3
18.4
16.2
10.5

75.7
57.9
55.3
54.1
45.9
55.3
55.3
52.6
44.7
31.6
35.1
24.3
18.4
18.9

P/E
Low High
88.0
69.2
69.2
56.0
56.0
57.7
56.0
56.0
50.0
52.0
36.0
20.0
28.0
20.0

D/A
Low High

61.1 ** 77.8 81.6
38.9 ** 72.2 68.4
72.2 60.5
50.0
55.6 50.0
55.6
70.6 44.7
44.4
55.6 47.4
55.6
50.0 52.6
38.9
55.6 52.6
44.4
38.9 50.0
27.8
33.3 42.1
27.8
38.9 28.9
27.8
22.2 23.7
16.7
11.1 18.9
11.1
16.7 18.4
11.1

Cash Cow
No Yes
71.4 92.3
59.4 69.2 **
57.8 69.2
54.0 69.2
47.6 75.0 **
46.9 69.2 *
51.6 46.2
46.9 69.2
46.9 46.2
31.3 53.8
27.0 46.2
22.2 15.4
15.9 23.1
11.1 30.8

Credit Rating
Low High
77.8
66.7
66.7
33.3
44.4
55.6
77.8
44.4
66.7
55.6
33.3
22.2
12.5
0.0

76.7
71.0
64.5
53.3
48.3
61.3
53.3
53.3
29.0
30.0
40.0
30.0
16.1
33.3 *

Tech Industry
Other Tech
72.9
58.3
58.3
57.6
46.6
50.0
45.0
48.3
41.7
35.0
32.2
20.3
15.3
15.3

80.0
73.3
60.0
46.7 *
66.7
53.3
66.7 *
53.3
66.7 **
33.3
26.7
26.7
20.0
13.3

H0: Average
rating=0

H0: Dividend
rating=Repurcha
ses rating

Median rating

(4)
***
**
**

(3)
***
***
***
***
**
***
**
***

(5)
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.0
-1.0

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

**
***
***

n.a.

Insider

Exchange

Prospects

Low High

Other NYSE

Worse Better

76.6
50.0
62.5
57.4
56.5
52.1
52.1
54.2
41.7
37.5
38.3
23.4
18.8
19.1

71.4
78.6 **
53.6
53.6
46.4
50.0
46.4
46.4
57.1
32.1
17.9
17.9
14.8
7.1

68.8
62.5
65.6
56.3
56.3
37.5
53.1
43.8
46.9
31.3
18.8
15.6
12.5
6.3

H0: Median
rating=0

80.0
66.7
55.6
54.3
44.1
58.3
51.4
57.1
47.2
31.4
40.0 **
25.7
17.1 **
20.0 ***

66.7
72.2
66.7
55.6
44.4
38.9
55.6
61.1
55.6
38.9
27.8
16.7
27.8
5.6

77.6
57.6
57.6
56.9
54.4
54.2
49.2
47.5
44.1
33.9
31.0
22.4
13.8 **
17.2

(6)
***
***
***
***
***
***
***
***

*
***
***

CEO age
Young Mature
73.2
66.7
57.9
57.1
52.7
56.1
52.6
49.1
50.9
35.1
30.4
21.4
17.5
17.9

78.9
42.1
63.2
52.6
47.4
31.6 **
47.4
52.6
36.8
31.6
26.3
21.1
16.7
5.3

Ownership
PrivatePublic
51.5
60.6
33.3
33.3
24.2
51.5
33.3
36.4
63.6
21.9
21.2
25.0
30.3
6.3

72.7
68.2
61.4
54.5
55.8
45.5
52.3
47.7
50.0
36.4
25.0
20.5
18.2
11.4

**
***
*
***
*

**

Table 11
Survey responses to the question: What factors might get your company to seriously consider paying dividends in the future?
(Only firms that have not paid dividends within the past three years)
Respondents were asked to rate on a scale of -2 (strongly disagree) to 2 (strongly agree). In panel A we report summary statistics for the responses. The percentage of respondents that
answered 1 (agree) and 2 (strongly agree) is given in column (1). The average for each question is given in column (2). P-values for the statistical tests in which the null hypothesis is that the
average response equals zero is given in column (3). Column (4) provides p-values for the comparison of the responses to those analyzed in Table 9. Column (5) provides the median response
for each question while in column (6) we provide p-values for the test that the median response is different from zero. Panel B provides average response sorted firm characteristics. These are
Size, P/E, Debt/total assets ratio, Cash cow, Credit rating, Tech industry, Insider holdings, Exchange, Prospects, CEO age, and Ownership. These variables are described in detail in Table 3.
***, **, * denotes a significant difference at the 1%, 5% and 10% level, respectively. n.a. in Panel A means that there is no corresponding repurchase question in Table 9.
Panel A: Unconditional averages
% important or
Average rating
very important
Question
(1) A sustainable increase in earnings (b)
(2) The influence of our institutional shareholders (f)
(3) Having fewer profitable investments available (e.g., as our industry matures) (i)
(4) Our company having extra cash/marketable securities (c)
(5) To convey information about our stock to investors (if the market is not fairly valuing our firm) (l)
(6) Market undervaluation of our stock (j)
(7) To attract investors subject to "prudent man" investment restrictions to purchase our stock (k)
(8) The dividend policies of competitors or other companies in our industry (d)
(9) To attract investors who will monitor or certify our decisions (h)
(10) The influence of our retail shareholders (g)
(11) Paying dividends to reduce cash, thereby disciplining our firm to make efficient decisions (e)
(12) A temporary increase in earnings (a)

Panel B: Conditional averages
% not
%
important or important or
Question:
not at all
very
important
important
25.3
58.7
(1)
18.7
56.0
(2)
32.0
49.3
(3)
36.0
45.3
(4)
29.7
39.2
(5)
41.3
38.7
(6)
33.3
33.3
(7)
36.0
33.3
(8)
44.0
32.0
(9)
42.7
29.3
(10)
76.0
9.3
(11)
80.0
9.3
(12)

obs
75.0
75.0
75.0
75.0
74.0
75.0
75.0
75.0
75.0
75.0
75.0
75.0

Size
Small Large
70.2 39.3 **
55.3 57.1
48.9 50.0
48.9 39.3
48.9 22.2
44.7 28.6 **
34.0 32.1
31.9 35.7
40.4 17.9 **
31.9 25.0
12.8 3.6
12.8 3.6 *

P/E
Low High
72.7
68.2
54.5
59.1
45.5
54.5
40.9
36.4
45.5
45.5
9.1
13.6

38.1
61.9
61.9
42.9
42.9
38.1
28.6
33.3
38.1
19.0
9.5
4.8

D/A
Low
*** 51.5
63.6
36.4
45.5
42.4
* 36.4
27.3
27.3
36.4
** 21.2
9.1
* 12.1

High
65.5
51.7
62.1 **
51.7
48.3
48.3
41.4
44.8
31.0
44.8
10.3
6.9

(1)
58.7
56.0
49.3
45.3
39.2
38.7
33.3
33.3
32.0
29.3
9.3
9.3

Cash Cow
No
55.0
56.7
50.0
41.7
40.7
35.0
33.3
31.7
30.0
31.7
11.7
10.0

Yes
73.3
53.3
46.7
60.0
33.3
53.3 *
33.3
40.0
40.0
20.0
0.0
6.7

Credit Rating
Low
43.8
43.8
43.8
31.3
31.3
12.5
18.8
31.3
12.5
25.0
12.5
6.3

Tech Industry

High
Other Tech
55.0
62.2 50.0
65.0
62.2 53.8
65.0 *
53.3 46.2
60.0
53.3 30.8
63.2 **
45.5 30.8 *
55.0 **
42.2 30.8 *
60.0 **
46.7 15.4 **
35.0
28.9 46.2
45.0 **
44.4 15.4 **
40.0
35.6 23.1
15.0
8.9
7.7
10.0
8.9
7.7

(2)
0.3
0.4
0.1
0.0
0.0
-0.2
-0.1
-0.2
-0.3
-0.3
-1.1
-1.3

(3)
*
***

H0: Dividend
rating=Repurcha
ses rating
(4)

**
**
***
n.a.
*
**
***
***

Insider
Low
61.4
52.3
50.0
40.9
34.1
38.6
34.1
38.6
29.5
31.8
9.1
13.6

H0: Average
rating=0

High
54.8
61.3
48.4
51.6
46.7
38.7
32.3
25.8
35.5
25.8
9.7 *
3.2

Exchange

n.a.
n.a.

Prospects

Median rating
(5)
1.0
1.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
0.0
-2.0
-1.0

CEO age

H0: Median
rating=0
(6)
***
***

***
***

Ownership

Other NYSE
Worse Better
Young Mature
Private Public
50.0 70.8 ** 75.0 52.7 *
57.6 60.0
55.2 60.0
52.3 58.3
50.0 58.2
52.5 66.7 *
44.8 47.5
43.2 58.3
50.0 49.1
57.6 20.0 ** 48.3 45.0
38.6 58.3 *
65.0 38.2 ** 45.8 46.7
41.4 45.0
39.5 41.7
50.0 35.2 *
36.2 53.3
34.5 43.6
34.1 45.8
45.0 36.4
42.4 26.7
20.7 42.5
31.8 41.7
40.0 30.9
32.2 40.0
10.7 30.0
27.3 41.7 *
25.0 36.4
35.6 20.0
37.9 32.5
31.8 37.5
40.0 29.1
28.8 46.7
31.0 30.0
27.3 33.3
35.0 27.3 ** 28.8 33.3
41.4 35.0
6.8 12.5
15.0
7.3 *
5.1 26.7
13.8 10.0
11.4
4.2
20.0
5.5 **
6.8 20.0
3.6 10.0

Table 12
Summary Views of Financial Executives about Payout Policy
DIVIDENDS
Very important. Do not cut dividends except in extreme circumstances.
Sticky. Inflexible. Smooth through time.

REPURCHASES
Historical Level
Flexibility

Historical level is not important.
Very Flexible. No need to smooth.

Little reward for increasing.

Consequence if Increased

Stock price increase when repurchase plan announced.

Big market penalty for reducing or omitting.

Consequence if Reduced

Little consequence to reducing from one year to the next, though they try to complete plans.

Most common target is the level of dividend, followed by payout ratio and growth in dividends. Target is
viewed as rather flexible.
External funds would be raised before cutting dividends.
First maintain historic dividend level, then make incremental investment decisions.
Dividend increases tied to permanent, stable earnings.
At the margin, do not reduce repurchases in order to increase dividends.
Tax disadvantage of dividends of second-order importance.
Dividends convey information.
Dividends are not a self-imposed cost to signal firm quality or separate from competitors.
Retail investors like dividends despite tax disadvantage. Retail investors like dividends about the same as
institutions like dividends.
Institutions generally like dividends but are not sought out to monitor firm.

Target

Most common target is dollar amount of repurchases, a very flexible target.

Relation to External Funds

Repurchases would be reduced before raising external funds.

Relation to Investment

First investment decisions, then make repurchase decisions.

Earnings Quality
Substitutes?
Taxes
Convey Information?
Signal?
Retail Investors
Institutional Investors

Not important.

Stock Price

Not important.

EPS

Not important.

Stock Options

Repurchases increase with permanent earnings but also with temporary earnings.
At the margin, reduce dividend increases (not level) in order to increase repurchases.
Tax-advantage of repurchases of second-order importance.
Repurchases convey information.
Repurchases are not used as a self-imposed cost to signal firm quality or separate from
competitors.
Retail investors like repurchases less than they like dividends.
Institutions generally like repurchases about the same as they like dividends.
Repurchase shares when stock undervalued by market.
Repurchasing in an attempt to increase EPS is very important.
Repurchasing to offset stock option dilution is important.

Not important.

Cash on Balance Sheet

Not important.

Float or Liquidity

Not important.

Mergers and Acquisitions

Not important.

Takeovers

Not important.

Cash Cows

Expected to return capital, including repurchasing shares.

Expected to pay dividends. Dividend growth is very important and dividend policy very conservative.
… we would keep dividend commitment minimized.
… earnings become positive and stable.

If we were starting over …
Nonpayers will initiate when …

Use to reduce cash holdings when cash is sufficiently high.
Do not repurcase if float is not sufficient.
Important.

… we would rely heavily on repurchases to return capital to investors.
… the market is undervaluing their stock.

… institutions demand dividends.

… they have extra cash on the balance sheet.

… they have fewer profitable investments available.

… institutions demand repurchases.
… they have fewer profitable investments available.
… they think that repurchases can increase EPS or offset stock option dilution.

