                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DO ALL NETWORKS FACILITATE
                                INTERNATIONAL COMMERCE?
                           US LAW FIRMS AND THE INTERNATIONAL
                             MARKET FOR CORPORATE CONTROL

                                              Simon J. Evenett

                                           Working Paper 9663
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9663


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        April 2003




I thank participants at the NBER-CEPR-TCER-RIETI conference for their comments and suggestions and
am especially grateful to Kyoji Fukao, Jim Harrigan, Takeo Hoshi, Stephen Redding, John Ries, and David
Weinstein. Jim Rauch also provided neat comments on a previous version of this paper. My understanding
of the determinants and regulation of cross-border mergers and acquisitions has been immeasurably improved
by discussions with senior American antitrust practitioners and current and former officials, in particular Bill
Kolasky, Bill Kovacic, Jim Rill, Doug Rosenthal, Charles Stark, and Randy Tritell. All remaining errors
should of course be attributed to me. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Simon J. Evenett. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Do all networks facilitate international commerce? US law firms and
the international market for corporate control
Simon J. Evenett
NBER Working Paper No. 9663
April 2003
JEL No. F2, L4

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper estimates the effects of several American law firms’ international networks of offices on
the total value of overseas mergers and acquisitions (M&A) by US corporations. Nowadays many
nations can review proposed mergers and US law firms help clients overcome such regulatory

hurdles, effectively greasing the market for corporate control. However, they can also oppose
transactions that are inimical to their clients’ interests. I present evidence that suggests that Baker

& McKenzie—the US law firm with the most overseas offices—has facilitated such transactions,
whereas the combined effect of the next five largest American law firms has tended to reduce such
M&A.


Simon J. Evenett
World Trade Institute
University of Bern and CEPR
Hallerstrasse 6
Bern
Switzerland
simon.evenett@worldtradeinstitute.ch
1.     Introduction

In recent years there has been considerable interest in the means by which
groups of market participants interact so as to facilitate various forms of
international commerce. Particular emphasis has been given in this research
program to mechanisms to locate potential buyers and sellers and to overcome
contract enforcement problems (Rauch, 2002; and Rauch and Casella,
forthcoming). Given the considerable growth in international trade flows since
1985, especially in the pan-Pacific region where Chinese business groups
operate extensively, it is perhaps not surprising that research into such
mechanisms has gathered pace (see, for example, Rauch and Trindade, 2002.)


The late 1990s witnessed a surge in one form of international commerce that has
received considerably less attention from international economists: a global wave
of mergers and acquisitions (M&A).2 What is more, since the 1980s—that is, well
before the latest M&A wave—leading law firms have been expanding their
presence     outside     their   home     jurisdictions,   creating     networks     of   legal
professionals to advise corporations as they take advantage of the opportunities
afforded by the current era of international market integration. This paper
explores whether there is a connection between these two phenomena; that is,
whether the formation of such global law firms has helped contribute to overseas
US M&A activity during 1999, one of the boom years in the latest wave of cross-
border M&A.


The causal links between the presence of global legal networks and transactions
in the international market for corporate assets are potentially different from
those traditionally emphasized in studies of international trade flows; the latter
stressing the roles of search costs, asymmetries of information, and contract
enforcement costs. A feature of transactions in the market for corporate control is

2
  See, however, Evenett (2003) for a detailed overview of the composition and scale of this
international wave of M&A; and an econometric analysis of the impact of such transactions on the
banking spreads in selected OECD nations.


                                                                                              2
that purchases and sales of firms often involve review by and approval by
national competition or antitrust authorities. These review processes not only
erect a potential barrier to M&A transactions but they also create demand for the
very   services   of   intermediaries—such    as   law    firms   and   economic
consultancies—whose actions may influence the outcome of these official
investigations.


In a multi-country world a merger of two firms may require the approval of many
national authorities. For example, the merger between Price Waterhouse and
Coopers and Lybrand, announced on September 17, 1997, required approval in
the United States, by the European Commission, in Canada, Australia, New
Zealand, and Switzerland—to name some, and by no means all, of the
jurisdictions involved (Kolasky, 2000). Law firms with a global imprint can and do
help clients to obtain clearances from national antitrust authorities for mergers
and takeovers with international ramifications. Familiarity with both the clients
needs and with numerous national merger review procedures are the means by
which global law firms can add grease to the international market for corporate
assets.


Another feature of merger review procedures is that some jurisdictions appear to
give rival firms greater opportunities to present evidence against a proposed
merger than others. It is often claimed that the European Commission’s merger
review procedure gives opponents to a proposed merger a greater role than in
comparable U.S. proceedings (Boeder, 2000; Venit and Kolasky, 2000); a point
that was made with particular force by some in the aftermath of the European
Commission’s decisions on the proposed Boeing-McDonnell Douglas and
General Electric-Honeywell mergers. To the extent that this is true, global law
firms can throw sand into the wheels of this form of international commerce by
presenting evidence against proposed transactions that are inimical to their




                                                                                3
clients’ interests.3 A priori, then, it is unclear whether the existence of global legal
networks has facilitated or retarded cross-border mergers and acquisitions.


A rich dataset of the overseas presence of 100 US law firms in 1997 is employed
here to examine whether their geographical reach across national borders
correlates with the pattern of overseas M&A by US corporations in 1999.
Controlling for the other plausible determinants of international M&A activity
(such as distance from the United States, national income and corporate tax
rates of the overseas jurisdiction), I examine whether the presence of six large
US law firms, which together account for 60 percent of the employment of US
lawyers in the foreign countries considered in my empirical analysis, have
contributed to the observed level of overseas M&A activity by US corporations in
1999. In addition, as merger notification requirements and reviews tend to apply
more strictly to relatively larger M&A transactions, I examine whether the
presence of these six US law firms increases the mean size of recorded cross-
border M&A transactions.


The principal finding is that the presence in a country of the US law firm with the
greatest global footprint (Baker & McKenzie) substantially raises the total value of
US M&A activity in that jurisdiction. In contrast, the presence in a country of five
other US law firms with large overseas operations tends to reduce both the total
value and mean size of M&A transactions in an economy. On net, however, the
geographical allocation of these six law firms’ offices is such that US M&A activity
into many non-G7 economies, including several relatively fast growing
developing economies, is double what would have otherwise occurred. This
implies that the global presence of at least one major US law firm has brought

3
  It is worth pointing out that relatively few mergers are publicly opposed or rejected by national
competition agencies. Often, officials make their opposition known in the early stages of a merger
review, so giving the merging parties an opportunity to withdraw their merger. In other cases,
officials signal their opposition during informal meetings (or “soundings”) before a merger is
proposed. Both types of official opposition may well be encouraged by the evidence provided by
legal advisers to rivals to the merging parties. In fact, the number of publicly rejected mergers is a
fraction of the planned mergers that are not consummated. (How small a fraction, of course, is
hard to tell.)


                                                                                                    4
additional pressure on (in particular publicly traded) firms in developing
economies to improve their performance. My regression results also imply that
nations with merger review procedures tend to receive half of the total value of
US overseas M&A than would have otherwise been the case, suggesting that
such legal requirements have considerable bite. (This latter finding is itself quite
interesting given the paucity of academic studies of the quantitative impact of
merger review laws on the number of national and international mergers and
acquisitions.4)


This paper is organized as follows. In the next section I summarize the key
aspects of the boom in global M&A activity in the mid-to-late 1990s, and the
growth of US law firms’ operations since 1985. In section three, the econometric
strategy and data employed are described, as are the estimation results. A
discussion of these findings, with suggestions for future research, are presented
in section four.


2.        The late 1990s boom in cross-border mergers and acquisitions and
the international expansion of US law firms


The 1990s saw a ten-fold real increase in the value of cross-border mergers and
acquisitions. According to OECD (2001), over a trillion US dollars of corporate
assets were involved in cross-border M&A in the year 2000. Unlike the surge in
cross-border M&A in the late 1980s, the latest wave was not confined principally
to transactions between British and American firms. Continental European,
Japanese, Korean, Latin American, and South East Asian firms played significant
roles in what has been termed by some as the first “global” wave of mergers and
acquisitions (Black, 2000). Figure 1 provides evidence on the extent of US
outward M&A activity, and shows that US purchases of corporate assets abroad
trebled in real terms between 1995 and 1999.



4
    For distinct empirical analysis of the effects of merger review regimes see Evenett (2002).


                                                                                                  5
Many factors are said to be responsible for this global wave of M&A.
Deregulation and privatization (especially in the utilities sectors) are important
explanations in Europe and in many developing economies (UNCTAD, 2000;
OECD, 2001). Changes in corporate strategy, which have emphasized both the
concentration on so-called core competencies and attaining global reach, is a
contributing factor in manufacturing industries in particular (OECD, 2001). And
liberalization of foreign direct investment regimes has no doubt played a role in
facilitating overseas acquisitions of corporate assets, as has the ease with which
firms were able to raise funds cheaply on stockmarkets in the late 1990s.


These developments have, of course, not gone unnoticed by antitrust officials
around the world. As Table 1 makes clear, an increasing share of overseas US
M&A activity involved the acquisition of a majority controlling interest in a foreign
firm. In fact, in 1999 nearly two thirds of such M&A transactions involved
acquiring a controlling stake. To the extent that these transactions reduce the
number of competitors in a given market5, antitrust officials may be concerned
about the potential exercise of monopoly power by the remaining firms.6 This has
undoubtedly contributed to an increase in the number of nations with active
programs for merger notification or review. According to an advisory committee
to the US government on international competition policy matters, by the year
2000 sixty jurisdictions had some form of mandatory merger notification scheme
(ICPAC, 2000, Annex 2-C).7 Such schemes are often complemented by review
procedures to assess the likely impact on a nation’s markets of a proposed or
actual transaction. In principle, therefore, a cross-border merger could be


5
  One of the ways in which greenfield foreign direct investments and cross-border mergers differ
is that the former typically increases the number of firms in a given industry in the recipient
economy which, in turn, can result in lower mark ups of prices over costs.
6
  It would be wrong to assume that all antitrust authorities analyze the economic impact of
mergers in the same way, as recent disagreements across the North Atlantic between US and
European antitrust officials can attest (see the contributions in Evenett, Lehmann, and Steil,
2000). This further adds to the demand for legal intermediaries and puts at a premium the ability
to coordinate in a coherent manner merger clearance procedures across many jurisdictions.
7
  The spread of such merger review laws is now so pronounced that one leading U.S. law firm,
White & Case, prepares an annual compilation of national merger review procedures and
extensively comments on the latest legal developments in this regard. See White & Case (2001).


                                                                                               6
reviewed by many national antitrust authorities; and depending on the statutes
governing these authorities’ powers, the latter can reject such a proposed merger
outright or, as is more common, can demand divestitures or other commitments
from the parties involved. In some countries, in particular those with federal
constitutions such as the United States, sub-national antitrust authorities may
add to the number of reviewing bodies. An interesting question is whether the
cumulative effect of these reviews is to erect a considerable barrier to
international mergers and acquisitions, that is, to the international trade in
corporate assets.


Multi-jurisdictional merger review has considerably expanded the demand for
legal services on two accounts. First, firms seeking approval for their proposed
M&A transactions need specialized counsel in (at least) each of the major
jurisdictions, and need to coordinate their counsel’s responses so that any
concessions (or agreements reached with antitrust authorities) do not jeopardize
the commercial viability of the transaction. Second, firms opposed to a rivals’
announced plans to merge or acquire assets abroad can hire legal counsel to
present evidence to antitrust authorities that casts the proposed transaction in a
poor light.8 Some antitrust legal practitioners refer to this practice as “forum
shopping”; the pursuit of jurisdictions that are sympathetic to firms opposed to a
merger. Again, such practices often need to be coordinated so as to maximize
the probability that a sufficiently large number of antitrust authorities take steps to
oppose enough components of a proposed deal that it is eventually abandoned.
As noted earlier, the receptiveness of antitrust authorities to evidence presented
by rival firms varies considerably across jurisdictions and may well be greater in
jurisdictions with nascent or younger merger review procedures.




8 It should be noted that there are, in principle, circumstances under which the rivals to two or
more merging firms would support—rather than oppose—the proposed merger. A merger
between firms in the same market that does not result in lower marginal costs for the merged firm
could well benefit rivals as the intensity of competition may well attenuate after the merger.


                                                                                               7
One supply side response to this increased demand for specialist antitrust
counsel in many jurisdictions has been the formation of M&A practice areas in
global law firms. Such firms almost always started out serving either the US or
the British national market. As far as US law firms are concerned, Spar (1997)
identifies two waves of overseas expansion: 1965-85 and after 1985. The first
wave saw US law firms follow their multinational clients abroad. For example,
Shearman & Sterling opened a Paris office in 1967 just as its client Citibank was
expanding vigorously overseas. Spar argues that:
        “Some of the US firms that went abroad matured past their initial
        clients, building sizeable independent practices in their new found
        locations. Most of them, though, did not, and left their overseas
        posts once their clients’ work was completed.” (Spar, 1997 page
        13)


The second wave was, however, on a larger scale and at the initiative of the law
firms themselves. For example, Morrison & Forrester, a San Francisco-based US
law firm, opened a practice in Hong Kong in 1982 without having a single client in
the region (Spar, 1997). In this wave, supply tended to lead demand, as Spar
notes
        “Once a few firms established sizeable international practices, they
        achieved a critical mass that made them attractive to multinational
        clients. Rather than asking multinationals to spread their legal
        advising among a number of far flung firms, multinational law firms
        could offer coordinated and consolidated service.” (Spar, 1997
        page 14)


These large global law firms were in place well before the global merger wave
took off in the late 1990s. By 1989, the 250 largest US law firms had 180
overseas offices (Spar, 1997). This growth continued through the 1990s. A
recent analysis revealed that in 1997 the top 100 US law firms had 363 overseas
offices employing 4214 lawyers (Beaverstock, Smith, and Taylor, 2000). One firm



                                                                                8
alone, Baker & McKenzie, had 1802 of these lawyers on its payroll and operated
48 overseas offices; far exceeding (on these metrics) the global reach of any rival
law firm.9


While accepting the argument that the overseas offices of US law firms have
been established to supply a wide range of services, meeting the expected future
needs of clients for advice on mergers and acquisitions has been a prominent
rationale for overseas expansion. For example, the law firms of Coudert
Brothers; Shearman & Sterling; Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue; Kaye, Scholer,
Fierman, Hays & Handler; and White & Case are said to have established offices
in China during 1993-2000 with mergers and acquisitions stated as important
practice areas.10


I will now summarize some of the main arguments of this section. Global legal
networks expanded before the latest wave of cross-border M&A. The presence of
a man-made impediment to trade in corporate assets—merger review
procedures—provides these networks with a means to hamper or to facilitate
cross-border M&A, and distinguishes these networks from the existing literature
on business networks which emphasizes the latters’ role in promoting
international trade in goods and services. The remainder of this paper is devoted
to examining whether there is any empirical evidence that the global footprint of
several leading US law firms facilitated or reduced US overseas M&A activity in
1999, a year when the latest wave of global M&A was in full swing.


3.     Econometric strategy and data employed


Given that many factors which are unrelated to the presence of legal
intermediaries can influence the amount of US cross-border M&A in a foreign


9
 For an account of the worldwide expansion of Baker & McKenzie see Bauman (1999).
10
      See    “Through    the    Open     Door:   Top    China   Outposts,”  accessed    at
http://www.law.com/special/professionals/amlaw/global_50/China_chart.html on October   15,
2001.


                                                                                        9
country, the objective here must be to adequately control for these determinants
and to examine how much of the remaining variation is associated with the
presence of global legal networks. The first step taken was to assemble the
largest possible dataset of economies which received US cross-border M&A in
1999. Several financial companies track announcements of proposed (and
completed) US cross-border M&A, and here I used the data reported in the 2000
Mergerstat Review. This source reports that 52 overseas economies or territories
received US cross-border M&A in 1999, with a total value of such transactions
equaling $173.5 billion. Three smaller territories (Bermuda, St. Kitts and Nevis,
and Puerto Rico) were excluded from the samples assembled here because they
were in fact either U.S. territories or where the reported M&A data may well be
misreported financial transfers (with no corporate assets changing hands.)11


I have modified the traditional gravity equation approach to estimating the
determinants of international trade flows to quantify the factors responsible for
US cross-border M&A in 1999. As cross-border mergers and acquisitions are a
form of foreign direct investment (FDI), my approach is not too different to the
many gravity-based studies of FDI flows; see, for example, Levy Yeyati, Stein,
and Duade (2002). However, as will become clear, I include many more merger-
specific variables in my econometric analysis than are typically found in FDI
studies.


The gravity equation approach posits that the value of the economic transactions
between two entities depends on each body’s economic mass and the distance
between them (Anderson, 1979, Deardorff, 1998, and Evenett and Keller, 2002.)
In this context, this amounts to assuming that the distance between a foreign
nation and the United States and the former’s national income are candidate
11
   Eliminating these three territories leaves 49 economies in my dataset. The 49 economies are:
Argentina, Australia, Austria, Bahrain, Belgium, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, the
Czech Republic, Denmark, the Dominican Republic, Egypt, El Salvador, Finland, France,
Germany, Ghana, Hong Kong PRC, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan,
Lithuania, Malaysia, Mexico, Netherlands, New Zealand, Norway, Pakistan, Peru, the Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Romania, Singapore, South Africa, Korea, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland,
Taiwan, Thailand, the United Kingdom, and Venezuela.


                                                                                            10
determinants of the total value of US cross-border M&A taking place in that
nation.12 The intuition is that a larger foreign market provides, other things being
equal, greater sales opportunities for US firms and their subsidiaries; and that
greater distance from the United States makes running a foreign subsidiary or
acquisition more difficult and so detracts from the desirability of buying or
merging with that nation’s firms. Data on the 49 economies’ gross domestic
products was taken from the World Bank’s World Development Indicators CD-
ROM. Following standard practice, the distance from Washington, D.C., to the
administrative capital of each economy was used as the proxy for distance from
the United States.


Three other control variables were employed. The first is a proxy for the retained
corporate profit rate (that is, the proportion of a firm’s profits that it can expect to
keep after paying taxes and other government-assessed fees and levies.)
Economies which have higher retained profit rates are hypothesized to be more
desirable places to undertake cross-border M&A. I proxy for this rate with one
minus the maximum corporate tax rate charged in an economy, which too is
available in the World Development Indicators database. The second control
variable is the foreign economy’s tariff rate. The logic here is that higher tariffs
reduce the profitability of exporting to an economy and enhance the
attractiveness of establishing local subsidiaries. However, an alternative
hypothesis is that national tariff rates proxy for the degree of policy-induced
internal and external distortions to an economy, and to the extent that such
internal distortions reduce the profitability of firms, this will discourage cross-
border M&A.13 I took the average tariff rate as the proxy for the restrictiveness of
a nation’s trade barriers, data which too is available on the World Development

12
   Strictly speaking the gravity equation approach suggests that the level of US national income is
a determinant too of the value of outward US cross-border M&A. However, the fact that my
dataset contains information on such cross-border M&A transactions for one year (1999) means
that the level of US national income cannot account for the variation in the value of M&A received
across different foreign economies. Consequently, I do not include US national income as an
explanatory variable in my econometric analysis.
13
   In the context of the cross-country growth literature, Xavier Sala-I-Martin has forcefully argued
that national tariff rates can proxy for both internal and external barriers to economic exchange.


                                                                                                 11
Indicators CD-ROM. The final control variable is whether a country has a British
colonial heritage. This could be important for two reasons. First, in an economy
with such a heritage English is more likely to be the language of business,
making it easier for a US firm to run any corporation it acquires in that economy.
Second, the likelihood that an economy has a common law system is greater if it
was at some point a British colony—and this is precisely the system that
operates in the United States and is familiar to US lawyers. Both conjectures
suggest that having a British colonial heritage will raise the amount of US cross-
border M&A. A dummy variable is introduced to capture this effect (taking the
value of one if the economy has such a heritage.)


The first antitrust-related variable employed in the empirical analysis is whether
the foreign economy has a merger notification scheme or merger review
procedure. As argued in the last section, such schemes and reviews are likely to
reduce the amount of cross-border M&A, especially for larger transactions. Even
though merger notification regimes and review procedures vary considerably
across nations, I employ a dummy variable to indicate whether a nation has such
a regime or not.14 The list of economies taken to have such regimes in 1999 was
assembled from ICPAC (2000, Annex 2-C) and from statements on the web
pages of the U.S. Department of Justice’s Antitrust Division and the Competition
Directorate-General of the European Commission. In our sample of 49
economies, the following were found not to have some form of merger review
regime in 1999: Ghana, Pakistan, Egypt, El Salvador, China, Indonesia,
Malaysia, the Dominican Republic, Singapore, and Hong Kong, PRC.


Before describing the first econometric specification employed it will be helpful to
introduce the following notation:
14
   One conference participant suggested that all of the EU members in my sample should be
aggregated into a single entity because mergers in these economies can be, in principle,
reviewed by a single body (the European Commission). While it is the case that these EU
members are similar in this respect, the values of the control variables (such as distance, retained
corporate tax rates, and alike) differ markedly across these economies; and such variation is
helpful in identifying the effect of such control variables on cross-border M&A. It is also the case
that some of the mergers in EU economies are reviewed by national competition authorities.


                                                                                                 12
MAi           Denotes the total value of US cross-border M&A into economy i in
              1999.
mai           Denotes the mean value of US cross-border M&A into economy i in
              1999.
GDPi          Denotes the value of gross domestic product of economy i in 1999,
              measured in US dollars.
DISTi         Denotes the distance of economy i’s capital from the Washington,
              D.C., in kilometers.
πi            Denotes the retained corporate profit rate in economy i.
(1+ti)        Denotes one plus economy i’s average tariff rate on imported goods.
BRITi         Denotes a dummy variable which equals one if economy i has a
              British colonial heritage.
MNi           Denotes a dummy variable which equals one if economy i has a
              mandatory merger notification regime or a merger review procedure in
              1999.
ei            Denotes a random error term, assumed to have zero mean and finite
              variance.
c             Denotes a constant.


The first two specifications estimated were:

ln(MAi ) = c + β 1 ln(GDPi ) + β 2 ln( DISTi ) + β 3 ln π i + β 4 ln(1 + t i ) + β 5 BRITi + β 6 MN i + ei
ln(mai ) = c + β 1 ln(GDPi ) + β 2 ln( DISTi ) + β 3 ln π i + β 4 ln(1 + t i ) + β 5 BRITi + β 6 MN i + ei


where ln(X) is the natural logarithm of a variable X and β 1 ,..., β 6 are parameters

to be estimated. The first specification takes the total value of US cross-border
M&A as the dependent variable, and the second specification takes the mean
value of US cross-border M&A as the dependent variable. Concerns about
heteroskedacity which are common in cross-sectional samples (such as the ones
analysed here) resulted in a two step estimation procedure being employed. In
the first step, each specification was estimated using ordinary least squares and

the absolute value of the regression residuals ei were recovered. The latter

were used to weight each observation and the specifications were re-estimated.
The full set of parameter estimates and their associated p-values are reported in


                                                                                                      13
Table 2 for the regression with the total value of M&A activity as the dependent
variable, and in Table 3 for the specification where the mean value of M&A
transactions was the dependent variable.


Examining the third and fourth columns of these two tables it is clear that the
controls have, by and large, their expected signs. Richer economies that are
closer to the United States, which have lower corporate tax rates and a British
colonial heritage, tend to attract more US M&A. The large negative estimated
parameter on the tariff terms suggests that they are most likely proxying for the
extent of internal as well as external distortions to an economy and, on net, repel
US M&A. As these control variables have little bearing on the main question at
hand, and because their estimated parameters do not vary much across the
specifications discussed below, I shall not discuss them further. In specification
1, the presence of a merger notification regime does not appear to influence the
total value and mean value of US cross-border M&A. I will return to this finding
later.


To examine the effect of the presence of American legal networks on US cross-
border M&A in 1999, I employed Beaverstock, Smith, and Taylor’s (2000) dataset
of the location of the overseas offices of the top 100 US law firms for the single
year 1997. What this remarkably detailed dataset lacks in the intertemporal
dimension is largely compensated for by its rich cross-sectional variation, which I
exploit here. Their database indicates that in the 49 economies in my samples
there were 4066 lawyers working overseas for these law firms. Further analysis
revealed that 60 percent of those lawyers worked in just six US law firms:
Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher & Flom; Jones, Day, Reavis & Pogue; Shearman
& Sterling; Coudert Brothers; White & Case; and Baker & McKenzie (see Table
4.) The vast scale of Baker & McKenzie’s overseas operations is apparent—this
US law firm operated in 30 of the 49 economies in my sample and employed
1743 lawyers (see Table 4 and Figure 2). For the purposes of exposition I refer to
these six US law firms as the “Big 6” firms, and the goal of the remaining



                                                                                14
empirical analysis is to estimate the contribution of the presence of these six
legal networks within a jurisdiction to the amount of US M&A that takes place in
that jurisdiction.


It is important to differentiate between the presence of these six law firms and the
number of lawyers employed by US firms in a foreign economy. Even though the
object of interest here is the effect of the former, the latter may well provide an
imperfect indicator of the capacity of US law firms to represent their clients
interests in an given overseas jurisdiction. In my initial attempt to sort out the
independent contribution of the Big Six, I proceeded as follows. First, I computed
the total number of lawyers hired by US firms in each of the 49 economies in my
samples, and the number of Big Six firms that had over 10 lawyers in any given
economy. (Requiring that there be 10 or more lawyers hopefully rules our smaller
overseas offices which are unlikely to have M&A practice areas.15) Specifications
2 and 3 in Table 2 and 3 report the parameter estimates when the (natural
logarithm) of the number of US lawyers and the number of Big Six firms are
included as independent variables. Consistent with the hypothesis that the effect
of such lawyers and legal networks on cross-border M&A is only due to the
presence of merger notification requirements and review procedures, I interact
these two new independent variables with the dummy variable indicating the
presence of a merger notification regime (MNi). Including the number of Big Six
firms causes the estimated parameter on the number of US lawyers to turn
negative and statistically significant (at the 10 percent level)—suggesting that the
net effect of having more lawyers employed by US firms in a foreign economy is
to reduce the sale of that economy’s assets to US corporations. As both tables
make clear, the number of Big Six firms in an economy does not appear to
independently influence either the total value or the mean value of US cross-
border M&A.



15
  I relaxed this requirement to five lawyers and found that it had no substantial effect on the
estimated results or qualitative findings.


                                                                                            15
One objection to specification 3, which includes both the number of US lawyers
and Big Six firms as independent variables, is that the former is likely to be larger
in precisely those economies where the Big Six firms are present. Consequently,
the independent variable for the number of US lawyers may well be absorbing
some of the explanatory power of the variable that records the number of Big Six
firms present. To address this problem, I purged the former variable of any
variation accounted for by the latter variable, effectively creating an instrument
for the number of US lawyers in an economy that is, by construction, orthogonal
to the number of Big Six legal firms present. Specification 4 reports the
parameter estimates which result from using this instrument. Interestingly, the
number of American lawyers still has a negative and statistically significant effect
on the amount of US cross-border M&A received. The number of the Big Six law
firms in an economy is found to depress the mean value of cross-border M&A but
not the total value of such M&A—suggesting that these firms are successful in
blocking larger cross-border M&A transactions (or deterring their announcement
in the first place.) Another interesting finding in specification 4, is that the
estimated coefficient for the presence of a merger notification regime turns
negative (but is not statistically significant at any recognized level.)


Given the difference in scale of Baker & McKenzie’s global network from the
other members of the Big Six, a question arises as to whether the effect of the
former’s network differs from those of the other five legal networks that I have
identified. One hypothesis of interest is that obtaining clearance for a merger in
many jurisdictions increases the demand for the services of global law firms with
a very wide reach, such as Baker & McKenzie. Whereas, attempting to frustrate
a rival’s plans to merge may only require the services of a global law firm with
offices in key (larger) jurisdictions, such as the other members of the Big 6.16 If
this hypothesis is correct, one might expect to see the presence of Baker &
McKensie to increase the mean size of the M&A transactions undertaken within a
jurisdiction by more than the presence of any of the other five legal networks.

16
     I thank Kyoji Fukao for succinctly crystallizing the issue is this manner.


                                                                                  16
Moreover, to the extent that the other five legal networks play a substantial role in
persuading competition authorities to block larger proposed M&A transactions,
then the mean size of such transactions may well fall.


To investigate this matter further, I have dropped the number of Big Six firms as
an independent variable, and included a separate dummy variable for the
presence of a Baker & McKenzie office in an economy (again with 10 or more
lawyers) and an independent variable for the number of the other Big Six firms in
an economy.17 The results are reported as specification 5 in Tables 2 and 3.
Interestingly, the inclusion of these terms produces—for the first time—negative
and statistically significant coefficients for the presence of a merger notification
scheme. The latter coefficients imply that merger review procedures reduce the
mean value of US M&A transactions by approximately 50 percent, a sizeable
economic impact.


The inclusion of these two network terms in specification 5 does suggest that
these global legal networks significantly affect the extent of US cross-border
M&A. It appears that having a large Baker & McKenzie office in a country
substantially boosts the total value of US cross-border M&A in that country, but
does not increase—at any recognized level of statistical significance—the mean
value of such M&A transactions. In contrast, the effect of the presence of the
other Big Six firms reduces the total value and the mean value of cross-border
M&A undertaken by US corporations in a jurisdiction. The parameter estimates in
table 2 imply that the presence of each of these other five legal networks is to
reduce the total value of such M&A by approximately 32 percent. This finding is
consistent with the explanation that the M&A practices of these five US law firms
have earned their spurs in part by frustrating the expansion plans of the rivals to
their US clients. An alternative explanation is that to sustain their large overseas

17
   One alternative approach I considered was to include separate dummy variables for the
presence of each of the Big Six firms. It turns out that there is significant collinearity between the
dummy variables for the five smaller members of the Big Six, which means the estimated effect
for each dummy variable would have been identified off at most a handful of countries—a highly
unsatisfactory basis upon which to make inferences.


                                                                                                   17
offices, these law firms have begun to defend local firms against US takeovers.
My results also imply that the presence of Baker & McKensie’s global network of
offices has only been to increase the number of small and medium sized cross-
border M&A transactions by US firms. Finally, in unreported results these
findings appear to be robust to other corrections for heteroskedacity and to
sample composition (outliers.)


A better sense of the net effect of these six legal networks on US cross-border
M&A can be found in Table 5. Using the estimated parameters in specification 5,
and taking account of the appropriate covariances, I recovered the combined
effect on each economy’s receipt of US cross-border M&A of the presence of all
six networks. At the 10 percent level (with one tailed tests), I found that all of the
statistically significant estimates are positive—suggesting that on net these
networks grease international transactions in corporate assets. What is more, the
effects are particularly pronounced in non-G7 economies, including developing
economies such as Brazil, Chile, Hungary, the Philippines, Thailand, and
Venezuela; a reflection of the fact that such nations have Baker & McKenzie
offices and few (or no) large offices from the other Big Six firms. To the extent
that such overseas M&A brings pressure on domestic firms in these economies
to improve performance, then this may well be a positive development.18 Of
course, to the extent that such M&A reduces competition in those nations’
markets then the effects may not be so benign.


4.      Summary and implications for future research


Much of the existing literature on the effects of networks on trade has
emphasized the trade-facilitating aspects of network formation. In this paper I
have considered the effects of global legal networks where a proiri one cannot be
certain that their presence has greased the wheels of one form of international


18
  This finding would also reinforce the case for liberalizing any restrictions on the entry of foreign
legal firms.


                                                                                                   18
commerce, cross-border mergers and acquisitions. The existence of merger
notification requirements and merger reviews provides a law firm with an
opportunity to present evidence that might go some way to convincing antitrust
authorities to oppose (or to demand changes to) a transaction proposed by a
rival to the law firm’s clients. I have presented evidence to suggest that for five
US law firms with sizeable global reach this is, on net, exactly the consequence
of their international presence.


There are a number of important caveats to my analysis which should be borne
in mind when interpreting the results. First, I am dissatisfied with the use of a
single dummy variable to estimate the effects of merger review and notification
procedures. These procedures do differ across economies and may have distinct
effects. Second, given that not every overseas office (even those with 10 or more
lawyers) of a US law firm may not be engaged in advising clients on cross-border
M&A, my measure of each of the Big Six’s global reach could with better data be
improved upon. Third, the cross-sectional analysis presented does not shed any
light on how the impact of these global legal networks has changed over time—a
deficiency that could too be remedied by a substantial investment in data
collection. One alternative might be to find time-varying instruments for the
presence of legal networks. Reflection suggests that this may not be as
straightforward as it might first appear; for example, one candidate instrument—
such as the type of the legal system (common law versus others)—varies a lot
across countries but little over time. Fourth, although the focus here has been on
the presence of US law firms abroad, one should be open to the possibility that
this is correlated with the presence of other service sector firms that facilitate
cross-border M&A, such as investment banks.19 Having said this, it is unclear to
me why the global reach of the latter would be correlated with the M&A-reducing
effects of the presence of five of the Big 6 law firms studied here. Finally, it is
worth reiterating that there is no clear mapping from the value of US M&A a
nation receives and changes in its economic well-being. As discussed at the end

19
     I thank Takeo Hoshi for this important observation.


                                                                                19
of the last section, cross-border M&A can enhance or worsen the allocation of a
nation’s resources. The goal of this paper was, however, far more modest—to
examine the positive impact of the presence of six large US legal networks.




                                                                              20
References

Anderson, James. (1979). “A Theoretical Foundation For The Gravity Equation,”
American Economic Review, 69(1): 106-116.
Bauman, Jon. (1999). Pioneering a Global Vision: The Story of Baker &
McKensie. Harcourt Professional Educational Group: Chicago, IL.
Beaverstock, J.V., R.G. Smith, and P. J. Taylor (2000). “Geographies of
Globalizatoin: US Law Firms in World Cities,” Urban Geography, 21(2):95-120.
Black, Bernard S. (2000). “The First International Merger Wave (and The Fifth
and Last US Wave),” University of Miami Law Review 54: 799-818.
Boeder, Thomas L. (2000). “The Boeing-McDonnell Douglas Merger,” in Simon J.
Evenett, Alexander Lehmann, and Benn Steil (eds). Antitrust Goes Global. The
Brookings Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
Deardorff, Alan V. (1998) “Determinants of Bilateral Trade: Does Gravity Work in
a Neoclassical World?” in Jeffrey Frankel (ed). The Regionalization of the World
Economy. University of Chicago Press for NBER: Chicago, IL.

Evenett, Simon J. (2002). “How Much Have Merger Review Laws Reduced
Cross Border Mergers and Acquisitions?” In William K. Rowley (ed.) International
Merger Control: Prescriptions for Convergence, September 2002.

Evenett, Simon J. (2003). “The Cross Border Mergers and Acquisitions Wave Of
The Late 1990s.” Paper presented at the CEPR-NBER International Seminar on
International Trade.
Evenett, Simon J., Alexander Lehmann, and Benn Steil (eds). (2000). Antitrust
Goes Global. The Brookings Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
Evenett, Simon J., and Wolfgang Keller (2002). “On Theories of the Gravity
Equation,” Journal of Political Economy.
International Competition Policy Advisory Committee (ICPAC) (2000). Final
Report. US Government Printing Office: Washington, D.C.
Kolasky, William J. (2000). “Pricewaterhouse Coopers” in Simon J. Evenett,
Alexander Lehmann, and Benn Steil (eds). Antitrust Goes Global. The Brookings
Institution Press: Washington, D.C.
Levy Yeyati, Eduardo, Ernesto Stein, and Christian Duade. (2002). “Regional
Integration and the Location of FDI.” Paper presented at the IDB-Harvard
Conference on Regional Integration and the FTAA. May.
Mergerstat. (2000) 2000 Mergerstat Review. Houlihan, Lokey, Howard & Zukin.
Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) (2001). New
Patterns of Industrial Globalisation: Cross-border Mergers and Acquisitions and
Strategic Alliances. OECD: Paris.



                                                                             21
Rauch, James. (2002). “Business and Social Networks in International Trade.”
Journal of Economic Literature. 39: 1177-1203.
Rauch, James, and Alessandra Casella. (forthcoming). “Overcoming
Informational Barriers to International Resource Allocation: Prices and Ties,”
Economic Journal.
Rauch, James, and Vitor Trindade. (2002). “Ethnic Chinese Networks in
International Trade.” Review of Economics and Statistics. 84: 116-130.
Spar, Deborah. (1997). “Lawyers Abroad: The Internationalization of Legal
Practice,” California Management Review. 39(3): 8-28.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD). (2000).
World Investment Report. United Nations: Geneva.
Venit, James S., and William J. Kolasky. (2000).”Substantive Convergence and
Procedural Dissonance in Merger Review,” Chapter 4 of Simon J. Evenett,
Alexander Lehmann, and Benn Steil (eds). Antitrust Goes Global. The Brookings
Institution Press: Washington, D.C.

White & Case. (2001). Worldwide Antitrust Merger Notification Requirements.
Washington, D.C.




                                                                              22
                                    Figure 1: US overseas M&A transactions 1985-1999
                                                                                                                          173.5
(Constant 1999 US dollars)   175
   Billions of US dollars


                             150

                             125
                                                                                                                   95.5
                             100                                                                            82.1

                             75                                                                 53.4 54.3
                             50                            28.1
                                                                  21.9
                                               14.9 19.1                       16.1 14.2 19.3
                             25          7.2                             6.7
                                   2.1
                              0
                              1985 1986 1987 1988 1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999

                                                                               Year



                              Figure 2: The Big 6 law firms dominate overseas activities
                              by US law firms, measured by number of lawyers in 1998




                                                 40%
                                                                                        43%




                                                                    17%



                               Baker & McKenzie                   Other Big 6 firms        Non-Big 6 firms




                                                                                                                            23
                    Table 1: Types of U.S. overseas mergers and acquisitions

                Acquisition of                       Divestitures of
                                Acquisition of                         Diverstitures of
     Year        controlling                          foreign-based                       Total
                               minority interests                      US-based units
                  interests                                units
                                                     Number of deals
     1990            128               23                   57               58            266
     1995            254               54                   94               81            483
     1999            882               48                  309              159           1398
                                                    Percentage of deals
     1990            48.1             8.6                  21.4             21.8          100.0
     1995            52.6             11.2                 19.5             16.8          100.0
     1999            63.1             3.4                  22.1             11.4          100.0

Source: Mergerstat (2000).




                                                                                          24
                                                                                  Table 2: Estimation results when total value of bilateral U.S. M&A transactions is the dependent variable.



                                                              Regressors                  Specification 1            Specification 2           Specification 3           Specification 4           Specification 5


                                                        Independent        Expected Parameter                    Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                  Parameter
                                                                                                     p-value                   p-value                   p-value                    p-value                   p-value
                                                          variable           sign    Estimate                     Estimate                  Estimate                  Estimate                   Estimate


                                                          Constant            ?         0.151            0.460     0.155           0.436     0.109           0.638     0.109            0.638     0.038           0.866



                                                      National Income         +         1.023            0.000     1.044           0.000     1.023           0.000     1.022            0.000     1.018           0.000



                                                     Distance from U.S.       -         -0.424           0.000    -0.477           0.000    -0.437           0.000     -0.437           0.000    -0.414           0.000


                                                       Retained profit
                                                                              +         5.292            0.000     5.250           0.000     4.376           0.000     4.376            0.000     4.816           0.000
                                                            rate




Controls
                                                         Tariff rate          ?        -13.142           0.000    -13.630          0.000    -14.647          0.000    -14.647           0.000    -13.966          0.000


                                                       British colonial
                                                                              +         1.681            0.000     1.638           0.000     1.622           0.000     1.622            0.000     1.759           0.001
                                                           heritage

                                                     Merger notification
                                                                              -         -0.025           0.758     0.044           0.686     0.092           0.437     -0.131           0.310    -0.693           0.001
                                                          regime

                                                     Number of lawyers
                                                                              ?                                    0.039           0.123    -0.137           0.060
                                                      in US legal firms

                                                     Number of Big Six
                                                                              ?                                                              0.204           0.578     0.047            0.561
                                                       US law firms

                                                        Instrument for
                                                     number of lawyers        ?                                                                                        -0.137           0.060    -0.558           0.000
                                                      in US legal firms


                                                     Presence of Baker
                                                                              ?                                                                                                                   1.601           0.000
                                                        & McKenzie


                                                     Number of Big Six
                                                     US law firms, other
                                                                              ?                                                                                                                  -0.383           0.008
                                                       than Baker &




Interaction between merger notification regime and
                                                         McKenzie

                                                               R-squared                         0.752                     0.750                     0.742                      0.742                     0.723
                                                                                  Table 3: Estimation results when mean value of bilateral U.S. M&A transactions is the dependent variable.



                                                              Regressors                   Specification 1           Specification 2           Specification 3           Specification 4           Specification 5


                                                        Independent        Expected Parameter                     Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter                 Parameter
                                                                                                      p-value                   p-value                   p-value                   p-value                   p-value
                                                          variable           sign    Estimate                      Estimate                  Estimate                  Estimate                  Estimate


                                                          Constant            ?           0.52            0.137     0.383           0.101     0.307           0.200     0.307           0.200     0.402           0.106



                                                      National Income         +          0.706            0.000     0.792           0.000     0.792           0.000     0.792           0.000     0.714           0.000



                                                     Distance from U.S.       -          0.150            0.052     0.034           0.656     0.073           0.371     0.073           0.371     0.194           0.066


                                                       Retained profit
                                                                              +          3.324            0.016     3.838           0.000     4.501           0.000     4.501           0.000     3.018           0.002
                                                            rate




Controls
                                                         Tariff rate          ?          -5.292           0.000    -9.588           0.000    -9.783           0.000    -9.783           0.000    -9.132           0.000


                                                       British colonial
                                                                              +          0.623            0.000     0.662           0.000     0.708           0.000     0.708           0.000     1.025           0.000
                                                           heritage

                                                     Merger notification
                                                                              -          0.190            0.527    -0.025           0.896    -0.087           0.696    -0.337           0.114    -0.600           0.043
                                                          regime

                                                     Number of lawyers
                                                                              ?                                    -0.172           0.000    -0.157           0.000
                                                      in US legal firms

                                                     Number of Big Six
                                                                              ?                                                              -0.046           0.230    -0.226           0.000
                                                       US law firms

                                                        Instrument for
                                                     number of lawyers        ?                                                                                        -0.157           0.000    -0.474           0.011
                                                      in US legal firms


                                                     Presence of Baker
                                                                              ?                                                                                                                   0.806           0.154
                                                        & McKenzie


                                                     Number of Big Six
                                                     US law firms, other
                                                                              ?                                                                                                                  -0.459           0.002
                                                       than Baker &




Interaction between merger notification regime and
                                                         McKenzie
                                                                                                                                                                                                                          26
                                                               R-squared                          0.942                     0.810                     0.801                     0.801                     0.803
                                           Table 4: The Big Six US law firms in the sample


                         Total number of   Total number of      Number of overseas offices with…          Overseas offices in…
  Big 6 US law firm     lawyers based in      overseas
                        overseas offices       offices       0-4 lawyers   5-9 lawyers   10+ lawyers   G7 nations    non-G7 nations

Skadden, Arps, Slate,
                              93                 12              5             4             3             5               7
  Meagher & Flom

Jones, Day, Reavis &
                              94                  9              3             1             5             4               5
       Pogue


Shearman & Sterling           133                 8              2             2             4             5               3


  Coudert Brothers            158                11              2             4             5             4               7


   White & Case               203                12              2             3             7             3               9


 Baker & McKenzie            1743                30              0             1             29            6               24


   Source data: Beaverstock, Smith, and Taylor (2000).




                                                                                                                                 27
                       Table 5: Implied combined effects of all six legal firm networks on cross-border M&A

Parameter estimates from specification 5 in Tables 2 and 3 were used to calculate these forecasts

                 Change in mean value of bilateral US cross-border M&A             Change in total value of bilateral US cross-border M&A

  Economy         Implied                                      Ratio of point       Implied                                      Ratio of point
                percentage    Point estimate Standard error      estimate to      percentage     Point estimate Standard error     estimate to
                  change                                       standard error       change                                       standard error
   France         -77.472         -1.490           1.054            -1.414          -27.065          -0.316            0.683        -0.462
      UK          -77.472         -1.490           1.054            -1.414          -27.065          -0.316            0.683        -0.462
  Beligum         -10.640         -0.113           0.793            -0.142          130.297           0.834            0.503         1.658
  Germany         -10.640         -0.113           0.793            -0.142          130.297           0.834            0.503         1.658
    Japan          41.453          0.347           0.684             0.507          237.873           1.218            0.427         2.855
   Mexico          41.453          0.347           0.684            0.507           237.873           1.218            0.427         2.855
   Poland          41.453          0.347           0.684             0.507          237.873           1.218            0.427         2.855
   Taiwan          41.453          0.347           0.684             0.507          237.873           1.218            0.427         2.855
  Argentina       123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650          1.601             0.333        4.811
  Australia       123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333        4.811
    Brazil        123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333        4.811
   Canada         123.916         0.806            0.554            1.454           395.650          1.601             0.333        4.811
    Chile         123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650          1.601             0.333        4.811
  Hungary         123.916         0.806            0.554            1.454           395.650          1.601             0.333        4.811
     Italy        123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811
 Netherlands      123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811
 Philippines      123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811
    Spain         123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811
   Sweden         123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333        4.811
 Switzerland      123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811
  Thailand        123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811
 Venezuela        123.916          0.806           0.554             1.454          395.650           1.601            0.333         4.811

                              Implies estimate is positive and statistically significant (at 10 percent level, one tail test)
                              Implies estimate is negative
                                                                                                                                             28
