                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                   INFLATION TARGETING IN TRANSITION COUNTRIES:
                            EXPERIENCE AND PROSPECTS

                                                Jiri Jonas
                                           Frederic S. Mishkin

                                           Working Paper 9667
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9667


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       April 2003




The views expressed in this paper are exclusively those of the authors and not those of the International
Monetary Fund, Columbia University, or the National Bureau of Economic Research. We thank the participants
in the Macro Lunch at Columbia University and the NBER Inflation Targeting Conference for their helpful
comments.

©2003 by Jiri Jonas and Frederic S. Mishkin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to
the source.
Inflation Targeting in Transition Countries: Experience and Prospects
Jiri Jonas and Frederic S. Mishkin
NBER Working Paper No. 9667
April 2003
JEL No. E5

                                            ABSTRACT


This paper examines the inflation targeting experience in three transition countries: the Czech
Republic, Poland and Hungary. While the examined countries have missed inflation targets often by
a large margin, they nevertheless progressed well with disinflation. A key lesson from the experience

of the inflation targeting transition countries is that economic performance will improve and support
for the central bank will be higher if the central banks emphasize avoiding undershoots of the inflation

target as much as avoiding overshoots. Also economic performance will be enhanced if inflation
targeting central banks in transition countries do not engage in active manipulation of the exchange
rate. The relationship between the central bank and the government in these countries has been quite
difficult, but this can be alleviated by having a direct government involvement in the setting of the

inflation target and with a more active role of the central bank in communicating with both the
government and the public. In addition having technocrats appointed as the head of the central bank
rather than politicians may help in depersonalizing the conduct of monetary policy and increase

support for the independence of the central bank. The paper also addresses the future perspective of
monetary policy in the transition economies and concludes that even after the EU accession, inflation
targeting can remain the main pillar of monetary strategy in the three examined accession countries
during the time before they will join the EMU.

Jiri Jonas                                      Frederic S. Mishkin
International Monetary Fund                     Graduate School of Business
700 19th Street, NW                             Uris Hall 619
Washington, DC 20431                            Columbia University
jjones@imf.org                                  New York, NY 10027
                                                and NBER
                                                fsm3@columbia.edu
                                        1. Introduction

       In the second half of the 1990s, several transition countries have abandoned fixed
exchange rate regimes, and instead introduced inflation targeting as framework for the
conduct of monetary policy. In this paper, we will analyses the experience of three countries
that moved to an inflation targeting regime: the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland.

         It is worth studying inflation targeting in these transition countries for two reasons.
First, the transition countries are becoming an important part of Europe and designing the
right monetary policy regime for their transition to successful European economies is
valuable in its own right. Second, these countries have three unique features that make the
study of inflation targeting in these countries particularly interesting: 1) they are new
democracies that are in the process of developing new governmental institutions; 2) their
economies are undergoing radical restructuring as part of the transition from communism to
capitalism; and 3) they are very likely to enter the European Union (EU) and Economic and
Monetary Union (EMU) in the near future. These three unique features are emphasized in
our discussion of their inflation targeting regimes.

        In the next section of the paper we discuss the reasons why these countries moved to
a more flexible exchange rate regime and for the introduction of inflation targeting. In the
third section, we examine in more detail the introduction of inflation targeting in the three
countries, and in the fourth section, we evaluate the preliminary experience with inflation
targeting. In the fifth section, we discuss a number of specific issues for inflation targeting in
transition economies: what inflation measure to target, whether to target a point or a range,
what should be the time horizon for the inflation target, who should set the inflation target,
what should be the response to faster than targeted disinflation, how monetary policy should
respond to deviations of inflation from the target, how much should the floor of the inflation
target be emphasized relative to the ceiling, and what role should the exchange rate play in an
inflation targeting regime. In section 6, we discuss the future prospects of inflation targeting
in transition economies in connection with the planned entry into EMU, focusing on inflation
targeting within the fluctuation band of ERM2 regime and on the potential conflict between
the inflation target and the exchange rate target. The final section contains concluding
remarks.


                                    2. From peg to float

        In economic history books, the 1990s will be probably remembered as a decade
when fixed exchange rate regimes lost much of their attraction as nominal anchors for the
conduct of monetary policy. As a result of devastating financial crises, many emerging
market countries were forced to abandon fixed exchange rate regimes, and replace them with
more flexible exchange rate arrangements. Some countries – though a significant minority –
even opted to introduce more flexible exchange rate regime in an orderly way, without being
forced to exit the peg as a result of financial crisis or market pressure on their currency.


                                               2
        This trend from a more fixed to more flexible exchange rate regimes was also
observed in transition economies of Central and Eastern Europe. In the early years of
transition, in the aftermath of price liberalization and exchange rate devaluation, many
transition economies have used the exchange rate peg as a nominal anchor to achieve a rapid
stabilization of price level. However, as with other emerging market economies, transition
economies too have suffered the standard problem of exchange rate-based stabilization
programs: while inflation did decline significantly, it did not decline enough to prevent a
large real appreciation that ultimately created a balance of payment problems and forced the
abandonment of the fixed exchange rate. While some countries opted for a hard version of a
fixed exchange rate – a currency board arrangement, others introduced managed float: first
the Czech Republic in 1997, then the Slovak Republic and Poland in 1998. Hungary did not
move to a full floating currency regime, but in May 2001, it introduced an exchange rate
band, allowing the currency to move up and down within this band by 15 percent.

        When abandoning the exchange rate pegs, the authorities of these countries had to
decide what nominal anchor to use instead of the fixed exchange rate. While the Slovak
Republic did not accompany the move to a floating exchange rate by an explicit introduction
of new monetary policy framework, the other three countries opted for inflation targeting.
Why did the authorities in these countries opted for inflation targeting, and why did they
reject other alternative policy frameworks? We can see why by examining the problems of
other monetary policy regimes.

         One alternative would be to use monetary aggregates as an intermediate target and
nominal anchor. However, targeting monetary aggregates does not have much attraction in
transition economies.1 The traditional problem of instability of money demand, and therefore
the unstable relationship between the growth of money supply and inflation, could be a
particularly serious obstacle to targeting monetary aggregates in transition economies.
Economic transition is characterized by a sequence of price shocks, including corrections in
administered prices and tax reforms, that make the relationship between money supply and
price level very difficult to predict. The instability of money demand and money-price
relationship is further exacerbated by far-reaching changes in financial sector, including deep
institutional changes, emergence of new types of financial assets and players etc. Therefore,
relying solely on targeting money supply growth could be a quite ineffective approach to
conducting monetary policy.

      Transition economies could have also applied a discretionary, “just-do-it” approach to
monetary policy as the Federal Reserve in the United States is doing, in which there is no

1
  Indeed, it is not at all clear that monetary targeting is a viable strategy, even in
industrialized countries, because the relationship between monetary aggregates and goal
variables such as inflation and nominal spending is typically quite weak. For example, see
Estrella and Mishkin (1997).




                                              3
explicit nominal anchor.2 Given the difficulty of establishing a more stable relationship
between some intermediate target and price level, some may think that a less formal
approach to monetary policy would be advisable. However, while this approach may work in
countries whose central bank has well-established anti-inflationary credibility, and where
inflation is low, it was doubtful that it would work well in transition economies. Particularly
in the Czech Republic where inflation was relatively high and rising after the fixed exchange
rate regime was abandoned, the just-do-it approach to monetary policy was not seen as being
potentially effective in bringing inflation expectations and actual inflation down. Without
anti-inflation credibility, the just-do-it approach would not sufficiently anchor inflation
expectations and persuade economic agents that monetary policy would be actually
conducted to control inflation.

       A third option would be to replace a fixed exchange rate regime with a harder variant
of exchange rate peg, that is, by introducing a currency board, or even unilaterally euroizing.
This option has the advantage that it provides a nominal anchor that helps keep inflation
under control by tying the prices of domestically-produced tradable goods to those in the
anchor country, and making inflation expectations converge to those prevailing in the anchor
country. In addition, it provides an automatic adjustment mechanism that helps mitigate the
time-inconsistency problem of monetary policy. Hard pegs also have the advantage of
simplicity and clarity, which make them easily understood by the public. However, the hard
peg option has the disadvantage that it leaves little scope for the country to conduct its own
monetary policy in order to react to domestic or foreign shocks.

        For transition countries that wanted to retain some control over domestic monetary
policy and so opted to keep a flexible exchange rate, the problems with monetary targeting
and the just-do-it approach led them to adopt a fourth option, inflation targeting. Inflation
targeting has several advantages over a hard peg, monetary targeting or the just-do-it
approach. In contrast to a hard peg, inflation targeting enables monetary policy to focus on
domestic considerations and to respond to shocks of both domestic and foreign origin.
Inflation targeting also has the advantage that stability in the relationship between money and
inflation is not critical to its success because it does not depend on such a relationship.
Inflation targeting, like a hard peg, also has the key advantage that it is easily understood by
the public and thus highly transparent. In contrast, monetary targets, although visible, are
less likely to be well understood by the public, especially as the relationship between
monetary aggregates and inflation becomes less stable and reliable. Because an explicit
numerical target for inflation increases the accountability of the central bank relative to a

2
  For a description of the just-do-it approach in the United States, see Bernanke et al. (1999).
Some transition economies are pursuing a managed float (Romania, Slovak Republic,
Slovenia) or free float (Albania) without a formal inflation targeting framework in place,
though Albania is now introducing full-fledged inflation targeting. It is interesting to
compare the development of inflation in these countries that have similarly flexible exchange
rate regimes but no formal inflation targeting regime in place (see section IV.c.).




                                               4
discretionary regime, inflation targeting also has the potential to reduce the likelihood that
the central bank will fall into the time-inconsistency trap. Moreover, since the source of
time-inconsistency is often found in (covert or open) political pressures on the central bank to
engage in expansionary monetary policy, inflation targeting has the advantage of focusing
the political debate on what a central bank can do on a sustainable basis--i.e., control
inflation--rather on than what it cannot do through monetary policy--e.g., raise output
growth, lower unemployment, or increase external competitiveness.

        How well were the transition economies prepared for the introduction of inflation
targeting? In the literature, a relatively long list of requirements has been identified that
countries should meet if inflation targeting regime is to operate successfully.3 These
requirements include: (1) a strong fiscal position; (2) a well understood transmission
mechanisms between monetary policy instruments and inflation; (3) a well-developed
financial system; (4) central bank independence and a clear mandate for price stability; (5) a
reasonably well-developed ability to forecast inflation; (6) absence of other nominal anchors
than inflation; and (7) transparent and accountable monetary policy.

        It is not possible to say whether a country meets these requirements or not: it is more
a question of degree to which these preconditions are met. On the whole, it could be argued
that the three transition countries that adopted inflation targeting, the Czech Republic,
Hungary and Poland, met these requirements to a sufficient degree to make inflation
targeting feasible and useful.4

        All three countries have an independent central bank with a clear mandate to pursue
price stability. In some cases, this independence and price stability mandate has been
strengthened just before the introduction of inflation targeting. There has been also
significant progress in making monetary policy decisions more transparent and central banks
more accountable, though this is still to some extent a work in progress in some countries.
Financial markets in the three analyzed economies are relatively well developed, allowing for
a reasonably effective transmission mechanism between monetary policy instruments and
inflation.

        With respect to fiscal position, partly as a result of explicit recognition of hidden
transformation-related costs, fiscal deficits have widened significantly, particularly in the
Czech Republic and Hungary (see table 1). However, these deficits have not yet posed a
direct problem to inflation targeting in the sense of fiscal dominance of monetary policy,



3
    See Debelle (1997) and Schaechter et. al. (2000).
4
  For discussion of whether Hungary is ready for inflation targeting, see Siklos and Ábel
(2001).




                                                5
because they have been financed by non-monetary means at relatively favorable terms.5 The
main reason why large fiscal deficits in accession countries do not trigger adverse market
reaction is that they are widely considered to be temporary. Partly, this reflects the
recognition of implicit public sector liabilities from the past. Moreover, as a result of
EU/EMU accession, these countries will adopt an institutional framework (Stability and
Growth Pact, SGP) that will require them to pursue disciplined fiscal policies. Still, before
the constraint of the SGP begins to operate, large fiscal deficits can complicate monetary
policy conduct in indirect ways as we will see in our later discussion of these three countries
experience with inflation targeting.

Table 1. Inflation-targeting countries: general government balance (in % of GDP) 1/

                   1998                1999                2000                2001
Czech Republic     -2.4                -2.0                -4.2                -5.2
Hungary            -4.8                -3.4                -3.3                -4.7
Poland             -3.2                -3.7                -3.2                -6.0

1/ Excludes privatization revenues
Source: European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (2002)

        As for the absence of multiple nominal anchors, this condition is clearly met in the
Czech Republic and Poland. These countries have in place a regime of managed float, and
inflation is the only nominal anchor in the economy. In Hungary, the situation is more
complicated, because of the presence of the exchange rate band. Theoretically, this could be
incompatible with the requirement of the single nominal anchor if the band is too narrow.
We should note that the existence of the exchange rate fluctuation band is is not only an issue
of concern to Hungary today, but it will be of concern to all transition countries that would
join the ERM2 system, when they will have to put in place the same fluctuation band. We
will discuss the issue of fluctuation band and inflation targeting in the section on monetary
policy within the ERM2 system.

         Perhaps the most serious objection raised against the adoption of inflation targeting in
transition economies is the limited ability to forecast accurately inflation. This is partly the
result of the relatively frequent occurrence of shocks to which transition economies are
exposed, including price deregulation and catching up with the more advanced economies,
and also the result of relatively large degree of openness of these economies. Actual inflation
is relatively unstable relative to the long-term inflation trend (Orlowski, 2000). Under such
circumstances, there are natural limits to central banks’ ability to forecast inflation that
cannot be quickly and substantially improved by more sophisticated forecasting models.
5
  Note that one can argue that a strong fiscal position is a requirement for successful conduct
of monetary policy under any policy framework, not just inflation targeting. See Eichengreen
(1999) and Mishkin and Savastano (1999).




                                               6
   However, inflation-targeting central banks are nevertheless making progress in improving
   their inflation-forecasting capacity. One approach is to use alternative and less formal
   methods of gauging future inflation. For example, in 1999, the Czech National Bank has
   introduced a survey of inflation forecasts by market participants to measure inflation
   expectations.

                  3. Introduction of inflation targeting in individual countries

           We will now turn in more detail to the introduction of inflation targeting in individual
   countries. We will briefly examine economic developments preceding the introduction of
   inflation targeting, and the main operational characteristics of the inflation targeting regimes
   in the three countries.

3.a. Czech Republic

           The Czech Republic was the first transition economy that introduced an inflation
   targeting regime, after it has abandoned fixed exchange rate regime following currency
   turbulence in May 1997.

           A fixed exchange rate regime played an important role in the macroeconomic
   stabilization package introduced in 1991. Several months after liberalization of prices and
   devaluation of currency in 1991, the rate of inflation has come down quickly, though not
   quite to levels prevailing in advanced economies. Inflation remained stuck at around 10
   percent, and wages and other nominal variables soon adjusted to this level. Higher domestic
   inflation and the fixed nominal exchange rate produced a real appreciation which was not
   fully validated by higher productivity growth, and after some time, erosion of
   competitiveness became a concern. The economy began to overheat, political constraints
   prevented a sufficiently vigorous and flexible use of fiscal policy to mitigate imbalances in
   nonpublic sector, and tightening of monetary policy alone could not cope with these rapidly
   growing imbalances. The mix of tighter monetary and continued loose fiscal policy may have
   only made things worse: it contributed to higher interest rates which attracted more short-
   term foreign capital, fueling further the growth of liquidity, keeping inflation high and
   widening the current account deficit.

           Ultimately, as the external deficit continued to widen despite the visible deceleration
   of economic growth later in 1996, the situation became unsustainable. It became increasingly
   obvious that policy adjustment that was feasible under the existing political constraints would
   fall short of what was needed to reverse the unsustainable deterioration of current account
   position. Uncertainties in financial markets, triggered initially by speculative attacks on the
   Thai baht, only accelerated the flight of foreign investors from koruna assets which forced




                                                  7
the authorities to stop defending a fixed exchange rate. On May 26, 1997, the government
and the Czech National Bank (CNB) decided to allow the koruna to float freely. 6

        Like many other emerging market countries, the Czech Republic did not exit the peg
at a time of strong external position, but only when it was forced to do so by market pressure.
However, unlike other central banks that were ultimately forced to abandon the defense of a
fixed parity, the CNB did not wait too long after the pressure on the koruna intensified. Even
though it first tried to fend off the pressure by raising interest rates, it did not waste a large
amount of foreign reserves in foreign exchange market intervention. In the week before the
decision to float, CNB’s foreign reserves declined by about $ 2.5 billion, to $10 billion.
Given the unsatisfactory experience with interventions as a tool to prevent the exit from a
pegged exchange rate regime, this was a correct decision.

         Possible inflationary effects of currency depreciation after the exit from the peg,
together with the absence of alternative nominal anchor to guide inflation expectations,
created a risk that inflation would increase significantly in the coming months. Therefore, the
CNB began to work on a new monetary policy framework, and in the meantime, it tried to
guide inflation expectations by its public pronouncements. After the koruna was allowed to
float, the CNB issued a public statement that it expected the average koruna exchange rate
will stabilize within months at roughly CZK 17 to 19.50 per 1 DEM (Czech National Bank,
1997). Furthermore, the CNB made it clear that in the future, monetary policy would be
unambiguously focused on domestic price level stability and reduction of potential
inflationary effects of the koruna’s exchange rate movements (Czech National Bank, 1997).
The first sentence may seem to have been somewhat at odds with the managed float. The
reason for announcing a band in which the CNB expected the CZK/DM exchange rate to
settle was to prevent overshooting at a time when there was no other nominal anchor to tie
down exchange rate and inflation expectations, and to limit to the extent possible any pass-
through of currency depreciation to domestic inflation.

        However, the CNB felt that this approach to monetary policy conduct was not
satisfactory and could not continue for much longer. Therefore, on December 21, the CNB
Bank Board decided that in the future, monetary programs would be formulated on basis of
inflation targeting. The stated purpose of inflation targeting was to provide a nominal anchor




6
  For a discussion of the Czech exchange rate crisis see Begg (1998). It is noteworthy that
unlike many other emerging market countries that were forced to abandon the currency peg,
the Czech koruna depreciated only moderately, and subsequently strengthened again. One
reason for this limited depreciation was the relatively low degree of dollarization and
currency mismatches in the Czech economy and thus the limited effect of the exit from the
peg on companies’ and banks’ balance sheets.




                                               8
in the form of an inflation target, to use monetary policy tools directly to achieve the inflation
target, and regularly inform the public about the conduct of monetary policy.7

        In deciding what measure of inflation to target, the CNB faced a trade-off between
transparency and the ability to control inflation, an issue that we will look at in detail later.
The CNB opted for a compromise that it considered most appropriate for an economy in
transition. For the purpose of inflation targeting, it introduced a new concept, so-called net
inflation. Net inflation measures changes in the consumer price index (CPI), excluding the
movement in regulated prices and is further adjusted for the impact on the remaining items of
changes in indirect taxes or subsidy elimination.8 Unlike many other inflation-targeting
countries, the CNB did not exclude from net inflation changes in prices of energy and
agriculture products. Such an exclusion would have narrowed the targeted price index too
much, and would make it too detached from the headline inflation. Instead, the CNB
subsequently introduced the so-called “exceptions” to deal with this problem (see below).

       In choosing whether to target a range or a single numerical value of inflation, the
CNB opted for a range. Initially, in 1998 and 1999, it was targeting a band 1 percentage point
wide, but from 2000, it widened the band to 2 percentage points. The CNB’s decision about
the width of the band was guided mainly by its assessment of the accuracy with which it
thought it could hit net inflation targets, as well as the past volatility of net inflation.

            At the end of 1998, the CNB made some modifications of its inflation targeting
strategy. First, the CNB introduced the “exceptions” that could justify missing an inflation
target. Exceptions refer to exceptional and unpredictable factors which cause that actual
inflation deviates from inflation target, and for which the CNB cannot bear responsibility.
These factors are: significant differences between actual and predicted world prices of
commodities; significant differences between actual and predicted exchange rate that do not
reflect developments of domestic economic fundamentals and monetary policy; significant
changes of conditions in agriculture which affect agriculture producer prices; and natural
disasters and other extraordinary events that produce demand-led and cost-pushed price
shocks (Czech National Bank, 1999, p. 57).

        Second, the CNB decided to take a more active role in affecting inflation
expectations. It realized that a much more rapid than originally expected decline in inflation
in the second half of 1998, together with large degree of rigidity in nominal variables, could

7
  The path to inflation targeting for the CNB has many similarities to the path followed by
the Bank of England and the Riksbank after the collapse of their exchange rate pegs in 1992.
See Bernanke et al. (1999).
8
  At the end of 1997, CPI consisted of 754 items, 91 items had regulated price, and net
inflation measured movements of 663 items, which in terms of weighs in consumer basket
represented about 4/5 of total basket.




                                               9
produce undesirable developments in real variables, most importantly, real wages. The CNB
therefore initiated an informative meeting with the representatives of trade unions and
employees, in order to explain what inflation it expects in 1999, and in this way, to help
reduce inflation expectations.9

        In December 1999, the CNB approved Long-term Monetary Strategy which specified
long-term inflation target for 2005. The objective was to make the inflation targeting strategy
more forward-looking. Importantly, the CNB made an effort to involve the public and the
government in discussion of the long-term monetary policy target. No doubt, this outreach
effort reflected the criticism by some politicians that the process of disinflation was too fast
and too costly in 1998 and 1999. The CNB did not wish to announce the quantified long-term
target corresponding to price stability and the speed with which this ultimate objective is to
be achieved, without acquiring the support of the government. The CNB seems to have
acknowledged implicitly that the decision on the speed of disinflation is ultimately a political
one, and that it had to be taken by a body with political mandate.

        Another modification of inflation targeting framework took place in April 2001. At
that time, the CNB decided that the main reasons for favoring net inflation targeting rather
than headline inflation targeting had disappeared, and it decided that from 2002 on, it would
target headline inflation measured by the consumer price index.10 The CNB explained that
headline inflation covers more comprehensively price developments in the economy, and that
it is more relevant for decisions of economic agents. For these reasons, by targeting headline
inflation, monetary policy should also be better able to affect inflation expectations. Headline
inflation targets for the period 2002-2005 were derived from the trajectory of net inflation
specified in the December 1999 Long-term Monetary Strategy. The CNB realized that
targeting headline inflation has its risks as well, the most important one being the uncertainty
regarding the development of regulated prices and effects of changes in administered prices.
For example, the need to achieve a stronger adjustment of fiscal imbalances could require
larger than expected increase in administered prices, with consequently larger impact on
headline inflation. Another complication could arise from the harmonization of indirect taxes
with the EU ahead of the EU entry. But these unexpected effects of changes in regulated

9
  Trade unions agreed that it would not be desirable to aim for higher than zero growth in real
wages in 1999. The catch was that trade unions’ economic experts projected that inflation in
1999 would reach 10 percent, and trade unions therefore demanded a 10 percent increase in
nominal wages which in their view would be consistent with zero growth in real wages. As
inflation in 1999 remained close to 2 percent, 10 percent nominal wage growth resulted in a
large increase in real wages. At the end of 1999, when the CNB was again discussing with
the representatives of trade unions inflation prospects for 2000, they seem to have learned
from their mistake and expressed more trust in CNB’s inflation forecast for 2000.
10
   However, already in 2000, when it announced net inflation target for end-2001, the CNB
also began publishing its projection of headline inflation.




                                              10
prices or administrative measures on headline inflation were included in the exceptions that
allow actual inflation to deviate from inflation target without necessitating a monetary policy
response. After the April 2001 modification, the list of the exceptions included:
•      major deviations in world prices of raw materials, energy-producing materials and
other commodities;
•     major deviations of the koruna's exchange rate that are not connected with domestic
economic fundamentals and domestic monetary policy;
•       major changes in the conditions for agricultural production having an impact on
agricultural producer prices;
•         natural disasters and other extraordinary events having cost and demand impacts on
prices;
•      changes in regulated prices whose effects on headline inflation would exceed 1-1.5
percentage points;
•         step changes in indirect taxes
        The CNB has also announced that the list of exceptions could be further widened in
the future to include one-time price shocks resulting from the adoption of EU standards.

3.b. Poland

        After the Czech Republic, Poland was the second transition country to introduce
inflation targeting. Its approach to inflation targeting differs in some important aspects from
the Czech Republic.

        As a part of Poland’s big bang approach to macroeconomic stabilization, the zloty
was pegged to a basket of currencies in 1990. But inflation did not decline sufficiently
rapidly, and fixed nominal exchange rate resulted in rapid real appreciation and erosion of
competitiveness. Therefore, a preannounced crawling peg was introduced in October 1991.
Capital account liberalization led in 1994 and 1995 to large capital inflows, which forced the
authorities to widen the crawling exchange rate band in May 1996 to ± 7 percent. Upward
pressure on the currency continued, and in December 1995, the central rate was revalued by
6.4 percent in order to be aligned with prevailing market rate. In early 1998, the NBP began
to widen the band again: to ±10 percent in February 1998, to ±12.5 percent in October 1998,
and finally to ± 15 percent in March 1999. At the same time, the rate of crawl was reduced
from an initial 1.8 percent per month in 1991 to 0.3 percent per month. The main reason for
the gradual widening of the band was the effort of the NBP to be better able to accommodate
large capital inflows.

       Poland’s transition to an inflation targeting regime began during 1998. As in
Hungary, the introduction of inflation targeting was preceded by the amendment of the Act
on the National Bank of Poland. This Act specified that the primary objective of the National


                                               11
Bank of Poland (NBP) is to maintain a stable price level and simultaneously support
economic policy of the Government, provided that this does not constrain the execution of
the primary target. The Act also established the Monetary Policy Council (MPC) of the NBP,
which replaced the NBP Management Board as the decision-making body. In April 1998, the
MPC updated the Assumptions of Monetary Policy for 1998, prepared originally by NBP
Management Board in September 1997, and confirmed that the 1998 NBP inflation target of
9.5 percent remained unchanged.11 In June 1998, the MPC defined target for monetary
policy in 1999, which was to reduce inflation to 8-8.5 percent and began to work on
Assumptions of Monetary Policy for 1999, as well as on Medium-Term Monetary Policy
Strategy for 1999-2003. These documents were approved in September 1998, and at the same
time, the NBP officially announced the introduction of inflation targeting. The NBP also
announced at that time the medium-term inflation target for 2003 – reduction of inflation to
less than 4 percent. The NBP also informed that from now on, annual inflation targets would
be announced in Assumptions of the Monetary Policy.

       It should be noted that at the time of announcement to implement inflation targeting,
Poland still maintained an exchange rate band which at the time of announcement was
widened from ± 10 percent to ±12.5 percent, and later to ±15 percent. Only in April 2000 did
Poland abandon the exchange rate band and switched to a managed float.

        Poland has decided to target the broad consumer price index. The NBP explained that
CPI has been used extensively in Poland since the beginning of transition, and that it is
deeply rooted in public perceptions as the measure of inflation. The CPI provides accurate
information about changes in price levels of consumer goods and services. Application of
some measure of core inflation would require eliminating from the targeted index some
prices of goods and services that affect strongly public perception of inflationary
developments. However, the NBP has started preparatory work for calculating the core
inflation index and it did not exclude that it would start targeting core inflation in the
future.12

         Like the Czech Republic, Poland has chosen to target a band rather than a point.
Initially, it chose a quite narrow target range, just one half of percentage point, which was
subsequently widened to 1.2 points. The NBP explains that before the introduction of
inflation targeting, monetary targets in Poland were defined as fixed points, and a wider band
could possibly signal to public a weaker commitment to reduce inflation. It could be argued
that under such circumstances, a fixed point could be better than a narrow band, as both are

11
     This should be interpreted more as a forecast rather than a full-fledged inflation target.
12
   See National Bank of Poland (1998). It is noteworthy that the NBP intends to calculate the
core inflation itself. Usually, central banks targeting a measure of underlying inflation do not
calculate this index. In order to avoid a conflict of interest, they let other agencies, mainly
statistical office, to calculate and publish underlying inflation.




                                                  12
unlikely to be hit, and the damage of missing a point could be less serious than the damage of
missing a band. However, the NBP did not exclude that it may widen the band in the future.

        Unlike the Czech National Bank, the NBP did not define explicitly exceptions that
would allow missing the inflation target without requiring the monetary policy response.
However, the NBP subsequently analyzed in depth the process of inflation in Poland and the
role of monetary and nonmonetary factors (National Bank of Poland (2001), appendix 2).
Specifically, the NBP calculates and analyzes different measures of the core inflation. It
explains that even though core inflation rates do not replace the headline consumer price
index, they provide input for research and analysis, and for decisions on monetary policy.


3.c. Hungary

        The introduction of inflation targeting in the Czech Republic could be characterized
as a “big bang” approach. There was a clear break with the past fixed exchange rate regime,
and after a few months of technical preparation, a full-fledged inflation targeting regime was
put in place. In contrast, Hungary’s introduction of inflation targeting could be characterized
as “gradualist”, even more so than for Poland.13

         Like other transition economies, Hungary adopted early in transition an exchange rate
peg of the forint against the basket of currencies. However, the peg was adjusted downward
quite often to maintain external competitiveness. The fluctuation band was gradually
widened from ± 0.5 percent to ± 2.25 percent, to reduce speculative pressures ahead of the
predictable adjustments of the parity. But this mechanism did not prevent large short-term
capital inflows in late 1994, and in March 1995, after a devaluation of 8.3 percent, the regime
of ad hoc adjustment was replaced with a crawling band. The monthly rate of crawl was
initially set at 1.9 percent monthly, but was gradually reduced down to 0.4 percent monthly
after October 1999. This regime succeeded in bringing inflation down from about 30 percent
in 1995 to below 10 percent in 1999.

       Even at the time when the Czech Republic and Poland were abandoning fixed
exchange rate regimes, the Hungarian authorities continued to view this narrow fluctuation
band as a useful nominal anchor. The band helped reduce inflation and anchor inflation
expectations, while at the same time avoiding excessive real appreciation and erosion of
competitiveness. However, like other emerging market countries with a fixed exchange rate,
Hungary too was ultimately forced to deal with the problems caused by large capital inflows.
For some time, Hungary was able to avoid pressure on the narrow exchange rate band
because of the presence of controls on short-term capital flows. These controls were effective

13
  Perhaps this is just another example of the gradualist approach of Hungary to economic
reforms more generally, unlike the “big bang” or “shock therapy” approach applied in the
Czech Republic and Poland.




                                              13
in introducing a wedge between onshore and offshore interest rates, providing some degree
of independence to monetary policy. But it was clear that as capital controls would be relaxed
in line with progression to EU accession, a narrow band regime would become more difficult
to sustain.

         The problems with the narrow exchange rate band began to intensify in the course of
2000. Inflation, which declined significantly in the period 1995-1999, began to creep up
again. While this increase in inflation was initially triggered by external shocks, like higher
world oil prices, domestic factors began to play a role as well, including the exchange rate
regime. The constraints of the narrow band and increasing capital inflows in 2000 began to
make it more difficult for the central bank to pursue simultaneously disinflation and nominal
exchange rate stability. Early in 2000, the central bank acted to reduce the pressure on the
exchange rate band by cutting interest rates, and it also threatened to introduce capital
controls. This strategy worked, and the exchange rate depreciated. However, in a situation of
strong economic growth, robust domestic demand and tight labor markets, reducing interest
rates did not help much in fighting inflation, which remained relatively high. Periodically,
speculative pressures for appreciation and widening of the band appeared, forced the central
bank to cut interest rates and/or intervene in foreign exchange market. It opted to do mainly
the latter, and it sterilized the liquidity created as a result of these interventions.

        However, as the sterilization costs were increasing, it was becoming clear that narrow
exchange rate band had outlived its usefulness, and that Hungary needed to introduce more
exchange rate flexibility if it was to succeed in reducing inflation further.14 In May 2001, the
authorities finally decided to widen the fluctuation band around the forint parity against the
euro to ±15 percent.15 The crawling regime was maintained, with the rate of crawl reduced to
0.2 percent monthly, and remaining controls on short-term capital flows were phased out. In
October 2001, the crawling peg was completely abolished.


14
   In 2000, inflation ended at 10.1 percent (December to December), much more than the
government had projected earlier. In 1999, the government projected that average annual
inflation would be 6-7 percent in year 2000. In early 2001, inflation increased further, close
to 11 percent. Hungary’s ambition to join the EU and EMU as soon as possible had probably
contributed to the increasing emphasis on further progress with disinflation that could be
accomplished only with a higher degree of nominal exchange rate flexibility, and on the
willingness to accept the consequences of a stronger currency for the competitiveness and
external balance.
15
  Israel also adopted an inflation targeting regime with a narrow exchange rate band in 1991.
Like Hungary, it also found it necessary to widen the exchange rate band, doing so in 1995.
Over time, the Israeli’s have further downplayed the exchange rate in their inflation targeting
regime. For a discussion of Israeli inflation targeting and the role of the exchange rate, see
Leiderman (2000) and Bernanke et al. (1999).




                                               14
        While a wider exchange rate band should allow the government to attach more
priority to fighting inflation, as we will discuss below, a conflict between the inflation target
and exchange rate target could still arise and complicate the conduct of monetary policy.
However, the change in the monetary policy regime has been somewhat confused. At the
time when the authorities decided to widen the fluctuation band, they did not immediately
announce a shift to a new monetary policy regime. Even though the new exchange rate band
was too wide to serve as a useful nominal anchor, the authorities were moving to inflation
targeting only gradually. But on July 13, 2001, the new Act on the National Bank of Hungary
was enacted by Parliament, which defined the achievement and maintenance of price stability
as the prime objective of the National Bank of Hungary. The Act also sought to reinforce
NBH independence, in accordance with the EU requirement.

        In its August 2001 Quarterly Inflation report, the NBH explained that for the next
couple of years it would be using the inflation targeting system to achieve a gradual
reduction of inflation to level corresponding to price stability (National Bank of Hungary,
2001, pp. 35-36). The NBH objective is to meet the Maastricht criterion on inflation in 2004-
2005, so that it could join the EMU in 2006-2007. Specifically, the NBH states that it will
seek to bring inflation down to around 2 percent. In agreement with the Government, the
NBH set an inflation target of 7 percent for December 2001, 4.5 percent for 2002 and 3.5
percent for 2003 and 2004. In recognition of the fact that the NBH cannot instantly offset
unexpected inflationary shocks, it has also established a ±1 percent tolerance band around the
announced disinflation path.

         The primary instrument that the NBH uses to attain its inflation targets will be
changes in its benchmark interest rates. The NBH has particularly emphasized the important
role of changes in exchange rate on inflation. It argues that in Hungary, the exchange rate
channel is the central bank’s most powerful and fastest means of influencing domestic prices.
(However, we will see later in Section 5 that this reasoning may be dangerous.) While the
exchange rate will not have the same prominent role as during the narrow-band regime, and
the NBH will be less able to control its short-term movements, it will continue to play an
important role. The NBH has indicated that it would try to influence the exchange rate in
order to achieve the desired inflation outcome. In order to achieve the changes in exchange
rate, it will use mainly changes in interest rates, while direct intervention in foreign exchange
market will be used only exceptionally, to deal with the emergency situations. The NBH
recognizes that in the short-term, the actual exchange rate could deviate from an exchange
rate path that would be consistent with the disinflation path. All in all, exchange rate
movements seem to play a much more important role in Hungary than in other inflation
targeting countries. Such explicit emphasis of the role of exchange rate movements in
achieving inflation targets as seen in Hungary is quite unique.

        The NBH estimates that it takes up to one and half year for changes in interest rates to
have a full impact on inflation. It argues that if it would try to keep inflation in line with the
targeted path over the short-term horizon, the result could be excessive volatility of output
(and arguably also excessive instrument volatility). Therefore, it would confine policy



                                               15
responses only to deviation of forecasted inflation from targeted inflation over the horizon of
1 to 1.5 years.

        The transparency of this new system should be enhanced by the publication of NBH’s
inflation projections every quarter for the following six quarters. Moreover, the NBH will
also publish its considerations that were behind its monetary policy decisions, and its analysis
of the achievement of inflation target. Quarterly Report on Inflation contains also the
projection of inflation using a fan chart.

        Unlike the CNB, the NBH began to target headline inflation immediately. But there is
no discussion in NBH official documents about the reasons for choosing to target headline
inflation rather than adjusted or underlying inflation. The NBH also did not specify any
exceptions that would justify a deviation of actual inflation from its inflation target, though
there is some discussion in its inflation reports about the possible extent of price deregulation
and their effects on headline inflation. When announcing the introduction of inflation
targeting, the NBH was also silent about the possible conflict between the exchange rate
band and the inflation target.

        Overall, the impression is that the NBH has focused less on operational aspects of the
inflation targeting regime than has the CNB or even the NBP. Perhaps this reflects the fact
that the NBH officials still attach importance to the nominal exchange rate band as an
important anchor of the economy. They seem to believe that moving the exchange rate within
the band will help them to achieve long-term inflation target which will allow them to qualify
for the EMU. In a sense, this strategy could be understood: why invest heavily in a detailed
design of policy framework that will anyway be removed in a few years after Hungary adopts
the euro? The Czech Republic and Poland introduced inflation targeting much earlier, and
they may also be less eager to join the EMU as soon as possible. This means that inflation
targeting could be in place for a longer time, and that a well-designed inflation targeting
framework was more necessary.


                      4. Preliminary experience with inflation targeting

       In view of the relatively short period during which inflation targeting has been
implemented in the transition economies, it is too early to make a definitive judgment about
the experience with the operation of this new policy framework. Nevertheless, some
preliminary observations could be made. There are two ways in which we can evaluate the
experience with inflation targeting in transition economies.

        First, we can look how successful were inflation targeting central banks in achieving
inflation rates close to their inflation targets. Here, the answer is “not all that well”. Initially,
the CNB has several times significantly undershot its inflation target, while the NBP has first
overshot it and subsequently undershot it. The NBH has hit its targets in 2001 and 2002, but
its short experience with inflation targeting does not tell us much yet. But even this short-



                                                 16
term experience brings one thing clear, namely the problems of targeting simultaneously
inflation and exchange rate in a world of free capital flows.

        Second, we can examine the success of inflation targeting in reducing inflation.
Looking only on the success in hitting their inflation targets could be a too narrow
perspective for assessing the performance of inflation targeting. All central banks in
inflation-targeting transition economies have emphasized that the main purpose of inflation
targeting framework is to allow these countries to bring inflation down to a level that would
allow them to qualify for EMU membership. When we evaluate inflation targeting from this
perspective, the preliminary experience with this regime should be judged more positively:
all three countries are proceeding well with disinflation, and there is a good chance that in a
few years, they should be able to reach price stability, as defined for the purpose of EMU
qualification. However, the process of disinflation is not a smooth one, and there are quite
large variations in inflation.

        Let us now look in more detail on the record of implementation of inflation targeting
in the three analyzed countries. First, we will discuss the speed of disinflation implied by
announced inflation targets, and then we will examine how successful the inflation targeting
countries were in hitting these targets.


4.a. Inflation targets and the speed of disinflation

         In many advanced economies that pursue inflation targeting, this regime has been
introduced only after price stability has been reached (Bernanke et. al. (1999)). But this was
not the case in the transition economies where at the time of introduction of inflation
targeting, inflation was still running well above the level considered consistent with price
stability. Therefore, the authorities in these countries had to make two decisions: (1) to
quantify inflation target that would be compatible with the long-term objective of price
stability; and (2) to decide on the time horizon within which this ultimate objective is to be
met, that is, to decide on the speed of disinflation.

         There is extensive literature discussing how to quantify price stability. In the literature,
we can find several arguments why central banks should not quantify price stability as inflation
at zero or near zero (in the range of 0-1 percent). One reason, relates to downward nominal
wage rigidity. If the inflation rate were to approach zero under the condition of downward wage
rigidity, it would be difficult to achieve real wage adjustment in response to changed market
conditions, such as a negative demand shocks. The result could be higher real wages than is
desirable, higher unemployment and lower economic growth. 16 A second reason relates to the

16
  This mechanism is described in Akerlof et al. (1996), but it is highly controversial because
the evidence that low inflation leads to a rise in unemployment is very mixed. In addition
while as pointed out in Groshen and Schweitzer (1996, 1999), inflation can not only put
                                                                                   (continued)

                                                 17
impossibility of reducing nominal interest rates below zero, which means that if inflation is
close to zero, real interest rates cannot be pushed below zero when this might be necessary in
order to stimulate economic activity.17 Furthermore, a zero inflation target may lead to periods
of deflation which could promote financial instability and make it harder to conduct monetary
policy because interest rates would no longer provide a useful guide to the stance of monetary
policy (Mishkin and Schmidt-Hebbel (2002)).

        In the literature, one can observe a convergence of views that an inflation rate of 1-3
percent corresponds to price stability (Table 2). If we look at how central banks quantify
price stability in practice, we see that there is not much difference between the theoretical
conclusions and what the central banks actually do. This is the case for all economies --
developed, developing and transition ones.

Table 2. Inflation targets

Country                         Targeted inflation in %    Period
Czech Republic                  1-3 (2-4 ) 1/              2005
Australia                       2-3                        Average during a business cycle
Brazil 18                       2-6                        2001
Chile                           2-4                        2001
Poland                          <4                         2003
Hungary                         Around 2                   2004-2005
Mexico                          3                          2003
Izrael                          3-4                        2001
New Zealand                     0-3                        From 1996
Canada                          1-3                        From 1995
Euro area                       <2                         From 1999
United Kingdom                  2.5                        From 1996

Source: Andrea Schaecher aj. (2000); web sites of Banco de México,
http://www.banxico.org.mx/, National Bank of Hungary, http://www.mnb.hu/, and European
Central Bank, http://www.ecb.int/.
1/ 1-3 percent is for net inflation, 2-4 percent for headline inflation.


“grease” in the labor markets as Akerlof. et. al argue, but can also put in “sand” that makes
the labor markets less efficient.
17
     This argument has been made in Summers (1991).
18
   For 2002, the target was subsequently set at 2.5-4.5 percent, but as a result of the debt
crisis and sharp currency depreciation, inflation in 2002 has reached 12.5 percent. In
response to higher inflation, the central bank has also raised its 2003 and 2004 targets.




                                               18
        However, some have raised the quesiton whether the specific conditions of transition
economies would not justify targeting somewhat higher inflation than in developed
economies. High growth countries typically experience real exchange rate appreciation by an
amount proportional to the relative difference of traded to non-traded sector productivity growth
relative to the rest of the world (the Harrod-Belassa-Samuelson effect). If it is appropriate for
these countries to aim at traded goods inflation similar to industrialized countries in the long
run, then trend real appreciation requires a domestic non-traded goods inflation that is somewhat
higher and so the inflation rate should be slightly higher than it would be desirable for average-
growth countries. Škreb (1998) notes that in the transition economies, it is particularly
difficult to measure precisely the improvements in the quality of goods. As a result, actual
inflation could be much lower than measured inflation. Because of these measurement
problems, as well as other reasons, Škreb argues that in transition economies, inflation in the
range of 4-5 percent would correspond to price stability.

         Other authors argue, however, that during the convergence with the developed
economies, transition economies should be expected to experience a rapid growth of labor
productivity from implementation of economic reforms, which should produce lower
inflation (Deppler, 1998). Clinton (2000) argues that rapid productivity growth in transition
economies weakens the traditional arguments in favor of a notably higher than zero inflation
rate. Given the rapid growth of labor productivity, a decline in nominal wages would rarely
be needed.19 Similarly, given the high real return on capital and high trend economic growth,
it is not very likely that a situation would arise in which a central bank would have to
stimulate an economy in recession with the help of negative real interest rates.

       What can be said about the speed of disinflation? Theoretically, disinflation could be
too quick, resulting in excessively large (though, arguably temporary) loss of output and
higher unemployment, or it could be too slow, inflation expectations could become more
entrenched at high level, and this would make it more costly to reduce inflation later.20
Therefore, it could be argued that there exists an optimal speed of disinflation which would
minimize the sacrifice ratio (the ratio of loss of output to disinflation).21 However, the
19
   One problem with this argument is that the rapid productivity growth applies economy-
wide, but there could still be firms or industries where productivity growth would be small or
negative, and where decline in nominal wages would be called for if inflation would be close
to zero.
20
  It could be argued that lower inflation means usually higher output growth, and therefore,
the sooner lower inflation is reached, the sooner will the economy achieve a higher output
growth. But there are also counterarguments. For example, due to a loss of marketable skills,
persons that could be seen as temporary unemployed during the period of rapid disinflation
could become permanently unemployed, which results in an additional loss of output.
21
  For a discussion of the costs of disinflation see Ball (1994). The author comes to the
conclusion that fast disinflation reduces the sacrifice ratio.



                                                19
determination of this optimal speed of disinflation is less a matter of exact science, and more
a matter of judgment.

         In the literature, a number of factors have been identified that affect the sacrifice
ratio, that is, the output effect of disinflation. These include the structure of the economy, the
degree and the way of indexation of wages and other nominal variables, past history of
inflation and stabilization, credibility of monetary policy, the degree of openness of the
economy etc. Furthermore, as has been shown in the case of other countries, change in
inflation is positively correlated with the level of economic activity (Stock and Watson,
(1999)). Given the fact that economic reasoning does not provide a hard conclusion about the
optimal speed of disinflation, and in view of the important consequences of the decision
about the speed of disinflation for the economy and for different groups of population,
societies pay particular attention to the mechanism how this decision is reached. By its
nature, the decision about the speed of disinflation is not a purely technocratic decision that
could be put solely in the hands of professional economists or central bankers. Because
different speeds of disinflation will have different consequences for different groups of
population, this decision is by its nature a political decision, and thus an argument can be
made for entrusting it to a political body that has a political legitimacy to make such political
choices. This has implications for the debate on optimal degree of central bank independence
that is discussed in Section 5.

        However, for transition countries in Central and Eastern Europe, the desire to join at
some point in the future EMU is of more practical relevance for monetary policy and the
theoretical arguments about the appropriate quantification of price stability and the optimal
speed of disinflation. Eventual EMU accession will depend on the ability to meet the
Maastricht criteria including low inflation, and the decision to join the EMU at a certain date
will thus implicitly contain a decision on how quickly and how far disinflation will have to
go.

        At this stage, all three countries that we examine have expressed a commitment to
join the EMU, even though they may choose a different speed with which to move from
joining the EU to joining the EMU. But notwithstanding this possible different speed, all
three countries are committed to a relatively fast disinflation. Table 3 summarizes the speed
of disinflation implied by the level of inflation at the time of the introduction of inflation
targets and by the long-term inflation objective.

Table 3. The speed of disinflation 1/

        End-1997        Introduction    Inflation at    Direction       Ultimate      Year to be
        inflation       of IT           that time       Of inflation    Objective     Achieved
CR      10.0            Dec 97          10.0            Rising          2-4           2005
Hungary 18.4            Aug 01          8.7             Falling         Around 2      2004-5
Poland  13.2            June 98         12.2            Falling         <4            2003




                                               20
1/ All inflation figures refer to CPI

        As we can see, the ultimate objective is defined in each country in a different way: as
a range in the Czech Republic (both upper and lower band is specified); as a maximum
ceiling in Poland (only upper band is specified), and as a “soft” point target in Hungary (no
lower and upper bound specified, but inflation should meet the Maastricht criterion). This
also means that one single inflation rate could meet all these constraints at the same time.

        Even though the Czech Republic did not reveal a firm intention to choose the fastest
possible strategy to join the EMU, the CNB has still opted for a relatively quick disinflation
so that it would be able to meet the Maastricht criterion and eventually move quickly to the
EMU membership if it chooses to. Figure 1 shows the CNB’s actual and inflation targets.
When the inflation targeting framework was adopted in December 1997, inflation was 10
percent, and it continued to rise, to about 13 percent in early 1998 (in CPI terms; net inflation
approached 8 percent). The CNB decided that at the end of 1998, net inflation should decline
to 5.5-6.5 percent; and at the end of year 2000, to 3.5-5.5 percent. In December 1999, the
CNB quantified its long-term objective of price stability: net inflation in the range 1-3
percent in 2005, which was subsequently complemented by setting the 2005 CPI target in the
range 2-4 percent. Given the inflation target for the year 2000 in the range of 3.5-5.5 percent,
this implied an average annual reduction in net inflation by 0.5 percentage points. The CNB
explained that this long-term target would basically imply a continuation of the existing pace
of disinflation. However, in December 2002, CPI inflation fell to 0.6 percent, which already
brought it well below the long-term target range.

         In Poland, the NBP first set a short-term inflation target in June 1998 for end-1999 in
the range of 8-8.5 percent (see Figure 2). At the time of the announcement of the inflation
target, inflation was above 12 percent, and declining. In September 1999, the NBP also
announced the medium-term target of CPI inflation of less than 4 percent at the end of 2003.
Subsequently, inflation continued to fall faster that expected, and in March 1999, when it fell
to around 6 percent, the NBP modified the end-1999 CPI target to 6.6-7.8 percent. In
September 1999, in Monetary Guidelines for the Year 2000, the NBP set end-2000 inflation
target in the range 5.4-6.8 percent. However, the process of disinflation in Poland was
interrupted, as inflation increased from 5.6 percent in February 1999 to 11.6 percent in July
2000. Therefore, the 2001 inflation target was set higher than in 2000, 6-8 percent, but the
targeted inflation range for the end-2002 was reduced to 4-6 percent. As inflation at the end
of 2001 fell to 3.6 percent, meeting this target would have required another mild pick-up in
inflation. But instead, inflation in 2002 fell rapidly and in December 2002 reached 0.8
percent, resulting in another significant undershooting of the target. Right now, inflation in
Poland is below the NBP long-term objective.




                                               21
         Hungary launched official inflation targeting only in mid-2001.22 At that time,
inflation was already declining: from a peak of 10.8 percent in May 2001, it fell to 8.7
percent in August when details of the new inflation targeting regime were published in the
Quarterly Inflation Report (see Figure 3). For 2001, the inflation target was set in the range
6-8 percent. For 2002, inflation target was set at 3.5-5.5 percent, and for 2003, the target was
set at 2.5-4.5 percent.23 The long-term NBH’s objective is that Hungary meets the Maastricht
criterion on inflation in 2004-2005, which should be possible with inflation even slightly
higher that 2 percent that the NBH seeks to achieve in long-term. Unlike the Czech Republic
and Poland, Hungary also specified its long-term inflation target qualitatively, in terms of
meeting the Maastricht criterion for inflation, thus underscoring its preference to join EMU
sooner rather than later. As inflation in December 2002 was 4.8 percent, meeting the long-
term inflation target would likely require stabilizing inflation slightly below present level, in
contrast to the Czech Republic and Poland, where inflation is likely to pick-up somewhat
from present unsustainable low levels.

4.b. Hitting and missing inflation targets

        In the previous part, we have examined the experience with inflation targeting from
the perspective of disinflation. In this section, we look at how successful the three countries
were in meeting their inflation targets. In this respect, we should keep in mind that countries
could be quite successful, in the longer-term, in bringing inflation down, but if a successful
disinflation is accompanied by a significant instability of inflation (as evidenced by repeated
large undershooting or overshooting of inflation targets), this could be costly for the
economy as well.

        There is not yet much we can read from the history of inflation targeting in Hungary
because it is so recent (see Figure 3). The 2001 target was announced only in August 2001,
and it therefore was more a short-term inflation forecast that actual inflation target.
Therefore, the fact that Hungary has met this target and the 2002 target does not tell much
about the operation of inflation targeting framework.24 The inflation target for 2002 implied a

22
  The NBH was publishing inflation objectives based on Government budgetary projections
for 1998, 1999 and 2000 (12-13 percent, 9 percent and 6-7 percent respectively), but these
were not formal inflation targets and there was no formal requirement for the NBH to meet
them (see Siklos and Ábel (2001)).
23
  The long-term inflation target and the 2002 target were announced in the August 2001
Inflation Report, while the 2003 target was announced in the press on December 2001, when
the government agreed with the NBH’s proposal.
24
  It will be interesting to watch how inflation targeting will operate in 2003, as the potential
conflict between the inflation target and exchange rate target will come to the fore and as
markets already expect the 2003 inflation to exceed the 2003 NBH target.




                                               22
fairly rapid disinflation, alongside the trend started in mid-2001. In 2001 and 2002,
disinflation was helped by the appreciation of the forint. However, since the forint has
reached the upper end of the fluctuation band and the government seems to resist the
revaluation of parity, there is no room for further nominal appreciation that would assist in
further disinflation.

         Table 4 and Figures 1 and 2 show the history of inflation targeting in the Czech
Republic and Poland tell a very different story. In the Czech Republic, the CNB significantly
undershot its inflation targets, particularly in 1998 and 1999, and less in 2000. Net inflation
fell to 1.7 percent at the end of 1998 and to 1.5 percent at the end of 1999, well below the
CNB’s targets. Only in 2001, in the fourth year of inflation targeting, did the CNB succeed in
achieving its inflation target, but it undershot its target again in 2002.


       Table 4. Targeted and actual inflation in Czech Republic and Poland

                          Czech Republic (net inflation)       Poland (headline inflation)
                          Target          Actual               Target               Actual
       1998               5.5-6.5         1.7                  X                    8.6
       1999               4-5             1.5                  6.4-7.8 (8-8.5)1/    9.8
       2000               3.5-5.5         3                    5.4-6.8              8.5
       2001               2-4             2.4                  6-8                  3.6
       2002               2.75-4.75 2/    0.5                  4-6                  0.8

       Source: Czech National Bank, National bank of Poland
       1/ Initial target in brackets
       2/ Headline inflation

        As we can see in Figure 2, in Poland there was an opposite problem, as the NBP
significantly overshot its targets in 1999 and 2000. In the course of 1998, inflation in Poland
was falling rapidly, and at the end of the year, it fell to 8.6 percent, less than the 9.5 percent
projected. A more rapid than expected decline in inflation prompted the NBP to reduce early
in 1999 its target for end-1999, from 8-8.5 percent to 6.4-7.8 percent, a step which in
retrospect may seem to have been somewhat premature. If the NBP maintained its original
target 8-8.5 percent, it would have missed it only by a very small margin. But in the course of
1999, inflation began to increase again, and the 1999 target was missed by a significant
margin, as was the 2000 target. Very tight monetary policy and slowing economic activity
helped to bring inflation down sharply in 2001, and subsequently, the 2001 and 2002 targets
were undershot quite sizably.

        These repeated large deviations of actual inflation from inflation target would seem to
suggest that inflation targeting was not very successful in the Czech Republic and Poland.
But before we make any definitive judgments about the success or failure of inflation
targeting in these two countries, it is important to understand the reasons for such significant


                                               23
deviations of actual from targeted inflation. We have to examine more closely both domestic
and external economic circumstances that have prevailed during this period, and that have
affected actual inflation.

At the time when the CNB launched inflation targeting, inflation was rising quite rapidly, but
at the same time, the economy was already slipping into a prolonged recession. The 1998 and
2000 inflation targets were specified at the time when the CNB (and other public and private
forecasters) expected much stronger economic growth than actually materialized.25 However,
with the onset of a major banking crisis in 1997-98, economic activity fell and contributed to
a much faster disinflation than envisaged by CNB’s inflation targets.26 Moreover, the 1997-
1998 financial crises and weak global economic activity contributed to falling commodity
prices, including energy prices.27 The CNB calculations suggest that these external factors
had a sizeable effect on net inflation: in 1998, these factors reduced net inflation by 2-3
percentage points („apek (1999), p. 9). In the absence of these shocks, net inflation at the end
of 1998 would probably have been close to the bottom of the target range. There were also
other structural shocks that contributed to lower than projected inflation. Among the more
important was the continuing unexpected decline in foodstuff prices in 1998 and 1999. Ex
post, the decline in foodstuff prices was ascribed to the struggle of the retail distributors for
market share in the Czech market. Weak domestic demand, together with strong koruna and
strong competitive pressure in the domestic economy resulting from penetration on the Czech
market of foreign distributors continued to keep inflation low even after the effects of
external price shocks began to disappear In addition, the decision not to exclude energy
prices and exclude adjustment of regulated prices from the targeted price index did not
achieve its objective of encouraging the government to pursue a “courageous policy of price
deregulation”, as the CNB initially hoped.



       When inflation targeting was introduced, Poland was facing very different economic
circumstances than the Czech Republic. First, the implications of global developments for

25
  For example, the May 1998 World Economic Outlook projected real GDP growth in 1998
of 2.2 percent. This forecast was quite accurate, but with an opposite sign. Actual growth
was –2.2 percent.
26
  Of course, the hotly debated question was whether and to what extent the CNB’s
excessively tight monetary itself contributed to slower than projected growth.
27
  In U.S. dollar terms, oil price fell by 31.2 percent, while nonfuel commodity prices fell by
14.7 percent in 1998. See International Monetary Fund (1999). It should be noted that this
effect of financial crises contributed to an unexpected fall in inflation worldwide. The May
1997 IMF World Economic Outlook projected that in 1998, consumer prices in advanced
economies would increase by 2.5 percent, while the actual increase was only 1.5 percent.




                                               24
domestic inflation were better known to the NBP at that time, and could be incorporated into
the inflation target. Like in the Czech Republic, inflation in Poland has declined significantly
during 1998 and 1999, but this decline was less dramatic, and did not last as long. Already in
the second half of 1999, inflation in Poland began to exceed by increasingly wider margin
inflation in the Czech Republic (see chart 1). Relatively rapid economic growth of domestic
demand, increase in import prices and monopolistic structure of some industries together
resulted in the reversal of disinflation in Poland in the course of 1999. Fiscal policy was also
much more expansionary than the NBP has expected, and this expansionary stance further
fueled domestic demand.

        The NBP responded to these developments by a significant tightening of monetary
policy, and it continued to keep monetary conditions very tight even when inflation began to
fall sharply later in 2000 and in 2001. This – to some excessively – tight monetary policy
also brought economic growth nearly to a halt by the end of 2001, and contributed to
increased tension between the NBP and the government, which even led by the end of 2001
to threats of reduction of NBP independence. It appears that the NBP tried to use a tight
monetary policy stance as an instrument to force the government to strengthen structural
fiscal balance, even at the cost of significant undershooting of its inflation target.

        Judging from the success in meeting its inflation target, the NBP has not been very
successful thus far. In the first two years, inflation targets were overshot, and in the third and
fourth years, there was a significant undershooting. Recent years saw a significant instability
of inflation, which was falling rapidly from 17.8 percent in the beginning of 1997 to 5.6
percent in February 1999, then rose to 11.6 percent in July 2000, and fell again to 0.8 percent
in December 2002. In Poland, external factors may have been of less importance in
explaining the failure to meet inflation targets than in the Czech Republic, while the conduct
of macroeconomic policy has probably mattered more. First, unexpected fiscal expansion,
combined with easy monetary policy, contributed to the acceleration of inflation and
overshooting of inflation targets; and subsequently, sharp tightening of monetary policy, in
the absence of further easing of fiscal policy, reduced inflation sharply down and produced a
significant undershooting of the target.

4.c. Comparison of Inflation and Output Performance of inflation targeters with other
transition countries


       We have seen above that hitting inflation targets has not been an easy exercise.
However, this may have been unavoidable given the shocks the inflation targeters were
subjected to. To access the success of inflation targeting in transition countries, we have to
ask how well the inflation targeters have done relative to the non-targeters?

       There are two alternative monetary policy regimes to inflation targeting that transition
countries have chosen:




                                                25
       1.         exchange rate peg: a crawling peg for Hungary until August 2001, a
                  standard peg for Latvia (peg to SDR) and a hard peg of the currency board
                  type for Bulgaria, Estonia and Latvia.
       2.         float without an inflation target: Slovakia, Slovenia and Romania.28

         Figures 4 and 5 compare inflation rates (year over year) in the Czech Republic and
Poland with the other transition countries. A relevant starting date for comparing the
different monetary regimes is December 1998 (marked in the figures) which corresponds to
the first date that inflation targets were to be met in the Czech Republic. As we can see in
Figure 4 which has a comparison with the non-inflation targeting floaters, the Czech
Republic and Poland have experienced lower levels of inflation for most of the 1999-2002
period than have the non-inflation targeting floaters. On the other hand, Figure 5, which has
a comparison with the exchange rate peggers, does not display a clear dominance of inflation
targeting over pegging. Hungary with its soft peg and Bulgaria with its currency board have
typically had higher inflation rates than the Czech Republic and Poland, but Lithuania with
currency board and Latvia with its standard peg have experienced lower inflation rates.
Estonia has had inflation rates comparable to those in the Czech Republic, but up until the
last half of 2002, has had lower inflation than Poland.

         Clearly a low level of inflation is only one measure of success of monetary regimes –
equally important is the variability of inflation and output. Table 5 provides the standard
deviation of both inflation and output for the period 1999-2002. Here we see that the Czech
Republic and Poland are in the middle of the pack on both criteria. The Czech Republic and
Poland have higher standard deviations of inflation than the hard pegging, Baltic countries,
while they have lower variability than Hungary, a soft pegger, Bulgaria, a hard pegger, and
Slovakia and Romania, non-inflation targeting floaters. Slovenia, a non-inflation targeting
floater, has equal inflation variability to the Czech Republic, but has lower variability than
Poland.

        Although, we should not make too much of the data in Figures 4 and 5 and Table 5
because it is over such a short period and because these countries have been subjected to
different shocks, it is worth noting in terms of inflation control, inflation targeting does not
clearly dominate the other monetary policy regimes chosen by transition countries.

         We reach a similar conclusion in terms of output variability as seen by the standard
deviations of output growth reported in Table 5.29 The Czech Republic and Poland have had

28
  Currency regimes of these countries are characterized as managed floats. In June 2001,
Romania’s currency regime was reclassified from a managed float to a crawling band
because the central bank intervenes to prevent currency appreciation.
29
   The mixed results reported here on the performance of inflation targeting regimes relative
to other monetary policy regimes is not very surprising. As argued by Calvo and Mishkin
(2003), the choice of monetary policy regime is likely to be less important to the
                                                                                   (continued)

                                                26
lower standard deviations than the hard peggers, Bulgaria and the Baltic states, but have had
higher standard deviations than Slovakia and Slovenia, non-inflation targeting floaters.
Hungary, a soft pegger for most of the period has had the lowest standard deviation of output
growth of all the countries in the table. However, even less should be made of these
comparisons because real shocks have differed dramatically across the transition countries.
For example, as we can see in Figure 6, the Baltic countries, which have a higher proportion
of their trade with Russia as a result of their having been part of the former Soviet Union,
suffered very dramatic output declines in 1999 in the aftermath of the Russian financial crisis
in the fall of 1998. The contraction of the Russian economy at that time would have had a far
smaller impact on transition countries which were less integrated with Russia and whose
trade was mostly with Western Europe.


Table 5. Inflation and Output Growth Volatility: 1998-2002

                                Inflation volatility            Output volatility
Czech Republic                  3.49                            2.00
Poland                          3.6                             1.82
Hungary                         3.08                            0.72
Estonia                         3.08                            3.07
Latvia                          1.34                            2.52
Lithuania                       2.18                            3.5
Bulgaria                        49.7                            3.97
Slovakia                        3.88                            1.39
Slovenia                        1.34                            0.82
Romania                         18.37                           4.83



         5. Lessons and problems of inflation targeting in transition economies

        Even though the experience with the implementation of inflation targeting in
transition economies is relatively short, it has nevertheless brought out several specific
issues, which deserve discussion. First, how should the standard operational aspects of
inflation targeting be specified: i.e., what price index should be targeted? should the
inflation target be a point or a range? and what should the horizon for the target be? Second,
given the fact that transition economies began inflation targeting in a situation of higher
inflation than the long-term objective, how should the speed of disinflation be determined,
and closely related, how should the government be involved in setting inflation targets?


macroeconomic performance of emerging market and transition countries than deeper
institutions.




                                               27
Third, how should monetary policy respond to the deviation of the actual inflation from the
targeted disinflation path and how much should the floor of an inflation target be emphasized
relative to the ceiling? And fourth, how should the exchange rate be incorporated into the
inflation targeting framework?

5.a. Operational aspects of inflation targeting

         What measure of inflation to target? In deciding what measure of inflation to
target, central banks face a trade-off between transparency and the ability to control inflation.
The advantage of a broadly defined headline inflation (i.e. the consumer price index) is that it
is better understood by the public. However, the problem is that headline movements could
reflect factors other than monetary policy measures. A more narrowly defined measure of
inflation that excludes possible effects of transitory shocks could be better controlled by a
central bank, but at the same time, it could be more difficult for the public to assess the
conduct of monetary policy on basis of such measure. Given the emphasis on central banks’
accountability and transparency in a regime of inflation targeting, this could potentially be a
serious handicap, particularly for a central bank that still has to earn its credibility.

        The CNB opted for a compromise that it considered most appropriate for an economy
in transition. For the purpose of inflation targeting, it introduced a new concept, so-called net
inflation which excluded regulated prices (see section 3a). Specific conditions of economic
transition have played an important role in selecting net inflation as the targeted measure of
inflation. Unlike in industrial countries, many prices were still regulated in the Czech
Republic in late 1997. The CNB knew that substantial changes in these regulated prices,
including rents, would be needed before they reached a market-clearing level. As a result, a
given monetary policy stance could produce different future paths of headline inflation,
depending on the pace of price deregulation or the size of adjustment of administered prices.
At the same time, this approach was supposed to avoid a situation where government would
be hesitant to pursue a faster adjustment of regulated prices out of concern that inflationary
effects of such policy would force the CNB to tighten monetary policy, with adverse effects
on economic growth, exacerbating thus the political cost of deregulation. Indeed, the former
Acting Governor of the CNB Pavel Kysilka stated that “by targeting net inflation, we have
provided a room to the government to pursue a courageous policy of price deregulation.”
(Kysilka (1998), pp. 10-12). Obviously, a high share of regulated prices in total CPI does not
make it easier for the central bank to deal with this trade-off between transparency and ability
to control inflation.30


30
  The Czech economy is very open, with imports representing about 50 percent of GDP, and
changes in import prices of oil and gas have large impact on domestic prices. However, at the
time of the introduction of inflation targeting, the CNB had considered isolating the effects of
price deregulation as more important than isolating the effects of terms-of-trade shocks or
exchange rate effects.




                                               28
        Subsequently, the pace of price deregulation and increase in administered prices was
less than the CNB had hoped and so use of the net inflation construct did not produce the
desirable outcome the CNB expected. In addition, the net inflation construct turned out to be
more volatile than headline inflation, helping to contribute to larger misses of the target.
When it decided to target net inflation, the CNB did not exclude that in the future, it could
modify the measure of targeted inflation. The problems with the net inflation measure thus
led the CNB to abandon it in April 2001, and it subsequently moved to targeting headline
inflation as has been discussed in section 3a.

         Target a point or a range? As in other aspects of design of the operational
framework, there is a trade-off involved in deciding about the width of the band. A wider
band increases the chance that monetary policy will be successful in keeping targeted
inflation inside. But a too large band could reduce the ability of inflation targeting to anchor
inflation expectations, and it could be of less help in establishing the antiinflationary
credibility. Some argue that a band that is narrow enough to anchor inflationary expectations
is likely to be frequently missed, and that it is preferable to target a point and explain the
deviations of actual inflation from that point target (Bernanke et al (1999) and Mishkin
(2001)).

         In a sense, one can argue that higher degree of uncertainty in projecting inflation and
correspondingly higher probability that even a target range would be missed makes the issue
of point versus range less of an issue than in more advanced inflation-targeting economies.
By setting a range, the central bank may indicate what is its estimate of uncertainty of
reaching the inflation target. This is how the CNB has explained its decision regarding the
width of the targeted range. Missing a target range then carries a larger risk of credibility loss
than missing a target point. Targeting a reasonably narrow band (that is, narrow enough so
that it provides a sufficient nominal anchor) does not make much sense when the probability
that it would be missed is not significantly less than the probability of missing a point.

         Time horizon of inflation targeting. Monetary policy affects the economy and
particularly inflation with long lags. In industrialized countries, lags from monetary policy to
inflation are typically estimated to be on the order of two years. Shorter time horizons, such as
one year can be highly problematic. The first problem with too short a horizon is that it can lead
to a controllability problem: too frequent misses of the inflation target, even when monetary
policy is being conducted optimally. The second problem is that it can lead to instrument
instability, in which policy instruments are moved around too much in order to try to get
inflation to hit its targets over the shorter horizon. A third problem is that too short a horizon
implies that not enough weight is put on output fluctuations in the central bank's loss function.31


31
  As demonstrated by Svensson (1997), a faster target path of inflation to the long-run inflation
goal implies a smaller weight on output variability in the central bank's loss function.




                                                29
         The experience with inflation targeting in New Zealand documented in Bernanke et al
(1999), illustrates these problems. In 1995, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand overshot its one-
year-horizon inflation target range, making the governor subject to dismissal under the central
banking law. It was recognized in the Reserve Bank that the overshoot was likely to be short-
lived and inflation was likely to fall, indicating that monetary policy had not been overly
expansionary. Fortunately, this view was accepted outside the Bank and the governor, Don
Brash, whose performance was excellent, retained his job. Attempting to hit the annual target
did, however, have the unfortunate consequence of producing excessive swings in the monetary
policy instruments, especially the exchange rate. In a small, open economy, like New Zealand,
exchange rate movements have a faster impact on inflation than interest rates. Thus trying to
achieve annual inflation targets required heavier reliance on manipulating exchange rates which
led to its having large swings. By trying to hit the short-horizon target, the Reserve Bank also
may have induced greater output fluctuations. For example, the Reserve Bank pursued overly
tight monetary policy at the end of 1996 with the overnight cash rate going to 10% because of
fears that inflation would rise above the target range in 1997, and this helped lead to an
undesirable decline in output. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand has recognized the problems
it had with a too short target horizon and now emphasizes a horizon of six to eight quarters in
their discussions of monetary policy (Sherwin (1999) and Drew and Orr (1999)). Furthermore,
the Policy Target Agreement between the central bank and the government has recently been
amended to be more flexible in order to support the longer policy horizon (Reserve Bank of
New Zealand (2000)).

         The solution to avoiding too short a horizon for the inflation target is to set inflation
targets for periods two years (or longer) ahead. This automatically implies that the central bank
will have multi-year inflation targets. The target for the current calendar year will have been set
two years previously, while there will also be a target for the following year. With multi-year
targets, the target from one year to the next could vary over time. The inflation target would
vary in response to shocks to the economy, especially to supply shocks which might need to be
accommodated in order to keep output fluctuations from getting excessive. Also putting a
weight on output fluctuations in a central bank's objectives, as is sensible, requires that the
approach of the inflation target to the long-run goal needs to be gradual (Svennson, 1997). This
also suggests the need for multi-year targets in which the inflation target, even one for two years
ahead, may differ from the long-run target if shocks to the economy have driven inflation away
from the long-run goal.

        Initially, inflation targets in the transition countries studied here were short, being on
the order of a year, and the short horizons may have contributed to controllability problem
and the frequent target misses. Possibly in response to these problems, the CNB was the first
to specify a long-term inflation target for a horizon of five years, and the NBH and the NBP
have also specified medium-term inflation targets (Table 2).




                                                30
5.b. Who should set the inflation target and decide the speed of disinflation?

         In the 1990s, there has been a significant shift worldwide toward more independent
central banks, partly in response to a better understanding of economic costs of political
interference with monetary policy and high inflation. While not all central banks have been
given complete freedom to set monetary policy targets, most of them gained instrument
independence, that is, the freedom to conduct monetary policy without external interference
to meet the objective. Among economists, there seems now to be consensus that central
banks should have instrument independence, that is, independence to conduct monetary
policy so as to meet the inflation target or other monetary policy objective. There seems to be
a consensus that central banks should not have goal independence, that is, independence to
set inflation targets or other monetary policy objectives (Fischer (1994)).

        From the early stages of economic transition, central banks in all three countries have
received a significant degree of de jure independence, not only in the conduct of monetary
policy (instrument independence) but also in setting the objectives of monetary policy (goal
independence).

        In the Czech Republic, the independence of the central bank was anchored in the
Constitution, which stated that the government may only intervene in the CNB’s affairs for
reasons clearly outlined in the Act on CNB. The Act on CNB (No. 6/1993 of Collection of
Laws) specified that the primary objective of the CNB is to ensure the stability of the Czech
national currency (Article 2); that the CNB Board should set monetary policy and the
instruments for the implementation of these policies (Article 5). Moreover, the Act explicitly
states that in providing for its primary objective, the CNB shall be independent of any
instructions given by the Government. The Governor, Vice-Governors and members of the
Board are appointed and recalled by the President (Article 6). The Act was subsequently
amended in 2002, and the main objective of the CNB was changed to maintain price stability,
with the standard qualification that without prejudice to its primary objective, the CNB shall
support economic policies of the Government leading to sustainable economic growth. The
amended Act also states that “when providing for the primary objective of the CNB and
when carrying out their activities, neither the CNB nor the CNB Board shall seek or take
instructions from the President of the republics, from Parliament, from the Government, from
administrative authorities or from any other body (Article 9). The appointment of the
Governor and other CNB officials remains fully the responsibility of the President.

         In Hungary, the Act on National Bank of Hungary was passed in October 1991 and
reinstated the independence of the NBH. It was amended several times since. The latest
version from June 2001 (Act LVIII of 2001) states that the primary objective of the NBH
shall be to achieve and maintain price stability (Article 3) and that the NBH shall define and
implement monetary policy in the interest of maintaining the stability of the national
currency (Article 4). Article 6 states that “within the framework provided for by this Act, the
NBH shall independently define its monetary policy and the instruments for implementing
such policy.” Article 38 stipulates that the Government may not instruct the NBH in relation
to its scope of tasks as set forth in the Act. The President of the NBH is appointed for a


                                              31
period of six years by the President of the Republic at the proposal of the Prime Minister.
The President of the Republics also appoint 3-5 Vice-Presidents and members of the
Monetary Council.

         The legal position of the National Bank of Poland is similar. The Act on the NBP of
August 29, 1997 stipulates that the basic objective of the NBP shall be to maintain price
stability, again with the addition that the NBP shall at the same time support the Government
economic policies, insofar as this does not constrain pursuit of the basic objective (Article 3).
The President of the NBP shall be appointed by the Sejm, at the request of the President of
the Republic, for a period of six years. The Vice-Presidents and other members of the NBP
Management Board are appointed by the President of the Republic at the request of the
President of the NBP. The nine members of the Monetary Policy Council are appointed in
equal numbers by the President of the Republics, the Sejm and the Senate (Article 13). The
responsibility of the MPC is to draw annual monetary policy guidelines and submit them to
the Sejm for information (Article 12). Article 21 stipulates that in discharging its
responsibilities, the NBP shall collaborate with the appropriate bodies of the central
government in developing and implementing national economic policy and strive to ensure a
proper performance of monetary policy guidelines. It should submit monetary policy
guidelines to bodies of central government and report on performance of monetary policy.

        However, de jure independence does not always imply a de facto independence.
While the NBP is not explicitly forbidden by the Act on NBP to seek instructions from the
Government and other bodies in pursuing its responsibilities, de facto, it decides alone on
inflation targets. On the other hand, the NBH is de jure independent and forbidden to seek
instructions, but in practice, the Governor of the NBH seeks Government endorsement for
the NBH’s monetary policy objectives.

        The effort to make central banks legally independent reflected the belief of reformist
governments and parliaments that politics should not interfere with the conduct of monetary
policy. To a large extent, central bank legislature in these countries was modeled after the
German Bundesbank which itself - for historical reasons - enjoyed a high degree of
independence. In the early years of transition, no one really questioned the high degree of
central bank independence in the transition countries, as governments had to deal with the
more urgent tasks of liberalization, privatization etc. However, the high degree of central
bank independence eventually became a source of tension.

        These tensions appeared first in the Czech Republic. As we have discussed, in the
early years of inflation targeting, the CNB has repeatedly undershot its inflation target, while
economic growth turned negative. In many countries, this would probably be sufficient to
create tensions between central bank and government. In the Czech Republic, these tensions
were further aggravated by political developments. To a large extent as a result of poor state
of the economy in the aftermath of the currency turbulence of 1997, the main pro-reform
party split and new elections were called for mid-1998. In the meantime, a caretaker
government was formed and the CNB governor became a caretaker prime minister. When a
new government was formed after the election, he returned back to the CNB. Inevitably, this


                                               32
has drawn the CNB further into politics, exactly the opposite to what the high degree of de
jure independence was supposed to achieve.

        The party that lost election in 1998 criticized the CNB and the governor for
mishandling monetary policy, contributing to economic decline and thus affecting the
outcome of elections. The CNB was considered to be too independent and unwilling to
coordinate monetary policy with economic policy of the government. The speed of
disinflation was considered as excessive, hurting economic growth. This criticism eventually
resulted in legislative effort to curb the CNB's independence. When the CNB and the new
government introduced jointly to Parliament an amendment to CNB Act to bring it in line
with the EU standards, members of the party that lost the 1998 election submitted their own
amendment that aimed at reducing significantly the CNB's independence. They proposed that
Parliament would supervise and approve the operational budget, salaries of Board members
were to be cut, monetary policy decision were to be consulted with the government, and
political partied were to have more say in appointing the governor and Board members.

        This proposal was strongly criticized by domestic and foreign financial analysts, by
the International Monetary Fund and - most importantly - by the European Union and
European Central Bank. Central bank independence is a requirement for both EU and EMU
membership, and this argument carried ultimately the largest weight because of the likely
accession of the Czech Republic into EU/EMU. In the end, the CNB retained its
independence, and with the appointment of new governor in 2000, the relationship with the
Government improved as well.

         Similar tensions between central bank and government emerged in Poland during
2000 and 2001. As economic growth began to falter while interest rates remained high, the
NBP was blamed by some politicians for having its monetary policy excessively tight, and
that it contributed to subpar growth performance. Tensions between the government and the
NBP accelerated in October 2001, after the new government took office. Contributing to the
tensions was the fact that the president of the NBP Leszek Balcerowicz was himself a former
politician and main author of the cold-turkey stabilization program that was criticized by the
center-left politicians that formed the government after the October 2001 elections.

        The prime minister and other members of the cabinet have attacked repeatedly the
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) for keeping interest rates too high. The pressure to
reduce the NBP's independence rose and some members of parliament from the two
governing parties drew legal proposals to broaden the NBP's objectives to include economic
growth and employment, and to increase the number of members of MPC. Even though the
government did not formally back these proposals, being well aware that this would
complicate the EU/EMU accession, it did not mind using them as a tool to put pressure on
the NBP to ease monetary policy. Because accession to EU/EMU is an important objective
for Poland, it is not likely that these initiatives will succeed.

        The Polish experience also illustrates the peril of central bank effort to use monetary
policy as a tool to force the government to pursue a more disciplined fiscal policy. The NBP


                                               33
tried to use tight monetary policy to press the government to improve structural fiscal
balance, and kept interest rates very high even as inflation was falling below its target and
growth came nearly to a halt. But instead of achieving this objective, the NBP has
antagonized the government and put its independence under risk.

        Even Hungary was not spared tensions between the central bank and the government.
Recently, the Government put forward a bill that proposes to set up a Supervisory Committee
within the National Bank of Hungary. This Committee would comprise delegates of political
parties and two persons appointed by the Minister of Finance. Such a committee already
existed in the past but was abolished. The NBH argues that such a step would infringe on
NBH's operational independence and would go against the EU requirements on central bank
independence. Members of the government have also pressured the NBH to reduce interest
rates in order to support growth. They argue that the NBH should not focus to much on
inflation.

         In Hungary, the reasons for this pressure on the central bank are mainly political and
personal. The new NBH president who was appointed in 2001 was a former minister of
finance and from this position, he was exercising pressure on his predecessor. However, the
previous NBH president is in a close contact with the present prime minister and has used
this to create pressure on his successor. More recently, the conflict between the inflation
target and exchange rate target has further increased these tensions.

        Why do we see these tensions in all three inflation-targeting countries? There are
several reasons. First, at the beginning of transition, central banks were given a large degree
of both operational and goal independence. In a situation where inflation is still higher than
the long-term objective of price stability, this means that central banks are given the freedom
to decide on the speed of disinflation. As central bankers tend to be more ambitious with
respect to the speed of disinflation than politicians, this creates potential for tensions. These
tensions tend to come open once economic growth falters, particularly of this poor growth
performance is perceived as contributing to a loss of popularity of the governing party(ies).
In our view, this experience suggests the superiority of closer involvement of political
authorities in setting monetary policy objectives. Particularly in difficult period of economic
transition, goal independence of central banks may complicate rather than facilitate the
conduct of monetary policy.

        Second, the fact that politicians became central bank governors, or that central bank
governors stepped into politics, had the unwanted consequence of drawing central banks
more into the political arena. Finally, despite significant progress in economic and political
reforms, the rule of law still remains less firmly established even in the most advanced
transition economies, making politically motivated attacks on central banks more likely.

        The kind of public disputes between the central bank and the government that we
have seen in the Czech Republic, Poland and Hungary is not desirable. It undermines the
credibility of the inflation targeting framework and could increase the costs of future
disinflation. As we have already noted, the decision about the speed of disinflation has


                                               34
different impact on different groups in the society, and there is thus a strong case for such
decision to be made by a politically responsible body like the government. Clearly, it would
serve better the credibility of monetary policy if the speed of disinflation were the result of a
joint decision by a central bank and government, though this is not obviously a practice in all
inflation-targeting countries.32 Such a joint decision would have several advantages. Most
important, it would be more credible. When a government decides (perhaps jointly with a
central bank) on the speed of disinflation, it is explicitly or implicitly committing itself to
policies supporting this disinflation objective. The speed of disinflation (co)decided by
government would be seen by markets as a political decision which takes into account
possible short-term tradeoffs, and it would reduce the probability that policies supporting the
achievement of targeted disinflation would be challenged on grounds that they do not reflect
the preferences of the society and that they are unduly costly.

        Even in situations where the ultimate responsibility for deciding the speed of
disinflation would rest with the government, the central bank could still provide an important
input into this decision, by voicing (possibly publicly) its own views about the desirable
speed of disinflation. Of course, there is a risk that government would choose too slow a
disinflation. However, it is not clear whether this would impose higher costs on the economy
than a unilateral decision by a central bank to pursue a more rapid disinflation that would be
subsequently challenged by government as being too ambitious. Furthermore, a unilateral
decision by the central bank to pursue rapid disinflation is likely to weaken support for the
central bank as has occurred in the Czech Republic and Poland. This increases the risk of
loss of independence and interference with the ability of the central bank to control inflation
in a longer run context.

        The question who should set inflation targets has a specific aspect in transition
economies that are expected soon to become members of the EMU. One can argue that when
the political decision to join the EMU is made, it effectively specified both the disinflation
path and the ultimate inflation target. The inflation target is determined by the need to meet
the Maastricht criterion concerning maximum permissible inflation, and the speed with
which this inflation is to be achieved is determined by the timing of the EMU entry. To the
extent that there is a firm political commitment to join the EMU, it becomes to a large extent
irrelevant whether the inflation target is set by a central bank or a government. The
government does not have much room to be more lenient on inflation than the central bank,
because of the possibly large economic and mainly political costs of not meeting the
Maastricht criteria.




32
   Such arrangement need not necessary imply a formal subordination of the central bank to
government in setting inflation targets. For example, in Australia, the inflation target is set by
a central bank alone, and the government subsequently endorses publicly this target.




                                               35
5.c. How to respond to deviations of inflation from the target and how much should the
floor of an inflation target be emphasized relative to the ceiling?

        The implementation of inflation targeting in the Czech Republic and Poland has
brought out an interesting problem that arises in other inflation-targeting economies as well.
How to respond to a significant deviation of inflation from the inflation target? If the
inflation rate overshoots the ceiling of the target range, then the logic of inflation targeting
clearly requires the central bank to bring the inflation rate back into the target range.
However, should an inflation-targeting central bank try to lock in a lower than targeted
inflation once actual inflation falls below the targeted path if inflation is not yet at the long-
run goal? Another way of asking this question is whether a central bank should emphasize
the floor of the inflation target as much as the ceiling and thus work as hard to avoid
undershoots of the target as overshoots.

        As we have noted, the CNB significantly undershot its inflation target in 1998 and
1999, and less so in 2000. Similarly, at the end of 2001, inflation in Poland fell well below
the NBP end-2001 target. What should central banks do in such situations? Should they be
upset at the undershoot and indicate that this was a serious mistake. Alternatively, would it
be appropriate for them to lock in the unexpectedly rapid disinflation of previous two years,
and focus its monetary policy on maintaining from then on price stability?

        A case could be made for acting opportunistically and using faster than expected
disinflation to lock in this windfall benefit of lower inflation (Haldane (1998)). This is what
Poland has tried to do, by adjusting its original end-1999 inflation target after actual inflation
early in 1999 began to fall faster than projected. It would seem that when inflation has been
reduced to less than the central bank target, but remains still above the level of inflation
corresponding to price stability, it would make no sense to let inflation go up again, only to
be forced to reduce it again later. Disinflation, even at a moderate pace, could be costly, and
if a country can avoid the need to disinflate in the future, this should spare the economy some
loss of output. Whether past faster than planned disinflation was a result of luck or
mistakenly tight monetary policy may seem not to matter, bygones are bygones, past costs, if
any, have been incurred, and let’s just avoid any future costs of disinflation. 33

        In practice, central banks have treated the floors of inflation target range in different
ways (Clifton (1999)). Some treat them as seriously as upper sides of a band, and eased
monetary policy to bring inflation back up inside the band (e.g., New Zealand in 1991), while
others preferred to consolidate the unexpected rapid disinflation (Israel in 1998,)

        The recent experience of Poland has shown the risks of trying to lock into lower than
originally targeted inflation. There are several problems with opportunistic disinflation and

33
   Of course, such an argument could be made only if inflation does not fall below the long-
term inflation target corresponding to price stability.




                                                36
for treating the bottom of the band leniently. First, there is a possibility that opportunistic
disinflation will not find much sympathy with politicians. Particularly if the faster than
originally intended disinflation coincides with a significant weakening of economic activity,
there will be calls for a relaxation of monetary policy, even if this should mean a return to
somewhat higher inflation. The NBP has exacerbated this problem because its inflation
target is now stated to be “less than 4%,” suggesting that they are not particularly disturbed
by undershooting the inflation target. This may have contributed substantially to the poor
relations between the NBP and the government and a decrease in public support for the NBP.
The CNB was well aware of the danger from its undershoots of the inflation target, and did
not even suggest that it could lock in the lower than targeted inflation.

        Second, if rapid disinflation is a result of temporary external shocks like large
declines in the price of commodities, it would be a mistake to assume that monetary policy
could lock in such disinflation forever without large future costs. Once these shocks are over,
prices of commodities usually do not stay low, but rise again, as global demand recovers.
Monetary policy that would try to prevent accelerated pace of disinflation at times of
declining commodity prices or other positive supply shocks would be probably too
expansive. In the same vein, monetary policy would risk being too restrictive if it would try
to avoid any acceleration of inflation as positive supply shocks are reversed.34 Like many
other inflation-targeting central banks, the CNB has explicitly recognized that monetary
policy should not attempt to offset temporary supply shocks that knock disinflation from its
projected path.

        Third, an opportunistic approach to disinflation could undermine the credibility of an
inflation targeting framework. By setting medium-term inflation targets, central banks
attempt to establish a predictable environment that would allow economic agents to plan for
the future. Even though there could and will be deviations from the target, credible inflation
targeting would lead the agents to expect that a central bank would do its best to return actual
inflation to the targeted path. Attempts at opportunistic disinflation could increase the
uncertainty, because it would make monetary policy less predictable. For example, economic
agents could expect that central banks would adjust an inflation target upward in case of a
negative shock as well.

        However, a situation may arise where the path of disinflation has been set incorrectly.
For example, competitive pressures in the economy, due to liberalization, privatization and a
more open trade would produce a faster disinflation for a given monetary policy stance that
originally expected. These favorable supply shocks would be likely to cause inflation to
undershoot without leading to a decline in output. In this case, maintaining the original
disinflation target would require an overly expansionary monetary policy, and it would seem
to be more appropriate to accept in such case a faster than originally intended disinflation.

34
  If a positive price shock would be permanent, perhaps as a result of a sudden increase in
productivity, it would be appropriate to accommodate the effect of such shocks on inflation.




                                              37
This would also likely be politically feasible because the undershoot of the inflation target
would not be accompanied by output losses.

5.c. Inflation targets and the exchange rate

        In the recent literature on inflation targeting, particularly on inflation targeting in
emerging market countries, increased attention has been paid to the open-economy aspect of
inflation targeting (Mishkin, 2000, Mishkin and Savastano, 2001, and Eichengreen, 2001). It
has been recognized that the large degree of openness of some emerging market economies,
in combination with specific characteristics of their financial systems, create additional
challenges for the implementation of inflation targeting. Exchange rate movements affect
directly domestic inflation, both as a result of external shocks and as a result of monetary
policy measures. The open economy aspect of inflation targeting plays a prominent role in
inflation-targeting transition economies as well.

       In the initial stage of transition, all three inflation-targeting countries analyzed in this
paper used a fixed exchange rate as a nominal anchor to import price stability and bring
domestic inflation quickly down. The currency peg-based stabilization was quite effective,
because it allowed them to bring down inflation relatively quickly. The initial monetary
overhang was eliminated by a one-time increase in price level, rather than by a sustained
growth in prices, and thus its elimination did not become embedded in inflation expectations.
However, first Poland, then Czech Republic and finally Hungary abandoned the currency peg
and moved to more flexible exchange rate arrangements. This has fundamentally changed the
operation of monetary policy and the operation of the monetary transmission mechanism.

        The importance of the exchange rate channel of monetary policy depends directly on
the degree of openness of the economy to trade flows, and on the degree of integration into
international capital markets. The Czech Republic and Hungary are very open economies
with respect to trade flows. The share of exports plus imports in GDP exceeds 100 percent in
Hungary and the Czech Republic. Poland is a more closed economy: the share of exports plus
imports reaches “only” about 50 percent. Therefore, exchange rate movements in the Czech
Republic and Hungary will have a more important effect on domestic prices and inflation,
and thus for inflation targeting. At the same time, all three countries are very open to
international capital flows, because in preparation for the EU membership, they have largely
completed capital account liberalization.

        There are several reasons why exchange rate movements are important for inflation
targeting in transition countries (Svensson (2000)). First, exchange rate movements provide
an additional transmission channel of monetary policy. While in a closed economy, aggregate
demand and expectation channels dominate, in open economy, the exchange rate channel
may be the most important one, particularly in the short-run. The exchange rate transmission
channel operates both directly and indirectly. Changes in nominal exchange rate affect




                                                38
directly the domestic prices of imported final goods, and thus the targeted CPI index.35
Indirectly, the exchange-rate channel operates by affecting domestic demand. Changes in real
exchange rate affect domestic and foreign demand for domestic goods, and thus enhance the
standard aggregate-demand channel. Second, the exchange rate is one channel through which
foreign disturbances could be transmitted into the domestic economy. Third, transition
countries also have a particular concern with their exchange rates because they went to become
part of the European Union and the euro zone. Thus they must eventually fix their exchange
rates to the euro as part of their planned entry into the Economic and Monetary Union and so
naturally care more about what exchange rate they will convert their currency into the euro upon
accession.

        Finally, it should be noted that emerging market countries and transition economies
are usually more vulnerable to large exchange rate movements. The reason is the
underdeveloped capital market in domestic currency and the need to borrow in dollars or
other foreign currency, except for a very short-term borrowing. This results in open foreign
exchange positions of banks and/or corporations, and thus increased vulnerability of their
balance sheets to large exchange rate movements. While large appreciation can make
domestic producers uncompetitive (both in foreign and domestic markets), large depreciation
could cause large damage to firms or banks with large open foreign exchange position and
precipitate a financial crisis of the type described in Mishkin (1996, 1999)

        While it is generally recognized that in such open economies like the Czech Republic
and Hungary, the exchange rate represents both an important channel of monetary
transmission and an important channel of transmission of external disturbances, it is less
obvious what are the implications for the treatment of exchange rate in the regime of
inflation targeting. We can distinguish two approaches to exchange rate: an active and
passive approach. In an active approach, the central bank cares about the exchange rate over
and above its effects on inflation and actively tries to influence the level of the exchange rate.
In a passive approach, a central bank cares about the exchange rate only to the extent it
affects aggregate demand and the inflation rate and it does not try to directly manipulate the
exchange rate and only reacts to changes in exchange rate that would threaten its inflation
target.36


35
   The CPI index includes prices of both domestic and imported goods. As such, it represents
a combined measure of domestic inflation and imported inflation. Domestic inflation is also
affected by changes in prices of imported goods indirectly. Changing the price of imported
input used for production of domestic goods would affect costs, and - depending on the
extent of the pass-through - domestic prices.
36
  Again, we can distinguish a more or less active use of this passive approach, depending on
the time horizon during which the central bank would try to meet inflation target by
responding to exogenous exchange rate changes.




                                               39
        As we have noted, particularly the Czech Republic and Hungary are very open
economies, and exchange rate will therefore have important effect on inflation and other
variables. Poland is less open, and exchange rate movements seem to play a less important
role in monetary policy deliberations. It seems that the NBH is pursuing this active approach,
as judged from its statements on the role of exchange rate in affecting inflation outcomes. As
Orlowski (2000) argues, in Hungary, the central bank has focused its monetary policy on
exchange rate stability, and for this reason, changes in exchange rates have a strong effect on
inflation. Such a strong effect was not observed in the Czech Republic and Poland. This may
explain the relatively larger emphasis put by the NBH on the exchange-rate channel of
monetary policy.

        The problem is that too much reliance on the exchange-rate channel of monetary
transmission carries the risk that a central bank would focus excessively on a short-term
horizon. In open economies, the exchange-rate channel is not only important, but operates
very fast, because changes in exchange rate affect directly domestic prices of imported final
goods, and with longer but still potentially quite short lag prices of domestic goods
containing imported inputs. This rapid transmission may induce the inflation-targeting
central bank into too much of a focus on a short-term horizon, and to try to keep actual
inflation in line with inflation target by orchestrating exchange rate changes. However,
excessive use of the exchange rate channel could have undesirable consequences. It could
cause a problem of instrument instability, result in excessive variability of real exchange rate,
and thus in an increased degree of uncertainty in the economy and higher variability of
output. 37 In addition, it runs the risk of transforming the exchange rate into a nominal anchor
that takes precedence over the inflation target. For example, as documented in Bernanke et
al (1999), Israel’s intermediate target of an exchange rate around a crawling peg did slow the
Bank of Israel’s effort to win support for disinflation and lowering of the inflation targets in
the early years of its inflation targeting regime. In addition, an active focus on the exchange
rate may induce the wrong policy response when a country is faced with real shocks such as
a terms-of-trade shock. Two graphic examples of these problems are illustrated by the
experience in New Zealand and Chile in the late 1990s.

         The short horizon for the inflation target in New Zealand led the Reserve Bank to focus
on the exchange rate as an indicator of the monetary policy stance because of the direct impact
of exchange rate movements on inflation. By early 1997, the Reserve Bank institutionalized
this focus by adopting as its primary indicator of monetary policy a Monetary Conditions Index
(MCI) similar to that developed by the Bank of Canada. The idea behind the MCI, which is a
weighted average of the exchange rate and a short-term interest rate, is that both interest rates
and exchange rates on average have offsetting impacts on inflation. When the exchange rate
falls, this usually leads to higher inflation in the future, and so interest rates need to rise to offset
the upward pressure on inflation. However, the offsetting effects of interest rates and exchange

37
  This risk seems to be well recognized by the NBH. See National Bank of Hungary (2001),
pp. 35-36




                                                   40
rates on inflation depend on the nature of the shocks to the exchange rates. If the exchange rate
depreciation comes from portfolio considerations, then it does lead to higher inflation and needs
to be offset by an interest rate rise. However, if the reason for the exchange rate depreciation is
a real shock such as a negative terms-of-trade shock which decreases the demand for a country's
exports, then the situation is entirely different. The negative terms-of-trade shock reduces
aggregate demand and is thus likely to be deflationary. The correct interest rate response is then
a decline in interest rates, not a rise as the MCI suggests.

        With the negative terms-of-trade shock in 1997, the adoption of the MCI in 1997 led to
exactly the wrong monetary policy response to East Asian crisis. With depreciation setting in
after the crisis began in July 1997 after the devaluation of the Thai baht, the MCI began a sharp
decline, indicating that the Reserve Bank needed to raise interest rates, which it did by over 200
basis points. The result was very tight monetary policy, with the overnight cash rate exceeding
9% by June of 1998. Because the depreciation was due to a substantial, negative terms-of-trade
shock which decreased aggregate demand, the tightening of monetary policy, not surprisingly,
lead to a severe recession and an undershoot of the inflation target range with actual deflation
occurring in 1999.38 The Reserve Bank of New Zealand did eventually realize its mistake and
reversed course, sharply lowering interest rates beginning in July 1998 after the economy had
entered a recession, but by then it was too late. It also recognized the problems with using an
MCI as an indicator of monetary policy and abandoned it in 1999. Now the Reserve Bank
operates monetary policy in a more conventional way, using the overnight cash rate as its policy
instrument, with far less emphasis on the exchange rate in its monetary policy decisions.

        Chile's inflation targeting regime also included a focus on limiting exchange rate
fluctuations by having an exchange rate band with a crawling peg which was (loosely) tied to
lagged domestic inflation. This focus on the exchange rate induced a serious policy mistake in
1998 because the central bank was afraid it might lose credibility in the face of the financial
turmoil if it allowed the exchange rate to depreciate after what had taken place in financial
markets after the East Asian crisis and the Russian meltdown, Thus instead of easing monetary
policy in the face of the negative terms-of-trade shock, the central bank raised interest rates
sharply and even narrowed its exchange rate band. In hindsight, these decisions were a mistake:
the inflation target was undershot and the economy entered a recession for the first time in the
1990s.39 With this outcome, the central bank came under strong criticism for the first time since


 38
   The terms-of-trade shock, however, was not the only negative shock the New Zealand
economy faced during that period. Its farm sector experienced a severe drought which also
hurt the economy. Thus, a mistake in monetary policy was not the only source of the recession.
Bad luck played a role too. See Drew and Orr (1999) and Brash (2000).
39
   Because, given its location in Latin America, Chile’s central bank did have to worry more
about loss of credibility and also because Chile encountered a sudden stop of capital inflows
at the time, the ability of the Chilean central bank to pursue countercyclical policy was more
limited than for the Australian central bank. However, although lowering interest rates in
                                                                                     (continued)

                                                41
it had adopted its inflation targeting regime in 1990, weakening support for the independence of
the central bank and its inflation targeting regime. During 1999, the central bank did reverse
course, easing monetary policy by lowering interest rates and allowing the peso to decline.

         The contrast of the experience of New Zealand and Chile during this period with that of
Australia, another small open economy with an inflation targeting regime is striking. Prior to
adoption of their inflation targeting regime in 1994, the Reserve Bank of Australia had adopted
a policy of allowing the exchange rate to fluctuate without interference, particularly if the source
of the exchange rate change was a real shock, like a terms-of-trade shock. Thus when faced
with the devaluation in Thailand in July 1997, the Reserve Bank recognized that it would face a
substantial negative terms-of-trade shock because of the large component of its foreign trade
conducted with the Asian region and that it should not fight the depreciation of the Australian
dollar that would inevitably result (McFarlane (1999) and Stevens (1999)). Thus in contrast to
New Zealand, it immediately lowered the overnight cash rate by 50 basis points to 5% and kept
it near at this level until the end of 1998, when it was lowered again by another 25 basis points.

         Indeed, the adoption of the inflation targeting regime probably helped the Reserve Bank
of Australia to be even more aggressive in its easing in response to the East Asian crisis and
helps explain why its response was so rapid. The Reserve Bank was able to make clear that
easing was exactly what inflation targeting called for in order to prevent an undershooting of the
target, so that the easing was unlikely to have an adverse effect on inflation expectations. The
outcome of the Reserve Bank's policy actions was extremely favorable. In contrast to New
Zealand and Chile, real output growth remained strong throughout this period. Furthermore,
there were no negative consequences for inflation despite the substantial depreciation of the
Australian dollar against the U.S. dollar by close to 20%: inflation remained under control,
actually falling during this period to end up slightly under the target range of 2 to 3%.

        While it would not be desirable if a central bank tried to actively manipulate the
exchange rate, this does not imply that it should not respond to an exchange rate shock.
However, whether it should respond or not, and how it should respond, depends on the nature
of the shock. As illustrated above, the response to a real shock to the exchange rate such as
a change in the terms-of-trade should be entirely different from the reaction to a portfolio
shock.

         The relevant question concerning the transition economies is, what types of shock are
they likely to face in the period ahead of the EU/EMU membership? And how vulnerable are
they to large exchange rate movements? How much they should be concerned about
exchange rate movements for other reasons than the risk that inflation target will not be met?



1998 may not have been as attractive an option, the sharp rise in the policy interest rate in
1998 was clearly a policy mistake.




                                                42
        Besides the standard shocks that all open emerging market economies could face,
transition economies could face specific external shock related to the EU accession:
specifically, the convergence play. The convergence play refers to capital inflows to
accession countries stimulated by the expected behavior of interest rates and exchange rate
ahead of the EMU accession. Countries that have joined the EMU in the past have
experienced a sizeable decline in the currency risk premium of their debt, that is, the
premium to compensate the debt holders for the risk that their currency would loose value.
The decline in currency risk premium resulted in lower interest rates on their debt
instruments in local currency, and thus higher price of these instruments. Increased prices
allowed holders of these instruments to realize capital gains. Therefore, investors could
reasonably expect that transition countries that have joined the EU will soon join the EMU as
well, and from the past experience, they could expect a reduction in interest rates on debt
instruments issued by these countries that would allow them to reap capital gains. In other
words, these investors have incentive to play on the convergence of interest rates to EMU
level and invest in fixed-income instruments issued by accession countries. The resulting
increase in capital inflows and currency appreciation could be viewed as a pure portfolio
shock that would require interest rate reduction. But reducing interest rates could conflict
with the inflation target, because it could stimulate domestic demand too much and result in
faster increase in domestic prices. On the other hand, if monetary policy does not respond,
the large capital inflow could lead to the standard problems of excessive currency
appreciation, balance of payments problems, and reversal of capital flow resulting in
currency depreciation and higher inflation.

       Complicating the problem even more is the exposure of accession countries to a
second shock – in this case a real shock. It has been well documented that as transition
economies catch up with the more developed EU countries, they experience rapid
productivity growth, which produces real exchange rate appreciation, either by means of
nominal appreciation or by means of a higher inflation. In this case, the appreciation of the
domestic currency should be seen as an equilibrium phenomenon, which is sustainable and
does not require a monetary policy response. In sum, in the period ahead of the EU/EMU
membership, accession countries could be exposed to two simultaneous external shocks that
would tend to produce exchange rate appreciation, but which would call for a different policy
response. In practice, it could be difficult to disentangle what part of the currency
appreciation is the result of the portfolio shock and what part results from the real shock.
Balance of payments data on the size and composition of capital flows, and data on
productivity growth should provide some indication of relative importance of these two types
of shocks

        The recent experience of the Czech Republic illustrates yet another problem: currency
appreciation caused by a large inflow of foreign direct investment (FDI) as a result of sale of
state-owned enterprises to foreign owners. One can argue that currency appreciation resulting
from the inflow of FDI is the typical real shock that does not call for a monetary policy
response: the currency appreciates, but FDI inflow results in more investment, better
management etc., and ultimately in higher productivity, which validated the appreciation of
the currency. This argument has two problems. First, while currency appreciation will


                                              43
happen always when there is a sale of domestic assets to foreigners for foreign currency, it is
less sure that the increase in productivity validating the currency appreciation will follow.
For example, a large part of recent sales consisted of utilities where the potential for
increasing the competitiveness in export markets is limited. Second, there is a time
discrepancy between the timing of the currency appreciation (immediately) and the
productivity increase (later). And third, expectation of currency appreciation as a result of
sales to foreigners of state-owned assets could itself induce investors to take positions in the
domestic currency, in order to benefit from the expected appreciation once the privatization
payment materializes. This would produce a currency appreciation even before the
privatization-related capital inflow materializes.

         All this complicates significantly the task of inflation-targeting central bank. To the
extent that currency appreciation reflects an equilibrium phenomenon, appreciation of the
real equilibrium exchange rate, there would be little reason for concern. Such appreciation
would not threaten economic growth and external equilibrium, and if inflation is still above
the long-term target, it should help the central bank to bring inflation down. But how much
should a central bank worry if this real appreciation is too fast and too large? It could result
in a widening current account deficit and subsequent large exchange rate depreciation, with
negative effects on inflation. And it could cause problems in corporate sector, because
adjustment to a fast and large currency appreciation could be more difficult. The standard
prescription for a central bank dealing with large capital inflows and currency appreciation is
sterilized intervention: buy foreign currency in foreign exchange market and neutralize
monetary effects of this intervention by selling bonds. Eventually, this intervention could be
complemented by interest rate cuts, to reduce the incentive for capital inflows.

        But this prescription may be of little help in the circumstances like those in the Czech
Republic in the 2001-2002. Large capital inflows are mainly in the form of FDI, and not
attracted by a large interest rate differential. Reducing interest rates is not going to slow
down FDI inflows. These are interest rate-insensitive. Sterilized intervention would be
possible, but this policy has its own problems. In order to be effective, it would have to be of
a very large amount (in the order of several billions of dollars) and it may not even be
effective at all. Sterilizing such intervention would be quite costly for the central bank. 40

        For these reasons, the CNB has pursued a pragmatic strategy of gradual interest rate
reduction, combined with occasional foreign exchange market intervention of limited
magnitude. This intervention has been subsequently sterilized. The CNB recognizes that at
present, currency appreciation reflects mainly the effect of the FDI inflow, as that it is
therefore a real shock that the monetary policy has no business of neutralizing. However, the
speed of the appreciation could be occasionally too fast, and at that point, the CNB feels that
it could slow down the pace of appreciation by intervening, so that the corporate sector has
more time to adjust to the trend appreciation. In late 2002, capital inflows related to the

40
     Of course, with falling interest rate differential, the costs of sterilization decline as well.




                                                   44
convergence play (the portfolio shock) were not a serious issue for the Czech Republic,
partly because the convergence play and the compression of yield spreads had already taken
place.41 Otherwise, the situation would have been even more complicated.

        Another reason for not having benign neglect of the exchange rate is emphasized in
Mishkin (2000) and Mishkin and Savastano (2001). For the reasons discussed earlier,
transition countries with a lot of foreign-denominated debt may not be able to afford large
depreciations of their currencies which can destroy balance sheets and trigger a financial
crisis. Central banks in these countries my thus have to smooth “excessive” exchange rate
fluctuations, but not attempt to keep the exchange rate from reaching its market determined
level over longer horizons. The stated rationale for exchange rate smoothing would be
similar to that for interest-rate smoothing, which is practiced by most central banks, even
those engaged in inflation targeting: the policy is not aimed at resisting market-determined
movements in the exchange rate, but at mitigating potentially destabilizing effects of abrupt
changes in exchange rates.

        The challenges facing the central bank are somewhat different in Hungary. As was
noted, Hungary still maintains an exchange rate band ±15 percent. In the literature on
inflation targeting, it is often emphasized that the absence of a second nominal anchor is one
of the prerequisite of the successful inflation targeting. Pursuing two nominal objectives
could result in a situation where one objective will need to be given preference over the
second objective, but without a clear guidance how such conflict would be resolved, this
could make monetary policy less transparent. 42 The question arises, to what extent might the
existence of the ±15 percent exchange rate band in Hungary be considered as a second
nominal anchor whose attainment could eventually conflict with the inflation target? The
answer has turned out to be "a lot".

        In mid-February, the exchange rate of the forint hovered some 12-13 percent above
the parity, approaching quickly the upper part of the band. Partly as a result of uncertainty
related to parliamentary election, the currency weakened somewhat during the Spring and
Summer, but it began to appreciate again later in 2002. In January 2003, it approached the
upper end of the band, and speculation about the revaluation of the parity resulted in a sharp
acceleration of capital inflow that forced the NBH to respond by cutting interest rates by 2
percentage points and intervening heavily in the foreign exchange market. The NBH is
reported to have bought more than 5 billion euros, increasing international reserves by 50

41
  In fact, at the end of 2002, spreads on domestic currency sovereign bonds compared to the
benchmark German bonds were negative for all maturities. See Ceska Sporitelna/Erste bank
(2002). Of course, the question is whether such dramatic compression of yield spreads is
sustainable.
42
   On the experience with inflation targeting in the presence of nominal exchange rate band
in Israel, see Leidermann (2000).




                                              45
percent and base money by 70 percent.43 Even though the NBH began subsequently to
sterilize this huge injection of liquidity, market participants now assume that maintaining the
exchange rate band will have a priority over the inflation target and expect inflation in 2003
to exceed the NBH inflation target.by 5 percentage points..44

        This conflict between the inflation target and exchange rate target need not be a
unique problem for Hungary. Other accession countries could face this problem once they
become members of the EU and once they decide to join the ERM2 mechanism that requires
them to limit exchange rate fluctuations exactly in the same way as Hungary does already
today, that is, to peg the currency against the euro and allow maximum ±15 percent
fluctuation around the established parity. Therefore, we now turn to the issue of monetary
policy implementation in the period after the EU accession and before the EMU accession.

                        6. Monetary policy within the ERM2 System

         The participation in the ERM2 mechanism and subsequently in the EMU is obligatory
for all new EU members (no opt-out clause available). Albeit, the new EU members do not
have to join the ERM2 mechanism immediately after the EU entry. Therefore, after joining
the EU, the new members will have to decide on how quickly to join the ERM2 mechanism
and thus the EMU, and whether the ERM2 membership would require a modification of the
inflation targeting framework.

        How would monetary policy in the accession countries operate under the ERM2
regime, and what would be the main nominal anchor of the economy? Formally, the
monetary policy framework after joining the ERM2 mechanism will be similar to the
monetary policy framework in Hungary today, where the ±15 percent fluctuation band is
already in place. But there will be also important differences. First, the actual EMU entry will
be approaching, which could have important implications for capital flows (convergence
play) and fiscal policy implementation (need to meet fiscal criteria). Second, breaching the
target band (its lower side) would have different consequences for Hungary today and for
accession countries operating within the ERM2 regime. Third, unlike Hungary’s monetary
policy today, monetary policy and exchange rate of an accession country within the ERM2
regime will be of common interest to all EMU members, and the European Central Bank
(ECB) could intervene to help the accession country to keep the exchange rate within the
band.

        The ERM2 fluctuation band will allow rather large exchange rate movements, too
large to provide a sufficiently firm nominal anchor. For this reason, the inflation target will

43
     See J.P. Morgan (2003).
44
  Analysts have interpreted this as an evidence that the NBH is determined to maintain the
currency band even at the cost of temporary higher inflation. See IMF (2002).




                                               46
likely need to continue to play the role of nominal anchor as it did in Spain before its entry
into EMU (see Bernanke et al., 1999). Successful operation of inflation targeting after the
ERM2 entry should be facilitated by the fact that the process of disinflation is likely to be
largely completed. Low inflation could reduce, though not fully eliminate, the probability
that the inflation target would conflict with the commitment to maintain the currency within
the ERM2. Still, the possibility of a conflict between the inflation target and the ERM2
exchange rate band cannot be fully excluded. But it is important to be clear about the nature
of this risk and how it could be mitigated.

        Within a ERM2 framework, two situations could arise where monetary and other
policies may need to be constraint by the fact that the exchange rate is approaching the lower
or upper side of the band. One possibility is that the exchange rate would approach the upper
(appreciated) band, as is now happening in Hungary. In order to prevent breaching the
permitted fluctuation band, interest rates may need to be reduced to moderate the pressure on
the currency. But lower interest rates could interfere with the inflation target, because they
could stimulate domestic demand more than the central bank considers prudent, and could
produce higher inflationary pressures. However, a strongly appreciating currency would
simultaneously also act as a mechanism to dampen inflationary pressures, so it is not at all
obvious that this conflict with inflation target would actually become serious.45 If reducing
interest rates would not help, and pressures on the currency to appreciate would persist,
another option would be to revalue the central parity.46 This would reduce the burden of
monetary policy and at the same time introduce a one-time deflationary shock.

        A different conflict between inflation target and exchange rate band would arise if
there is a downward pressure on the currency and if the exchange rate threatens to break
through the lower (more depreciated) end of the band. Breaching the ERM2 lower target
band would force the country to start again the ERM2 two-year test, so it could be potentially
costly. Central banks could react to such a situation by tightening monetary policy and
raising interest rates. But this response certainly should not conflict necessarily with the
inflation target. On the contrary, it should be in line with the inflation-targeting policy if the
reason for downward pressure was too relaxed a policy. And tighter monetary policy would
also help to mitigate inflationary pressures that may arise from currency depreciation. Tighter
monetary policy would also be appropriate in the case when the currency depreciates as a
result of a negative portfolio shock. Higher interest rates should help arrest capital outflow,
by making domestic currency assets more attractive. But the situation could be more

45
  The direct effect of the appreciated exchange rate on inflation will be felt sooner than the
indirect effect of reduced interest rates on aggregate demand and demand-induced
acceleration of inflation.
46
   For countries in the ERM2 framework, the ECB would also be expected to help a national
central bank to sustain the currency inside the fluctuation band, of course, to the extent that
this does not interfere with the ECB’s price stability objective.




                                               47
complicated when the currency depreciates as a result of negative real shock which at the
same time reduced aggregate demand for domestic output (domestic or foreign demand).
Maintaining the currency within the fluctuation band could require a tighter policy stance
than what would be required if monetary policy were guided only by the inflation target. As a
result, actual inflation would become lower than the inflation target, and monetary policy
would further weaken demand and economic activity that was already affected adversely by
the negative real shock. Under the normal circumstances, this would not be desirable. But
temporary lower economic activity may be a price worth paying in a situation where the
alternative would be to violate the Maastricht criterion of two years of successful operation
within the ERM2 system, thus delaying the EMU entry.

         To some extent, fiscal policy could be used to reconcile eventual conflict between
inflation target and ERM2 band. First, maintaining a fiscal policy stance that would clearly
indicate authorities’ determination to meet Maastricht criteria of public debt and fiscal deficit
would reduce the risk of downward pressure on the currency as a result of a negative
portfolio shock. It would also allow the maintenance of lower interest rates than if fiscal
policy were more expansionary, and thus reduce short-term capital inflows. Second, a
changing fiscal policy stance could be used as a defense against large exchange rate
movements threatening to breach the ERM2 band. Fiscal policy could be tightened even
more than what is required by Maastricht criteria in case of downward pressure on the
currency that would threaten to break the lower side of the band, or – to the extent that
meeting Maastricht criteria is not threatened – it could be relaxed in case of upward pressure
on the currency. But in this case, using interest rate policy would be clearly preferable as a
first line of defense.

        The risk of conflict between the inflation target and exchange rate target will depend
importantly on market expectations of conversion rate of the national currency into the euro.
If market participants expect that the current market rate will be also the conversion rate,
there will be less risk of such conflict as the behavior of market participants should actually
limit the fluctuation of the actual exchange rate. However, widespread market expectation
that future conversion rate will differ significantly from the current exchange rate could
result in large and volatile capital flows and swings in actual exchange rate that could
severely complicate the simultaneous achievement of inflation target (sufficiently low
inflation to meet the Maastricht criteria) and exchange rate target (keeping the currency
within the fluctuation band).


        How should inflation targets be set after the countries will have joined the EU and
eventually the ERM2 mechanism? The obvious answer is to set the inflation target in such
way that it would converge to inflation rate estimated to be consistent with the Maastricht
criterion. Table 6 shows the annual inflation rate in three current EMU members with lowest
inflation rate in the period 1995-2001. If we add to the average of inflation in three euro area
best performers and the 1.5 percentage point margin allowed by the Maastricht Treaty, we
receive the maximum permissible inflation in the accession countries that would be applied if
they were to join the EMU in that particular year.


                                               48
Table 6. Lowest inflation rates in EMU countries, 1995-2000

                1995    1996     1997          1998         1999        2000       2001
Country A       0.8     0.6      1.2           0.8          0.5         1.7        1.6
Country B       1.5     1.3      1.3           0.9          0.6         1.9        2.5
Country C       1.7     1.4      1.4           0.9          0.6         2.3        2.5
Average         1.3     1.1      1.3           0.9          0.6         2.0        2.2
inflation
Maastrict       2.8     2.6      2.8           2.4          2.1         3.5        3.7
Criterion
inflation 1/

1/ Average inflation in three countries plus 1.5 percentage points. Average inflation rounded
up.
Source: United Nations (2002).

        If we take the period 1995-2001 as a benchmark, the inflation rate that the accession
countries would have to reach in order to meet the Maastricht criterion was in the range 2.1-
3.7 percent. In 1998 and 1999, inflation in the euro area countries was particularly low, and it
would thus seem that reaching the Maastricht objective would have been particularly
challenging for accession countries at that time. However, we should note that to some
extent, exceptionally low inflation in the euro area was a part of global tendency of falling
inflation, which affected the transition economies as well. To the extent that inflation in the
euro area and in the transition economies waiting to join the EMU moves jointly in response
to common external shocks like falling commodity prices and weak global economic activity
accompanied by large excess production capacity and weak pricing power of producers,
lower permissible inflation does not make it necessary more difficult (does not require a
tighter monetary policy) to qualify for the EMU.

       We can also see that the range of maximum permissible inflation 2.1-3.7 percent is
broadly in line with the long-term inflation targets in the Czech Republic (2-4 percent),
Hungary (around 2 percent) and Poland (less than 4 percent).

                                        7. Conclusion

        In this paper, we have discussed the experience with inflation targeting in the three
transition economies – the Czech Republic, Hungary and Poland. We have examined the
circumstances leading to the switch from exchange rate pegs to inflation targeting and the
modalities of inflation targeting in each of these countries. The short history of inflation
targeting in these three countries does not yet allow us to draw any definitive conclusions
about the success or failure of this regime. However, we conclude that inflation targeting in
transition economies could be implemented reasonably successfully. While the examined
countries have missed inflation targets often by a large margin, they nevertheless progressed


                                              49
well with disinflation. Still, increased uncertainty prevailing in transition economies makes it
particularly difficult to predict inflation sufficiently well ahead, as required by a forward-
looking nature of inflation-targeting approach. In view of that, and given the possibility that
transition countries will be more frequently hit by shocks that could divert inflation from the
targeted path, misses of inflation targets are more likely than in the more advanced
economies.

        This does not imply that monetary policy targeting other nominal variables like
monetary aggregates would make the task of controlling inflation easier. Even though
inflation targeting in transition economies is more difficult than in advanced economies, it
could still bring significant benefits. It should be clear, though, that too much focus on hitting
inflation targets at any price at all times could produce a significant instability of monetary
policy instruments, damaging economic performance. The focus of inflation-targeting central
banks should be on the medium-term horizon to ensure that disinflation remains on track and
that inflation converges to level deemed consistent with price stability. Alongside this
trajectory, there will inevitably be misses, possibly sizeable. Thus, the onus is on central
banks’ ability to communicate to the public clearly what are the limits and possibilities of
inflation targeting in transition economies, and if it happens, to explain credibly and openly
why inflation targets were missed.

        A key lesson from the experience of the inflation targeting transition countries is that
economic performance will improve and support for the central bank will be higher if central
banks emphasize avoiding undershoots of the inflation target as much as avoiding
overshoots. Undershoots of the inflation targets have resulted in serious economic
downturns that has eroded support for the central bank in both the Czech Republic and
Poland. Also economic performance will be enhanced if inflation targeting central banks in
transition countries do not engage in active manipulation of the exchange rate. This seems to
be less of an issue in the Czech Republic and Poland, but is still a live issue in Hungary.

        A difficult problem for inflation targeting in transition countries is the often stormy
relationship between the central bank and the government. This can be alleviated by having
a direct government involvement in the setting of the inflation target and with a more active
role of the central bank in communicating with both the government and the public. In
addition having technocrats appointed as the head of a central bank rather than politicians
may help in depersonalizing the conduct of monetary policy and increase support for the
independence of the central bank.

        We have also addressed the future perspective of monetary policy in the transition
economies. We concluded that even after the EU accession, inflation targeting can remain the
main pillar of monetary strategy in the three examined accession countries during the time
before they will join the EMU. Inflation targets would be guided toward meeting the
Maastricht criteria for inflation, which would require maintenance of inflation at the level
defined in long-term inflation objectives.




                                               50
        In addition, an important advantage of the inflation targeting regimes in transition
countries is that the central banks in the countries practicing inflation targeting have been
learning how to set monetary policy instruments to hit their inflation goals. Since these
central banks will have a role in setting monetary policy instruments at the ECB when they
enter EMU, the monetary policy experience that they have acquired by operating an inflation
targeting regime, will help them play a more active and positive role in deliberations at the
ECB.




                                             51
                                        References

Akerlof, George et al. (1996), “The Macroeconomics of Low Inflation.” Brookings Papers
on Economic Activity, 1, pp. 1-76,

Ball, Lawrenece (1994), “What Determines the Sacrifice Ratio?” In N. Gregory Mankiw
(ed.), Monetary Policy. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.

Begg, David (1998), “Pegging Out: Lessons from the Czech Exchange Rate Crisis,” Journal
of Comparative Economics 26, 669-690.

Bernanke, B. S., Laubach, T., Mishkin, F.S. and A. S. Posen 1999. Inflation Targeting.
Lessons from the International Experience. Princeton, New Jersey. Princeton
University Press.

Brash, Donald T. (2000). "Inflation Targeting in New Zealand, 1988-2000," Speech to the
Trans- Tasman Business Cycle, Melbourne, February 9.

Calvo, Guillermo and Frederic S. Mishkin (2003). “The Mirage of Exchange Rate Regimes for
Emerging Market Countries,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, forthcoming.

Capek, Aleš (1999), “Udrñet inflaci pod kontrolou bude stále obtíñnjší” (“Keeping Inflation
Under the Control Will Be Ever More Difficult”), HospodáÍské noviny, October 22, p. 9.


Ceska Sporitelna/Erste Bank (2002), Macroeconomic and Fixed Income Weekly Report,
December 16.

Clifton, Eric V. (1999), “Inflation Targeting: What is the Meaning of the Bottom of the
Band?” IMF Policy Discussion Paper, 99/8.

Clinton, Kevin (2000), “Strategic Choices for Inflation Targeting in the Czech Republic.” In
Warren Coats, ed., Inflation Targeting in Transition Economies: The Case of the Czech
Republic. Czech National Bank and the International Monetary Fund.

Czech National Bank (1997). Monthly Bulletin, 1997/5.

Czech National Bank (1999), Inflation Report, January.

Debelle, Guy (1997), “Inflation Targeting in Practice,” IMF Working Papers 97/35

Drew, Aaron and Adrian Orr, 1999. "The Reserve Bank's Role in the Recent Business Cycle:
Actions and Evolution," Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 62, No. 1.



                                             52
Eichengreen, Barry (1999), “Solving the Currency Conundrum.” Paper prepared for the
Council of Foreign Relations Study Group on Economic and Financial Development
(http://elsa.berkeley.edu/users/eichengr/htm.)

Eichengreen, Barry (2001), “Can Emerging Markets Float? Should They Inflation Target?”
Mimeo, see http://elsa.berkeley.edu/users/eichengr/POLICY.HTM

Estrella, Arturo and Frederic S. Mishkin (1997), “Is There a Role for Monetary Aggregates
in the Conduct of Monetary Policy,” Journal of Monetary Economics 40:2 (October) pp.
279-304.

European Bank for Reconstruction and Development (2002), Transition Report 2002.

Fischer, Stanley (1994), “Modern Central Banking,” in Forrest Capie, Charles A. Goodhart,
Stanley Fischer and Norbert Schnadts, Eds., The Future of Central Banking: The
Tercentenary Symposium of the Bank of England, pp. 262-308. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press, 1994.

Groshen, Erica L. and Schweitzer, Mark E. (1996). "The Effects of Inflation on Wage
Adjustments in Firm-Level Data: Grease or Sand?" Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff
Reports, No. 9.

Groshen, Erica L. and Schweitzer, Mark E. (1999). "Identifying Inflation's Grease and Sand
Effects in the Labor Market," in Martin Feldstein, ed., The Costs and Benefits of Price Stability
(University of Chicago Press, Chicago): 273-308.

Haldane, Andrew (1998), “Pursuing Price Stability: Evidence from the United Kingdom and
Other Inflation-Targeters”, in Czech National Bank, Workshop on Inflation Targeting,
Prague.

International Monetary Fund (1999), World Economic Outlook, October 1999.

International Monetary Fund (2001), “Monetary and Exchange Rate Regimes in Central
European Economies on the Road to EU Accession and Monetary Union. Unpublished.

International Monetary Fund (2002), Global Market Monitor, December 17.

Kysilka, Pavel (1998), “Nezdravý rçst dlouho nevydrñí.” (“Unhealthy Growth Will Not Be
Sustainable”) Ekonom, 4, 10-12.

Leidermann, Leonardo (2000), “Inflation Targeting Under a Crawling Band: Lessons from
Israel,” in Mario Blejer et al. (eds), “Inflation Targeting in Practice: Strategic and
Operational Issues and Application to Emerging Market Economies.” International Monetary
Fund, Washington, D.C.



                                               53
Mishkin, F.S. (1996) "Understanding Financial Crises: A Developing Country Perspective,"
in Michael Bruno and Boris Pleskovic, eds., Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics 1996 (World Bank: Washington D.C.): 29-62.

Mishkin, F.S. (1999), "Lessons from the Asian Crisis," Journal of International Money and
Finance, 18, 4 (August): 709-723.

Mishkin, F.S. (2000), "Inflation Targeting in Emerging Market Countries," American
Economic Review (May), Vol. 90, #2: 105-109.

Mishkin, F.S. (2001), "Issues in Inflation Targeting," in Price Stability and the Long-Run
Target for Monetary Policy, (Bank of Canada: Ottawa, Canada, 2001): 203-222.

Mishkin, F.S. and M.A. Savastano (2001), “Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America.”
Journal of Development Economics, 66, No. 2, 415-444.

Mishkin, F.S. and Klaus Schmidt-Hebel (2002), “One Decade of Inflation Targeting in the
World: What Do We Know and What Do We Need to Know?” ) in Norman Loayza and
Raimundo Soto, eds., Inflation Targeting: Design, Performance, Challenges (Central Bank
of Chile: Santiago 2002): 117-219.

Morgan, J.P. (2003), Emerging Europe, Middle East & Africa Weekly, January 31.

National Bank of Hungary (2001), Quarterly Report on Inflation, August.

National Bank of Poland (1998), Medium-Term Strategy of Monetary Policy.

National Bank of Poland (2001), Inflation Report 2000, appendix 2.

Orlowski, Lucjan T. (2000), “Direct Inflation Targeting in Central Europe.” Post-Soviet
Geography and Economics, 41, No. 2, pp. 134-154.

Schaechter, Andrea et al. (2000), “Adopting Inflation Targeting: Practical Issues for
Emerging Market Countries.” IMF Occasional Paper 202, Washington, D.C.

Siklos, Pierre L. and István Ábel (2001), “Is Hungary Ready for Inflation Targeting?” Mimeo

Stock, James H. and Mark W. Watson, (1999), “Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S.
Macroeconomic Time Series”, in J.B. Taylor and M. Woodford, eds., Handbook of
Macroeconomics. Amsterdam, Elsevier, pp. 3-64.

Summers, Larry (1991), “Panel Discussion: Price Stability; How Should Long-Term
Monetary Policy Be Determined?” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 23, August,
part II, pp. 625-631.



                                              54
Svensson, Lars E.O. (1997), “Inflation Forecast Targeting:Implementing and Monitoring
Inflation Targets,” European Economic Review, Vol. 41, pp. 1111-1146.

Svensson, Lars E.O. (2000), “Open-Economy Inflation Targeting.” Journal of International
Economics, 50, pp. 155-183.


Škreb, Marko (1998), “A Note on Inflation.” In: Carlo Cotarelli a György Szapari, eds.,
Moderate Inflation. International Monetary Fund and National Bank of Hungary, pp. 179-
184.

United Nations Economic Survey of Europe, 2002, No. 1.




                                            55
                                         Figure 1. Czech Republic. Annual Inflation and Inflation Targets

      16

                                  CNB announces targeting net inflation               CNB announces targeting headline inflation
      14

                                  headline inflation

      12



      10

                                                net inflation targets

       8                                                                                                       headline inflation targets
                                                                               `
  %




       6



       4


                         net inflation
       2



       0
      97




                    98




                                           99




                                                               00




                                                                          01




                                                                                       02




                                                                                                          03




                                                                                                                               04




                                                                                                                                            05
                                                             20




                                                                          20




                                                                                      20




                                                                                                        20




                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                            20
      -2



Year-over-year
Source. Czech Statistical Office
                                                   -2-




                                             Figure 2. Poland: Actual Inflation and Inflation Target

       20


       18                                                   NBP announces inflation targeting 1/


       16


       14


       12


       10
   %




        8


        6


        4


        2


        0
       97




                             98




                                                     99




                                                                              00




                                                                                                      01




                                                                                                                               02




                                                                                                                                                       03
                                                                            20




                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                             20




                                                                                                                                                     20
             1/ In June 1998, the NBP defined end-1999 inflation target. However, the NBP officially annoucned introduction of inflation targeting only in September


Year over year
Source: Central Statistical Office Poland
                                          -3-




                                    Figure 3. Hungary: Actual Inflation and Inflation Targets

      20


      18                                                                              NBH announces inflation targeting


      16


      14


      12


      10
  %




       8


       6


       4


       2


       0
      97




                     98




                                     99




                                                     00




                                                                    01




                                                                                    02




                                                                                                      03




                                                                                                                            04
                                                   20




                                                                  20




                                                                                  20




                                                                                                    20




                                                                                                                          20
Year over year
Source: Hungarian Central Statistical Office
                                                        -4-




                           Figure 4. Inflation in Czech Republic, Poland and the Non-inflation Targeting Floaters

       60

                                                                                                    Romania


       50




       40




       30                                       Start of inflation targets in CR 1/
   %




                                                                               Start of inflation targets in Poland 1/

       20
                Poland
                                                                                                        Slovakia

            Czech Republic
       10                                                                                                                 Slovenia




        0
       97




                                98




                                                              99




                                                                                        00




                                                                                                                     01




                                                                                                                                       02
                                                                                      20




                                                                                                                   20




                                                                                                                                     20
            1/ Indicates the date of first inflation target


Year over year
Source: Czech Statistical Office, Central Statistical Office Poland, Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia., Statistical
office of the Slovak Republic, National Statistical Office of Romania.
                                                        -5-




                                      Figure 5. Inflation in the Czech Republic, Poland and Countries With Peg

      40


                                                                             Start of inflation targets in Poland 1/
      35

                                             Bulgaria
      30


      25


                                             Start of inflation targets in the CR 1/
      20
             Poland
      15
  %




                   Estonia                               Czech Republic

      10

                             Latvia
       5


       0

                                                                                                                               Lithuania
       97




                                 98




                                                               99




                                                                                         00




                                                                                                                   01




                                                                                                                          02
                                                                                       20




                                                                                                                 20




                                                                                                                        20
       -5


      -10
             1/ Indicates the date of first inflation target


Year over year
Source: Czech Statistical Office, Central Statistical Office Poland, NBP, National Statistical Office of Bulgaria, Statistical office
of Estonia, Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia., Statistical office of the Slovak Republic. Statistics Lithuania, Central
Statistical Bureau Latvia.
                                              -6-




                                     Figure 6. Transition Economies: Real GDP (1997 = 100)

  130


  125


  120


  115


  110


  105


  100


   95


   90


   85


   80
            CR         Hungary       Poland         Slovakia       Slovenia       Estonia     Latvia   Lithuania     Bulgaria

                                                    1997   1998   1999   2000   2001   2002




Source: Czech Statistical Office, Central Statistical Office Poland, National Statistical Office of Bulgaria, Statistical office of
Estonia, Statistical Office of the Republic of Slovenia., Statistical office of the Slovak Republic, Statistics Lithuania, Central
Statistical Bureau Latvia,
