                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           TWIN FALLACIES ABOUT EXCHANGE
                           RATE POLICY IN EMERGING MARKETS

                                         Carmen M. Reinhart
                                         Vincent R. Reinhart

                                         Working Paper 9670
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9670


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      April 2003




We have benefitted from helpful comments from Phillipe Bacchetta and Paul De Grauwe. The views
expressed are our own and are not necessarily shared by others at the International Monetary Fund or the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and
not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Carmen M. Reinhart and Vincent R. Reinhart. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Twin Fallacies About Exchange Rate Policy in Emerging Markets
Carmen M. Reinhart and Vincent R. Reinhart
NBER Working Paper No. 9670
April 2003
JEL No. F30, F31, F41

                                            ABSTRACT


Two assertions about exchange rate regimes circulate with some frequency in policy circles. The
first, the hypothesis of the excluded middle, holds that authorities must either choose perfectly
floating exchange rates (preferably anchored by an inflation target for the central bank) or a hard
(preferably irrevocable) peg. The second, seemingly unrelated, argues that the inability of emerging
market economies to exercise monetary independence owes to the severe mistrust that they are
perceived with by global investors because of the economic failures of prior governments. This
paper argues that the theories of the excluded middle and original sin are twin and related fallacies
that are contrary to theory and evidence.

This paper will provide a model in which the government can choose policies consistent with either
a pure float anchored by a constant money stock or a pure peg but, under certain circumstances, fail
to find exchange rate stability at either corner. The problem is that the potential for regime change
implies that the current government’s successors may behave less admirably, which will weigh on
investors’ current behavior. The difficulties imparted by this expectation channel in an otherwise
standard model of optimizing agents endowed with rational expectations shows both why looking
back to explain credibility problems is looking the wrong way and why the excluded middle is, in
fact, so crowded.


Carmen M. Reinhart                                    Vincent Raymond Reinhart
Research Department                                   Division of Monetary Affairs
Room 10-700H                                          Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
International Monetary Fund                           Washington, DC 20551
700 19th Street, NW                                   vreinhart@frb.gov
Washington, DC 20431
and NBER
reinhart@econ.umd.edu
                T WIN F ALLACIES ABOUT E XCHANGE R ATE P OLICY
                            IN E MERGING M ARKETS

I. Introduction

      Two assertions about exchange rate regimes circulate with some frequency in

policy circles. The first, which could be called the hypothesis of the excluded middle,

holds that authorities must either choose perfectly floating exchange rates (preferably

anchored by an inflation target for the central bank) or a hard (preferably irrevocable)

peg.1 In the former camp tends to be the small number of industrial countries with

sufficient credibility to run independent monetary policies. In the latter camp are

mostly emerging market economies that have so little credibility in the financial

marketplace that adopting another country’s currency seems like a small sacrifice of

autonomy.

      The second, seemingly unrelated, notion attempts to explain why policy makers

in some countries have little credibility. Eichengreen and Hausmann (1999) and

Hausmann (2002) argue that the inability of emerging-market economies to exercise

monetary independence owes to the severe mistrust that they are perceived with by

global investors. That mistrust, exemplified by the inability of emerging market



      1
         One clear expression of this view is the quote from Summers (2000) repeated
in Fischer’s (2002) more nuanced discussion of the choice of exchange rate regime.
Frankel, Schmukler, and Serven (2000) offer a theoretical model to explain some
advantages of being at the corners. There is some ambiguity in this literature on how
“hard” is a hard peg, ranging from a conventional fixed exchange rate to the adoption
of an anchor currency.
economies to borrow at long maturities in their own currencies, transcends current

fundamentals and traces back to the failure of prior policy makers. Hausmann dubs

this “original sin” to emphasize that this lack of credibility is a taint unrelated to

actions or incentives of the current crop of authorities.

       This paper argues that the theories of the excluded middle and original sin are

twin and related fallacies that are contrary to theory and evidence. The sense that

credibility problems stem from a simple and irrational source–failures of prior

generations of policy makers–lends credence to alternative regimes that seem to allow

the easy purchase of investor confidence–an exchange rate regime at one of the

corners. Two decades of theory and empirical evidence cumulate to argue that this is

too simple an answer. As to the theory, the literature on time inconsistency,

pioneered by Guillermo Calvo (1978), has amply demonstrated that the inability to

precommit future policy decisions gives reason to doubt that the current regime will

be maintained. That doubt stems, not from the record of prior failures, but from the

inconsistency of incentives in the future.

       As to the evidence, Reinhart (2000) and Calvo and Reinhart (2002) have

documented the record of what authorities actually do rather than what they report

and have found that the excluded middle is crowded indeed. Many exchange rate

regimes–particularly in emerging market economies–exhibit limited flexibility. That is,

the variability of exchange rates is damped relative to a typical asset price but not so

                                              2
small as to be considered a peg. These very dirty floats or quite soft pegs seem to

reflect an unwillingness on the part of authorities to trust the foreign exchange

markets enough to either float freely or to be fixed. For Calvo and Reinhart, this is

evidence of a “fear of floating.”

       This paper will provide a model in which the government can choose policies

consistent with either a pure float anchored by a constant money stock or a pure peg

but, under certain circumstances, fail to find exchange rate stability at either corner.

The problem is that the current government faces an election at a later date, and the

possibility that its successors may behave less admirably will weigh on investors’

current behavior. The difficulties imparted by this expectation channel in an

otherwise standard model of optimizing agents endowed with rational expectations

shows both why looking back to explain credibility problems is looking the wrong way

and why the excluded middle is so crowded.

       The next section provides some stylized evidence that suggests policy makers in

many Latin American countries do face investor objections that would seem

consistent with original sin. That section then takes what might seem like a detour in

an economics paper by examining early Christian thought on original sin. However,

this digression shows that a consistent interpretation of the doctrine stresses that the

“stain of Adam” made people fallible so that their future actions cannot be counted on.

Hence, original sin provides a rational warning about the future, not an irrational

                                             3
stigma from the past.

       The model in Section III uses the device of a future election to show the

problems about choosing a corner solution for an exchange rate regime, and the last

section offers concluding comments.

II. Unequal Market Access and Original Sin

       We focus on the economies of Latin America because their experience has,

unfortunately, provided ample evidence of the withdrawal of global investors. Three

pieces of evidence establish this record.

       Figure 1 shows recent calculations of the distribution of bonds on the global

market by original issuer (as related in the International Monetary Fund’s Global

Financial Stability Report, 2002). In most model of optimizing portfolios, the amount of

debt outstanding should be proportional to income. That is, we should expect that

shares on the global bond market should approximate shares of world GDP. As is

evident in the solid line at the top panel, industrial countries are considerably

overrepresented on the world market, with the United States’ presence about double

its proportion of world income. Since global shares have to sum to 100 percent, the

industrial counties’ overages are mirrored by the small participation on the global debt

market of emerging markets, especially developing Asia but also including countries in

the Western Hemisphere. The relatively high levels of income per capita in the

industrial countries also implies that comparisons based on share of world population,

                                             4
Figure 1: The Global Bond Market, 2001
And World GDP
           50
           40             share of global bond market
           30
Percent




                                                          share of world GDP
           20
           10
           0
                United    Euro Area        Japan   Asia      Latin    E Europe,
                States                                      America    M East,
                                                                       Africa
And World Population
           60
           50            share of global
           40             bond market                       share of world
 Percent




           30                                                 population
           20
           10
            0
                United     Euro Area       Japan   Asia      Latin    E Europe,
                States                                      America    M East,
                                                                       Africa
 Source: (lines) IMF World Economic Outlook (9/02) and
     (bars) Global Financial Stability Report (10/02)
as in the bottom panel, are even more skewed.

       Reflecting this limited participation in global bond markets, issuers in emerging

markets have found it relatively more advantageous to rely on shorter maturities. As

shown in Figure 2, which is based on data from the International Monetary Fund’s

World Economic Outlook (IMF, 2002), this holds with particular force for the developing

countries of the Western Hemisphere. About 14 percent of the external debt of those

nations, on average over the past eight years, had a short maturity, the highest share of

the major developing country groups.

       Despite this relatively short maturity, as shown in the upper panel of Figure 3,

developing countries in the W estern Hemisphere have paid a higher rate on their

external debt than the other main groups of developing countries. Moreover, as is

evident in the bottom panel, that rate is especially volatile for countries in the Western

Hemisphere. In part, the higher and more volatile rate reflects a smaller proportion of

official aid at preferential rates in the total. But some portion of the higher and more

volatile interest cost evidences a distaste on the part of global investors for the

obligations of developing countries of the Western Hemisphere.

       Why so? In a series of influential papers written alone or with coauthors,

Ricardo Hausmann has offered a simple explanation for the inability of Latin

American countries to exert their presence on global financial markets (Eichengreen

and Hausmann, 1999, and Hausmann, 2002, among others). In particular, the

                                             5
       Figure 2: Share of Short-term in Total
       External Debt, 1994 to 2002

    Western Hemisphere


Middle East and Turkey


        Developing Asia


                  Africa


 All developing countries


                            10.0   10.5   11.0   11.5    12.0     12.5   13.0   13.5   14.0
                                                        Percent
   Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook (9/02)
Figure 3: Implied Interest Rate on External
Debt, 1980 to 2002
     Average level
     Western Hemisphere


 Middle East and Turkey


        Developing Asia


                 Africa


    Developing Countries


                           0.0   2.0         4.0   6.0   8.0     10.0 12.0 14.0 16.0 18.0 20.0
                                                               Percent
         Standard deviation of the annual change

     Western Hemisphere


 Middle East and Turkey


        Developing Asia


                 Africa


    Developing Countries


                           0.0         0.5         1.0     1.5             2.0   2.5   3.0   3.5
                                                                 Percent
       Source: IMF, World Economic Outlook (9/02)
evidence that developing countries cannot borrow abroad in their own currencies or

at longer maturities in any currency is taken to mean that global investors attach some

stigma to current governments as a result of the failure of previous governments.

This market failure creates the maturity and currency mismatches on balance sheets in

emerging market economies that are central to episodes of financial crisis and

contagion. While the perspective of two centuries of default experience provided by

Kaminsky, Reinhart, and Vegh (2002) does suggest that Latin American countries are

different, there are a variety of considerations in understanding the doctrine of

original sin and how it might apply to markets.

      At the sake of taking what appears to be an unconventional approach, we will

spend a little time examining what the doctrine of original sin meant to the

framers–Christian saints of the early millennium. Understanding what original sin

meant in its original context will reveal an important inadequacy in its modern

incarnation. In particular, early Christian scholars devoted considerable attention to

explaining why a just God would punish the children of Adam for transgressions in

the Garden of Eden. This literature can be roughly summarized as offering a three-

part syllogism:

      (1)    Because of Adam’s sin, all his children are mortal and fallible. In the

             Epistle to the Romans, St. Paul explained that “. . . for as by the

             disobedience of one man, many were made sinners . . .”

                                            6
       (2)    As a result of that original sin, all people now alive share the fallibility of

              Adam. St. Thomas Aquinas offered that the role of the individual

              should be seen as that as a part of society, or that “. . . an individual can

              be considered either as an individual or as part of a whole, a member of

              a society . . . Considered in the second way, an act can be his although he

              has not done it himself, nor has it been done by his free will but by the

              rest of society or by its head. . .”2

       (3)    As a logical consequence of the prior two propositions, we know that

              people are fallible, and those counting on their good behavior should be

              wary. The Christian scholar most associated with the doctrine of original

              sin, St. Augustine of Hippo, offered that “not what your ancestors have

              wrought but what you have thought is what matters.” 3

       St. Augustine’s doctrine is a forward-looking proposition of considerable depth.

In it is a sense that the past is past. Only the part of experience that might predict

future behavior is relevant for current experience. There is no stigma or stain in St.

Augustine, only an appreciation of the evil that fallible people may do in the future.




       2
         As quoted in the entry in the Catholic Encyclopedia of 1911 on “original sin,”
which is on the web at www.newadvent.org.
       3
         Garry Wills’s (1999) biography of St. Augustine addresses these issues, with
this quote appearing on page 128.

                                               7
III. Exchange Rate Determination at the Corners

       Our discussion of the true nature of the doctrine of original sin suggests that

we should look for the problem of credibility in the possibility of future folly rather

than some perceived stain from the past. Indeed, to make matters more distinct, the

model embodies a monetary policy maker acting consistently with the chosen

exchange rate regime. However, there will be an election at a later date that offers a

nontrivial possibility of regime change in which the subsequent policy maker will not

act so appropriately. By making the probability of regime change dependent on

conditions in the foreign exchange market, the possibility of a transition to a bad

central banker will complicate–indeed, potentially thwart–the efforts of the good

central banker at either exchange-rate corner, a pure float or a pure peg. Thus, an

understanding of the inability of policy makers to precommit the actions of

successors–to St. Augustine, the fallibility introduced by original sin–helps to explain

why the excluded middle is in fact so crowded.

       To do this, we consider a simple continuous-time framework grounded in

household optimization under, first, a pure float with an independent money growth

target consistent with price stability, and second, a pure peg supported by a consistent

domestic financial policy. This small nation produces a single good in fixed supply,

taking the foreign price level as given. To simplify matters, the foreign price level is

fixed over time at one. The (logarithm of the) exchange rate, e, is quoted as home

                                             8
currency per unit of foreign currency so that the (logarithm of the) domestic price

level also equals e.4

       The government spends a fixed amount per period on goods and varies a

lump-sum tax in an amount that satisfies its flow budget restraint so as to keep the

stock of its outstanding debt constant. That government spending is perfectly

wasteful, in that it does not enter household utility. The instantaneous utility of the

representative household depends on consumption and real money balances, the latter

written in logarithmic form as m - e. As Calvo (1979) showed in a model with fixed

output, the solution to this planning problem reduces to a Cagan-style demand for

money, as in

                                                                                          (1)

where the dot operator denotes the derivative with respect to time and 0 , the interest

elasticity of the demand for money, is constant. 5

       As is familiar from Mussa (1982) and Obstfeld and Rogoff (1995), the

determination of nominal magnitudes depends on the exchange rate regime and the

associated monetary and budgetary policy rules. Our complication will be to


       4
         Lower case letters will denote the logarithm of the variable and time
subscripts will be suppressed where possible.
       5
        Chapter 8 of Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996) provides a clear derivation of this
money demand function and its applicability to models of exchange rate
determination.

                                            9
introduce a nontrivial role for regime change. Specifically, at time t, it is announced

that an election will be held at time T, t < T. The current incumbent is committed to

keeping the stock of domestic reserves constant. However, the opposition party has

credibly included in its platform a more expansionary policy of increasing domestic

reserves at the rate : .

       The probability of a change in power is 8 , with 1-8 , therefore, equaling

probability that the government stays in office. Voters are sensitive to financial

market conditions at the time of the election. Simply put, an exchange rate different

from that consistent with price stability will alienate some of the citizenry–although it

is likely to be different people disappointed when the exchange rate is deemed to be

too high than when it is deemed too low. To capture the sense that what goes on in

financial markets speaks to the competence of the incumbent, we assume that the

probability of electoral success for the opposition depends on the square of the

deviation of the exchange rate at the time of the election from its level consistent with

price stability,   , or


                                                                                          (2)



This voting function obeys the properties of a probability density function, in that

                                       V’ > 0, and

                                    as y 64, V(y) 6 1.

                                            10
Since there are issues other than economic at play in the election, we also assume that

achieving price stability does not guarantee reelection,

                                          V(0) = v,

where v is some constant.6 A potential voting function that obeys these conditions is

depicted by the solid line in Figure 4.

       Having specified behavior, what is left is to consider the exchange rate regime.

A Pure Exchange Rate Float

       Let us assume that the current government is committed to a pure exchange

rate float and a monetary regime of price stability. Foreswearing transacting–or even

holding–foreign exchange reserves, the domestic money stock will be constant up to

time T and, if the incumbent wins reelection, forever after that. However, if the

opposition wins at time T, the money stock will growth at the rate : thereafter.

       The key to solving the model is to recognize that at the resolution of the sole

source of uncertainty at time T, the level of the exchange rate will jump discretely and

move subsequently along one of two distinct paths. Just before time T, the level of

the exchange rate must balance those two outcomes so that there is no excess return




       6
        In principle, the voting function could be thought of as the preference map
of the median voter, as in the models discussed by Persson and Tabellini (1994) and
summarized in the introduction of that book. Of course, the inconsistency that
remains in our model is that agents are assumed to homogenous when deriving
money demand and heterogenous in voting.

                                             11
in expected value terms. As is common in solving rational expectations models, we

will work backward by first characterizing exchange rate movements post election,

then the instant before the election, and lastly the evolution starting time t when the

election is first called.

       The economic structure of the model makes it straightforward to solve. If the

incumbent wins, the exchange rate and the price level will be expected to be stable

given that the money stock will be held constant. So, for all time after T,

                                                                                        (3)

which also defines the price-stability exchange rate,    , that appears in the voting

function. Similarly, if the opposition is elected, for all time after T, the exchange rate

will evolve according to:

                                                                                        (4)

Recognize here that the exchange rate will depreciate over time at the rate : as the

money stock expands at that same pace.

       The exchange rate just before the election (at the time measured an instant

before T) will be a weighted average of these two possibilities, with the weights given

by the voting function,

                                                                                        (5)


We can substitute the two explanations for the behavior of the exchange rate


                                            12
(equations 3 and 4) and collect terms to get:

                                                                                           (6)

Lastly, note that m equals the exchange rates’s value under price stability, so that

                                                                                           (7)

Taking 8 as fixed for a moment, this equation explains that the exchange rate just

before the election will be higher than (depreciated relative to) its value under price

stability the more likely the oppositions is likely to win, the more inflationary is its

announced policy, and the more sensitive to interest rates is money demand.

       But the probability of the opposition winning is not fixed, rather it is given by

the voting function. Substituting that function (equation 2) yields:


                                                                                           (8)



which is a nonlinear function in eT that admits an intuitive geometric solution. Note

that the right hand side of this equation is just a multiplicative factor of the voting

function, as in the dashed line in Figure 4. The ray with unit slope emanating from

the point where the exchange rate equals its price-stability level will intersect that

function at the solution point. At this fixed point, the exchange rate will be

depreciated relative to the value consistent with current policy continuing because

market participants will factor in the chance that the election may bring the opposition


                                             13
to power. Three observations stand out:

   •   The exchange rate will be more depreciated just before the election: the more

       sensitive are voters to financial market conditions, the more inflationary is the

       opposition’s policy, and the more sensitive are households to interest rates;

   •   The incentive of the opposition to assure financial market participants is quite

       limited. With a severe inflationary threat, financial market conditions are more

       likely to be disorderly, casting doubt in the minds of voters about the

       competency of the incumbent.

   •   Speaking outside the confines of the model, if it is in the interest of the

       opposition to appear more inflationary before the election, then it might also

       revise its position to be less accommodative after victory, a reversal common in

       models of political economy.

       Having determined the exchange rate at time T, we now have an anchor to

understand dynamics from the point the election is called onward to the election, a

problem familiar in the literature since Wilson (1979). The specification of money

demand implies that, with the money supply fixed, the exchange rate follows an

unstable differential equation,


                                                                                        (9)




                                            14
This equation must hold at every point from time equals t to T, but we also know that

the exchange rate must wind up at eT (the solution to equation 8) to eliminate excess

returns on the election outcome. Therefore, the exchange rate at the moment the

election is called must move from its price-stability value to a level consistent with it

evolving so as to equal eT at time T.

         The general solution to the first-order differential equation given by equation 9

is an exponential with root 1/ 0 . We can write the specific solution, after some

rearrangement, as:



                                                                                         (10)




When the election is called, the exchange rate depreciates on impact relative to its

prior value consistent with price stability. The extent of that depreciation depends on

the same determinants of eT already discussed and the nearness of the election, in that

as the excess of T over t grows, the exchange rate stays closer to its price-stability

value.

         To stress an obvious mathematical point: Within this model, the determination

of the exchange rate is highly nonlinear. The economics as a result is that even

governments playing by the rules of a pure float and monetary conservatism may not

                                             15
observe a stable exchange rate. That market outcome will depend on potentially

changeable notions of the opposition’s odds of victory and policies once victorious.

And the problem is not in the government’s past, it is inherent in its future. In the

face of such potential volatility in financial markets and the electoral stakes threatened

by that volatility, it is also understandable why a central bank might be tempted to

vary monetary policy to offset incipient movements in the exchange rate, including by

intervening in the exchange market. That is, one reason policy makers might pull

away from the corner of a pure float is that there desire for job security.

A Pure Peg

       Essentially the same framework can be applied to examine the case when the

incumbent has committed to maintain the exchange rate fixed at some fixed level,        ,

and chosen domestic monetary and budgetary policies consistent with that peg

holding indefinitely. Working from the same model of private behavior, we will

shows that it is possible for a similar outcome as in the prior section to occur–a

government following the rules of the game is not rewarded with a stable financial

market because of concerns about the behavior of potential subsequent policy makers.

       As to the model, the central bank has two assets on its books that represent the

counterparts of its monetary base, foreign exchange reserves, B F, and domestic




                                            16
securities, B H.7 Assuming 100 percent reserve requirements and no other items on the

central bank’s balance sheet, basic accounting tells us:

                                                                                     (11)


In order to hold the peg indefinitely, the current government is assumed to keep B H

constant, implying as in the previous example that the money stock would be constant

in the absence of pressures in foreign exchange markets.

      At time t, however, an election is called in which the opposition has promised

to expand the domestic portion of the monetary base at the rate : , although it has also

promised to keep the exchange rate fixed as long as it can. This policy, of course, will

ultimately come to tears, as the expansion of domestic reserves will have to be offset

by sales of foreign exchange reserves in order to keep the exchange rate fixed. When

the new government burns through those foreign exchange reserves, it will have to

adopt a float. Krugman’s (1979) insight was that the foreign reserves run will be

brought forward in time by market participants to ensure that the expected future

path of the exchange rate remains continuous, thereby eliminating any excess returns.

       While we know that the peg will ultimately fail if the new government is

elected, the question is whether the run might occur on the incumbent’s watch even

      7
          This follows the exposition in Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), pp. 558-566. In
the standard version of this model, which we adhere to, the central bank is assumed to
use its foreign exchange reserves to defend its peg and keep domestic reserves along
some predetermined baseline.

                                            17
though the government is playing by the rules of the game. A bit of introspection can

show that the answer potentially is yes, depending on the voting function, the extent

to which the oppositions plans to be inflationary, the sensitivity of money demand to

interest rates, and the initial stock of foreign reserves. The key modeling feature to

recognize is that the demand for money has to be satisfied at every point in time. If

agents begin to expect depreciation, they will reduce their demand for money. To

hold the peg, the central bank has to reduce the supply of money–the counterpart to

which is its foreign exchange reserves–to match the reduced demand. The peg breaks

down exactly at the point when market participants realize that only the sale of all

foreign reserves would equalize the money supply to the reduced demand for money

at the pegged rate. At that point, investors run on the foreign exchange reserves and

the exchange rate subsequently depreciates, validating expectations.

       Logically, there are three potential points when the peg could fail: before the

election, when the election results are announced, or sometime after the election of

the opposition. We will only discus the first case, which is the counterpart of the

prior section where the good-behavi ng government suffers from the potential folly of

its successors. If the peg fails before time T, we know that at time T:

   •   the government has already depleted its foreign exchange reserves,

   •   the nominal stock of money equals B H, and

   •   the exchange rate is freely floating.

                                               18
To solve the model, we characterize equilibrium around T assuming that the peg has

already failed, we next determine what condition must hold for that to have been the

case, and then we solve backward to determine when in time the run on reserves must

have occurred.

       Had the peg held for ever, by definition, the exchange rate would equal that

consistent with price stability, as in

                                                                                      (12)


as was explained in our derivation of equation 3 above. After the run, the money

supply will be lower by the exhaustion of foreign exchange reserves, implying that the

exchange rate that prevails if the incumbent is reelected will be:

                                                                                      (13)


which is lower than that entering the voting function–the official peg rate–because the

incumbent will have reduced the money stock in a futile defense. The irony, of

course, is that the exchange rate ends up ultimately appreciated as a result of the

run–if the incumbent is reelected. The exchange rate prevailing should the opposition

win reflects the higher expected rate of depreciation, weighted by the probability of a

change in regime, and the smaller money stock given that reserves have already been

depleted. Similar to the derivation of equation 9, substituting into the money demand



                                            19
function and making use of the voting function, we can write the difference between

the actual exchange rate at time T and that expected to prevail if the incumbent wins

as:

                                                                                         (14)



to ensure that no arbitrage profits are expected at the announcement of the election

results. Note that we can add the term           to both sides of this equation to yield:


                                                                                         (15)



The first term (which is negative) is given by the difference between equations 12 and

13, which is a nonlinear transformation of the initial composition of the central bank

balance sheet. Hence, we can solve the model geometrically with the same apparatus

as in Figure 4. The one difference is that the ray with unit slope is shifted in the

amount         to the left, reflecting the negative wedge introduced because the

exchange rate delivered by the incumbent if the peg fails differs from that desired by

voters. The extent of the leftward shift depends on that disappointment–which will

be proportional to the initial share of foreign reserves in the central bank’s balance

sheet (that is because a successful run would deplete a large proportion of the money

stock).


                                            20
       We can thus characterize the exchange rate at time T if a run has occurred. But

will it? The peg will have failed if the expectation of exchange rate depreciation

lowers the demand for money beyond the ability of the central bank to reduce the

supply of money be selling off foreign exchange reserves. In an expectational sense,

the anticipated rate of depreciation is V : and, accordingly, the demand for money will

be:

                                                                                       (16)


If this equilibrium can be supported by a positive level of foreign reserves, then the

peg will hold up to the election. If the incumbent is reelected, it can hold indefinitely

thereafter. From this, a sufficient condition for the peg to fail before the election is

apparent. If

                                                                                       (17)

then the demand for money at the pegged exchange rate has fallen to the point that

would require foreign exchange reserves to be negative, which is impossible. Hence,

the peg must have failed before time T, despite supportive government policies. Note

that this depends only on the parameters of the model, the intentions of the

opposition, and the initial level of domestic reserves. Thus, it is possible that the good

behavior of the current government to be undermined by concerns about the policies

of its potential successor.


                                            21
      When will the run occur on the incumbent’s watch? This just requires solving

differential equation 10 for the time at which the exchange rate equals the pegged rate

even though foreign reserves have disappeared. The result is an exponential similar in

form to equation 11. Once again, it is the expectation of future failings that market

participants bring forward. And it is the possibility that a policy maker might be

punished despite good current performance that may make a pegged rate corner less

palatable than exercising some element of discretion.

IV. Conclusion

      We have argued that the notion of original sin has furthered interest in pinning

the exchange rate regime to a corner, either a pure float or a pure peg. If policy

makers in some emerging market economies are indelibly stained by the past mistakes

of others, they will never be trusted by markets to exercise discretion wisely. Our

reading is different: The legacy of those who defaulted was not an irredeemable stain

that sets them apart from others in otherwise similar circumstances. Rather, their

legacy was weak institutions, a lack of political comity in part associated with an

unequal distribution of income, and a capricious attitude toward the rule of law. Such

attitudes made the initial default possible and, as that legacy is handed down to

subsequent generations, now makes future defaults and other forms of expropriation

more likely.

      To assert that some countries are subject to irrational discrimination on the part

                                            22
of global investors pushes off responsibility to others and delays the institutional

reforms necessary to make real progress. Seeing the problem as a deep-rooted

inability to commit in advance so that good near-term behavior may not be viewed as

likely to be sustained implies that there may be no easy answer to the problem of

recurring financial crises in emerging markets. But that is probably a more realistic

answer.

       In the presence of an important expectations channel–which our model

suggests is highly nonlinear–policy makers might see being somewhat ambiguous in

describing their current regime as constructive. Some discretion–whether called a

dirty float or a flexible peg–may give them the ability to lean against such

expectational shocks. Moreover, such ambiguity may make defining success or failure

harder, thereby militating against voter backlash.

V. References

Calvo, Guillermo A., On the Time Consistency of Optimal Policy in a Monetary

       Economy, Econometrica, Nov. 1978, v. 46, iss. 6, pp. 1411-28

Calvo, Guillermo A., On Models of Money and Perfect Foresight, International

       Economic Review, Feb. 1979, v. 20, iss. 1, pp. 83-103.

Calvo, Guillermo A. Reinhart and Carmen M. Fear of Floating, Quarterly Journal of

       Economics, May 2002, v. 117, iss. 2, pp. 379-408.

Eichengreen, Barry and Ricardo Hausmann, Exchange Rates and Financial Fragility,

                                            23
      in New Challenges for Monetary Policy, Proceedings of a Symposium Sponsored by

      the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, 1999, pp. 329-368.

Fischer, Stanley, Exchange Rate Regimes: Is the Bipolar View Correct? Finance and

      Development, June 2001, v. 38, iss. 2, pp. 18-21.

Frankel, Jeffrey, Sergio Schmukler, and Luis Servén, “Verifiability and the Vanishing

      Intermediate Exchange Rate Regime,” Brookings Trade Forum, 2000, pp. 49-108.

Hausmann, Ricardo, Unrewarded Good Fiscal Behavior: The Role of Debt Structure,

      working paper, Harvard University, 2002.

Kaminsky, Graciela, Carmen Reinhart, and Carlos Végh, Two Centuries of Financial

      Market Contagion, working paper, International Monetary Fund, 2002.

Krugman, Paul, A Model of Balance-of-Payments Crises, Journal of Money, Credit, and

      Banking, Aug. 1979, v. 11, iss. 3, pp. 311-25.

Mussa, Michael, A Model of Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal of Political Economy, Feb.

      1982, v. 90, iss. 1, pp. 74-104.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, Exchange Rate Dynamics Redux, Journal of

      Political Economy, June 1995, v. 103, iss. 3, pp. 624-60.

Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, Foundations of International Macroeconomics, MIT

      Press, 1996.

Persson, Torsten and Guido Tabellini, Monetary and Fiscal Policy (Volume2: Politics), MIT

      Press, 1994.

                                            24
Reinhart, Carmen M., Mirage of Floating Exchange Rates, American Economic Review,

      May 2000, v. 90, iss. 2, pp. 65-70

Summers, Lawrence H., International Financial Crises: Causes, Prevention, and Cures,

      American Economic Review, May 2000, v. 90, iss. 2, pp. 1-16.

Wills, Garry, Saint Augustine, Viking Press (Penguin Lives), 1999.

Wilson, Charles A., Anticipated Shocks and Exchange Rate Dynamics, Journal of

      Political Economy, June 1979, v. 87, iss. 3, pp. 639-47




                                            25
