                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      RISK AVERSION, LIABILITY RULES, AND SAFETY

                                           Joshua Graff Zivin
                                              Richard Just
                                            David Zilberman

                                          Working Paper 9678
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9678


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




We would like to thank Sherry Glied and Art Small for numerous helpful discussions. The opinions expressed
in this paper are those of the authors alone. Joshua Graff Zivin is Assistant Professor, Department of Health
Policy and Management, Mailman School of Public Health, and International Center for Health Outcomes
and Innovation Research, Columbia University and NBER. Richard Just is Distinguished University
Professor, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of Maryland. David Zilberman
is Professor, Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics, University of California, Berkeley. Please
address all correspondence to: Joshua Graff Zivin, Joseph L. Mailman School of Public Health Columbia
University, Department of Health Policy and Management, 600 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Joshua Graff Zivin, Richard Just, and David Zilberman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
Risk Aversion, Liability Rules, and Safety
Joshua Graff Zivin, Richard Just, and David Zilberman
NBER Working Paper No. 9678
May 2003
JEL No. D8, K0, Q2

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the performance of liability rules in two-party stochastic externality
problems where negotiations are feasible and side payments are based on the realized level of
externalities. Results show that an increase in polluter liability does not necessarily increase safety

or efficiency in cases where the polluter is risk neutral. Complete polluter liability is found to yield
Pareto optimality. When either party is risk averse, an increase in polluter liability may sometimes

reduce safety and efficiency. If the polluter is risk neutral and the victim is risk averse, Pareto
optimality is only achieved by assigning full liability on the polluter, i.e. giving the victim complete
property rights to a clean environment. If the polluter is risk averse and the victim is risk neutral,
no level of polluter liability is optimal. In this case, optimality can only be achieved through a

contract on abatement activities, such that the risk-averse polluter receives a guaranteed payment
regardless of the stochastic outcome.




Joshua Graff Zivin                                             Richard Just
Department of Health Policy and Management                     Department of Agricultural
Columbia University                                            and Resource Economics
600 West 168th St. #608                                        University of Maryland
New York, NY 10032                                             College Park, MD 20742
and NBER                                                       rjust@umd.edu
jz126@columbia.edu

David Zilberman
University of California, Berkeley
Department of Agricultural and Resource Economics
207 Giannini Hall # 3310
Berkeley CA 94720-3310
zilber@are.berkeley.edu
Risk Aversion, Liability Rules, and Safety



I. Introduction

     It is generally agreed that, when externalities exist, the competitive price mechanism does not

yield a Pareto-optimal resource allocation. The Pigouvian tax has been the traditionally prescribed

remedy to external pollution problems (see Baumol and Oates; and Mishan). In a seminal paper,

however, Ronald Coase described an alternative means to control externalities --one especially

relevant for cases where the number of decision makers involved is small. Coase claimed that a

competitive system with well-defined property right assignments, perfect information, and zero

transaction costs would attain Pareto optimality through a process of voluntary bargaining and side

payments. In his words: “It is necessary to know whether the damaging business is liable for

damage caused since without the establishment of this initial delimitation of rights there can be no

market transaction to transfer and recombine them. But the ultimate result (which maximizes the

value of production) is independent of the legal position if the pricing system is assumed to work

without cost” (see Coase [1960, p. 8]).

     Coase's work has spawned a wide body of literature in both the economics of law and the

environment (e.g. Farrell; DeSerpa; Medema). With rare exception, these literatures have

examined externalities in a deterministic setting. In a practical sense, however, pollution problems

are often stochastic with externalities depending on random forces such as human error, weather, or

other natural phenomena. Indeed, many of the cases described in the seminal externality literature

were stochastic in nature. For example, the foundry-laundry case discussed by Pigou described a

situation where pollution occurs only when the wind is blowing in a certain direction. Similarly,

Stigler described a case where contamination of a stream kills fish depending on flow rates



                                                  3
affecting dissolution and dispersion. Moreover, some of the most spectacular environmental

disasters – the nuclear meltdown at Chernobyl and the plant explosion at Bhopal – have been the

result of random events, not consistent and predictable ones.

     This stochasticity is important for two reasons. First, when pollution is stochastic, the victim

cannot necessarily infer polluter action, thus inhibiting their ability to contract on pollution

abatement or prevention activities. The departure from the assumption of determinism makes

information asymmetries between polluter and victim more likely. In this case, victims may be

limited to contracts on realized damages or be forced to engage in expensive monitoring that may

allow them to contract on the polluter activities that contribute to victim damages. Second,

stochastic pollution problems mean at least one agent involved in the Coasean bargain will have a

stochastic income stream, suggesting an important role for risk preferences. Given wide variations

in the wealth and size of agents that generate and suffer from pollution, agents are likely to differ in

their ability and willingness to shoulder risk. These heterogeneous risk preferences will, of course,

manifest themselves in equilibrium contracts.

     This latter issue of risk preferences has received some attention in the economics literature.

Greenwood and Ingene constructed a model where both parties have full information and therefore

are able to employ nonstochastic side-payment schemes, which depend on variables that affect the

distribution of pollution (in their case, these variables are the output levels of both parties). They

demonstrate that the Coase result – the invariance of pollution levels to the assignment of property

rights – holds if both parties are risk neutral, but does not under risk aversion. Graff Zivin and

Small expand upon this single-case result by deriving a contract curve that describes all possible

equilibria as function of the initial allocation of property rights, agents relative bargaining power,

and risk preferences. They demonstrate that the Coase theorem obtains only if both agents have the




                                                    4
same coefficient of absolute risk aversion. They also show that the ability to hedge environmental

risks can restore the Coase result.

      Our analysis of liability rules in two-party stochastic externality problems when negotiations

are feasible differs from the existing literature in several distinct directions. First, the focus of this

paper is not on the attainment of the Coase result, per se, but on identifying the conditions under

which changes in the assignment of liability will increase, maintain, or decrease safety. Second,

unlike most of the literature on liability rules and externalities, this paper does not limit the analysis

to the two extreme cases, when the polluter is either fully liable for damage or not liable at all, but

rather investigates the performance of the continuum of liability rules between these two extremes.1

The analysis is done by abstracting to the case of a unilateral stochastic externality that occurs

either at a fixed level or does not occur at all such that the polluter's activities affect only the

probability and not the level of pollution. The modeling of the stochastic externality is thus similar

to that in Spense.

      Lastly, we assume that information is asymmetric. Agents cannot contract directly on firm

activities, such as input use, abatement activities, or output levels. Instead, this paper considers

side-payment schemes based on realized damages, which are observable by both parties. Rather

than bribing the polluter to reduce output or increase abatement, as in Greenwood and Ingene and

Graff Zivin and Small, the polluter receives a side payment from the victim for every period with

no externality.

      In this regard, our model can be viewed as a departure from the Coasean world of perfect

information and similar in nature to the literature on the optimal design of liability rules. In most of

those models, however, the agency relationship is generally viewed as one between the government


1
 We note, however, that the spirit of such a continuum was captured in the analysis by Graff Zivin and Small through
their use of the bargaining power concept.


                                                          5
and the firms causing injuries, where both parties are assumed risk neutral and polluters and victims

do not negotiate directly with one another (e.g. Shavell, 1980; Polinsky). The work that does

address liability and incentives in the presence of risk aversion assumes symmetric information

between agents (see Shavell, 1987). Extensions that examine asymmetries include some recent

work on vicarious liability, which analyzes agency problems within the firm, i.e. where firm

management is the principal and the agents are employees engaged in illegal activities (Shavell,

1997; Privileggi et al.). Like other principal-agent models in the economic literature on

contracting (e.g. Stiglitz; Hart; Lazear and Moore), the principal is always assumed to be risk-

neutral. The model developed differs from these in that we examine the realistic case of a risk-

averse principal, the pollutee. Moreover, given our focus on infrequent but quite damaging events,

the stochastic structure of our model and, in turn, the modeling approach undertaken is rather

different. This yields rather distinct results to a slightly different set of questions.

      The results show that, when both parties are risk neutral, the equilibrium distribution of

pollution will be identical under a wide range of liability rules. This continuum includes the case of

no polluter liability and cases of partial polluter liability, which result in positive side payments

from pollutee to polluter whenever pollution does not occur. However, as polluter liability becomes

large enough to crowd out pollutee side payments, increases in polluter liability yield increases in

safety. Only complete polluter liability consistently yields socially optimal levels of safety. When

the polluter is risk neutral but the pollutee is risk averse, complete polluter liability is again the only

arrangement that always produces socially optimal safety levels. When the polluter is risk averse

and the pollutee is risk neutral, optimality cannot be achieved with a contract on realized damages.

This occurs, in part, because any contract that can be struck on damages will leave the polluter

bearing some risk. In this case, optimality can only be achieved through a contract on abatement




                                                     6
activities, such that the risk-averse polluter receives a guaranteed payment regardless of the

stochastic outcome.

       These results are especially important because many stochastic environmental problems

occur at the intersection between public/corporate interests and small/local interests. The former

are likely to be risk neutral, while the latter are likely to be risk averse. When polluters are large

entities and victims are local inhabitants, polluters should be held fully accountable for all damages.

On the other hand, when polluters are small and victims are large, policy makers may prefer to

invest in monitoring efforts that allow contracts to be set on production and abatement activities.

Indeed these results may help explain why, in practice, we see corporations held liable for damages

they inflict on their neighbors, while farmers engaged in noxious activities are held subject to

regulations on input use.



II. The Model

     Suppose a region includes a polluter and a pollutee. The polluter produces output and

generates pollution. The amount of pollution generated as a byproduct in the production process is

a dichotomous random variable, Y, which takes on values of zero or one with

                        q ≡ Pr(Y = 0); 1 − q ≡ Pr(Y = 1) .

     The term q is called “safety.” Each level of safety requires some ongoing pollution abatement

activities. The cost of attaining a certain safety level q is given by the cost function, c(q), for which

marginal cost is increasing (c' > 0, c′′ > 0), and c(0) = 0. The cost of safety includes the direct cost

of pollution abatement activities and losses due to a reduction in output relative to the case where

no attention is given to safety. The polluter's short-run profit (or quasi rent), when the pollution




                                                    7
problem is ignored, is equal to a dollars per period. The introduction of safety measures thus

reduces short-run profit to a - c(q).

     The pollutee's short-run profit (or quasi rent) is affected by the occurrence of pollution. When

pollution does not occur, the pollutee's profit is equal to b dollars per period. When pollution

occurs, the pollutee's profit is reduced by R dollars and is equal to b - R.

     Both agents operate subject to a liability rule L(α) imposed externally. The parameter α is a

fraction of the pollutee's loss (in periods when pollution occurs) which is paid by the polluter, i.e.,

the polluter compensates the pollutee with αR dollars whenever pollution occurs. Thus, full polluter

liability holds when α = 1, full pollutee liability (no polluter liability) holds when α = 0, and partial

polluter liability corresponds to 0 < α < 1.

     Since the behavior of the polluter affects the pollutee, the latter may use side payments to

motivate the polluter to increase safety. Assuming that the pollutee cannot monitor the polluter's

activities (or, alternatively, monitoring costs are extremely high), the use of side payments based on

the actual levels of the polluter's output and abatement activities (and thus the actual level of q) is

not practical. Instead, a side-payment agreement based on a variable the pollutee can observe--

namely, the level of pollution--is possible. Whenever pollution does not occur, the pollutee will pay

the polluter a bribe of S dollars. This arrangement is the most natural since it is simple and easily

enforceable.

     Both parties are assumed to maximize the expected utility of their income. The polluter

chooses his output and safety level for a given liability rule and a given bribe offer. The pollutee

has to determine the size of bribe offered, given the liability rule and the polluter’s reaction

function (which denotes safety as a function of the bribe) that is assumed to be known by the




                                                    8
pollutee. The decisions of both parties, taken simultaneously, determine the equilibrium level of

safety and the distribution of profit, given the liability rule.



III. The Case of Risk Neutrality of Both Parties

      When both parties are risk neutral, both maximize their expected income. Thus, for a given

liability rule and bribe, the polluter's decision problem is

(1)                     max q q [a - c(q) + S] + ( 1 - q) [a - c(q) - α R].

Assuming that the problem has an internal solution, the first-order condition for optimality is

(2)                     Rα + S - c′(q) = 0.

      For a risk-neutral polluter, safety is a function of the sum of the liability payment and the

bribe. Denote this sum by Z = αR + S and call it the polluter's gain from a safe period. The

polluter's gain reflects the increase in the polluter's earnings during an unpolluted period relative to

a polluted period. Condition (2) states that optimal safety is determined by equating

the marginal cost of safety to the polluter's gain from a safe period. Using (2), it is possible to

construct the safety function q(Z) which denotes safety as a function of polluter gain from a safe

period. Total differentiation of (2) shows that the safety function is positively sloped with

                               −1
(3)                     q Z = cqq > 0.

      The safety function of the polluter is assumed to be known by the pollutee, and the latter uses

it in his decision making process to determine the level of the bribe he should offer. The pollutee's

profit is b - S in a period without pollution and b - R (1 - α) when pollution occurs. Thus, the

expected profit of the pollutee is q(Z) (b - S) + [1 - q(Z)] [b - (1 - α) R]. The expected profit can be

expressed as a function of the polluter's gain from a safe period as follows:

(4)                     L( Z ) = b − (1 − α ) R + q( Z )( R − Z ) .


                                                         9
Thus, for a given liability rule, the optimization problem of the pollutee becomes

(5)                       max Z L( Z )

subject to Z ≥ αR . From the pollutee's expected profit formulation in (4), one deduces that

maximizing behavior requires that the bribe be smaller than the pollutee's loss when pollution

occurs, i.e.,

(6)                       R (1 − α ) − S = R − Z > 0 .

      In case of complete pollutee liability (α = 0), the expected profit of the pollutee when no bribe

is paid (when S = 0) is equal to the expected profit when a bribe of R dollars is paid [which is b - R

since q(0) = 0]; when the bribe obeys (6), expected profit is higher than b - R. Thus, there is an

optimal bribe for which 0 < Z < R.

      At the optimal solution,

(7)                       LZ (α ) ≡ q Z ( R − Z ) − q( Z ) = 0 .

To interpret this condition, note that a marginal increase in the bribe increases safety by q Z , and the

pollutee earns R - Z dollars more when pollution does not occur; thus, the pollutee's marginal gain

from bribing is q Z ( R − Z ) . On the other hand, an increased bribe reduces the pollutee's gain in a

safe period; thus, the pollutee's marginal cost associated with the bribe is equal to q(Z). Condition

(7) thus indicates that optimal bribery occurs when the marginal gain for the pollutee from the bribe

is equal to his marginal loss. By dividing both terms in (7) by the average expected gain from the

bribe, [q( Z ) ⋅ ( R − Z ) / Z ] , one finds the optimality condition,

                                     Z
(8)                       η(Z ) =       ,
                                    R−Z

where η ( Z ) = q Z ⋅ Z / q( Z ) is the elasticity of the safety function. By the properties of the cost

function, this elasticity is a positive bounded function of Z. The polluter's gain from a safe period



                                                          10
per unit of the pollutee's gain from a safe period, Z/(R - Z), is an increasing function of Z which

converges to infinity as Z converges to R.

         Both functions are depicted in Figure 1. When Z is small, the marginal gain from bribing is

larger than the marginal cost of bribing; thus, for small Z, η(Z) is above Z/(R - Z). As Z is increased,

both curves become closer and intersect at A where condition (8) holds. The polluter's gain from a

safe period at the intersection point is S0, which is the bribe paid under complete pollutee liability.

The elasticity of safety curve intersects Z/(R - Z) at A from above. It is assumed that the properties

of the cost function ensure that A is a unique intersection.2 To the right of A, the elasticity curve is

below Z/(R - Z) reflecting the supposition that, for Z > S0, the marginal gain from the bribe is

smaller than the marginal loss and that any increase in the bribe when Z > S0 will reduce the

pollutee's expected profit.

         In cases with partial pollutee liability (α > 0), the feasible set of Z's is smaller than under

complete pollutee liability since the polluter's gain from a safe period is at least αR. However, the

marginal gain and loss of bribing are the same for any α. Therefore, the curves η(Z) and Z/(R - Z)

can be used to find the optimal bribe and safety as functions of the liability rule.

         A comparison of outcomes for two liability rules can be demonstrated using Figure I. In the

first case the liability payment is smaller than the bribe under complete pollutee liability, i.e.,

Z1 = αR < S 0 . In the second case the liability payment is greater than S0, i.e., Z 2 = αR > S 0 . In the

first case the pollutee maximizes his expected profits by paying a bribe that raises the polluter's

gain from a safe period to S0. Thus, the bribe for α = Z1 / R is S 0 − αR , and safety is the same as if


2
    It is very reasonable that η(Z) intersects Z/(R - Z) only once. At A, the slope of   ηA   is smaller than that of Z/(R - Z)
which means that, by (7), q ZZ ( R − S 0 ) − 2q Z < 0 or − c qqq ( R − S 0 ) − 2c        < 0 . To have another intersection
                                                                                    2
                                                                                    qq




                                                               11
α = 0 . In the second case the polluter's price of safety is greater than S0 and, since the marginal

gain from a bribe is smaller than the marginal loss for Z > S0, any bribe will reduce the pollutee's

expected profit. Thus, for α = Z 2 / R , the bribe is zero. These two results can be generalized to

yield:



PROPOSITION 1: When both the polluter and pollutee are risk neutral, (a) the optimal bribe is a

decreasing linear function of the polluter liability share α for α ≤ S 0 / R with intercept S0 and slope

-R; for α ≥ S 0 / R , optimality implies no bribe, i.e.,

                                     S − Rα               S
                                                     0 ≤α ≤ 0
                                      0                      R
(9)                         S (α ) = 
                                                        S0
                                      0            α ≥ R,

and (b) safety is constant at q = q(S0) for 0 ≤ α ≤ S 0 / R and is increasing in α according to

q = q(αR) for S 0 / R < α ≤ 1 .

      Proposition 1 demonstrates that, for cases of uncertain pollution where bribe payments are

conditioned on the actual levels of the externality (and not on the polluter activity levels), different

liability rules do not necessarily yield the same safety levels. Note, however, that there is a wide

range of rules (where polluter liability is relatively small, α < S 0 / R ) which yields constant safety

levels. In this case, changes in polluter liability completely crowd out the bribe such that the gain

from a safe period, and thus safety, is unchanged. In cases of higher polluter liability, an increase

in polluter liability will increase safety.




requires that − c qqq < −2cqq /( R − Z ) for some Z > S0. It is impossible to have a cost curve with cqq > 0 with a large
                            2


negative third derivative. A sufficient condition for uniqueness is that cqqq > −2cqq /( R − Z ) .
                                                                                    2




                                                           12
       Figures IIa and IIb depict the results of Proposition 1 graphically. Example: Consider the

case of a homogeneous cost function,

(10)                    c(q) = Aq m ,              m > 1.

The safety function associated with c(q) is

                                            1 /( m −1)
                                  Z 
(11)                    q( Z ) =                       .
                                  mA 

and the isoelastic cost function has resulted in an isoelastic safety function with elasticity (m - 1)-1.

For α = 0, the optimal bribe is

                               R
(12)                    S0 =     .
                               m

By Proposition 1, the optimal bribe and safety levels are functions of the liability rules of the form:

                                  R (1 − mα )                   0≤α≤ 1
(13)                    S (α ) =  m                                       m
                                   0                           otherwise



(14)
                            R
                              ( 2      )
                                    1 /( m −1)

                        q =  m A 1 /( m −1)
                                                             0 ≤α < 1
                                                                          m

                            
                               (
                             αR mA     )                    1
                                                                 m
                                                                     ≤ α ≤ 1.

       As condition (13) and (14) indicate, less convex cost functions (with smaller elasticities of

safety) have larger segments of liability rules that yield constant safety levels (and positive bribe

payments). However, when changes in liability rules affect safety (α > 1/m), safety levels are more

sensitive to changes in the polluter's liability share when the elasticity of the cost function is lower.

Generally, cost functions with lower elasticities result in larger bribes (when bribes are paid) and

larger safety levels.



IV. Pollutee Risk Aversion




                                                                  13
       As in the previous section, suppose the polluter is risk neutral, but now consider the pollutee

to be risk averse with a well-behaved utility function, u, defined on profits with u' > 0 and u" < 0.

For a given liability rule and bribe, the expected utility of the pollutee is given by

q(Z) ⋅ u(b-S) + [ 1-q(Z)] ⋅ u[b-( 1-α)R] . Using the definition, Z = αR + S, the expected utility of the

pollutee can be written as the following function of α and Z:

                          ~
(15)                      L( Z , α ) = q( Z ) ⋅ u (b + αR − Z ) + [1 − q( Z )] ⋅ u (b + αR − R) .

The decision problem of the pollutee thus becomes

                                   ~
(16)                      max Z L( Z ,α )

subject to Z ≥ αR . Also, the expected profit function in (15) can be rewritten as

                          ~
(17)                      L( Z ,α ) = q( Z ) ⋅ [u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R)] + u (b + αR − R) .

In the context of (17), it is clear that, as in the previous case, optimizing behavior will result in

Z < R which means that the bribe will be smaller than the pollutee's loss when pollution occurs.

                                                                         ~
       To find the behavior of the optimal bribe, differentiate L( Z ,α ) with respect to Z to obtain

                          ~
(18)                      L Z ( Z ,α ) = q Z [u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R)] − q( Z ) ⋅ u ′(b + αR − Z ) = 0

To interpret this condition, note that the marginal gain from bribing is equal to the marginal

increase in safety times the difference in the utility derived in periods with and without pollution.

The marginal loss from bribing is equal to the marginal reduction in the utility of income from the

increased bribe times the probability of paying the bribe. Hence, (18) implies that, again, the

optimal bribe equates the pollutee's marginal gain and loss from bribing.

       Multiplying the differences between the marginal gain and loss from bribing by a positive

value, Z /{q ( Z ) ⋅ [u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R)]}, results in




                                                          14
(19)                     η ( Z ) − Z ⋅ h ( Z ,α )

where h( Z , α ) = u ′(b + αR − Z ) /[u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R)] . Thus, when the marginal gain

from bribing exceeds the marginal loss, the expression in (19) is positive and vice versa.

        To examine the expression in (19), the elasticity of safety and Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) are depicted as

functions of Z in Figure III; Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) is an increasing function of Z, which rises from zero and

approaches infinity as Z approaches R. The functions η ( Z ) and Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) intersect at B where the

polluter's gain from a safe period is Z1. Clearly, the value of Z1 depends on α. For a given α, the

marginal impact of a bribe on the pollutee's expected utility is positive for Z < Z1 (α ) and negative

for Z > Z1 (α ) . Thus, for those liability rules with a liability payment smaller than Z1, a positive

bribe will be paid to raise the polluter's price of a safe period to Z1 [i.e., S (α ) = Z1 (α ) − αR if

Rα < Z1 (α ) ] while, in cases where the liability payment exceeds Z1, no bribe will be paid [i.e.,

S (α ) = 0 if αR < Z1 (α ) ].

       Recall that, when a bribe is paid by a risk-neutral pollutee, the polluter's gain from a safe

period is equal to S0 and is determined by the intersection of the elasticity of safety curve with

Z /( R − Z ) (denoted by point A in Figure III). To compare S0 with Z1 (α ) , it is important to

compare Z /( R − Z ) with Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) . The difference between the latter two is given by

                           Z                        1             u ′(b + αR − Z )         
                              − Z ⋅ h( Z , α ) = Z       −                                 
(20)
                          R−Z                       R − Z u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R) 
                             Z [u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R) − u ′(b + αR − Z ) ⋅ ( R − Z )]
                         =                                                                       .
                                        ( R − Z )[u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R)]

       By risk aversion, the expression in (20) is positive implying that Z /( R − Z ) is greater than

Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) . Hence, the intersection of Z /( R − Z ) with the elasticity curve (point A) is to the left of

the intersection of Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) with the elasticity curve (point B) and Z1 (α ) > S 0 for all α. These


                                                        15
results indicate that, for liability rules that result in positive bribes, a risk-averse pollutee will pay a

greater bribe and gain higher levels of safety than a risk-neutral pollutee.

       To analyze the behavior of the risk-averse pollutee in more detail, first consider the behavior

of h( Z ,α ) −1 ,

                                           u (b + αR − Z ) − u (b + αR − R)
(21)                      h( Z ,α ) −1 =
                                                   u ′(b + αR − Z )

Approximating the denominator of (21) with the first two elements of its Taylor-series expansion

yields,

                                                                         R−Z
(22)                      h( Z ,α ) −1 ≈ ( R − Z ) 1 + R A (b − αR − Z )       ,
                                                                          2 

where R A (⋅) ≡ −u ′′(⋅) / u ′(⋅) is the Arrow-Pratt measure of absolute risk aversion.

       The formula in (22) indicates that Z ⋅ h( Z ,α ) is increasing in liability for a pollutee with

decreasing absolute risk aversion, is constant for cases of constant absolute risk aversion, and is

decreasing for cases of increasing absolute risk aversion. Applying these results to the graphical

presentation of Figure III implies that, for liability rules with positive bribes, the polluter's gain

from a safe period and the safety level rise (fall) with the polluter's liability share when pollutees

have increasing (decreasing) absolute risk aversion. A pollutee with constant risk aversion has

constant safety with respect to liability rules with positive bribes.

       These results can be explained intuitively as follows. When a pollutee has decreasing absolute

risk aversion, his behavior tends toward that of a risk-neutral polluter as he gets a fixed increase in

income. An increase in α is such an increase; since safety under risk aversion is higher than under

risk neutrality (when S > 0), an increase in α will reduce the safety of a pollutee with decreasing

absolute risk aversion.




                                                           16
       Results relating to the polluter's gain from a safe period can lead to the necessary additional

results relating to the behavior of the bribe for various liability rules. For a pollutee with decreasing

absolute risk aversion, an increase in the polluter's liability results in a reduction in the bribe for

two reasons. First, it causes a reduction in the polluter's gain from a safe period; second, it increases

the liability payment. The bribe level is the difference between the polluter's gain from a safe

period and the liability payment. In the case of constant absolute risk aversion, the bribe is

decreasing for the second reason only. In the case of increasing absolute risk aversion, an increase

in the polluter's liability share raises the polluter's gain from a safe period and, hence, leads to an

increase in the bribe; but the increase in the liability payment itself causes a reduction in the bribe.

Hence, it is not clear that the bribe is always decreasing with an increase in the polluter's liability

share. However, this is the probable result in most cases since the bribe is positive in the case of

complete pollutee liability and is zero for complete polluter liability (and possibly for other cases

with high polluter liability).

       The results of this section are summarized by:



PROPOSITION 2: Suppose that the polluter is risk neutral. Then (a) a larger bribe is paid with a

risk-averse pollutee than with a risk-neutral pollutee. For a pollutee with decreasing absolute risk

aversion, the bribe function is decreasing with the polluter's liability share (to the point of no bribe),

and the slope is smaller than -R. For constant absolute risk aversion, the bribe function is linear

with slope -R; and for increasing absolute risk aversion, the slope of the bribe function is larger

than -R, i.e.,

                               < −R          R ′A < 0
                         dS   
(23)                           = − R when    R ′A = 0
                         dα   > − R
                                            R ′A > 0.



                                                    17
(b) When the bribe is paid, more safety is attained under pollutee risk aversion than with a risk-

neutral pollutee; the same safety is attained when no bribe is paid. In cases of a positive bribe,

optimal safety is decreasing with the polluter's liability share for pollutees with decreasing absolute

risk aversion. Safety is constant under constant absolute risk aversion and is increasing for

increasing absolute risk aversion, i.e., for S > 0:

                            < 0              R ′A < 0
                         dq 
(24)                         = 0 when        R ′A = 0
                         dα 
                            > 0            R ′A > 0.

The results of Proposition 2 are depicted in Figures IV and V.



V. The Case of a Risk-Averse Polluter

       The case analyzed in this section is the antipode of the case in the previous section. Here the

pollutee is assumed to be risk neutral, while the polluter is assumed to be risk averse. Since the

pollutee is risk neutral, the analysis in Section 3 indicates that a positive bribe is paid if the

elasticity of the safety curve intersects Z /( R − Z ) at a level of Z larger than the polluter's liability

payment. The bribe is the difference between the polluter gain from a safe period ( Z = αR + S ) and

his liability payment. No bribe is paid when the intersection is at a level of Z where Z < αR. The

safety level is determined by the safety function of the risk-averse polluter, given the polluter's gain

from a safe period and his liability share.

       Thus, to understand the outcome for a risk-averse polluter, the properties of his safety

function must be analyzed. Suppose the polluter has a twice differentiable utility function

u (π ) defined on profits (quasi rents) with u ′ > 0 and u ′′ < 0 . Profit during a safe period is π 1 ; and

during a period with pollution, profit is π 2 where




                                                         18
                           π 1 = a − c(q) + S
(25)
                           π 2 = a − c(q) − αR.

Introducing the definition of Z into (25) yields

                           π 1 = a − αR − c(q) + Z
(26)
                           π 2 = a − αR − c(q).

The decision problem of the polluter thus becomes

(27)                        max q E (u ) = q ⋅ u (1) + (1 − q) ⋅ u (2)

where u (i ) = u (π i ), i = 1,2 .

       Suppose that a solution exists satisfying the first-order condition for optimality,

                                  u (1) − u (2)
(28)                       cq =                 .
                                       Eu ′

The second-order condition for optimality is

(29)                        M = −2cq [u ′(1) − u ′(2)] − E (u ′)cqq + cq2 E (u ′′) < 0.

The optimality conditions (28) and (29) imply that the safety level attained by a risk-averse polluter

does not depend only on the sum of the bribe and liability payment (polluter's gain from a safe

period) but also on its composition since the marginal utility of income is different depending on

                                                                                          ~
the occurrence of pollution. The safety function for risk aversion will be denoted by q( Z ,α ) . It is

                            ~
interesting to compare q with q(Z), the safety function under risk neutrality.

       Condition (28) indicates that, under risk aversion, the optimal safety level for a given (Z, α)

combination is determined by equating the marginal cost of safety and the polluter's marginal

benefit from safety (in monetary terms). The marginal benefit from safety is equal to the increase

in utility in an unpolluted period (over a polluted period) translated into monetary terms through

division by the average marginal utility of income.


                                                            19
        If for a given (α, Z) combination the marginal benefit from safety (of a risk-averse polluter) is

higher than the polluter's gain from a safe period, it follows from (2) and (28) that the safety level

attained by a risk-averse polluter is higher than the safety level attained by a risk-neutral polluter

(since marginal cost is increasing). Under risk aversion, the sign of

                                  u (1) − u (2)               1
(30)                                                    −Z =      [u (1) − u (2) − q ⋅ u ′(1) ⋅ Z − (1 − q) ⋅ u ′(2) ⋅ Z ]
                          q ⋅ u ′(1) + (1 − q) ⋅ u ′(2)      Eu ′

is negative when q is near zero and is positive when q is near one. Thus, one concludes:



LEMMA 1: For a given combination of liability payments and bribes, risk neutrality leads to lower

safety than risk aversion in cases where safety is sufficiently high under risk aversion, but risk

neutrality leads to greater safety in problems where safety is sufficiently low under risk aversion,

i.e.,
                                   ~                    ~
                         q ( Z ) > q ( Z ,α )    if     q ( Z ,α ) → 0
(31)                               ~                    ~
                         q ( Z ) < q ( Z ,α )    if     q ( Z ,α ) → 1.

        The behavior described in Lemma 1 can be explained by the fact that a risk-averse firm gives

up expected profits to reduce financial uncertainty. Since complete certainty occurs only when q is

zero or one, uncertainty is reduced by adjustment of q toward either zero or one. Thus, for a given

policy, optimal safety under risk aversion is below (above) optimal safety under risk neutrality in

problems with low (high) safety.

        To understand the behavior of the safety function under risk aversion, differentiate (28) with

respect to q, α, and Z to find

                          ~     u ′′(1) ⋅ cq ⋅ q − u ′(1)
(32)                     qZ =
                                          M

and


                                                            20
                              ~          u ′(1) − u ′(2) − cq ⋅ E (u ′′)
(33)                          qα = R ⋅                                     .
                                                      M

From (32), safety is increasing with the polluter's gain from safe periods; hence, the elasticity of

safety with respect to Z is always positive.

         The effects of a change in the liability rule on the safety function are not conclusive.

However, introducing (28) in (33) yields

                              ~          u (1) − u (2)  u ′(1) − u ′(2) E (u ′′) 
(34)                          qα = R ⋅                  u (1) − u (2) ⋅ E (u ′) .
                                              M                                  

When absolute risk aversion is decreasing, R ′A < 0 (in which case u ′′′ > 0 ), then

                              u ′′(1) ⋅ Z > u ′(1) − u ′(2) > u ′′(2) ⋅ Z
(35)
                              u ′(1) ⋅ Z < u (1) − u (2) < u ′(2) ⋅ Z

for Z > 0 and 0 ≤ q ≤ 1 which implies

                              u ′′(1) u ′(1) − u ′(2) u ′′(2)
(36)                                 >               >        .
                              u ′(1) u (1) − u (2) u ′(2)

It is easy to verify from (34) and (36) that, for a polluter with decreasing absolute risk aversion, the

                                                                                               ~
safety function is increasing in liability (for a given Z) when safety is high [ q( Z ,α ) → 1 ] and

                                                         ~
decreasing in liability when safety is low [ q( Z ,α ) → 0 ].3 This result follows logically from the

lemma. Since risk aversion results in more (less) safety than risk neutrality when q → 1 ( q → 0 )

and an increase in a holding Z unchanged reduces the fixed profit of the polluter, the increase in a

will increase the risk aversion of a polluter with decreasing absolute risk aversion; thus,

                               ~
                              qα > 0 if q → 1
(37)                           ~
                              qα < 0 if q → 0.


3
    The properties of such a safety function are discussed in greater detail in Just and Zilberman.


                                                                 21
      A heuristic graphical description of the behavior of the safety functions under risk neutrality

and risk aversion (with α = 1 ) is presented in Figure VI. There is a critical level of the polluter's

gain from a safe period, say, Z+ at which the two safety functions intersect. When the polluter's gain

from a safe period is below Z+, the safety function under risk neutrality is higher; whereas, when

the polluter's gain from a safe period is above Z+, the safety function under risk aversion is higher.

For a polluter with decreasing absolute risk aversion, the safety function for 0 ≤ α < 1 is between

the safety function for α = 1 and that of a risk-neutral polluter (not shown).

                                                                                                           ~
      To determine the bribe payment, the (risk-neutral) pollutee uses the safety function q(α , Z ) of

the risk-averse polluter. The final outcome can be derived using the analysis of Section 3 (where

                                                                                                           ~
both polluter and pollutee are risk neutral) and by replacing the safety function q(Z) with q(α , Z ) .

The level of bribe paid for any liability rule is determined by the intersection of the elasticity of

                    ~           ~              ~
safety function [ η ( Z ,α ) = q Z ( Z ,α ) ⋅ Z / q ( Z ,α ) ] with Z /( R − Z ) . If at the intersection point the

polluter's gain from a safe period is lower than the polluter's liability payment (Z < αR), no bribe

will be paid. Otherwise, the bribe is equal to the difference between the two ( S = Z − αR ).

      Using the same arguments as in Section 3, it can be easily verified that a positive bribe is paid

under complete pollutee liability ( α = 0 ), and no bribe is paid under complete polluter liability

( α = 1 ). Moreover, bribes apparently are paid in cases where the polluters' liability shares are

relatively low, whereas no bribes will be paid when the polluters' liability shares are relatively high.

      Unlike the case of a risk-neutral polluter, liability rules with positive bribes do not yield the

same safety level when the polluter is risk averse. The reason for the difference is that, for a risk-

averse polluter, different liability rules result in different safety functions. The relative complexity

of the safety function under risk aversion prevents obtaining further results for liability rules with



                                                          22
bribe payments. However, the properties of the safety function for risk-averse polluters derived

previously are useful for analysis of the outcomes for liability rules for which no bribes are paid.

                                                                             ~
For these cases, the safety obtained by a risk-averse polluter is equal to q(αR,α ) , and the safety for

a risk-neutral polluter is q(αR) . Using Lemma 1, one can thus deduce:



PROPOSITION 3: For liability rules with no bribe payments, risk aversion on the part of the

polluter leads to lower safety than risk neutrality if safety under risk aversion is sufficiently high;

risk neutrality leads to higher safety when the safety under risk aversion is sufficiently low.



VI. Conclusions and Welfare Implications

       If both a polluter and pollutee belong to an economy possessing a well functioning price

system (prices reflect social valuations) with the exception of the externality between the two, then

efficiency can be attained if joint expected profits of the polluter and the pollutee can be maximized

without imposing risk on any risk averter. The optimality problem of this paper is thus

(38)                    max q a − c(q) + b − (1 − q ) ⋅ R .

Assuming that an internal solution exists, the first-order condition which holds at the optimal safety

level q* is

(39)                    c q (q * ) = R .

Efficiency implies that the marginal cost of safety should be equal to the (marginal) damage of

pollution. Using the safety function for a risk-neutral polluter, efficiency is thus attained if the

safety level is q * = q( R) and no risk is carried by a risk-averse agent.




                                                    23
         This result and Propositions 1 and 2 indicate that, when the polluter is risk neutral, only

complete polluter liability always results in efficient allocation when bribes are based on actual

damage. Furthermore, when the polluter is risk averse, even complete polluter liability does not

yield efficiency. That is, the safety level obtained by a risk-averse polluter under complete polluter

liability is not necessarily equal to the efficient safety level. When safety is low, a risk-averse

polluter tends to reduce safety beyond the efficient safety level (even with full liability); thus, none

of the other liability rules will obtain the efficient safety level. When safety is high, a risk-averse

polluter tends to increase safety above the efficient safety level. In this case, the efficient safety

level might be attained by some partial liability rules, but even then the outcome is not efficient

since a risk-averse agent--the polluter--is carrying risk. Thus, when the polluter is risk averse, it is

impossible to obtain efficiency by assignment of a liability rule. In this case, optimality could be

achieved if contracts could be struck on verifiable polluter activities, which would shift risk bearing

from the polluter to the pollutee. It should also be noted that if fair insurance were provided as a

means of transferring risk from the polluter, then efficiency would be possible even if the polluter

were liable for stochastic damages.4

         The convexity of the cost function implies that (excluding risk-bearing costs) outcomes with

safety levels which are closer to q* are more efficient. Proposition 1 indicates that, despite the

superiority of full polluter liability, there is a range of liability rules ( α < 1 / m ) where increases in

polluter liability will not increase safety but will have only equity effects if both parties are risk

neutral. When the pollutee is risk averse, the effect of increases in polluter liability on safety will

depend on the relationship between the degree of risk aversion and pollutee wealth. If the polluter

is risk averse, an increase in polluter liability may result in outcomes that are smaller and farther

from the optimal level, q*.

4
    A more detailed discussion of insurance and efficient Coasian risk sharing is contained in Graff Zivin and Small.

                                                             24
      Most environmental pollution problems occur in a stochastic environment where firm

activities (e.g. prevention and abatement activities) are not easily monitored and agents are often

risk averse. Agent risk aversion will depend, in part, on firm size and access to financial and

insurance markets that help the firm diversify and hedge risk. If large, well connected firms are

viewed as (nearly) risk neutral and small firms with limited access to financial management tools

are viewed as risk averse, then the results of this paper can easily be translated into practical policy

suggestions. When both polluter and pollutee are large, liability rules are of little consequence –

agents will bargain to efficient outcomes. When the polluter is large and the pollutee is small,

polluters should face complete liability for damages. When the polluter is small and the pollutee is

large, all liability rules will be non-optimal and efforts to contract on verifiable polluter activities,

rather than realized damages, will be preferred. Interestingly, these policy prescriptions appear

consistent with some current forms of regulation. For example, large corporations are generally

held liable for damages to the environment, while small producers, like farmers or dry cleaners, are

generally subject to regulations on input use.

      The analysis presented here is short run in nature. The pollution damage is assumed to be

unaffected by the pollutee's actions. Future work should examine possible (moral hazard) increases

in the pollutee's output resulting in increased pollution damage when the polluter is fully liable. In

such a world, the general lessons from our analysis should remain the same; only Pareto optimality

will never be achievable. The potential for moral hazard will necessitate some risk bearing by the

pollutee, much like the potential for moral hazard in insurance markets forces insurers to introduce

deductibles and co-payments such that plans only partially cover insured risks. Note that if the

pollutee behavior were observable and contractible, optimality might still be achieved through a

combination of a pollutee negligence standard with residual polluter liability. Additional work




                                                    25
might also consider a continuum of pollution levels rather than an all or none process.

Nevertheless, our results point to some necessary conditions in any stochastic pollution problem

where continuous monitoring of safety precautions, is impractical.




                                                 26
REFERENCES

Baumol W and W Oates, “The Theory of Environmental Policy Externalities, Public Outlays, and
the Quality of Life,” Prentice-Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ (1975).

Coase R, “The Problem of Social Cost,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 3, 1-44 (1960).

DeSerpa A, “Pigou and Coase: A Mathematical Reconciliation,” Journal of Public Economics, 54,
267-286 (1994).

Farrell J, “Information and the Coase Theorem,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 1, 113-129
(1987).

Graff Zivin J and A Small, “Risk Sharing in Coasean Contracts,” Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management, forthcoming.

Greenwood P and C Ingene, “Uncertain Externalities, Liability Rules, and Resource Allocation,”
American Economic Review, 68, 300-310 (1978).

Hart O, “Optimal Labour Contracts Under Asymmetric Information,” Review of Economic Studies
50(1983): 3-35.

Just R and D Zilberman, “Asymmetry of Taxes and Subsidies in Regulating Stochastic Mishap,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 93, 139-148 (1979).

Lazear E, and R Moore, “Incentives, Productivity, and Labor Contracts,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics 99(1984): 275-296.

Medema S (Ed.), “Coasean Economics: Law and Economics and the New Institutional
Economics,” Kluwer Academic, Boston, MA (1998).

Mishan E, “The Postwar Literature on Externalities: An Interpretative Essay,” Journal of Economic
Literature, 9, 1-28 (1971).

Pigou A, “The Economics of Welfare,” Macmillan, London (1962).

Polinsky M, Strict Liability Versus Negligence in a Market Setting,” American Economic Review
70(1980): 363-367.

Priveleggi F, C Marchese, and A Cassone, “Agent’s Liability Versus Principal’s Liability When
Attitudes Toward Risk Differ,” International Review of Law and Economics 21(2001): 181-195.

Shavell S, “Strict Liability Versus Negligence,” Journal of Legal Studies, 9. 1-25 (1980).




                                                 27
Shavell S, “Economic Analysis of Accident Law,” Harvard University Press, Cambridge, MA
(1987).

Shavell S, “The Optimal Level of Corporate Liability Given the Limited Ability of Corporations to
Penalize Their Employees,” International Review of Law and Economics 17(1997): 203-213.

Spense M, “Consumer Misperceptions, Product Failure and Producer Liability,” Review of
Economic Studies, 44, 561-572 (1977).

Stigler G, “The Theory of Price,” The Macmillan Company, New York (1952).

Stiglitz J, “Incentives and Risk Sharing in Sharecropping,” Review of Economic Studies 41(1974):
219-255.




                                               28
         Figure I: Optimal Safety Under Risk Neutrality




Safety                                     Z/(R-Z)
 q




                                      A

                                                          η(Z




                               Z1     Z0       Z2    R          Z




                                      29
Figure IIa: Bribe as a Function of the Polluter Liability Share Under Risk Neutrality


       S




       S0




                                                      1        α
                                      S0/R



 Figure IIb: Safety as a Function of the Polluter Liability Share Under Risk Neutrality


   q




        1




                                                                   α
                                       S0/R           1




                                                 30
         Figure III: Optimal Safety Under Pollutee Risk Aversion




                                          Z/(R-Z)
Safety
 q

                                                    Z⋅h(Z,α




                                          B

                                                               η(Z




                                          Z1                         Z




                                          31
                  Figure IV: Bribe as a Function of the Polluter’s Liability Share When the Pollutee is Risk Averse




S                                              S                                          S
           Bribe under DARA                                Bribe under CARA                             Bribe under IARA

S0                                             S0                                         S0



     Bribe                                          Bribe                                      Bribe
     under                                          under                                      under
     neutrality                                     neutrality                                 neutrality


                                      α                                          α                                         α

             Figure IVa                                          Figure IVb                                 Figure IVc




                                                                 32
              Figure V: Safety as a Function of the Polluter’s Liability Share When the Pollutee is Risk Averse




q                                          q                                          q

     Safety under DARA                            Safety under CARA
                                                                                            Safety under IARA




    Safety under neutrality                     Safety under neutrality                    Safety under neutrality



                                  α                                          α                                       α

           Figure Va                                        Figure Vb                                  Figure Vc




                                                           33
         Figure VI: Safety Under Risk Neutrality and
                Under Polluter Risk Aversion




Safety
 q




                                                ~
                                               q( Z ,1)


                                                       q(Z)




         Z+                                                   Z




                                    34
35
