                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               FIRM-SPECIFIC HUMAN CAPITAL:
                                 A SKILL-WEIGHTS APPROACH

                                           Edward P. Lazear

                                         Working Paper 9679
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9679


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




This research was supported in part by the National Science Foundation. I am grateful to my Stanford
colleagues who have provided many insightful comments that are incorporated in the paper. Susan Athey,
David Kreps, Steve Levitt, Ulrike Malmendier, John McMillan, Paul Oyer, Paul Pfleiderer, Peter Reiss,
Kathryn Shaw, Steve Tadelis, Justin Wolfers, and Jeffery Zwiebel made important suggestions.The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Edward P. Lazear. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach
Edward P. Lazear
NBER Working Paper No. 9679
May 2003
JEL No. M5, J24

                                            ABSTRACT

One problem with the theory of firm-specific human capital is that it is difficult to generate
convincing examples of investment that could generate the sometimes observed large and continuing
effects on earnings. Another approach, called the "skill-weights" view, allows all skills to be general

in that there are other firms that use each of the skills. But firms use them in different combinations
and with different weights attached to them. The skill-weights view not only has aesthetic appeal,

but is consistent with the frequently observed large tenure effects. All of the implications of the
traditional view are produced by this approach, and there are a number of other implications that
distinguish the new view from the traditional one. The empirical evidence already contains some
support for the skill-weights view.

Edward P. Lazear
Graduate School of Business
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-5015
and NBER
lazear@gsb.stanford.edu
       Most professors of labor economics teach their students the difference between general

and firm-specific human capital. Firm-specific human capital makes workers more productive in

their current firm, but not elsewhere. General human capital augments productivity in the same

way at multiple firms. But when searching for examples of firm-specific human capital, many of

us fall back on the same cliched examples. “Knowing how to find the restrooms,” “learning who

does what at the firm and to whom to go to get something done,” “learning to use equipment or

methods that are completely idiosyncratic,” are ones that come to mind. The problem is that it is

difficult to generate convincing examples where the firm-specific component approaches the

importance of the general component. If we think of our own jobs as academics, there is surely

some value to knowing the specifics of the university at which we are employed, but does that

capital come close to the amount of general economic knowledge that we have acquired on the

job through seminars, reading and writing papers, and talking with colleagues? The answers is

almost certainly no, and this is true for virtually every job that one considers. Yet the tenure

coefficient is close to the same size as the experience coefficient in many empirical papers.1

       Another view of firm-specific human capital is offered here that is based solely on

general skills, but generates the findings observed in the literature on earnings functions. The

approach is this. Suppose that there are a variety of skills used on each job and suppose that


       1
          See, for example, Topel (1991), who finds significant tenure effects even after
accounting for endogeneity, and Neal (1995), table 4. Altonji and Shakotko (1987) argue that
much of the earlier findings on tenure effects are biased upward as a result of heterogeneity. The
first strong evidence of at least the possibility of firm-specific human was provided by Parsons
(1972), which was inferred from a comparison of stayers’ and leavers’ earnings.

                                                 1
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach             April, 2003



each of these skills is general in the sense that it is used at other firms as well. The difference,

however, is that firms vary in their weighting of the different skills. A real-world example of

which I have some personal knowledge may be helpful. A small Silicon Valley start-up provides

enterprise software that does tax optimization. The typical managerial employee in this firm

must know something about tax laws, something about economics, and something about

software and Java programming. None of these skills, taken alone, is firm-specific. There are

many other firms in the economy that make use of knowledge on taxes. Other firms use

economic reasoning to produce their products. Java is a language used commonly throughout

the Valley. But the combination of these skills, especially in the quantities used at the start-up in

question, are unlikely to be replicated in many, if any, other firms. A manager who leaves the

start-up will have a difficult time finding a firm that can make use of all the skills he acquired at

the first firm. The second job might use some of the economics and some of the tax, but little of

the programming expertise. Or it might use tax and programming, but little economics. In part,

the loss in going to a new job depends on the thickness of the labor market and on search costs.

When markets are very thick and search costs are low, a laid-off worker is more likely to find a

job where skill demands match closely those of his previous assignment. When markets are thin

and search costs are high, the worker might have to settle for a firm that makes little use of all

the skills acquired at the prior firm, even though each of those skills is “general” in the sense that

there are other employers who make use of the same skill. As a result, a separation, especially in

thin markets and in high search cost occupations, results in a wage loss and yields a positive

coefficient on tenure in wage regressions.


                                                     2
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach              April, 2003



        There are other stories that generate positive tenure coefficients, which have nothing to

do with firm-specific human capital. Upward-sloping tenure-earnings profiles can provide

incentives as in Lazear (1979, 1981). They may also reflect pure rent seeking activity if more

senior workers are better at extracting rents than their junior counterparts. But there is a

difference between these two rationales and traditional firm-specific human capital reasoning. In

the case of firm-specific human capital, senior workers are underpaid relative to their

productivities because of rent-splitting that is part of the equilibrium contract. Senior workers

receive more than they could elsewhere, but less than they are worth to the firm. In the case of

incentive profiles or rent-extraction, senior workers are paid more than their productivities.

Other things equal, an exogenous shock (like a death) that induces a separation makes the firm

worse off if the affected worker has firm-specific human capital. The same shock makes the

firm better off if senior workers are overpaid.

        Why bother with another story for specific human capital? The traditional view seems to

have generated many predictions that are consistent with the data. The advantage of this new,

“skill-weights” view of human capital is that it provides a more reasonable story and seems more

consistent with high values of the tenure coefficients that are sometimes observed, as well as

yielding all of the implications for earnings functions that are documented in the empirical

human capital literature. Furthermore, a number of additional testable implications, some of

which have already received the support of existing empirical work, come from this view,

thereby distinguishing it from the traditional view of firm specific human capital. In short, this

skill-weights view is likely to be closer to reality.


                                                     3
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach           April, 2003



                                               The Model

        Let there be two skills, A and B, which the individual can acquire at cost C(A,B). Two

skills and two periods are sufficient to derive all of the propositions. Think of workers making

their investments during period 1 and receiving the payoff from work in period 2.

        A worker with skill set (A,B) has potential earnings at firm i given by



(1)     yi = λi A + (1-λi) B



The λi reflects the fact that each firm i may weight the two skills differently from another firm j.2

        The worker must decide on his human capital investment strategy. Define the initial

firm, denoted firm1, as the firm at which the worker is employed during the first period. Before

the second period begins, the worker learns whether he will continue at the initial firm or move

to some other firm, which is given exogenously. Let the probability of remaining at the initial

firm be p. The worker’s investment problem is then to choose A and B, knowing that he may

remain at the initial firm, but that there is some chance that he will have to move to another firm,

which weights skills differently. The random variable λ has density f(λ). So a worker at firm 1

chooses A and B so as to maximize




        2
         Since the capital, or in this case weights, are firm specific, rents are shared. The sharing
rule is subsumed in the definitions of A and B because they are not central to this analysis. It is
possible to think of A as the part of skill A that the worker captures in earnings and similarly for
skill B. As a result, we can abstract from the bargaining problem.

                                                     4
Edward P. Lazear             Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach             April, 2003



                                                              1
(2)      Net Earnings = p [ λ1 A + (1 − λ1 ) B] + (1 − p) ∫ [ λA + (1 − λ) B] f ( λ)dλ − C ( A, B)
                                                              0




The first-order conditions are




(3)      pλ1 + (1 − p) λ − C A = 0


and


(4)      p(1 − λ1 ) + (1 − p)(1 − λ ) − C B = 0



        Investment is a weighted average of the relevant skill-weights inside the firm and outside,

where the weights depend on the probability of separation. The intuition is clear. If p=1 so that

continuation in the initial firm is certain, then only the initial skill-weights matter and workers

set

           λ1 − C A = 0

and

         (1 − λ1 ) − CB = 0 .

At the other extreme when p=0, the current firm is irrelevant. Of course, the worker does not

know where he will end up so he invests based on the expectation of λ, and investment solves

           λ − CA = 0

                                                      5
Edward P. Lazear              Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach          April, 2003



and


         (1 − λ ) − C A = 0 .


The Tenure Coefficient

        The motivation given for this altered view of firm-specific human capital was that the

tenure coefficient in earnings regressions seemed too high to be consistent with the stories about

firm-specificity. The model presented above also yields a tenure coefficient, and it is instructive

to examine it in light of the data.

        Tenure coefficients in earnings regressions are identified in the cross-section by

comparing those who leave the firm with those who stay at the firm. The difference between the

earnings growth associated with a given amount of experience for those who stay and those who

go loads on the tenure coefficient. The amount of wage growth that the leavers get loads on the

experience coefficient. In the context of this model, wages are set to zero in period 1 and to

        y1 = λ1 A* + (1-λ1) B*

in period two for those who stay with their initial firm (where A* and B* are the optimal levels

of A and B chosen). The leavers receive

        y2 =       λ2 A* + (1-λ2 ) B*

where λ2 is the skill-weight at the firm to which the worker moves. Recall that A* and B* are

chosen based on λ1 and the expected value of λ.

        The tenure coefficient is that part of wage growth that is not common to both stayers and

leavers, i.e.,


                                                       6
Edward P. Lazear             Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach              April, 2003



        ∆ = λ1 A* + (1-λ1) B* - λ2 A* - (1-λ2 ) B*

or

        ∆ = (λ1 - λ2 ) (A*- B*)

so the model predicts that one period’s worth of tenure is then given by the expectation of ∆ or

(5)     Tenure effect= E{(λ1 - λ2 ) (A*- B*)}

The one-period experience effect is the part that is common to both, i.e., the returns that even

leavers receive,

(6)     Experience effect = E{λ2 A* + (1-λ2 ) B*} .



The sign of the tenure coefficient:

        The loss associated with a move from the initial firm to a new firm is just the tenure

effect, ∆ . Is ∆ always positive? Is there always a loss associated with moving from the first

firm to another? The answer is usually, but not always.

        The intuition is this. The worker must choose his investment strategy not knowing

whether he will remain at the firm or not. Usually, p is sufficiently large so that the worker will

invest in skills, banking primarily on continued employment at his initial firm. As a result, he

then invests somewhat idiosyncratically, catering to the demands of the first job. When he loses

that job and moves to another, he suffers a loss because he is unlikely to find a job that matches

his skill set perfectly, given his idiosyncratic investment. But there are exceptions. If the

probability that he is going to remain at his initial firm is very low, i.e., p is close to zero, the

worker will adopt an investment strategy that is more consistent with λ than with λ1. Under

                                                      7
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach            April, 2003



these circumstances, losing a job is good luck rather than bad. Because he invested in skills that

match more closely with λ , a job switch enables him to use his skills better, at least on average.


        To see this, note from the first-order conditions (3) and (4) that as p goes to one, the

worker ignores the rest of the market and invests only in skills that pertain to the initial firm.

Any job loss under these circumstances puts him in a situation that can be no better than those at

the initial firm and in general must be worse. Thus, the loss in (5) must be positive because A*

and B* are optimal assuming only λ1. As p goes to zero, the opposite applies. All investment is

based on λ so the worker can do no better than going to the firm with the average λ. The initial


firm cannot, in general, have λ= λ so the worker enjoys a gain when he moves.




Tenure effects and the probability of separation:

        The intuition of the limiting cases p61 or p60 carries through more generally. It is

possible to show that the expected value of the loss, ∆, increases with p.

        To see this, note that the expectation of ∆ can be written




                   1 1
         E ( ∆) = ∫ ∫ ( λ1 − λ2 )( A * − B*) f (λ1 ) f (λ2 )dλ1dλ2
                   0 0




                                                     8
Edward P. Lazear                Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach      April, 2003



which is



                            1

(7)                E ( ∆) = ∫ ( λ1 − λ)( A * − B*) f (λ1 )dλ1
                            0




because A* and B* do not depend on the realization of λ2 .

        Differentiating with respect to p gives

                                  1
                     ∂ E ( ∆)                ∂ A* ∂ B*
                              = ∫ ( λ1 − λ)(      −     ) f ( λ1 )dλ1 .
                       ∂p       0
                                              ∂ p   ∂ p



Using the first-order conditions for A* and B* and substituting yields



                                   1
                      ∂ E ( ∆)                    1      1
                               = ∫ ( λ1 − λ) 2 (      +      ) f (λ1 )dλ1
                        ∂p       0
                                                 C AA   C BB




which is positive.

        Again, the result is quite intuitive. The expected loss rises with p because the individual

adopts a more idiosyncratic investment pattern when he expects to stay with the firm. This is

consistent with the original story of firm-specific human capital. Workers who do not expect to

stay are unwilling to invest in firm-specific human capital. The same intuition applies here, but



                                                         9
Edward P. Lazear               Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach                   April, 2003



what is different is not that the skills are unique to the initial firm, but rather that their

importance is greater at the initial firm than elsewhere. Thus, the size of the tenure coefficient

should be negatively related to the amount of turnover in the occupation. The same implication

follows from the traditional view of specific human capital.



Idiosyncratic firms and the tenure coefficient:

        The tenure effect is larger for workers whose initial job is at a firm with relatively

idiosyncratic weights. The reason is that the tenure effect is identified by comparing movers to

stayers. Those who leave firms with unusual weighting patterns suffer larger wage loss for a

given p.

        To see this, differentiate (7) with respect to λ1 - λ to obtain



                           1
            ∂E ( ∆ )                          ∂A *              ∂B *
                         = ∫ {( λ1 − λ )(                 −                 ) + ( A * − B*)} f ( λ1 )dλ1
           ∂ (λ1 − λ )                      ∂ (λ1 − λ )       ∂ (λ1 − λ )
(8)
                           0




To show that the derivative in (8) is positive, first it is shown that it is positive for p=½. Then it

is shown that the derivative is increasing in p so that it must be positive for all p>½.

        First, define A to be the skill such that λ > ½ . Next, note from the f.o.c. in (3) and (4)



                                                       10
Edward P. Lazear                  Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach         April, 2003



that when p = ½ ,

                   λ1 + λ
        CA =
                     2


and

                    (1 − λ 1) + (1 − λ )
        CB =                               .
                             2



If A is idiosyncratic to the firm, then λ 1 > λ ≥           1
                                                                2   , which implies that


         λ 1 + λ (1 − λ 1) + (1 − λ )
                >                     .
            2             2



Given a symmetric cost function, by which CA (A, B) = CB (B, A), A* > B*, this second term

inside the integral in (8) is positive. The first term is

                        p    p
         ( λ1 − λ)(        +    )>0.
                       C AA CBB



Thus, when p = ½, the derivative in (8) is positive.

        It is also true that the expression in (8) increases in p; so for p > ½, (8) is also positive.

To see this, note that




                                                          11
Edward P. Lazear              Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach        April, 2003



                   1
∂ ( A − B)                 1    1      ∂A ∂B
           = ∫ {(λ1 − λ)(     +    )+ ( −    )} f (λ)dλ
    ∂p       0
                          C AA CBB     ∂p ∂p

                   1
                               1    1      λ − λ (1 − λ1 ) − (1 − λ)
             = ∫ {(λ1 − λ)(       +    )+ ( 1    −                   )} f ( λ)dλ
                   0
                              C AA CBB      C AA        CBB




which is positive for λ1 > λ . This completes the proof.


        The same analysis can be repeated in reverse so that when λ1 < λ , decreases in λ1 result

in larger losses from a random termination and therefore a larger tenure effect.

        The intuition is clear. As a firm’s requirements become more idiosyncratic, the worker’s

investment strategy, albeit tempered by the market, becomes less typical. A departure results in

a larger loss because the worker has been induced to invest in skills that are less general. The

effect is worsened as p goes to 1. When p is large, the worker is quite certain that he will remain

with the first firm and invests even more idiosyncratically. When an unanticipated departure

occurs, the loss is all the larger as a result.



Market Thickness


                                                      12
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach            April, 2003



        One implication of the skill-weights view of human capital that is less obvious under the

prevailing view is that the tenure coefficient decreases with market thickness. As is made clear

in this section, the definition of firm-specific human capital is actually endogenous. As market

thickness increases, investments that would otherwise be viewed as firm specific become more

general. Also, as markets become thicker, the individual undertakes investment strategies that

are closer to the strategy that would prevail in the absence of any potential mobility, i.e., with

p=1.

        An increase in market thickness is modeled here as allowing more search. The model

above assumes that if a separation occurs [which happens with probability (1-p)], the worker

gets a new draw of λ. A thicker market is represented as one where when separation occurs, the

worker gets two draws of λ and can select the job that best suits his prior investment strategy.

        Since, as shown in the last section, the loss associated with a move increases in the

difference between λ1 and the new λ, it is clear that the worker will choose to work at the firm

where λ is closer to λ1. It also follows directly that the loss associated with the move must be

smaller than it was with only one draw. (The most obvious proof of this proposition is that the

worker could always ignore the second draw and be no worse off than when faced with only one

λ).

        Denote λ * as the expected value of λ on separation, given that the worker now has two

draws and chooses the best of the two (in this case the closest to λ1). The first-order conditions

(3) and (4) now become



                                                    13
Edward P. Lazear             Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach              April, 2003



(3')     pλ1 + (1 − p)λ * −C A = 0


and


(4')     p(1 − λ1 ) + (1 − p)(1 − λ *) − C A = 0



Since it is necessarily the case that

         λ1 − λ * ≤ λ1 − λ ,


the convex combination shown in (3') and (4') must be closer to the pure investment strategy of

        λ1 - CA = 0

and

        (1-λ1) - CB = 0

that would prevail were the individual certain to stay at the initial firm. Thus, when markets are

thick, the worker loses less on a move despite the fact that he engages in a more firm-specific

investment pattern.

        The reason is that when thickness of the market increases, the investment is not really so

firm specific. Each skill taken by itself can always find a use in another firm, but as market

thickness increases, the chances of finding a firm that uses skills in the same combination of

those at the initial firm improve. It is in this sense that the definition of specific capital is

endogenous. Tenure effects reflecting the idiosyncracy of skill weights that would be large


                                                     14
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach           April, 2003



when markets are thin become smaller when markets are thick.

        Under the traditional notion of specific human capital, the thickness implication is less

obvious, if present at all. When specific human capital takes the form of learning who does what

in a firm or how things are done at a particular firm, it is unclear why having more firms in a

market would make such knowledge more general.



Who Pays for Specific Training?

        One of the “puzzles” in the literature has been that some forms of training seem general,

yet firms seem to bear the cost of them.3 Under the skill-weights view, it is natural that the firm

would pay for at least some of the human capital that appears to be general. Take the example

used for motivation, where a firm requires tax, economics and Java programming. Because a

worker who leaves the firm will almost certainly fail to find another firm that needs the skills in

the same proportions, and because this imposes a wage cost on mobile workers, the worker is

unwilling to bear the full cost of training. The firm finances some learning about taxes,

economics, and Java, even though each of these skills, taken separately, is completely general.

A corollary is that as the skill mix becomes more idiosyncratic, workers are less likely to pay for

the training even though each component is general.



Special Case


        3
        This issue has attracted a good bit of attention in the literature, especially recently. Best
known among recent contributions are Acemoglu and Pischke (1998) and Booth and Zoega
(1999). Cappelli (2002) argues that this helps attract better workers to the firm.

                                                    15
Edward P. Lazear             Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach           April, 2003



        The traditional view of firm-specific capital is merely a special, but unrealistic, case of

this approach. Let each firm j have a factor xj with a positive weight associated with it. Let all

firms k…j have weight zero on that factor. Then, the traditional view of firm specificity is

captured by this specification. For example, knowing the personalities at firm j have value at

that firm, but nowhere else. But the view is unrealistic not because there are no factors that are

completely unique to each firm, but because the unique factors are very unlikely to account for

as much human capital as the non-unique factors. In order for the tenure coefficient to be as high

as the experience coefficient, the weight on the idiosyncratic factor would have to be large

enough to allow the contribution of the idiosyncratic component to equal that of all other

common components combined. Thus, the large tenure coefficients can handle this special case,

but are unlikely to be justified by it.



Firm-Specificity Increases with Tenure

        One of the more important implications of the traditional view of firm-specific human

capital is that the stock of firm-specific human capital increases with tenure on the job. In this

section, it is shown that the skill-weights view of specific human capital provides the same

implication.

        To do this, let there be three periods instead of two. As before, an exogenous separation

can occur at the end of period 1, which happens with probability (1-p1). Conditional on staying

with the firm during period 2, an exogenous separation can also occur at the end of period 2,

with probability (1 - p2) . Now the worker faces a two-period problem. He must choose


                                                     16
Edward P. Lazear              Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach         April, 2003



investment in period 1; then depending on whether he remains with the firm or leaves, choose

investment in period 2.

        The period 2 problem is identical to the one shown in first-order conditions (3) and (4),

except that the relevant probability is p2 . Conditional on having reached period 2, the

investment problem is a one-period problem with first-order conditions4




(3")     p2 λ1 + (1 − p2 )λ − C A = 0


and


(4")        p2 (1 − λ1 ) + (1 − p2 )(1 − λ ) − CB = 0




        In period 1 the worker anticipates that he may leave the firm after one period or may

remain for one or two more additional periods. The probability that he remains for two periods

is p1p2 . The probability that he remains for the first but not the second is p1 (1-p2) . The

probability that he leaves after the first period is (1-p1) . The maximization problem in period 1




        4
        There is a slight complication because investment is irreversible. So, for example, the
worker might have invested in too much B, thinking that there was a good chance that he would
move to another firm before period 2. After learning that he has been retained at least through
the second period, he might prefer to have selected a lower level of B. Thus, in the conditions
above, A and B should be interpreted as the maximum of A and B from (3") and (4") and A and
B that come from the first-period maximization, below. The first-period problem will have
already accounted for this irreversibility.

                                                      17
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach          April, 2003



then yields first-order conditions


                                   λ1 + λ
(3a)     p1 p2 λ1 + p1 (1 − p2 )          + (1 − p1 )λ − C A = 0
                                      2



and


                                        (1 − λ1 ) + (1 − λ)
       p1 p2 (1 − λ1 ) + p1 (1 − p2 )                       + (1 − p1 )(1 − λ) − CB = 0
(4a)                                             2




        Note that (3a) and (4a) are just weighted versions of the terms in (3) where the weights

reflect the probabilities of each of the events. For example, a separation occurs at the end of

period 2 with probability p1 (1-p2) so the second term in (3a) is the optimal investment strategy

given separation in period 2 times the probability of separation at the end of period 2.

        Completely idiosyncratic investment occurs when p1 and p2 are equal to 1. Then, the

worker chooses A so that CA = λ1 and B so that CB = (1-λ1). Other skill weights are irrelevant.

Now, in period 2 the worker chooses a hybrid of basing investment on λ1 and basing it on λ .

The same is true in period 1.

        In period 2 the weight attached to the firm’s idiosyncratic production function is higher

than in period 1 because p2 > p1p2 . (In the case where investment, say in B, from period 1

already exceeds the optimum for those who are retained, the condition becomes a weak

                                                    18
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach            April, 2003



inequality. Investment can never become less idiosyncratic.). As a result, investment in period 2

is more highly skewed toward the current firm’s idiosyncratic weights, which implies that firm-

specificity increases over the worker’s tenure with the firm.

        This provides two implications. The first is the standard one that specific human capital

investment increases over time simply because surviving in the firm implies that another round

of investment is appropriate. The second implication, not emphasized in the standard theory, is

that investment becomes more idiosyncratic over time. Not only does the worker undertake

additional investment, but the nature of this investment becomes more skewed to the needs of the

current firm.



The Size of the Tenure Coefficient

        Part of the justification for thinking about specific human capital in this somewhat

different way is that the tenure coefficient is too large relative to the experience coefficient to be

consistent with the stories behind the firm-specific effect. It is shown here that the model skill-

weight interpretation of specific human capital can generate coefficients that are observed in the

data.

        To do this, simulations were done, where the λ for the initial firm and the firm that the

worker lands in if terminated are drawn from either a uniform distribution on the [0, 1] interval

or bimodal distribution. The bimodal allows λ = [0, 1] with equal probability. The results are

contained in table 1.




                                                    19
Edward P. Lazear             Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach                  April, 2003



                                                Table 1
                                         Results of Simulation
                             Effects of Tenure and Experience on Wages

 p                 p = .3                       p = .6                               p = .9
 Distribution      Uniform     Bimodal          Uniform          Bimodal             Uniform   Bimodal
 Tenure            .049        .148             .099             .299                .150      .445
 Experience        .499        .502             .500             .500                .500      .504
 Ratio             .1          .3               .2               .6                  .3        .9


         There are a number of points that table 1 makes clear. First, it is possible to generate

tenure coefficients that are nearly the same size as the experience coefficients. The bimodal case

with p=.9 comes the closest. There, the experience effect is .504 and the tenure effect is .445, so

that the tenure coefficient is about 90% as high as the experience coefficient. Second, the higher

is p, the larger is the tenure coefficient relative to experience. This was proved above in the

theory section and reflects the fact that the higher is p, the more idiosyncratic is investment.

When the worker is almost certain that he will remain with the firm, he invests heavily in

idiosyncratic skill patterns. An unexpected departure then brings large losses, which is reflected

in high tenure coefficients. Third, the uniform distribution (where 0<λ<1) yields lower tenure

coefficients than the bimodal where λ=0 with probability .5 and λ=1 with probability .5. The

intuition is this. When λ takes extreme values, it is certain to be very far away from λ which is


.5 in both cases above. The binomial case guarantees the largest deviation between λ1 and λ ,

which means that the period 1 investment pattern generates bigger losses in the binomial case


                                                       20
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach           April, 2003



than in the uniform case. The main point, though, is that it is possible to generate coefficients on

tenure and experience that have relative values that are observed in the real world.



Skill-Weights and Matching

        The skill-weights interpretation is also consistent with the matching view of the labor

market.5 Think of a worker as being endowed with some vector of skills, (A0,B0) . Output is

        Output = λ1A0 + (1-λ1 ) B0 ,

and the derivative with respect to λ1 is

         ∂Output
                 = A 0 − B0
           ∂λ1



which is positive for A0 - B0 > 0. This means that matching consists of finding a firm with the

highest λ1 if A0 - B0 > 0 and finding a firm with the lowest λ1 if A0 - B0 < 0.

        The notion behind matching is that an individual has a set of skills that fit better in some

firms than others. It is essentially equivalent to firm-specific human capital, except that the

investment part is de-emphasized. In matching, there is no presumption that the worker learns

the specific skills that make him a good match with a firm. Instead, in the matching story, the

worker has an endowed set of skills, and those skills are better suited to some firms than to

others. It is not that the skills are not useful anywhere else. A more reasonable interpretation of

matching is that the value placed on skills that the individual possesses differs across firms.



        5
         Jovanovic (1979a, b).

                                                    21
Edward P. Lazear              Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach          April, 2003



Thus, the skill-weight interpretation is not only consistent with matching but seems a natural

view of it.



                                   Empirically Testable Implications

          The goal of theory is to provide implications that can be tested and verified or refuted.

There are a number of implications of the skill-weights approach that go beyond those of the

traditional view of firm specific human capital and some that can distinguish between the two.

          1. Market Thickness: The implications of market thickness distinguish between the two

theories. In the skill-weights approach, tenure effects should be smaller in thick markets than in

thin markets. No such implication comes from the traditional view.

          A market is thick when two conditions hold. First, the cost of searching for offers is low

so the worker receives many offers for a given amount of search effort. Second, the density is

such that the expected difference between the weight λ in the original firm and the weight λ in

the newly offered job is small. Thus, a tight or concentrated distribution of λ results in lower

tenure coefficients than a disperse distribution of λ. Empirical proxies of density and search

costs might include regional population densities and industry and occupation concentration

ratios.

          2. Firm Size: When a worker leaves a large firm, tenure effects should be large. When a

worker joins a large firm, tenure effects should be smaller. If large firms have lower turnover

rates and can better cater to a worker’s endowed skills, then workers from large firms are likely

to be less diversified in their choice of skills than those from small firms. Thus, departures from


                                                      22
Edward P. Lazear             Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach           April, 2003



large firms should result in larger wage losses. Conversely, when a worker joins a large firm,

there is a better chance that the worker will find a job that suits his pattern of prior investment

because within the firm there is a larger range of specialization.6 This is not an implication of

the traditional view of firm-specific human capital.

        3. Idiosyncratic Firms: The more idiosyncratic is a firm’s skill-weights, the larger is the

loss associated with a move. New and unusual technologies, even though general in the

traditional sense, probably have more idiosyncratic weights. As a result, tenure effects should be

larger in new and unusual industries. Newness is straightforward to measure, but it may be more

difficult to obtain empirical analogues of “unusualness” in the sense that few firms attach

significant weight to the skill required at the initial firm.

        4. Payment for General Training: As already mentioned, firms will pay for a larger share

of what would otherwise appear to be general training when the firm’s particular weights on the

skills are idiosyncratic. This implies that firms are more likely to pay for general training in

industries and occupations where tenure effects are largest because those are the industries with

the largest losses associated with moving from one firm to another.

        5. Occupations: A very detailed definition of occupation might be thought to hold

constant the skill-weights. That is, one way to define an occupation is such that all individuals in

the occupation have identical skill weights. If so, then holding occupation constant in the wage

regression should reduce the magnitude of the tenure effect. There is some evidence of this in

Shaw (1984), table 4. Wage regressions that include occupational experience have somewhat


        6
         Finding a job at a large firm contains an element of luck.

                                                     23
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach             April, 2003



lower tenure coefficients than those without. More important, the occupational effect itself is

about four times as large as the pure tenure effect. To the extent that occupation is a proxy for

skill-weights -- and it surely cannot reflect firm-specific capital in the traditional sense -- then

the fact that occupational experience is so important suggests that the skill-weights view has

merit. Furthermore, if some occupations are defined better, i.e., more finely, than others, then

those occupations that are defined best should have the lowest tenure coefficients. This can be

thought of as an errors-in-variables problem. Poorly defined occupations generate variables that

are more noisily measured. The coefficient on this variable is biased toward zero and that on

others that proxy it are generally biased upward.7

        6. Time-Dependent Tenure Effects: Because of the way that uncertainty gets resolved

over time, the tenure effects should be largest at the time that a separation occurs and should die

out over time. There is some evidence (Jacobson, LaLonde, and Sullivan, 1993), that supports

this conclusion.




        7
        See also Neal (1995) and Parent (2000), who find that industry and occupation effects
eliminate the firm tenure effects.

                                                    24
Edward P. Lazear            Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach              April, 2003



                                               Conclusion



The tenure effects found in the empirical literature on earnings functions are difficult to reconcile

with the standard examples of firm-specific human capital. Often equal in size with the general

experience effect, it is difficult to imagine that the firm-specific learning in the typical job is as

great as the learning that transfers across firms. An alternative approach that is based on general

human capital with firm-idiosyncratic weights provides all the implications of the traditional

story, but has the virtue that it is more realistic. Furthermore, the skill-weights approach

provides a number of additional implications, some of which have already been shown to be

consistent with the data.

        Like the traditional view, the skill-weights approach implies that workers who experience

an exogenous change in job lose some earnings associated with their previous tenure. The

amount of the loss grows as workers are with the firm for longer periods of time and tends to be

greatest when separation probabilities are low, so that a worker is less likely to switch jobs.

Further, the more idiosyncratic is the initial firm’s technology, the larger is the loss associated

with a job switch, even though workers hedge against this loss by adopting a more external-

oriented investment strategy.

        There are a number of additional implications that come from the skill-weights view.

First, the size of the tenure coefficient varies with the thickness of the market. In markets where

job offers are rare or where firms have very different skill weights, the tenure coefficient is

larger than in those where offers are common and there are many firms with skill requirements


                                                    25
Edward P. Lazear              Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach               April, 2003



that are close to one another.

        The more idiosyncratic is the weighting of skills in which the worker is initially

employed, the larger is the tenure coefficient. Thus, in new industries that use skills in

uncommon combination (as economics, tax, and Java programming), the tenure coefficient

should be relatively large.

        The firm may bear some or even most of the cost of skills that look general. In the skill-

weights version, no skills need be truly “firm-specific” in the sense of there being no other

potentially competitive firm at which they have value. On the contrary, the skills appear to be

general because in isolation, they are used at a number of firms in the market. But the weights

differ by firm. If the skills are acquired in relatively idiosyncratic patterns, e.g., learning

medicine and law in the same firm, the firm may bear a larger fraction of the cost of the skills

that are most likely to be lost were the worker to be displaced.

        Matching stories are a natural application of the skill-weights view. If workers possess

some combination of general skills before arriving at a firm, a firm that weights most heavily

those skills that the worker possesses in abundance is a good match for the worker.

        The theory implies that workers who are displaced from large firms will have greater

earnings losses than those who leave small firms. Conversely, those who join large firms will

have smaller wage losses than those who join small firms.

        Finally, the tenure effect should be reduced when industry and occupation effects are

taken into account. There is ample evidence, found in a variety of data sets, that supports this

implication.


                                                      26
Edward P. Lazear          Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach       April, 2003



                                             References

Acemoglu, K. Daron and Jorn-Steffen Pischke. “Why Do Firms Train? Theory and Evidence,”
     Quarterly Journal of Economics 113 (February 1998): 79-119.

Altonji, Joseph G. and Robert A. Shakotko. “Do Wages Rise with Job Seniority?” Review of
        Economic Studies 54, no. 3 (July 1987): 437-459.

Booth, Alison L. and Gylfi Zoega. “Do Quits Cause Under-Training?” Oxford Economic
       Papers, 51 (February 1999): 374-386.

Cappelli, Peter. “Why do Firms Pay for College?” NBER working paper 9225 (September
2002).

Jovanovic, Boyan. “Job Matching and the Theory of Turnover,” Journal of Political Economy
      87, no. 5 (1979a): 972-990.

Jovanovic, Boyan. “Firm-Specific Capital and Turnover,” Journal of Political Economy 87, no.
      6 (1979b): 1246-1260.

Lazear, Edward P. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political Economy 87, no.
       6 (December 1979): 1261-84.

Lazear, Edward P. “Agency, Earnings Profiles, Productivity, and Hours Restrictions,” American
       Economic Review 71, no. 4 (September 1981): 606-20.

Jacobson, Louis S., Robert J. LaLonde, and Daniel G. Sullivan. “Earnings Losses of Displaced
       Workers,” American Economic Review 83, no. 4 (September 1993): 685-709.

Neal, Derek. “Industry-Specific Human Capital: Evidence from Displaced Workers,” Journal of
       Labor Economics 13, no. 4 (October 1995): 653-677.

Parent, Daniel. “Industry-Specific Capital and the Wage Profile: Evidence from the National
        Longitudinal Survey of Youth and the Panel Study of Income Dynamics,” Journal of
        Labor Economics 18, no. 2 (April 2000): 306-323.

Parsons, Donald O. “Specific Human Capital: Application to Quit Rates and Layoff Rates,”
       Journal of Political Economy 80, no. 6 (1972): 1120-1143.

Shaw, Kathryn. “A formulation of the Earnings Function Using the Concept of Occupational
      Investment,” Journal of Human Resources, XIX, 3, (1984), pp. 319-340.


                                                  27
Edward P. Lazear          Firm-Specific Human Capital: A Skill-Weights Approach      April, 2003



Topel, Robert. “Specific Capital, Mobility, and Wages: Wages Rise with Job Seniority,”
       Journal of Political Economy, 99, no. 1 (Februrary 1991): 145-176.




                                                  28
