NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COOPERATIVE MARKETING AGREEMENTS
BETWEEN COMPETITORS:
EVIDENCE FROM PATENT POOLS
Josh Lerner
Jean Tirole
Marcin Strojwas
Working Paper 9680
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9680
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003

We thank Chris Allen, Isidro Ferrer, Andrew Frisbee, Nick Lau, Erika McCaffrey, Franklin Noll, Olga
Trzebinska, Sarah Woolverton, Bernard Yoo, and especially Adrian Ma for research assistance. Ken French
and Dietmar Harhoff provided us with supplemental data. Seminar audiences at the American Law and
Economics Association meetings, the Ecole des Mines, Harvard University, the National Bureau of Economic
Research, the U.S. Department of Justice, and the Toulouse Conference on the Economics of the Internet and
Software Industries provided helpful comments. The case study in Section 6 would not have been possible
without the cooperation of a number of practitioners. Harvard Business School’s Division of Research
provided financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of
the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Josh Lerner, Jean Tirole, and Marcin Strojwas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.

Cooperative Marketing Agreements Between Competitors: Evidence from Patent Pools
Josh Lerner, Jean Tirole, and Marcin Strojwas
NBER Working Paper No. 9680
May 2003
JEL No. L2, L4, O4
ABSTRACT
On numerous occasions, rival firms seek to market goods together, particularly in high-technology
industries. This paper empirically examines one such institution: the patent pool. The analysis
highlights five findings consistent with the theoretical predictions: (a) pools involving substitute
patents are unlikely to allow pool members to license patents independently, consistent with our
earlier theoretical work; (b) independent licensing is more frequently allowed when the number of
members in the pool grows, which may reflect the increasing challenges that reconciling users?
differing technological agendas pose in large pools; (c) larger pools are more likely to have
centralized control of litigation, which may reflect either the fact that the incentives for individual
enforcement in large pools are smaller or that large pools are more likely to include small players
with limited enforcement capabilities; (d) third party licensing is more common in larger pools,
consistent with suggestions that such pools were established primarily to resolve the bargaining
difficulties posed by overlapping patent holdings; and (e) during the most recent era, when an
intense awareness of antitrust concerns precluded many competition-harming patent pools, more
important patents were selected for pools and patents selected for pools were subsequently more
intensively referenced by others.
Josh Lerner
South Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
josh@hbs.edu
Marcin Strojwas
Cotting Hall
Harvard Business School
Boston, MA 02163
mstrojwas@hbs.edu

Jean Tirole
Institut d'Economie Industrielle
Manufacture des Tabacs
Bureau MF529 - Bat. F
21 allees de Brienne
31000 Toulouse - FRANCE
tirole@cict.fr

1. Introduction
On numerous occasions, rival firms seek to market goods together. In some
cases, they seek to offer complementary products, such as when a toothpaste
manufacturer offers a promotion with a toothbrush maker. Yet on other occasions, the
goods are closer to substitutes, or at least somewhere in between substitutes and
complements. Examples include airlines entering into code-sharing agreements, rival
newspapers offering package advertising rates, and record companies allowing users to
assemble customized collections of songs from multiple labels. One arena where joint
marketing is particularly prevalent is in high-technology industries. Firms frequently
commit to jointly make their intellectual property available, for instance through
commitments to a standard-setting organization or an open source body.

These interactions have attracted relatively little scrutiny from economists. This
paper seeks to address this neglect, empirically examining one knowledge-sharing
institution: the patent pool.

Patent pools can be defined as formal or informal

organizations where for-profit firms share patent rights with each other and third parties.1
A companion paper examines these bodies from a theoretical perspective.

Patent pools are particularly interesting for two reasons. First, the determinants of
organizational structure have been a major concern in the industrial organization
literature for many decades. While certain hybrids between arm’s length contracting and
More formally, we define these as cases where either (a) two or more firms combine to
license patents to third parties (which we term “open” pools) or (b) three or more firms
come together to license patents to share the patents among themselves ("closed" pools).
1

full integration—e.g., joint ventures—have been extensively scrutinized, patent pools
represent a little studied organizational structure that may shed light on contracting
challenges. The second motivation is a more practical one. The United States over the
past two decades has seen an explosion of patent awards, and a dramatic increase in the
volume of patent litigation between rivals. Numerous commentators have suggested that
the proliferation of these awards has had socially detrimental consequences: overlapping
intellectual property rights may make it difficult for inventors to commercialize new
innovations. (Gallini [2002] reviews this literature.) Patent pools have been proposed by
Merges [1999], Shapiro [2000], and the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (Clark, et al.
[2001]) as a way in which firms can address these “patent thicket” problems. Indeed,
patent pools are already an economically significant institution: a recent estimate
(Clarkson [2003]) suggests that sales in 2001 of devices based in whole or in part on
poked patents were at least $100 billion. Were these suggestions to be adopted, their role
might approach that seen in the early days of 20th century, when many (if not most)
important manufacturing industries had a patent pooling arrangement.

After briefly summarizing the history of patent pools, we review the theoretical
predictions concerning the structure of these pools, some of which are based on the
framework in Lerner and Tirole [2002]. We then describe the construction of the sample
of 63 pools established between 1895 and 2001. The analysis highlights five findings
consistent with the theoretical predictions:
•

First, pools involving substitute patents are unlikely to allow pool members to
license patents independently, consistent with our earlier theoretical work.

2

•

Second, independent licensing is more frequently allowed when the number of
members in the pool grows, which may reflect the increasing challenges that
reconciling users’ differing technological agendas pose in large pools.

•

Third, larger pools are more likely to have centralized control of litigation. This
may reflect either the fact that the incentives for individual enforcement in large
pools are smaller (i.e., because free riding is more intense) or the fact that large
pools are more likely to include small players with limited enforcement
capabilities.

•

Fourth, third party licensing is more common in larger pools, consistent with
suggestions that such pools were established primarily to resolve the bargaining
difficulties posed by overlapping patent holdings.

•

Finally, during the most recent era, when an intense awareness of antitrust
concerns precluded many competition-harming patent pools, (a) more important
patents were selected for pools and (b) patents selected for pools were
subsequently more intensively referenced by others.

We conclude with a clinical study of a particular patent pool, which in part corroborates
the large-sample study and in part raises additional questions.

As noted above, there is a very limited amount of related literature. Priest [1977]
and Shapiro [2000] represent pioneering attempts to model the rationales for patent pools.
Bittlingmayer [1988] and Cassady [1959] present clinical studies of single patent pools.
Gilbert [2002] provides a historical overview of these pools. Legal scholars, however,
have written the bulk of the literature on these institutions: Carlson [1999] and Merges
[1999] are examples.

3

2. A Brief History of Patent Pools2
The first patent pool is widely agreed to have been established by sewing machine
manufacturers in 1856. By the 1890s, pooling agreements had become commonplace in
the United States. Interest in patent pools stemmed in part from the desire to avoid the
restrictions on anti-competitive activities that had been enacted as part of the Sherman
Act of 1890. Patent pools were seen as exempt from regulatory scrutiny, a perception
that was buttressed in 1902 when the U.S. Supreme Court refused to invalidate a patent
pool, noting “the general rule is absolute freedom in the use or sale of patent rights under
the patent laws of the United States. The very object of these laws is monopoly….”3

Soon thereafter, however, the tide began to shift. The Supreme Court struck
down the bathtub enameling patent pool in 1912 in the Standard Sanitary decision.
Private antitrust litigation regarding pools increased sharply thereafter. Government
efforts to investigate and break up pools accelerated after well-publicized hearings on
patent pools in the late 1930s. (This period also saw a more general increase in antitrust
enforcement, as discussed in Ghosal and Gallo [2001].) The Supreme Court decision in
the Hartford-Empire case, in which Justice Hugo Black pronounced “the history of this
country has perhaps never witnessed a more completely successful economic tyranny
over any field of industry than that accomplished by [the pool members],”4 was widely
seen as ushering in an era of regulatory intolerance for these arrangements.

2

This section is based on Carlson [1999], Merges [1999], and Vaughn [1925, 1956].

3

E. Bement & Sons v. National Harrow Company, 186 U.S. 70, 91 (1902).

4

Hartford Empire Co. v. U.S., 323 U.S. 386, 436-437 (1945).
4

As a

consequence, the number of new patent pools formed in the United States dwindled away
to almost nothing after World War II.

In recent years, however, there has been a cautious revival.

In 1995, the U.S.

Department of Justice and U.S. Federal Trade Commission issued its “Antitrust
Guidelines for the Licensing of Intellectual Property,” which explicitly noted, “crosslicensing and pooling arrangements may provide pro-competitive benefits.”5 Shortly
thereafter, Justice’s Antitrust Division issued a favorable review letter concerning the
MPEG-2 Video patent pool.

The result has been a modest resurgence of these

arrangements. Numerous steps have been taken by the designers of these pools to avoid
antitrust scrutiny, including in many cases the submission of the pooling agreement to the
Antitrust Division for advance approval.

3. Theoretical Perspectives
In the companion work to this one (Lerner and Tirole [2002]), we present a
theoretical treatment of rationales for and consequences of patent pooling agreements.6
This section is not intended to duplicate that paper. Rather, it seeks to highlight several
key insights based on that framework regarding the structure of patent pools.

5

http://www.usdoj.gov/atr/public/guidelines/ipguide.htm (accessed March 19, 2002).

The focus of the theory paper is on normative issues relating to antitrust policy.
Nonetheless, the framework leads to a number of positive insights. In this paper, we
complement the earlier analysis with some additional theoretical points.
6

5

We focus here on four characteristics of the patent pools. The first of these is
whether the pool allows its members to engage in independent licensing (i.e., not as part
of the pool). Lerner and Tirole [2002] show that the requirement that independent
licenses be offered is a perfect screening device when—as is often the case—the antitrust
authorities are poorly informed as to whether the patents in the pool are substitutes or
complements. For welfare-decreasing pools (which we will refer to as “pools with
substitute patents” for short7), the requirement that independent licenses be offered
returns the outcome to what it would have been in the absence of a pool. For welfareincreasing pools (“pools with complementary patents”), the requirement that independent
licensing be permitted has no impact. The theory thus predicts that in the absence of
strong antitrust enforcement, patent pools should allow independent licensing precisely
when it is innocuous, that is, when patents are complements. (All things being equal, we
believe that firms would allow independent licensing, since it would help assuage the
concerns of antitrust authorities, particularly in the most recent years.) Pools between
substitutes would be likely to prohibit such licensing, due to its negative impact on pool
and member profits.

We also expect that independent licensing will be more common in large pools,
though the strength of our conclusions must be tempered. If a large number of patents
are included in the pool, licensors are only likely to be interested in a subset of the
patents. Independent licensing allows this problem to be addressed. To be sure, pools do
We use this terminology, even though the change in the sign of the welfare impact does
not coincide with the switch from “complements” to “substitutes” (using the definitions
standard in demand theory). It is correct to say, though, that the more substitutable the
patents in the pool are, the more likely it is that the pool will reduce welfare.
7

6

not need to allow independent licensing in order to let licensors select which patents meet
their needs. Alternatively, they could offer “menus,” or subsets of patents to license.
One of the surprises we encountered in the data collection phase was how few pools
(11% of the entire sample) offered menus. As the case study discussed in Section 6
highlights, transaction costs, disagreements over how to price items on the menu, and
disputes over the sharing of licensing fees all served to discourage the use of menus.
Such potential disagreements may make independent licensing an attractive substitute for
menus.

The second characteristic of the pools we consider is whether control of litigation
is centralized. Initially, it might be thought that it would always make sense to assign
control over enforcement activities to the original patent-owners: after all, they should be
better informed about their patents than anyone else. But the choice as to whether to
control litigation centrally is driven by two considerations: capabilities and externalities.

On the capabilities front, the abilities of firms to detect infringements and manage
patent litigation cases are likely to vary drastically. In particular, small firms without
large patent portfolios are unlikely to have experienced lawyers specializing in
intellectual property issues. These limited capabilities mean that centralized enforcement
is advantageous. Pools with many members may be more likely to have firms without
the capacity to litigate.

7

The choice of whether to centralize the control of litigation is also driven by the
presence of externalities among the members.

Each member, under decentralized

enforcement, considers its own welfare, but not that of other participants. In the absence
of independent licensing, each firm only receives 1/nth of the pool’s proceeds from its
expenditures on enforcement.

We would expect this “free-rider problem,” and the

consequent reduced investment in enforcement, to be most severe when there are many
firms in the patent pool.

Independent licensing reduces this free-rider rider problem, as royalties on
individual patents are then only partially shared. Thus, independent licensing should
work against centralization. Note, though, that although this effect is clear, its strength
may be limited if—as theory predicts and will be verified empirically—independent
licensing is mainly present when patents are complements. Thus, the use of independent
licensing will be limited, and it will only be able to partially mitigate the free-rider
problem.

We should note that pool members’ attitudes towards the reduced litigation
resulting from decentralized control might vary. Suppose, for instance, that members are
allowed to license their patents independently. If patents are substitutes (an unlikely
case, as we argued above), then the under-investment in litigation leads to negative
consequences for the pool. When the patents are complements, however, the absence of
litigation may actually help the other pool members: the lower price that a pool member

8

who fails to litigate his patents or his infringer charges may lead to increased demand for
the other, independently licensed patents.

Pools are more likely to grant licenses to third parties if the latter are downstream
suppliers of products not offered by the pool members or (even better) complements to
the pool’s products. Unfortunately, we do not observe the extent to which the pool
members have a presence in the downstream product markets.

It is also difficult for us to predict whether pools consisting of patents that are
substitutes or complements with each other are more likely to offer licenses to third
parties.

Owners of intellectual property can enter into patent pools for a number of

reasons. These different motivations are likely to lead to very different choices. One
rationale for entering into a patent pool is to facilitate collusion. Firms may enter into
such agreements to reduce the degree of competition with their peers. In product market
cartels, the pool may serve as a mechanism to extract greater profits from the downstream
market. By combining patents that are substitutes and licensing them as a package, firms
may be able to charge higher royalties for the usage of the technology. A more benign
alternative is that firms enter into patent pools to solve the “patent thicket” problem: the
presence of overlapping intellectual property holdings that make it difficult for third
parties to license patent holdings and develop new technologies. Such pools, unlike the
ones discussed above, have the potential to enhance social welfare.

9

Similarly, it is difficult for us to anticipate the impact of pool size.

One

conjecture is that small pools may lack the capability for downstream production, while
larger pools have such a capability. Larger pools may thus be less likely to grant licenses
to third parties. As we’ll see once we turn to the data, however, fully 98% of the pool
members have the option to make use of the patents included in the pool, so the
conjectured effect is unlikely to be a strong one.8 Alternatively, it may be possible that
the motivation for forming the larger pools is that key patents are more widely distributed
across firms. If the motivation for such pools is to address “patent thicket” problems,
then third party licensing may be more common in these settings.

Finally, we examine the innovation friendliness of the pools: the extent to which
features of the pool encourage or deter future innovation by the pool members. Pools
encourage innovation by their members by allowing them to keep the rights to the
intellectual property that they discover after the pool is formed.9 By requiring these
awards to be assigned to the patent pool, the incentive to innovate is dulled. It should be
noted that however undesirable the reduced incentives to innovate are from a social
perspective, this consequence may not be worrisome for pool members: firms may seek
to boost their profits by “softening” their competition in the R&D market in this manner.
But innovation unfriendly terms also play a more benign role. By adopting such a clause,
the pool members protect themselves from hold-up problems by one of their

It is not clear that that the firms exercised this option in every case; this term’s
prevalence may reflect the very low cost of adding such a provision to an agreement.
8

See Lerner and Tirole [2002] for a more general analysis of the determinants of
innovation friendliness.
9

10

opportunistic peers. By requiring automatic licensing, the potential problem that a pool
member may make an essential discovery and then demand an extraordinary sum from
the other members for access to the technology is defused.

The impact of the rate of technological progress on the decision to make a pool
innovation friendly is ambiguous.

If rapid technological progress characterizes an

industry, the possibility of a radical innovation that would make opportunistic behavior
possible is greater. This concern argues for the adoption of provisions that require the
assignment of future patents, even if they reduce the incentives to innovate. At the same
time, the dangers associated with the reduced incentives to innovate may be the greatest
here: another firm outside the pool may be more likely to make a discovery that
“leapfrogs” (obsoletes) the technology of the pool members. Thus, a faster rate of
innovation in the industry increases both the costs and benefits of innovation friendliness.

The consequences of being leapfrogged are particularly severe if the main aim of
the pool is to license its technology to third parties. (By way of contrast, pool members
combining patents for their own use may welcome some external competition.) Hence,
we would expect innovation friendliness to be positively associated with licensing to
third parties, particularly when the patents included in the pool are complements.

Another set of predictions relate to the recent set of pools, almost all of which
have been extensively scrutinized by the U.S. Department of Justice for possible
detrimental impacts on competition. Even in the recent pools not submitted to the

11

Department for review, pool members—seeking to deter antitrust scrutiny—have
typically hired outside experts to ascertain that the patents are truly essential (that is,
complementary). It might be thought that in these pools, we would see two effects at
work:
•

The quality of the patents included in the pools would be higher, reflecting the
screening of potential patents.

•

Since in these cases, the pools are especially likely to enhance usage of the
patents by third parties, the patents included in these pools should be more heavily
employed by others.

We will test these suggestions using the various measures of patent quality found in the
earlier literature (e.g., using patent citations as a proxy for utilization).

4. Constructing the Sample
The literature on patent pools to date—which, as noted above, has been largely
confined to law reviews—focuses on the reported judicial decisions on these
arrangements. While the decisions discuss aspects of the pools’ structure, they do not
provide sufficient details to allow a systematic analysis of the features of the pools. In
order to test the theory delineated above, we needed the actual agreements governing the
patent pools. This section describes the procedure we employed to construct the patent
pool sample, as well as the supplemental data used in the analysis.

A. Identifying the Pools
The first question was one of definition.

Our definition of patent pools in

footnote 1 excludes several other types of arrangements:

12

•

Simple cross-license arrangements between two firms, where there was no clearly
stated intention of engaging in future licensing transactions.

•

New operating companies that were established to manufacture products based on
intellectual property of a number of firms (e.g., Radio Corporation of America).

•

Firms that acquired large amounts of patents and then licensed them to other
concerns (e.g., American Steel and Wire Company, American Tobacco Company,
and other “patent consolidators”).

•

Pools that are dominated by non-profit entities (e.g., universities), where profitmaximizing considerations may not be paramount.
We then compiled a list of all identifiable patent pools. The primary sources for

these identifications were Carlson [1999], Commerce Clearing House [various years],
Kaysen and Turner [1959], Merges [1999], Vaughn [1925, 1956], and “War and Peace”
[1942], though many other sources were used as well.

In total, we identified

approximately 125 patent pools, dating between 1856 and 2001. (In some cases, we were
unsure based on the information that we could collect whether the arrangement satisfied
our definition of a pool.)

These pools appear not to have been disclosed by firms in filings with the U.S.
Securities and Exchange Commission. Instead, we obtained the pooling agreements in
five ways:
•

Congressional hearings during the 1930s and 1940s scrutinized a number of
patent pools (especially U.S. Congress [1938-1940], U.S. House [1935], U.S.
Senate [1942]). In many cases, the pooling agreements were either published in
the records of the hearings or else retained as unpublished exhibits (which are
preserved in the committees’ files in the National Archives in Washington, D.C.)

•

Many of the pools were subjects of private or federal antitrust litigation. In the
course of the trials, frequently the patent pooling agreements were entered as
exhibits. The dockets of these cases are preserved in the various regional
depositories of the National Archives. In order to limit costs, we focused on those
13

depositories with the greatest concentration of cases: Boston (which has records
from federal district cases in the first judicial circuit), Chicago (which includes
much of the sixth and seventh circuits, as well as some of the ninth circuit),
Kansas City (which has records from parts of the eighth and tenth circuits, as well
as older records from parts of the second and third circuit), and New York City
(which has more recent records from parts of the second and third circuits).
•

The Antitrust Division of U.S. Department of Justice investigated a number of
patent pools, some of which were litigated against and others were not. Since the
time these files were used by Hay and Kelley [1974], the records have been
transferred to the National Archives’ Suitland, Maryland facility. These files
were located with the assistance of Johnson [1981]. As part of the investigations,
the patent pooling agreements were sometimes gathered and preserved.

•

The U.S. Department of Justice and the U.S. Federal Trade Commission have
scrutinized a number of the recent pools. In these cases, we obtained the key
documents through Freedom of Information Act requests.

•

In the case of recent pools that had not been the subject of federal scrutiny, we
requested the documents from the pool administrators.

In all, we were able to collect the documentation on 63 patent pools.10 We then identified
and coded the key characteristics of the agreements. We focused on the initial agreement
establishing the pool, rather than the many amendments that frequently characterize these
agreements.

Given the lack of a systematized database of patent pools, it is difficult to assess
the comprehensiveness of our sample.

At the same time, it is reassuring that the

distribution of the 63 pools, summarized in Table 1 and 2, reflects the patterns discussed
in Section 2. We believe it is likely that the sample underrepresents the very oldest
pools: the federal government was far less active in antitrust enforcement during this

We have not identified any non-U.S. government sources for patent pool agreements
(though our sample does include some agreements exclusively between firms outside the
United States). Antitrust authorities outside the U.S. historically do not appear to have
systematically reviewed or litigated patent pooling arrangements until recent years.
10

14

period, and many of district court files from this period are lost or unusable. In addition,
it may be that pools involving German firms are disproportionately represented, since ties
between German and American firms were a particular focus of the Bone Committee’s
hearings in 1942.

B. Supplemental Information
We next collected a variety of information on each of these pools. One important
variable in our analysis was patenting activity in the industry of the patent pool in the five
years prior to the establishment of the pool.

To undertake this analysis, we first

determined which patent subclasses using today’s classification scheme the patent pool
covered. (The patent classification scheme is periodically updated as new technologies
emerge.) These subclasses were identified in two ways. First, we examined the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office’s (USPTO) Manual of Classification (available at
http://www.uspto.gov/go/classification/uspcindex/indextouspc.htm), which details the
U.S. patent classification scheme. Second, we determined the patents that were included
in the pool from the pooling agreements. These were determined from the agreements
themselves and USPTO indexes. We ascertained the subclasses into which the patents
are assigned today using the database available at http://patft.uspto.gov/netahtml/searchadv.html. We then determined how many patents were assigned to these subclasses
(whether included in the pool or not) in the years before the establishment of the pool
using the latter database. We also computed two alternative measures: the overall growth
in patenting by pool members and the patenting by members in the subclass covered by
the patent pool. A detailed index to U.S. patent awards by firm is available in electronic

15

format only after the early 1970s. To identify patenting by firms for the older pools, we
used the USPTO’s annual Index of Patents Issued by the Commissioner of Patents and its
predecessor publications.

We also collected several other measures, which we used in supplemental
regressions not reported in the paper:
•

The revenues of pool members in the five years prior to the establishment of the
pool. For recent pools, we employed the data in Compustat and WorldScope
databases. For older pools, we relied on information in the Moody’s Industrial
Manuals, which list both U.S. and major foreign firms, and various non-U.S.
national corporate directories. In some cases, we were able to determine from the
publication another measure of financial performance (e.g., the firm’s operating
profits or net income), but not the firm’s revenues. In these cases, we used the
median ratio between this measure and the revenues for other firms in the industry
during the same year (also determined from the Moody’s manual) to impute the
revenue. We were not able to determine any financial information, however, for
approximately one-third of the firms.

•

The median book-to-market ratio for firms in the industry of the patent pool in the
year prior to the establishment of the pool. This ratio, which is frequently used as
a proxy for growth prospects, was determined for recent pools using the
Compustat and the Center for Research in Securities Prices (CRSP) databases.
For the pools established prior to the 1970s, we employed market value data from
the CRSP database and the book value data collected from Moody’s manuals by
Davis, Fama, and French [2000]. Because valuation levels shift dramatically over
this period, we adjust the median industry book-to-market ratio by subtracting
from it the median ratio for all firms in that year.11

This data set only extends as far back as 1926, so we do not have this measure for
earlier patent pools.

11

16

C. Additional Data for the Most Recent Pools
As noted above, we intensively study five patent pools12 formed in 1995 and after.
We elected to focus on recent pools for two reasons. First, as noted above, there was a
strong rationale for believing that these pools would be consistently innovation and
efficiency enhancing, as opposed to those from earlier periods, where considerable
diversity characterized the population of pools.13 Second, the U.S. patents in these pools
could be analyzed using the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) Patent
Citations Data File constructed by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001].

(Detailed

information about U.S. patents awarded before the 1970s are not available in any
electronic database.)

Upon identifying the pooled patents, we proceeded to form two sets of matching
patents:
•

The first of these matching sets included the patents awarded to the same firms
that were most proximate to the pooled patent. (We defined the most proximate
patent as the one with the closest award number.)14

•

The second of these matching patents was the most proximate patents awarded to
the same type of assignee as the pooled patents and within the same USPTO

The pools whose patents were analyzed included the two DVD, MPEG-2, 1394, and
DVB-T associations. Though we had the pooling agreements for two additional recent
patent pools, the Bluetooth and 3G organizations, these documents did not include data
on which patents had been assigned to these pools. Thus, we could not use these two
pools in the patent analysis.

12

While antitrust officials are unlikely to always know whether the patents in the pools are
substitutes or complements, the use of external reviewers to determine essential patents
and (as we argue in Lerner and Tirole [2002]) the presence of independent licensing
requirements help insure that these recent pools are innovation and efficiency enhancing.

13

We were not able to assign a matching patent based on this criterion for one pooled
patent because the assignee did not own any patents other than the patents included in the
pool.
14

17

technology class. We relied upon the assignee type field in the NBER patent
database to determine whether each patent was assigned to a government, nongovernment organization (mostly corporations), or an individual, and whether the
patent was assigned to a U.S. or non-U.S. entity.
When the matching patent coincided with a patent that was included in a pool or with a
patent that was already selected as a matching patent, then the next most proximate patent
was selected as the matching patent. In cases where the matching patent for a given
pooled patent based on the same-firm criteria was the same as the matching patent based
on the same-class criteria, we found a new same-class match for the patent, choosing the
second most proximate award.

In the majority of cases, the award date of the matching patents was the same as
the award date of the pooled patent. The mean of the absolute number of days between
the pooled patent and the matched patent based on the same-firm criteria was 37.3 days
and the median was 0.0. The mean absolute number of days between the pooled patent
and the matched patent based on the same-class criteria was 2.5 days and the median was
0.0.

5. Analysis
We proceed in two parts. First, using the patent pools established before 1995,
we examine the determinants of the characteristics of these agreements. We then focus
on the most recent pools, and exploit our more detailed data on these organizations.

18

A. Analyses of Pool Characteristics
Our first approach is to examine the univariate relationships. Table 3 presents an
initial tabulation of the four dependent variables we will examine, as well as the three
independent variables discussed above.

While such an analysis can only scratch the surface—we do not consider the
relationships between the dependent variables or the interaction effects discussed
above—a few patterns stand out.

First, a secular trend appears to be at work.

Independent licensing provisions are more common in later pools, while the centralized
control over litigation has become less so. Second, pool size appears to matter. Larger
pools are associated with a greater probability of independent licensing, consistent with
theoretical suggestions above.

We then seek to estimate a formal model. Following the discussion in Section 3
above, we hypothesize the following relationships:
indivlic = a + b×firmcount + c×substitute + ε1
litigcentral = d + e×firmcount + f×firmcount×licto3rd×(1-indivlic) + g×indivlic +
h×substitute×indivlic + ε2
licto3rd = i + j×firmcount + k×substitute + ε3
innovfr = l + m×licto3rd + n×(1-substitute)×licto3rd + o×growth + ε4
These equations had three sets of variables, which we will discuss in turn.

There were four limited dependent variables. Indivlic, licto3rd, and innovfr take
on value one if the pool allows independent licensing by pool members, allows licensing

19

to third parties, and does not require pool members to automatically assign discoveries to
the pool. Litigcentral takes on the value of one if litigation is controlled by each firm
acting on its own; three if the pool is in control of the litigation with no provision for optout; and two in the intermediate cases. Simultaneous estimation is necessary because
some limited dependent variables appear on the right-hand side of the equations.

The exogenous independent variables included the count of the number of parties
in the pool (firmcount) and the growth of patenting in the industry segment of the pool in
the five years prior to the pool’s formation (growth). Because we believe that there will
be substantial non-linearities with firm size (e.g., the coordination challenges may be
very different in a pool with two members and one with six members, but not differ
appreciably between ones with ten and thirty members), we winsorize the firm count
variable. Firmcount is top-coded at six. In robustness checks discussed below, we use
alternative measures for the count of the firm members and for growth.

The variable substitute takes on the value one if the patents in the pool are pure
substitutes, zero if they are entirely complements, or else takes on an intermediate value
in this range. Because we do not observe the degree of substitutability, we estimate this
as a latent variable, using the following fifth equation:
substitute = p + q×y45bef + r×royaltyfreemem×(1-licto3rd) + s×notgilbertcase +
ε5
The independent variables are measures that we expect will be associated with the degree
of substitutability or complementarity of the patents in the pool. Y45bef indicates pools
formed before the Hartford-Empire decision of 1945; royaltyfreemem denotes pools

20

where the members used the patents in the pool on a royalty free basis; and
notgilbertcase denotes pools other than those identified by Gilbert [2002] as ones where
the courts identified the pool as anti-competitive in intent. Only the rationale for the
second item probably needs discussion. We hypothesized that in cases where pool
members were free to use patents on a royalty free basis and the pool did not license them
to third parties, it was less likely that the decision to establish the pool was driven by
anticompetitive motivations (and the patents were less likely to be substitutes).

The five equations are estimated simultaneously following the approaches
delineated in the discrete choice literature. Heckman [1978] discusses the issues of
identification and estimation in this setting. Schmidt [1981] provides the necessary and
sufficient conditions for simultaneous equations with limited dependent variables to be
internally consistent.

More specifically, each limited dependent variable, y, is associated with a latent
variable, y*, that follows a normal distribution:
Prob(y = i) = Prob(zi-1 < y* < zi)
The set of parameters includes {a,…, o, q,…, r} and the threshold parameters {zi}. The
scaling constant p is used to enforce the constraint that the latent variable substitute falls
between 0 and 1. As a result, p is not a well-identified parameter to be estimated in the
analysis. The estimates are obtained by numerically maximizing the log likelihood
function. The standard errors of the estimates are calculated from the inverse of the

21

Fisher information matrix. The numerical second derivative of the log likelihood function
is used as in Hamilton [1994].

The intensive reviews of the draft patent pool agreements by U.S. Department of
Justice officials in 1995 and thereafter may have resulted in fundamentally different
dynamics behind these agreements. Reflecting this concern, our analysis is restricted to
pools established prior to 1995.

The results from this analysis are presented in Table 4. The following results
stood out from the analyses:
•

Pools involving substitute patents are unlikely to allow pool a member to license
patents independently, consistent with our earlier theoretical work.

•

Independent licensing is more frequently allowed when the number of members
in the pool grows, which may reflect the increasing challenges associated with
reconciling users’ differing technological agendas in large pools.

•

Larger pools are more likely to have centralized control of litigation. As noted
above, this may reflect either the fact that the incentives for individual
enforcement in large pools are smaller (i.e., because free riding is more intense) or
the fact that large pools are more likely to include small players with limited
enforcement capability. The former hypothesis had suggested that the interaction
between the count of firms in the pool and the absence of independent licensing
would have particular explanatory power, but this coefficient proves to be
insignificant and of the opposite sign.

•

Suggestive, though statistically insignificant, results emerge from the relationship
between the centralized control of litigation and independent licensing. As
predicted above, independent licensing is associated with a lower probability of
centralized control of litigation.

•

We had few unambiguous predictions regarding the determinants of patents being
licensed to third parties. We find that third party licensing is more common in
larger pools, which is consistent with suggestions that such pools were established
primarily to resolve the bargaining difficulties posed by overlapping patent
holdings.
22

•

Again, the analysis of innovation friendliness produces suggestive, if statistically
insignificant results. Innovation friendly terms are associated with pools where
there is licensing to third parties, particularly of complementary patents.

•

The estimated latent variable regressions generate one statistically significant
result consistent with our priors: pools identified by Gilbert [2002] as particularly
problematic are more likely to contain substitutes. The greater probability of
pools formed prior to 1945 having substitute patents, while statistically
insignificant, is also consistent with our priors.
While our ability to examine the robustness of the results was limited by the small

sample size and the modest number of details on the pool members that we were able to
ascertain, in unreported regressions we undertook a variety of supplemental analyses.
We employ alternative dependent and independent variables (for instance, coding
litigcentral as a binary measure like the others and no longer winsorizing firmcount). We
substitute the alternative variables measuring growth (growth in pool members’ sales and
patenting) for growth in overall industry patenting. The results delineated above continue
to come through, though the significance of the firmcount measure is frequently lower
when the full measure is used, due to the heavy influence of a few very large pools.

Another set of robustness checks examined the possibility of selection biases. As
acknowledged above, our sample was not a random one: the pools included in the
analysis were disproportionately likely to have been litigated.

These pools might

reasonably be thought to have characteristics (e.g., anti-competitive provisions) not
shared by the others. To address this concern, we examined the subset of historical pools
that were identified through means other than litigation records: those revealed in the
course of congressional hearings.

The criteria used to select pools for scrutiny by

23

Congress were quite different: for instance, a number of hearings systematically
examined all active pools in certain industries (e.g., dyestuffs, petroleum, and precious
metals) or involving firms of a given nation (Germany).

We repeated the above analyses, using this sub-sample. Because of the smaller
sample size, we did not estimate the full set of equations, but rather single equations or
sets of two equations. The magnitude of the effects continued to be similar, though the
statistical significance was more modest in some cases (reflecting the smaller sample
size).

A third concern related to the presence of omitted variable biases. We were
worried that our results could stem from the fact that variables such as firmcount might
be correlated with important omitted measures, such as the degree to which the members
of the pool dominated the upstream or downstream product markets. While we could not
thoroughly address this concern, we did explore the robustness of the results to
specifications with additional independent variables.

These results were generally

consistent, though significance levels did vary.

B. Analysis of Pool Performance
We then examined the relative importance of the patents that were included in the
recent pools, as well as the effects of selection into these pools on the usage of these
patents. We focus our analysis on the most recent period when, as noted above, patent
pools were subject to extensive antitrust scrutiny. Consistent with theoretical suggestions

24

above, pools appear to have higher-quality patents and the inclusion in the pool seemed
to trigger more utilization.

Table 5 provides a look at the differences between pooled patents and their
counterparts. In Panel A, we focus upon a measure of the importance: patent citations
received. A patent that receives more citations is generally viewed as being more
important than a patent with fewer citations (see, for instance, Jaffe and Trajtenberg
[2002]). We divided the number of citations to each patent into two components: the
citations received before the pool was formed and those received afterwards.

In order to count the number of citations a patent received before and after the
pool was formed, we used the NBER Patent Citation Data File. We were able to identify
all of the patents that cited patents in our sample through the end of 1999. Once we
identified these patents, we used the grant date of each citing patent to determine if it was
awarded before or after the formation of a given pool. For the matching patents, we
similarly examined the number of citations prior to and after the formation of the pool in
which the corresponding pooled patent was included.

The number of citations received before the pool was formed served as a measure
of the importance of a patent that can reasonably be assumed to be unaffected by its
inclusion in a pool. The number of citations received after the pool was formed reflects
factors such as the intrinsic significance of the patent, the increased attention received
due to its inclusion in the pool, and potentially the decreased concerns about blocking

25

patent issues that arise in follow-on innovations. In Panel A of Table 5, we compare the
average annual number of citations before and after the pools’ formation. Tests of the
equality of means and medians reveal that the number of citations received before and
after pool formation are both significantly higher for pooled patents relative to the
matching patents. These results suggest that the patents included in the pools were
relatively more important.

Figure 1 and 2 provide a graphical look at the number of citations received by
year. In the first graph, we present the annual citation rate relative to the year of the
award: e.g., we depict the citations per patent in the sample in the year after the award.
Consistently, those patents that are included in the pools are more intensively cited. In
the second, the citations are presented relative to the year of pool formation. The figure
reveals that while patents in the pool are more intensively cited than their peers, the
difference is confined to the years immediately before the pools’ formation and the years
subsequent to the pools’ establishment.

In Panel B and Panel C of Table 5, we look at differences in “originality” and
“generality” respectively between patents included in pools and the matching sets. We
use the measures of originality and generality employed by Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002],
where generality/originality is defined as one minus the sum of the squared percentage of
citations received/made from each patent class. Originality is a proxy for the
innovativeness of patents because patents citing patents from a more diverse set of
classes can be thought of as linking innovations from a broader set of domains. Panel B

26

indicates that the originality of the pooled patents is not significantly different from the
originality of the matching sets.

Generality is also related to the economic value of a patent. Patents cited by
patents from a wider set of classes tend to be more valuable because they form the basis
for follow-on innovations in a larger set of fields. Panel C reveals that the generality of
the pooled patents is significantly higher than the generality of the matching patents. This
suggests that either the patents being included in pools have the potential to be leveraged
in a wider variety of domains or the effect of being included in the pools results in their
broader utilization.

In Panel D, we utilize the number of claims made by a patent as a proxy for the
scope of a patent. Patents that make more claims tend to be broader and therefore more
valuable. For both matching sets in Panel D, the Wilcoxon median test yields a smaller pvalue than the t-test. This difference can be attributed to the skewness in the distribution
of the number of claims made by patents. The results of the Wilcoxon median test are
probably more relevant because of the weaker distributional assumptions made by this
test.15 Employing the set of matching patents by class and by firm, the Wilcoxon median
test indicates that the number of claims made by pooled patents is significantly higher
than non-pooled patents at the 10% level of significance. Restricting the set of matching
patents to matches by firm yields similar results.

The Wilcoxon median test simply assumes that the two sets come from populations with
the same distribution without imposing restrictions on what this shape may be.

15

27

We then seek to perform similar analyses of the characteristics of pooled patents in
a multivariate framework. We employed the same sets of matching patents as above to
construct our sample. The dependent variables we used in these analyses are the same
measures of patent characteristics as used above: citations received, originality, generality,
and claims made.

In Table 6, we explore the importance of patents as measured by citations received.
We use as the dependent variable the number of citations received in each year after the
award. As in the univariate analysis, we employed this strategy to address the concern that
once a patent is included in a pool, it will receive more citations due its exposure and its
availability on established licensing terms. We employ several specifications, in the style
of Furman and Stern [2002].

First, we simply estimated ordinary least squares

regressions, with dummy variables controlling for the year of the patent award, the vintage
of the patent (that is, the number of years between the award and the observation), and
each matched set of patents (the pooled patent and the two matching ones). The patents in
the pool are more frequently cited in general, but particularly after the establishment of the
pool.

Due to the discrete nature of the number of citations received, we also ran a set of
regressions using a negative binomial specification.

We again employed a dummy

variable for each group of patents, and also estimated the equation with a distinct dummy
variable for each patent. Once again, patents included in pools were more frequently cited

28

in general, and especially after their inclusion in a pool (an effect that was particularly
strong in the latter specification).16

We employed only one observation for each patent in the regressions analyzing
originality, generality, and the number of claims reported in Table 7. As control variables,
we employed dummy variables for the year in which a patent was granted, the pool in
which the patent was included (the pool of the corresponding pooled patent in the case of
matching patents), and the category of the patent as defined in the NBER patent database.17
The results are also consistent with the univariate comparisons in Table 5. Across the
specifications, generality is highly significant while originality is not. These regressions
suggest that pooled patents tend to have a broader range of applications but do not
integrate a broader set of innovations. The last regression reveals that the number of
claims made by pooled patents is not significantly greater than the number of claims made
by non-pooled patents.

We repeat the regression analyses, adding a dummy variable for patents that would be
added to a pool in the next one-to-three years (as well as an interaction term as above).
This interaction term is also positive and significant across the regressions. Even after
we control for the greater propensity to cite both patents that are already in pools and
those that are soon to be added to pools, the coefficient on the variable denoting patents
that are included in pools is consistently positive and significant. In other words, the
tendency to cite pooled patents more frequently is not confined to the periods
immediately before and after they are included in a pool.

16

These categories are Chemical (excluding drugs), Computers and Communications,
Drugs and Medical, Electrical and Electronics, Mechanical, and Other.

17

29

6. Field Research
To gain a richer understanding of the forces shaping patent pooling agreements,
we supplemented our theoretical and large-sample research with a case study of the
MPEG-2 patent pool.18

MPEG-2 is a digital video compression standard used in

products including DVD and high definition television. The standard was developed by
the International Organization for Standardisation (ISO) under the leadership of Leonardo
Chiariglione, along with scientists and engineers from many universities and
corporations. The standard setting effort began in the July 1990 and the final MPEG-2
standard was approved in November 1994. During the completion of the standard setting
process, intellectual property issues became a paramount concern. While all participants
in the standard setting process signed a letter of assurance of fair, reasonable, and
nondiscriminatory (RAND) licensing, concerns lingered due to the large number of
patents required to implement the standard. Even if each individual patentholder licensed
their patents on reasonable terms, Chiariglione and other participants were concerned that
the sum of all such licenses might not be reasonable.19

18

This section is based on interviews with current and former employees from five
different organizations that participated in or negotiated with the pool. In addition, we
spoke with Leonardo Chiariglione, Vice President, Multimedia at Telecom Italia Lab, the
research center of Telecom Italia. Finally, we spoke with a representative from MPEG
LA, the corporate entity formed to administrate the pool.
It should be noted that considerable ambiguity surrounds the definition of what
constitutes RAND licensing. A number of standard-setting bodies we talked to were
unable to provide a precise definition of what constituted a reasonable royalty. For
instance, one group indicated that they used 5% as an upper bound, but did not
distinguish between cases where the rate applied to the individual component and the
entire system.
19

30

The MPEG Intellectual Property Rights Working Group was thus formed in 1993
to develop a unified approach to MPEG-2 licensing. As the standard materialized, this
task was led by CableLabs, an R&D consortium for the cable industry formed in the late
1980s when there was little compatibility among cable systems in the U.S. CableLabs
was an active participant in the MPEG-2 standard setting process with the goal of making
sure that the resulting standard was consistent with their needs. Baryn Futa, executive
vice president and COO of CableLabs, gained the trust of participants by chairing the
MPEG intellectual property working group. Solutions other than a patent pool were
considered, such as a trade association that would function as a clearinghouse. But patent
holders wanted to ensure that their intellectual property would be aggressively marketed
and thus rejected such an association. As a result, CableLabs and other licensors injected
$3 million to found a corporation, MPEG LA, which handled licensing MPEG-2 patents.

Forming the MPEG-2 patent pool and convincing companies to join the pool was
complicated due to the different incentives among pool members. These heterogeneous
incentives, as well as antitrust considerations, shaped the critical features of the pool.

The most debated issue was the licensing rate that MPEG LA would charge
licensees. The primary motive for certain companies was not to maximize licensing
revenues, but rather to accelerate the adoption of the standard. For instance, while Sony
is both a licensor and licensee of MPEG-2 patents, Sony focuses on maximizing sales of
its electronics products and pursues patents as a “defensive mechanism” to protect its
intellectually property.

31

By way of contrast, other organizations such as Lucent and Columbia University
wanted to maximize the licensing revenues they received from their MPEG-2 patents.
Columbia was particularly motivated to see the pool succeed due to its fears that if a pool
were not formed, then MPEG-2 patents would largely be shared via royalty-free crosslicensing agreements. Since the university did not stand to gain by being offered a license
to another firm’s technology, in the absence of a pool Columbia would be put in the
unenviable position of demanding license payments in an environment where no other
cash payments were being made for MPEG-2 licenses. Thus, Columbia’s ability to
demand a relatively high royalty rate was balanced by its need to ensure that a patent pool
emerged.

On the other hand, Lucent’s bargaining position with the MPEG-2 pool was quite
different. Lucent had a large internal licensing department with sufficient resources to
conduct its own MPEG-2 licensing activities. Moreover, Lucent believed that two of its
patents were most critical to the MPEG standard. Lucent felt that the licensing rate
established by MPEG LA was lower than it could have been and decided not to join the
pool.20 Lucent estimated that the higher royalty rates it would be able to charge by not
joining the pool would more than offset the decreased fraction of the MPEG-2 market
that would license its technology if it pursued its own licensing activities.21
Lucent was also constrained by licensing policies that were established as part of a 1956
consent decree settling federal antitrust litigation against Western Electric.

20

So far, this has not been the case, as MPEG-2 licensees generally have been willing to
pay Lucent no more than the per-patent rate charged by MPEG LA for licenses under
Lucent’s MPEG-2 patents. The failure of Lucent to reap attractive returns from its “hold

21

32

The final licensing rate set by the pool was $4 per decoder for each MPEG-2
system. This “one size fits all” strategy led to problems in some markets. In some cases,
licensees already had licenses to some of the MPEG-2 patents based on broad licensing
agreements they had with MPEG LA member firms. In such cases, the licensees have
demanded that the rates they are charged be reduced. MPEG LA has handled such
situations by telling these firms to negotiate concessions with the individual firms
involved in the previous licensing agreements rather than altering the standard MPEG LA
licensing terms. A bigger problem has occurred in using the same terms for firms in
different industries. Computer companies have been reluctant to pay these rates, due to
the computer industry norm of not paying royalties and due to the number of features
embodied in computers that do not relate to MPEG-2. This led seven MPEG LA pool
members to initiate infringement litigation against Compaq and Dell.

Additional clauses in the MPEG LA license agreement were designed to make
MPEG-2 licensees comfortable in adopting the technology. The MPEG LA license grants
licenses under the future MPEG-2 essential patents of pool members at no additional
charge. This provision was viewed as a way to allay the fears of potential licensees that
they would be subject to a hold-up problem if and when new MPEG-2 patents surfaced.
The MPEG LA license also commits to not raising the royalty rate unless extreme
out” strategy may appear initially puzzling. The seller of a complementary good should
be able to charge more when other firms cut their prices. Industry observers, however,
argued that substantial uncertainty surrounded the determination of the proper royalty
rate for patents. MPEG LA’s decision to set a low rate may have been seen as a signal of
the patents’ value, leading to a reduced willingness to license Lucent’s complementary
patents at a high rate.
33

conditions arise. This clause is also intended to make potential licensees comfortable with
committing to use MPEG-2 in their products without the worry of being charged
excessively high licensing rates in the future.22

The commitment not to raise royalty rates, however, also impacts the ability of
the pool to attract new licensors. When a new licensor enters the pool, as any essential
MPEG-2 patent holder may do, each existing licensor is diluted: the formula used by the
pool for royalty distribution calls for each licensor to receive a pro rata share of the
licensing revenues (based on the number of essential patents it owns) while the rate
charged to licensees remains constant. This formula was seen as the only feasible
formula to avoid controversies regarding assigning value to each individual patent.

The influence of antitrust concerns necessitated that (a) licensors would not be
precluded from offering licenses under their individual patents, (b) pool membership
would be open to any firm with essential MPEG-2 patents, and (c) only “essential”
patents (as determined by outside counsel) would be included.

In other respects,

however, the pool was somewhat user unfriendly. For instance, licensees were required
to grant back the patents on any innovations that are essential to MPEG-2. One possible
rationale was that while pool members made important concessions to the Department of
Justice, in other areas they felt free to even the balance.

In point of fact, the royalty rate has subsequently been lowered to $2.50, even as the
number of patent families covered by the pool has expanded from 25 to 118.

22

34

7. Conclusions
This paper empirically examines the structure and impact of patent pools. These
complex organizations have been little studied, despite their inherent interest on both
theoretical and practical grounds.

We suggest that the changing features of these

arrangements over time and across different circumstances—as well as the performance
of recent pools—are in many respects consistent with theory.

At the same time, the final section, which examined a particular pool in detail, has
highlighted some issues that we did not address here. For instance, the importance of
insuring equitable treatment across pool members and the apparent signaling role that the
terms of the MPEG license played are not issues addressed in our theoretical framework.
These questions would certainly deserve further exploration.

Another set of unexplored issues relate to the generality of the patterns seen here.
As noted in the first paragraph of this paper, joint marketing arrangements are seen in
many industries, and many of these arrangements are similar to those posed here.23
Exploring the nature of and rationales for these arrangements appears to be a promising
area for future researchers.

The mapping is, of course, not exact. For instance, in airline code-sharing
arrangements, an analogy to “innovation friendliness” is the extent to which the
agreement encourages the introduction of new routes. An analogy to “centralized control
of litigation” is the degree to which decisions over key assets are jointly managed.
23

35

References
Bittlingmayer, George L., “Property Rights, Progress, and the Aircraft Patent
Agreement,” Journal of Law and Economics, 31 (1988), 227-248.
Carlson, Steven C., “Patent Pools and the Antitrust Dilemma,” Yale Journal on
Regulation, 16 (1999), 359-399.
Cassady, Ralph, Jr., “Monopoly in Motion Picture Production and Distribution, 19081915,” Southern California Law Review, 32 (1959), 325-390.
Clark, Jeanne, Joe Piccolo, Brian Stanton, and Karin Tyson, “Patent Pools: A Solution to
the Problem of Access in Biotechnology Patents?,” Unpublished working paper, U.S.
Department of Commerce, Patent and Trademark Office, 2001.
Clarkson, Gavin, 2003, “Patent Network Density: The Quest for Patent Thickets,”
Unpublished working paper, Harvard University.
Commerce Clearing House, Trade Regulation Reporter, New York, Commerce Clearing
House, various years.
Davis, James, Eugene F. Fama, and Kenneth R. French, “Characteristics, Covariances,
and Average Returns: 1929-1997,” Journal of Finance, 55 (2000), 389-406.
Furman, Jeffrey L., and Scott Stern, “Climbing Atop the Shoulder of Giants: The
Economics of Cumulative Knowledge Hubs,” Unpublished working paper, Boston
University and Northwestern University, 2002.
Gallini, Nancy T., “The Economics of Patents: Lessons from Recent U.S. Patent
Reform,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (Spring 2002), 131-154.
Ghosal, Vivek, and Joseph Gallo, “The Cyclical Behavior of the Department of Justice’s
Antitrust Enforcement Activity,” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 19
(2001), 27-54.
Gilbert, Richard J., “Antitrust for Patent Pools: A Century of Policy Evolution,”
Unpublished working paper, University of California at Berkeley, 2002.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg, “The NBER Patent Citation
Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” Working paper no. 8498,
National Bureau of Economic Research, 2001.
Hamilton, James, Time Series Analysis, Princeton, Princeton University Press, 1994.
Hay, George A. and Daniel Kelley, “An Empirical Study of Price Fixing Conspiracies,”
Journal of Law and Economics, 17 (1974), 13-38.
36

Heckman, James, “Dummy Endogenous Variables in a Simultaneous Equation System,”
Econometrica, 46 (1978), 931-959.
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg, Patents, Citations and Innovations: A Window
on the Knowledge Economy, Cambridge, MIT Press, 2002.
Johnson, Marion, Preliminary Inventory of the General Records of the Department of
Justice, Washington, National Archives and Records Administration, 1981.
Kaysen, Carl, and Donald Turner, Antitrust Policy: An Economic and Legal Analysis,
Cambridge, Harvard University Press, 1959.
Lerner, Josh, and Jean Tirole, “Efficient Patent Pools,” Working paper no. 9175, National
Bureau of Economic Research, 2002.
Merges, Robert P., “Institutions for Intellectual Property Transactions: The Case of
Patent Pools,” Unpublished working paper, University of California at Berkeley, 1999.
Priest, George L., “Cartels and Patent Licensing Arrangements,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 20 (1977), 309-377.
Schmidt, Peter, “Constraints on the Parameters in Simultaneous Tobit and Probit
Models,” in Charles Manski and Daniel McFadden, editors, Structural Analysis of
Discrete Data with Econometric Applications, Cambridge, MIT Press, 1981.
Shapiro, Carl, “Navigating the Patent Thicket: Cross Licenses, Patent Pools, and
Standard Setting,” Innovation Policy and the Economy, 1 (2000), 119-150.
U.S. Congress, Temporary National Economic Commission on Public Resolution 113,
Investigation of Concentration of Economic Power: Hearings, 75th-76th Congress,
Washington, U.S. Government Printing Office, 1938-1940.
U.S. House of Representatives, Committee on Patents, Pooling of Patents, 74th Congress,
4 volumes, Washington, Government Printing Office, 1935.
U.S. Senate, Committee on Patents, Patents, 77th Congress, 2nd session, Washington,
Government Printing Office, 1942.
Vaughan, Floyd A., The Economics of Our Patent System, New York, MacMillan, 1925.
Vaughan, Floyd A., The United States Patent System: Legal and Economic Conflicts in
American Economic History, Norman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1956.
“War and Peace and the Patent System,” Fortune, 26 (August 1942), 102-105, 132, 134,
136, 138, 141.

37

Table 1: The sample of patent pools. The table presents information on the 63 pools analyzed in the paper, including the year in which the pool was formed, the
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) that most closely describes the pool’s subject matter, the number of members initially included in the pool, the nationalities of
the entities initially in the pool, and the manner in which the pool agreement(s) were located.
Pool Subject Matter
Pneumatic Straw Stackers
Duplicating Machines
Automobiles
Railroad Couplers
Aircraft
Braking Systems
Plate Glass
Sand-Spun Pipe
Dyestuffs
Magnesium
Metal Dies
Cast Iron Pipe
Coated Abrasives
Petroleum Refining-JASCO
Petroleum Refining-Hydro Patents
Water Conditioning Apparatus
Grinding Hobs
Magnesium Alloys
Rail Joint Bars
Railroad Springs
Hydraulic Oil Pumps
Machine Tools
Petroleum Refining-Gray Processes Co.
Petroleum Refining-JUIK Group
Phillips Screws
Television/Radio Apparatus-Australia
Beryllium
Electrical Equipment
Lecithin
Petroleum Refining-Fractional Distillation
Polymeric Acrylic Acid
Variable Condensers
Acrylic Acid For Laminated Glass (Plexigum)
Dyestuffs
Petroleum Refining-Gas Polymerization

Year of
Formation
1895
1912
1915
1916
1917
1924
1924
1924
1925
1927
1928
1929
1929
1929
1930
1930
1931
1931
1931
1932
1933
1933
1933
1933
1933
1933
1934
1934
1934
1934
1934
1934
1935
1935
1935

Closest
SIC Code
3523
3579
3711
3743
3721
3714
3211
3321
2865
3339
3544
3321
3291
2911
2911
3589
3545
3339
3312
3493
3561
3541
2911
2911
3452
3651
3339
3600
2070
2911
2821
3629
3229
2865
2911

38

Initial Pool
Membership
3
2
146
6
8
2
4
7
11
2
2
4
9
4
4
3
3
2
3
3
3
4
5
5
2
2
3
3
5
5
2
3
2
5
5

Nations
Represented
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
Ger.; U.K.; U.S.
U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Australia
Ger.; U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
Den.; Ger.; U.S.
U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Switz.; U.S.
U.S.

Source of
Contract
NAR
NAR
USC
NAR
USC
NAR
NAR
NADC
USC
USC
USC
NADC
NAR
USC
USC
NAR
NAR
USC
NAR
NAR
NADC
NAR
USC
USC
NAR
NAR
USC
NAR
NAR
USC
USC
NAR
NAR
USC
USC

General Chemical
Male Hormones
Wrinkle Finishes
Dropout Cutouts
Inductive Heat Treatment
Opthalmic Frames
Petroleum Refining-Hydrocarbon
Pour Depressants
Slip Covers
Petroleum Refining-Alkylation
Dyestuffs
Television Equipment
Television/Radio Apparatus-Canada
Alginate (Dental) Impression Powder
Plastic Artificial Eyes
Television/Radio Apparatus-Great Britain
Tractor Cabs
Daylight Fluorescent Pigments
Glass Fibers
Sewing Machines
Laser Eye Surgery
MPEG-2 Digital Video
DVD-ROM, DVD-Video
Wireless Personal Area Networking-Bluetooth
1394 Digital Data Transfer Interface
DVB-T - Digital Broadcasting
DVD-ROM, DVD-Video
3G-Mobile Communications

1936
1937
1937
1938
1938
1938
1938
1938
1938
1939
1940
1942
1943
1947
1948
1948
1948
1949
1956
1956
1992
1997
1998
1998
1999
1999
1999
2001

2800
2833
3582
3643
3547
3851
2911
2911
2221
2911
2865
3651
3651
3843
3842
3651
3537
2816
3229
3639
3845
3652
3652
3663
3577
3663
3652
3663

3
4
2
2
2
2
5
3
3
4
3
3
4
3
2
5
3
4
3
3
2
8
3
9
6
4
6
19

Can.; U.K.; U.S.
Ger.; Switz.; U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Ger.; U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
U.K.; U.S.
U.K.; U.S.
U.S.
Can.; U.S.
U.S.
U.S.
Neth.; U.K.
U.S.
U.S.
Jap.; U.S.
It.; Swed.; U.S.
U.S.
Jap.; Neth.; U.S.
Jap.; Neth.
Fin.; Jap.; Swed.; U.S.
Japan; Neth.; U.S.
Fr.; Jap.; Neth.
Jap.; U.S.
Fin.; Fr.; Ger.; It.; Jap.; Neth.; S.K.

USC
NAR
NAR
NAR
NAR
NAR
USC
NAR
NADC
USC
USC
NAR
NAR
NADC
NAR
NAR
NAR
NADC
NAR
NAR
FTCFOIA
DOJFOIA
DOJFOIA
POOL
POOL
POOL
DOJFOIA
POOL

Notes: Standard Industrial Codes ending with one or more zeros indicate that the pool covered multiple subclasses within a given classification.
National abbreviations: Can. = Canada; Den. = Denmark ; Fin. = Finland; Fr. = France; Ger.= Germany; It. = Italy; Jap. = Japan; Neth. = The Netherlands ; S.K. =
South Korea; Swed. = Sweden; Switz. = Switzerland; U.K. = United Kingdom ; U.S. = United States.
Source abbreviations: DOJFOIA = U.S. Department of Justice Freedom of Information Act request; FTCFOIA = U.S. Federal Trade Commission Freedom of
Information Act request; NADC = U.S. Department of Justice files in the National Archives (Suitland, Maryland); NAR=District court docket files in the regional
facilities of the National Archives (Boston; Chicago; Kansas City; and New York City); POOL = provided directly by patent pool administrator; USC = published
hearings or unpublished files of the U.S. congressional investigations.

39

Table 2: Summary of characteristics of patent pools. The table presents summary information on a variety of features of the sample of 63 patent pools.
Medians and standard deviations are not reported for dummy variables.
Mean
Year signed
Number of initial members in pool
Number of nations initially represented in pool
Must patents be transferred to the pool?
Are future patents automatically assigned to the pool?
Must know-how also be transferred to other pool members?
Do pool members use the patents in the pool?
Do all pool members have relevant patents?
Are cash transfers required as part of joining pool?
Can pool members use all patents on a royalty-free basis?
Are licensing proceeds split equally between pool members?
Are patents licensed to third parties?
Can other parties join the pool?
Can individual pool members license the patents?
Are patents licensed to third parties on “most favored nation” basis? a
Must third party licensees “grant back” patents on future discoveries? a
Do third party licensees face menu of license types? a
Is the royalty rate charged third parties fixed in the pool agreement? a
Is the per unit rate charged third parties fixed in the pool agreement? a
a

Only computed for those pools where third party licenses are offered.

40

1942
4.54
1.67
0.25
0.73
0.35
0.98
0.75
0.13
0.24
0.23
0.67
0.19
0.44
0.52
0.52
0.14
0.33
0.45

Median
1934
3
1

Standard Deviation
24
4.85
1.03

Minimum
1895
2
1
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Maximum
2001
36
7
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Table 3: The prevalence of terms of patent pools. The table presents four critical terms that that affect the workings of patent pools: the stipulations that pool
members can offer licenses independent of those offered by the pool, that the control of the litigation process is centralized, that licenses are granted to third
parties, and that pool members need not assign to the pool all future related patents. In each case, the characteristics of the pools are presented for pools that did
or did not have this requirement. The characteristics examined are whether the agreement is signed before 1945, whether the agreement is signed in 1995 or
after, the count of firms originally in the patent pool, and the growth of patenting in the industry segment of the pool in the five years prior to the formation of the
pool. In each case, the first line presents the mean of each measure and the t-test of the null hypothesis that these two populations are identical; and the second
line, the median and the associated Wilcoxon test. (For the univariate values, a Pearson χ2-statistic is presented.) Asterisks denote cases where the differences
are statistically significant. The final row presents the mean frequency of the term in the sample.

Agreement before 1945?
Agreement after 1994?
Count of pool
members
Five-year growth,
pool industry patenting
Mean for sample

Test
Reported
χ2-test
χ2-test
t-test
Wilcoxon
t-test
Wilcoxon

Pool members
can make
own licenses
Yes
No
64%
**86%
25%
***0%
5.8
*3.6
4
*3
67%
51%
52%
26%
44%

* Statistically significant at 10% confidence level.
** Statistically significant at 5% confidence level.
*** Statistically significant at 1% confidence level.

41

Centralized
control of
patent litigation?
Yes
No
85%
**58%
6%
*21%
4.6
4.6
3
3
54%
66%
30%
36%
25%

Licenses
granted to
third parties?
Yes
No
69%
*90%
14%
5%
3.9
5.9
3
3
57%
60%
26%
64%
66%

Pool members
need not transfer
patents to pool?
Yes
No
72%
88%
15%
0%
4.8
4.1
3
4
67%
33%
48%
15%
75%

Table 4: Regression analysis of the determinants of patent pool structure. The table presents a generalized method of moments estimation of a system of
equations. The sample consists of 56 patent pools formed between 1895 and 1994. The dependent variables are as follows: qualitative variables denoting
whether the pool allowed independent licenses, whether the control of litigation was centralized, whether patents were licensed by the pool to third parties, and
whether the terms of the pool were innovation friendly, and a latent variable measuring whether the patents in the pool were substitutes (constrained to fall
between zero and one, with one denoting cases where they were substitutes). The independent variables include the count of firms originally in the patent pool
(top-coded as 6), the growth of patenting in the industry segment of the pool in the five years prior to the formation of the pool, dummy variables denoting pools
formed before 1945, where members use the patents on a royalty-free basis, and not among those identified by Gilbert [2002] as displaying anti-competitive
behavior, and various dependent variables. Standard errors reported in brackets.

Count of firms in pool
Are patents substitutes?
Count of firms * Third party licensing *
No independent licensing
Independent licensing
Substitutes * Independent licensing
Patents licensed to 3rd parties?
Complements * 3rd party licensing
Growth of patenting in the industry
Pool formed before 1945?
Members use royalty-free and don’t
license to others?
Not problematic case (Gilbert [2002])
Constant
Log likelihood
Number of observations

Are Independent
Licenses Allowed?
0.29
**[0.14]
-1.48
*[0.77]

Is Control of Litigation
Centralized?
0.25
*[0.14]
-0.13

[0.14]

-1.20
0.36

[0.93]
[0.98]

Dependent Variable:
Are Patent Licensed
To Third Parties?
0.33
**[0.14]
-0.25
[0.89]

0.13
0.41
0.27

0.06
-171.05
51

[0.73]

0.14

[0.58]

*=Significant at the 10% level; **=significant at the 5% level; ***=significant at the 1% level.
a

Is Pool Innovation
Friendly?

Standard error is not meaningful for constant in latent variables estimation.

42

-0.17

[0.80]

0.80

Are Patents
Substitutes?

[0.40]
[1.34]
[0.28]

**[0.40]

0.18
0.16

[0.26]
[0.10]

-0.66
0.66

*[0.38]
a

Table 5: Comparison of patents included in recent pools with matching patents. The sample consists of 174 patents that were included in five patent pools
formed in 1995 and after along with 347 matching patents. The patents are compared according to several measures of technological and economic significance
that Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001] refer to as patent importance, originality, generality, and scope. The first four columns present means of the various
measures [medians in brackets] for the set of patents that were included in pools and for two sets of matching patents. The first of these sets labeled “Matching
Patents by Firm and Class” contains two matching patents for each pooled patent. The first of these matching patents was chosen as the most proximate patent
awarded to the same firm. The second of these matching patents was chosen as the most proximate patent awarded within the same main USPTO technology
class and to the same type of assignee. The matching set used in the third and fourth column consists of the two sub-sets of matching patents. p-values from ttests and Wilcoxon tests of the null hypotheses that the two samples have the same means and medians are presented in the fifth and sixth columns respectively.

Citations/year received before pool formation
Citations/year received before pool formation
Citations/year received before pool formation
Citations/year received after pool formation
Citations/year received after pool formation
Citations/year received after pool formation

Originality measure
Originality measure
Originality measure

Generality measure
Generality measure
Generality measure

Number of claims made
Number of claims made
Number of claims made

Panel A: Importance
Pooled
Matching
Matching
Patents Patents by Firm
Patents by
and Class
Firm
1.6 [0.9]
0.8 [0.4]
1.6 [0.9]
0.8 [0.3]
1.6 [0.9]
2.5 [0.9]
1.3 [0.3]
2.5 [0.9]
1.3 [0.3]
2.5 [0.9]
Panel B: Originality
Pooled
Matching
Matching
Patents Patents by Firm
Patents by
and Class
Firm
0.38 [0.44]
0.38 [0.44]
0.38 [0.44]
0.37 [0.44]
0.38 [0.44]
Panel C: Generality
Pooled
Matching
Matching
Patents Patents by Firm
Patents by
and Class
Firm
0.42 [0.48]
0.33 [0.40]
0.42 [0.48]
0.34 [0.44]
0.42 [0.48]
Panel D: Scope
Pooled
Matching
Matching
Patents Patents by Firm
Patents by
and Class
Firm
16.1 [13]
15.2 [11]
16.1 [13]
14.2 [10]
16.1 [13]

43

Matching
Patents by
Class
0.7 [0.4]
1.3 [0.3]
Matching
Patents by
Class
0.38 [0.44]
Matching
Patents by
Class
0.33 [0.38]
Matching
Patents by
Class
16.1 [12]

p-Value
from t-Test

p-Value from Wilcoxon
Median Test

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001
0.016
0.007

0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.001

p-Value
from t-Test

p-Value from Wilcoxon
Median Test

0.863
0.809
0.953

0.711
0.619
0.884

p-Value
from t-Test

p-Value from Wilcoxon
Median Test

0.005
0.023
0.012

0.004
0.019
0.010

p-Value
from t-Test

p-Value from Wilcoxon
Median Test

0.525
0.171
0.984

0.058
0.057
0.170

Table 6: Regression analysis of citations to patents included in recent patent pools. The sample consists of 174
patents that were included in five patent pools formed in 1995 and after along with 347 matching patents that were
selected based on grant date and belonging to the same USPTO patent class and being assigned to the same firm as
the pooled patents. The dependent variables consist of the number of patent citations in each year, whether before or
after the award. In Panel A, the sample includes the pooled patents, as well as the full set of 347 matching patents
that were chosen based on assignee and class. Panel B includes the pooled patents as well as the matching set of
patents selected based on assignee. Panel C includes the pooled patents as well as the matching set of patents
selected based on patent class. Independent variables include a dummy variable indicating whether the patent was
included in a pool, whether the observation was after the formation of the pool, the year the patent was awarded, the
years since the award of the patent, and either the patent grouping (including the patent and its matches) or the
individual patent. (Only the first two dummies are reported.) In each panel, the first regression employs an ordinary
least squares (OLS) specification, the second two, a negative binomial specification. Standard errors are reported in
brackets.
Panel A: Matched Sample includes Matches by Firm and Matches by Class
Specification:
OLS
Negative Binomial
Negative Binomial
Was patent included in pool?
0.86
***[0.11]
0.71
***[0.06]
Patent in pool and after pool formed?
1.19
***[0.18]
0.19
** [0.09]
0.25
***[0.07]
Dummies for award year and vintage?
Yes
Yes
Yes
Dummies for patent groupings?
Yes
Yes
No
Dummies for individual patents?
No
No
Yes
p-Value
R2
Number of observations

0.000
0.000
0.35
3,020
3,020
Panel B: Matched Sample includes Matches by Firm Only
Specification:
OLS
Negative Binomial
Was patent included in pool?
0.91
***[0.13]
0.83
***[0.07]
Patent in pool and after pool formed?
1.11
***[0.21]
0.15
[0.10]
Dummies for award year and vintage?
Yes
Yes
Dummies for patent groupings?
Yes
Yes
Dummies for individual patents?
No
No
p-Value
R2
Number of observations

0.000
0.000
0.40
2,014
2,014
Panel C: Matched Sample includes Matches by Class Only
Specification:
OLS
Negative Binomial
Was patent included in pool?
0.83
***[0.13]
0.64
***[0.07]
Patent in pool and after pool formed?
1.14
***[0.21]
0.16
*[0.10]
Dummies for award year and vintage?
Yes
Yes
Dummies for patent groupings?
Yes
Yes
Dummies for individual patents?
No
No
p-Value
R2
Number of observations

0.000
0.38
2,009

* Statistically significant at 10% confidence level.
** Statistically significant at 5% confidence level.
*** Statistically significant at 1% confidence level.

44

0.000
3,020
Negative Binomial
0.27
Yes
No
Yes

***[0.08]

0.000
2,014
Negative Binomial
0.14
Yes
No
Yes

0.000

0.000

2,009

2,009

*[0.08]

Table 7: Ordinary least squares regression analysis of patent significance for patents included in recent
patent pools. The sample consists of 174 patents that were included in five patent pools formed in 1995 and after
along with 347 matching patents that were selected based on grant date and belonging to the same USPTO patent
class and being assigned to the same firm as the pooled patents. The dependent variables consist of several
measures of technological and economic value which Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001] refer to as patent
originality, generality, and scope. In Panel A, the sample includes the pooled patents, as well as the full set of 347
matching patents that were chosen based on assignee and class. Panel B includes the pooled patents as well as the
matching set of patents selected based on assignee. Panel C includes the pooled patents as well as the matching set
of patents selected based on patent class. Independent variables include a dummy variable indicating whether the
patent was included in a pool, as well as dummy variables (not reported) that control for the year the patent was
awarded, the pool to which the patent belongs (in the case of matching patents, this is the pool of the corresponding
patent that was included in a pool), and the patent category as defined by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001]. All
regressions employ an ordinary least squares specification. Standard errors are reported in brackets.
Panel A: Matched Sample includes Matches by Firm and Matches by Class
Dependent Variable:
Originality
Generality
Claims
Was patent included in pool?
0.008
[0.024]
0.082 ***[0.027]
0.853
[1.424]
p-Value
0.002
0.000
R2
0.096
0.187
Number of observations
518
433
Panel B: Matched Sample includes Matches by Firm Only
Dependent Variable:
Originality
Generality
Was patent included in pool?
0.013
[0.028]
0.074 **[0.033]
p-Value
0.007
0.000
0.129
0.212
R2
Number of observations
345
287
Panel C: Matched Sample includes Matches by Class Only
Dependent Variable:
Originality
Generality
Was patent included in pool?
0.005
[0.028]
0.089 **[0.031]
p-Value
R2
Number of observations

0.003
0.124
347

0.000
0.199
300

* Statistically significant at 10% confidence level.
** Statistically significant at 5% confidence level.
*** Statistically significant at 1% confidence level.

45

0.438
0.048
505
Claims
1.891
[1.363]
0.216
0.086
336
Claims
-0.066
[1.757]
0.672
0.053
337

Citation rate per active patent

5

4

3

Citation rate for pool patents
Citation rate for class-matched patents
Citation rate for firm-matched patents

2

1

0
0

5

10

Years subsequent to that of patent award

Figure 1: Citation rate for pool and matching patents relative to award date. The sample consists of 174 patents that were included in five patent pools
formed in 1995 and after along with 347 matching patents that were selected based on grant date and belonging to the same USPTO patent class and being
assigned to the same firm as the pooled patents. The figure presents the mean number of citations per patent for each year after the award (the calendar year of
the patent award is designated as year 0, and so forth). Because there are few seasoned patents in the sample, the final observation includes awards from year 13
and afterwards.

46

9
8

Citations per active patent

7
6
5

Citation rate for pool patents
Citation rate for class-matched patents
Citation rate for firm-matched patents

4
3
2
1
0
-15

-10

-5

0

5

10

Years before or after pool formation

Figure 2: Citation rate for pool and matching patents relative to pool formation date. The sample consists of 174 patents that were included in five patent
pools formed in 1995 and after along with 347 matching patents that were selected based on grant date and belonging to the same USPTO patent class and being
assigned to the same firm as the pooled patents. The figure presents the mean number of citations per patent for each year before and after the formation of the
pool (the calendar year of the pool’s formation is designated as year 0, and so forth).

47

