                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        THE ELUSIVE GAINS FROM INTERNATIONAL
                               FINANCIAL INTEGRATION

                                      Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas
                                            Olivier Jeanne

                                         Working Paper 9684
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9684


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2003




We wish to thank for their comments, without implicating, Charles Engel, Itay Goldstein, Enrique Mendoza
as well as seminar participants at UC Berkeley, Cornell, the Federal Reserve Board, Harvard/MIT, the IMF,
NYU, Princeton, UCLA, Virginia, Yale, the 2002 SED meeting (NY), theWorld Bank-Georgetown- CFS
conference on Þnancial globalization, the 2002 NBER summer Institute, the 2002 LACEA-IADB-UTDT
conference (Buenos Aires) and the IV RTN conference on capital markets (Dublin). The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Olivier Jeanne. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
©notice, is given to the source.
The Elusive Gains from International Financial Integration
Pierre-Olivier Gourinchas and Olivier Jeanne
NBER Working Paper No. 9684
May 2003
JEL No. F2, F3, F43, E13, O11

                                          ABSTRACT

Standard theoretical arguments tell us that countries with relatively little capital benefit from
financial integration as foreign capital flows in and speeds up the process of convergence. We show
in a calibrated neoclassical model that conventionally measured welfare gains from this type of

convergence appear relatively limited for the typical emerging country. The welfare gain from
switching from financial autarky to perfect capital mobility is roughly equivalent to a one percent

permanent increase in domestic consumption for the typical emerging economy. This is negligible
relative to the potential welfare gain of a take-off in domestic productivity of the magnitude
observed in some of these countries.



Pierre Olivier Gourinchas                            Olivier Jeanne
Department of Economics                              International Monetary Fund
Princeton University                                 ojeanne@imf.org
311 Fisher Hall
Princeton, NJ 08540
and NBER
pog@princeton.edu
1       Introduction
Ask an economist, and the beneÞt of international Þnancial integration that Þrst comes to his
or her mind is likely to involve, in one way or another, the eﬃciency of laissez-faire. A more
open and competitive international capital market induces a more eﬃcient international
allocation of capital. A development-minded economist, in particular, will point to the
impact of capital ßows from developed (capital-abundant) to less developed (capital-scarce)
countries on economic growth and convergence. Indeed, one of the main motivation behind
the push towards the international Þnancial integration of less developed countries has been
to accelerate their growth by attracting foreign capital.1

    We understand these beneÞts well enough in theory, but how large are they in practice?
This paper presents a new piece of evidence, based of the calibration of a simple neoclassical
growth model. We choose the neoclassical framework for two reasons. First, it is one where
international Þnancial integration is desirable for well-known reasons. Second, this model
has increasingly been adopted as the benchmark framework in the literature on growth and
convergence in an international perspective. As a result, we can rely on this literature to
calibrate the model, and compare the welfare eﬀects of diﬀerent policies, including capital
account opening.

    We present two versions of the neo-classical model. The Þrst —and simplest— one is a
variant of the Ramsey-Cass-Koopman model where countries accumulate physical capital
only. It serves to motivate and provide some intuition for our results. The second one
proposes a higher level of detail and realism by introducing human capital accumulation in
a ‘Macro-Mincer’ framework. Our main Þnding is that while Þnancial openness increases
domestic welfare, and while this beneÞt can be signiÞcant for some countries, it is not
very large on average. For the typical non-OECD country, the welfare gain from switching
from Þnancial autarky to perfect capital mobility is equivalent to a permanent increase in
consumption of about one percent. This beneÞt is of the same order of magnitude as the
cost of economic ßuctuations (in less developed countries), and of an order of magnitude
smaller than the gains that development economists and policymakers seek to achieve. For
example, we Þnd that eliminating 25 percent of the productivity gap with the United States–
a productivity increase smaller than the magnitude experienced in post-war Singapore, Hong-
Kong or Israel–yields a welfare beneÞt that is more than one hundred times larger!

    Interestingly, we Þnd that the gains from international Þnancial integration may be rel-
atively small even for countries that receive a lot of capital inßows. In the simple Ramsey
model, for example, the typical non-OECD country has a gain of only 1 percent in spite of
the fact that inßows more than double its stock of capital. This apparent disconnect comes
    1
     See Eichengreen and Mussa (1998) (p.12): “The classic case for international capital mobility is well-
known but worth restating. Flows from capital-abundant to capital-scarce countries raise welfare in the
sending and receiving countries alike on the assumption that the marginal product of capital is higher in the
latter than in the former. Free capital movements thus permit a more eﬃcient global allocation of savings
and direct resources toward their most productive uses.”, or Fischer (1998) (p. 2): “Put abstractly, free
capital movements facilitate an eﬃcient global allocation of savings and help channel ressources to their
most productive uses, thus increasing economic growth and welfare”.



                                                     2
from the essentially transitory nature of the distortion induced by imperfect capital mobil-
ity. A capital-scarce country that restricts the entry of foreign capital bears a distortion
that is proportional to the wedge between the domestic and foreign returns on investment.
Even if the capital account restriction remains in place forever, the distortion endogenously
vanishes over time as the country accumulates capital domestically. The average distortion,
as a result, is much lower than the initial distortion–and the initial capital inßows—might
suggest.
    We also Þnd that international Þnancial integration does not lead to a signiÞcant degree
of convergence between developed and less developed countries. The reason for that result
is straightforward. In the neoclassical model, the gap in GDP per capita between developed
and less developed countries can be decomposed into a transitory component due to capital
scarcity and a permanent component due to diﬀerences in productivity and domestic distor-
tions. For international Þnancial integration to have a substantial impact on convergence,
the Þrst component would have to be relatively important. The data, however, suggest that
the opposite is true: less developed countries have a lower income per capita mainly because
they are less productive or their economy suﬀers from domestic distortions, not because they
are capital-scarce.
    We believe that our Þndings have important implications for the research agenda on
Þnancial globalization. The recent crises have certainly dampened the hope that capital
account liberalization provides a smooth road to growth and development, and the time
seems ripe for re-examining the beneÞts and costs of international Þnancial integration. This
paper suggests that if the beneÞts of international Þnancial integration are large, they must
occur through channels that are not in the standard neoclassical framework. Moreover, these
channels can explain large gains (in our metric) only if international Þnancial integration
raises the productivity of less developed countries.2 A challenge for future research is to
identify the possible channels and test their empirical relevance.3
    Our Þndings also have implications for the recent debate on reforming the “interna-
tional Þnancial architecture”. A commonly held view is that capital ßows to less developed
economies are excessively low, and that the international Þnancial architecture should be
designed so as to increase the access of less developed countries to the international Þnancial
market. This paper suggests that even if capital ßows were below the eﬃcient level, the
potential gains from mitigating this ineﬃciency might be quite moderate. Countries have
much more to gain from upgrading their domestic engines of growth and development than
from attracting foreign capital.4
    This paper contributes to a growing literature on the beneÞts of capital account liberal-
ization for less developed countries. A number of papers have attempted to answer the same
   2
     The literature on trade liberalization has reached a similar conclusion. In calibrated neoclassical models
the gains from trade liberalization typically amount to less than 1 percent of GDP (de Melo and Tarr (1992)).
This has led some authors in the trade literature to conclude that if free trade yields large welfare gains, it
must be because of its impact on productivity (Rutherford and Tarr (2002)).
   3
     Possible channels are discussed in the concluding comments.
   4
     Of course, a country that increases its productivity also makes itself more attractive to foreign investors.
Our claim is that the country beneÞts much more from the productivity increase itself than from the resulting
capital inßows.

                                                       3
question as we do, but on the basis of cross-country regressions.5 The results are pretty
heterogenous, ranging from no impact of capital account opening on growth (Rodrik (1998))
to a more or less signiÞcant positive impact (see Edison, Levine, Ricci and Sloek (2002), for
a review). At the optimistic end of the spectrum Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2002) and
Henry (2003) Þnd that opening the stock market to foreign investors boosts growth by 1 to
2 percent for Þve years in a row. Such a result, however, is not obvious to translate in terms
of domestic welfare. How permanent is the impact of capital account opening on growth? Is
the level of output aﬀected in the long-run? What share of the output increase is transferred
to foreign investors? These questions are crucial in assessing the welfare impact of capital
account opening, and can be addressed only by looking at the data through the lenses of an
explicit model.

    Another branch of literature looks at the beneÞt of international Þnancial integration
in terms of portfolio diversiÞcation. A number of papers present quantitative estimates
based on calibrated models, comparable to ours since they are expressed in the same metric.
The reported results vary enormously, with most papers Þnding gains from international
risk-sharing smaller than 0.5 percent (e.g., Backus, Kehoe and Kydland (1992)) and some
studies reporting larger welfare gains (see e.g. Obstfeld (1994)).6
    Whatever the reasons behind these diﬀerences, there is widespread consensus on the fact
that the world is remote from the extent of risk-sharing that takes place in these models—a
gap between the theory and reality that is multifaceted and has been abundantly documented
in the literature on the “puzzles” of international Þnance (Obstfeld and Rogoﬀ (2000)). If
anything, this gap seems even wider for the emerging market countries than for developed
ones–the “sudden stops” in capital ßows documented by Calvo and Reinhart (2000) seem
especially diﬃcult to interpret in terms of optimal risksharing.7 For all these reasons, we
view capital accumulation and growth as potentially better candidates than international
risk-sharing to understand the beneÞts of international Þnancial integration for developing
economies.

    Our results are consistent with the recent developments of the literature on growth and
convergence in international perspective. In contrast with early papers that stressed factor
accumulation as a source of growth (Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992); Barro, Mankiw and
Sala-i-Martin (1995)), the literature has moved towards the view that total factor productiv-
ity rather than factor accumulation accounts for most of income diﬀerences across countries
(Hall and Jones (1999); Easterly and Levine (2001)).
    This literature has not looked at the impact of international Þnancial integration on
growth and convergence. We present a ‘development accounting exercise’ that highlights the
   5
     Some papers present estimates of the beneÞts of international Þnancial integration based on calibrated
models, as we do here, but focus on developed economies. For example, Mendoza and Tesar (1998) estimate
the impact of integration in models where the taxation of capital is endogenous. Table 2 in Mendoza and
Tesar (1998) suggest that the welfare beneÞt of integration is small—less than 0.5 percent of permanent
consumption in the United States.
   6
     See Athanasoulis and van Wincoop (2000) for a discussion of the literature and an attempt to account
for these diﬀerences.
   7
     Somewhat paradoxically, the theoretical welfare gains from international risksharing are estimated to
be larger when the model is calibrated with reference to less developed economies because they are more
volatile (see Pallage and Robe (2003)).

                                                    4
relative contributions of factor accumulation, productivity and a conditional convergence
gap that Þnancial integration eliminates. We show that while countries may be far from
their steady state, conditional convergence plays a minor role compared to the other two
factors in explaining the development gap between poor and rich countries. One implication
is that international Þnancial integration can equalize the marginal return of capital across
countries without closing the large gaps in productivity and income per capita between poor
and rich nations. It is this implication of the “neoclassical revival” in growth economics that
we quantify in this paper.

    The paper is structured as follows. Section 2 presents results based on a very stylized
neoclassical model. Section 3 presents an extension of the model with endogenous human
capital accumulation and various distortions, and interprets our results in the context of a
decomposition of world inequality in output per capita. Section 4 concludes with a discussion
of the implications of this paper for future research.



2     A Simple Experiment
Consider a small Ramsey-Cass-Koopman (RKC) economy that can accumulate physical
capital using the savings of its residents and/or by attracting capital from abroad. The
country is small relative to the rest of the world in the well-deÞned sense that the capital
account regime has no impact on the world return on capital. Our ‘experiment’ assesses the
beneÞts of international Þnancial integration for this economy by comparing two extreme
cases: a state of complete Þnancial autarky in which the country has to rely purely on
domestic savings, and a state of perfect Þnancial integration in which the country can import
or export capital at the (given) world interest rate.
    We assume that there are no impediments to Þnancial ßows under Þnancial integration.
This maximizes the welfare beneÞts from integration, since capital movements will fully
and immediately arbitrage away any diﬀerence in marginal returns to capital. In other
words, Þnancial integration can potentially result in immediate and massive capital ßows
from a capital-abundant rest of the world to a capital-scarce domestic economy. While the
associated dynamics are trivial, this represents, we believe, a simple and transparent case
where the gains from international Þnancial integration are potentially large.
    Because of its theoretical simplicity, this experiment provides a useful benchmark to start
with. The next section will incorporate the insights of the recent literature on convergence
and growth in an international perspective, to obtain a more realistic measure of the beneÞts
of international Þnancial integration for a large sample of emerging economies. As we will
see, our results are surprisingly robusts to these extensions.

2.1    The Model
We consider a world with one homogeneous good and a number of countries. In this world,
we focus on a subset of small less-developed countries that may or not open their capital
account. Time is discrete and there is no uncertainty. The population grows at an exogenous


                                              5
rate n: Nt = nt N0 that is country speciÞc. The population of each country can be viewed
as a large family that maximizes the welfare function
                                              X
                                              ∞
                                       Ut =         β s Nt+s u (ct+s ) ,                                 (1)
                                              s=0

where ct is consumption per capita and u (c) ≡ c1−γ / (1 − γ) is a constant relative risk
aversion (CRRA) instantaneous utility function with coeﬃcient γ > 0. In the case where
γ = 1, the utility function is u (c) = ln (c) .
   The domestic economy produces the homogeneous good according to the Cobb-Douglas
production function
                                      Yt = Ktα (At Lt )1−α ,
where Kt denotes the stock of domestic capital, Lt is labor supply and At is a labor-
augmenting measure of productivity. Labor supply is exogenous and proportional to pop-
ulation (Lt = Nt ). Factor markets are perfectly competitive. Labor productivity grows at
a gross rate gt ≡ At /At−1 , which may diﬀer across countries in the short-run but converges
towards the same value for all countries8

                                               lim gt = g∗ .                                             (2)
                                              t→+∞

This is a common assumption in the empirical growth literature (Mankiw et al. (1992)).9 The
common asymptotic growth rate g∗ reßects the advancement of knowledge, which should not
be country speciÞc in the long run. If growth rates of productivity diﬀered permanently across
countries, the world income distribution would diverge without bounds and the country or
region with the highest long-run growth rate would overtake world output. Some mechanism,
such as innovation and technology transfers, must constrain the tendency toward inÞnite
divergence (Eaton and Kortum (1999); Parente and Prescott (2000)).
    However, countries could diﬀer in their growth rate of productivity in the short run, or
in their levels of productivity A in the long-run. Diﬀerences in productivity growth underlie
recent ‘growth miracles’. Diﬀerences in productivity levels reßect, as Mankiw et al. (1992)
mention, ‘not just technology but resource endowments, climate, institutions, and so on’
(p.411). Hall and Jones (1999) ascribe these diﬀerences in productivity levels to diﬀerences
in institutions and government policies, which they call ‘social infrastructure’.

    Under Þnancial autarky each country accumulates capital domestically. The neoclassi-
cal framework predicts that the economy will converge towards a balanced growth in which
capital, output and consumption per capita asymptotically grow at the same rate as pro-
ductivity. We denote with tildes the variables normalized by the level of productivity, i.e.
x̃t = xt /At . It follows from the Euler equation for consumption, u0 (ct ) = βRt+1 u0 (ct+1 ) that

                                       c̃t = (βRt+1 )−1/γ gt+1 c̃t+1 ,                                   (3)
   8
     We assume further that βng ∗(1−γ) < 1 so that the utility is well deÞned.
   9
     The literature often adopts the stronger assumption that the growth rate of productivity is the same for
all countries and at all times, i.e. gt = g ∗ .



                                                       6
so that in the long-run the return on domestic saving is given by

                                              R∗ = g ∗γ /β.                                            (4)

R∗ , the natural level of the gross rate of interest, is the same for all countries.
    Taking the limit of the Þrst-order condition for capital Rt = αk̃tα−1 + 1 − δ k (where δ k is
the depreciation rate of capital) gives the asymptotic level of productivity-adjusted capital
                                                  µ                ¶1/1−α
                                             ∗           α
                                lim k̃t = k̃ =         ∗
                                                                            ,                          (5)
                               t→+∞                   R + δk − 1

which is also the same for all countries.

    Under Þnancial integration domestic agents can lend or borrow at the gross world
interest rate. We assume that the rest of the world is composed of developed countries that
have already achieved their steady state. Under that assumption, the world interest rate
is equal to the natural gross rate of interest, R∗ , and Þnancial integration does not ‘tilt’
permanently consumption proÞles.10 This assumption has one important implication. The
long-run levels of capital and output per capita are the same under autarky and Þnancial
integration. These levels may diﬀer across countries because of persistent diﬀerences in
productivity levels, but they are not aﬀected by the capital account regime. The eﬀect of
integration is to accelerate the country’s convergence towards a steady growth path that is
determined by other factors.

    Under Þnancial integration the path of the economy is as follows. First, the Euler equation
ct = (βR∗ )−1/γ ct+1 implies that domestic consumption per capita grows at rate g ∗ as soon
as the country is Þnancially integrated. Second, the Þrst-order equation for capital implies
that k̃t jumps immediately to its long-run level k̃∗ . Let us assume that domestic residents
can choose the international allocation of domestic wealth k0 at time 0. The consumption
level then results from the family’s intertemporal budget constraint:
                                ∞ ³
                                    n ´t
                                                        ∞ ³
                               X
                                                ∗
                                                       X    n ´t
                                      ∗
                                         ct = R   k0 +        ∗
                                                                 wt ,
                               t=0
                                    R                  t=0
                                                            R

where wt = (1 − α)At k̃∗α is the real wage received by the representative family member at
time t. It follows that c0 is given by
                                                   µ     ¶
                        ∗       ∗               ∗α    ng∗ X+∞ ³ n ´t
                 c0 = (R − ng ) k0 + (1 − α) k̃     1− ∗                  At .         (6)
                                                      R        t=0 R∗


   We measure the gains from international Þnancial integration as follows. Let us denote by
Uaut and Uint the domestic welfare at time 0 under Þnancial autarky and Þnancial integration
respectively. The welfare under autarky has no closed-form expression in general, and must
be computed by solving numerically for the saddle-point stable equilibrium. By contrast,
  10
    We believe that it would not be very appealing to assume that the beneÞts of international Þnancial
integration come from intrinsic and permanent diﬀerences in the natural rate of interest between countries.


                                                      7
since under Þnancial integration consumption per capita is increasing at the constant rate
g ∗ , one can derive a closed form expression for Uint

                                                     R∗     c01−γ
                                     Uint = N0                    ,                                  (7)
                                                  R∗ − ng∗ 1 − γ
where c0 comes from the intertemporal budget constraint (6).
    By the Þrst welfare theorem we know that domestic welfare is higher under Þnancial
integration than under autarky. In the following discussions, we report the Hicksian equiva-
lent variation µ, deÞned as the percentage increase in the country’s consumption that brings
domestic welfare under autarky up to its level under integration:
                                              µ          ¶ 1−γ
                                                            1
                                                  Uint
                                         µ=                      −1                                  (8)
                                                  Uaut
if γ 6= 1, and µ = exp((1 − nβ)(Uint − Uaut )/N0 ) − 1 if γ = 1.

2.2     Calibration and Results
We estimate the welfare gains of Þnancial integration for 82 non-OECD countries with annual
data in 1995.11 Some parameters are common to all countries while others are country-
speciÞc. The common parameters are given in Table 1. We set g ∗ = 1.012 in line with
long run multifactor productivity growth in the U.S. While the assumption that the capital
share is constant across countries is certainly too strong, recent estimates by Gollin (1998)
suggest that the Cobb-Douglas assumption is roughly appropriate, with an estimated capital
share between 0.2 and 0.4. Accordingly we set α = 0.3. We also assume a common rate of
depreciation of physical capital, equal to 6% per annum. With these assumptions, the world
real interest rate is equal to R∗ = 1.0542 and the –common– steady state capital-output
ratio k∗ /y ∗ is equal to 2.63.

    Each country is characterized by a constant population growth rate n, an initial level of
capital per capita k0 , and a productivity path (At )t≥0 . We measure n as the average rate of
growth of the working age population between 1985 and 1995, where working age is deÞned
as 15 to 64 years old. Data on total population and on the fraction of the population of age
15-64 is obtained from the 2002 World Bank Development Indicators.
    We construct measures of the initial capital stock using data from the Heston, Summers
and Aten (2002) Penn World Tables, Mark 6.1 (PWT) using investment rates and a perpetual
  11
    The selection is based on OECD membership at the beginning of the time period, so our sample includes
three current OECD members, Mexico, South Korea and Turkey. The 82 countries are Algeria, Angola,
Argentina, Bangladesh, Barbados, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cameroon,
Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Republic of Congo, Costa Rica, Cote D’ivoire, Cyprus, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Ethiopia, Fiji, Gabon, Ghana, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hong
Kong, India, Indonesia, Iran, Israel, Jamaica, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Mauritania,
Mauritius, Mexico, Morocco, Mozambique, Nepal, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Pakistan, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Rwanda, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Singapore, South Africa, South
Korea, Sri Lanka, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad & Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Uruguay,
Venezuela, Zambia and Zimbabwe.

                                                    8
                                     β   γ      α   δk    g∗
                                    0.96 1     0.3 0.06 1.012
                                  Table 1: Common parameters

inventory method like in Bernanke and Gürkaynak (2001).12 The productivity level of a given
country in a given year 0 can then be derived from its capital stock, its output and the Cobb-
Douglas relationship y0 = A1−α 0  k0α . One can then compute for each country the ratio of the
capital installed in year 0 to the capital level that would prevail under perfect Þnancial
integration, k0 /(A0 e
                     k∗ ). This capital ratio is a measure of the country’s capital abundance.
It is higher than 1 for the countries that export capital under integration, and lower than 1
for the countries that import capital.
    Table 2 gives population weighted averages of the capital ratios for various subsets of our
sample of countries deÞned on a regional or income level basis.13 For comparison, we also
report the capital ratio for 22 OECD countries (last row).14 There is no signiÞcant capital
gap for OECD countries, a result consistent with our assumption that emerging countries
can borrow and lend internationally at rate R∗ from industrialized countries.
    Non-OECD countries exhibit a signiÞcant capital deÞcit, with capital ratios averaging
0.41, and increasing steadily with income level. While that average masks substantial het-
erogeneity —with capital ratios as low as 0.03 for Uganda, and as high as 1.37 for Singapore,
most developing countries are still far away from their steady state. A decomposition by
regions reveals that Africa and Asia are furthest away from steady state, compared to Latin
America. Finally, since China and India together represent 52.8% of the population in our
sample, the table also reports separately the results for Non-OECD countries outside these
two countries.

    In order to compute countries’ welfare gains from integration in year 0 we need the path
of future productivities (At )t≥0 . We start with the simple assumption that productivity
grows at the long-run rate g ∗ from year 0 onwards (i.e., that there is no productivity catchup
relative to the U.S. after year 0).
    Table 3 shows the beneÞts of international Þnancial integration for the same country
groupings as in table 2. While the gains for individual countries can be substantial (with a
maximum of 8.03 percent for Mozambique), the average gain per capita are much smaller, of
the order of 1.24 percent of autarky consumption. These gains are decreasing with income,
as expected, since richer countries are also closer to steady state. The results are similar
whether China and India are included in the sample or not.

       It is important to emphasize that we Þnd small welfare gains despite, as table 2 makes
  12
     Hsieh and Klenow (2003) and Cohen and Soto (2002) argue that one should construct capital stocks using
nominal investment rates instead of PPP investment rate, since poorer countries face systematically higher
relative prices for investment goods. Since nominal investment rates are higher, this yields comparatively
smaller capital gaps, and hence smaller welfare gains. Using nominal investment rates, we estimate an
average capital ratio of 0.75. (The results are available upon request to the authors.)
  13
     We use the World Bank income classiÞcation. See http://www.worldbank.org/data/countryclass/classgroups.htm
  14
     The 22 OECD countries are Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Greece,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, New-Zealand, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Swe-
den, Switzerland, the United Kingdom and the USA.

                                                  9
                                                             Capital ratio
                                                             k0 /k∗     Obs.
                              Non-OECD countries              0.41        82
                               Low Income                     0.29        38
                               Lower Middle Income            0.46        25
                               Upper Middle Income            0.68        14
                               High Income (non-OECD)         1.04         5

                                Africa                        0.34       44
                               Latin-America                  0.63       22
                               Asia                           0.40       16

                               except China and India         0.46       80
                               China and India                0.36        2

                              OECD                            1.01       22

                Table 2: Capital scarcity. Population weighted average. Year is 1995.
                                                  Equivalent Variation, µ (percent)
                                                  mean min max s.d.              Obs.
                    Non-OECD countries            1.24     0    8.03 0.87         82
                    Low Income                    1.71 0.01 8.03 0.92             38
                    Lower Middle Income           0.98     0    2.99 0.54         25
                    Upper Middle Income           0.23 0.09 2.10 0.28             14
                    High Income (non OECD)        0.05 0.01 0.32 0.09              5

                      Africa                       1.65    0.01   8.03   1.60      44
                      Asia                         1.27      0    1.81   0.51      16
                      Latin-America                0.40    0.09   1.95   0.51      22

                     except China and India       1.06     0.00   8.03   1.19      80
                     China and India              1.39     1.08   1.79   0.50      2

Table 3: The beneÞts of international Þnancial integration.
The table reports the population weighted average of the equivalent variation µ. Year is 1995.


clear, substantial initial capital gaps. Figure 1 reports the equivalent variation as a function
of the initial capital ratio k0 /k∗ for all non-OECD countries in our sample. The solid line
represents the theoretical welfare gains for a country with the same population growth rate
as the United States, as a function of its initial capital ratio.15 This graph delivers a stark
message: since the curve is very ßat around 1, a country must be very scarce or very abundant
in capital to signiÞcantly beneÞt from international Þnancial integration. The capital ratio
must fall below 0.36 or exceeds 2 for the gains from integration to exceed 2 percent. The
same is true for the developing countries in the sample: only countries very far from steady
state —typically below 0.2— enjoy signiÞcant gains from Þnancial integration. Such countries
represent less than 4 percent of the aggregate population in our sample.16
  15
    Countries are below the curve because they generally have a higher population growth rate than the
United States.
 16
    The 11 countries, all African, with gains in excess of 2 percent are: Burundi, Central African Republic,
Chad, Egypt, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mauritius, Mozambique, Rwanda, Sierra Leone and Uganda.


                                                    10
2.3     Is it large? Some Comparisons.
It is important to establish relevant points of comparisons. After all, a welfare gain of 1.24%
of consumption would be considered quite high in the empirical public Þnance literature
establishing the incidence of taxes (Mendoza and Tesar (1998)). Another point of comparison
comes from the literature on the beneÞts of smoothing economic ßuctuations. Although our
estimates are substantially larger than the beneÞts for developed economies, estimated to
represent a fraction of a percentage point (Lucas (1987)), they are of the same order of
magnitude as the beneÞts obtained by Pallage and Robe (2003) for less developed economies
and aid-dependent countries.
    This section proposes two other points of comparison. First, we present estimates of the
welfare gains from a productivity catch-up. Then, we evaluate the beneÞts of international
Þnancial integration on output growth and convergence.

2.3.1   The beneÞt of a productivity take-oﬀ
We now revisit the assumption that relative productivity remains constant. Clearly, this is
an extreme and unrealistic assumption. Figure 2 reports the change in relative productivity
A0 /Aus
      0 for non-OECD countries between 1960 and 1995. While many developing countries
fell behind in terms of relative productivity, a number of countries –such as Hong-Kong,
Singapore, Cyprus, Israel or Mauritius–experienced a drastic improvement in productivity.
These countries increased their productivity relative to the United States by more than 25
percent over that time period, and by as much as 78 percent for Hong Kong. We now
evaluate the welfare gains from such productivity catch-up.

    More speciÞcally, assume that productivity converges partly toward the world technology
frontier (here, the U.S.) according to
                                                 µ         ¶
                                 At    A0      t       A0
                                     = us + x      1 − us                                (9)
                                Aus
                                  t    A0     35       A0

in the Þrst thirty-Þve years (t ≤ 35), after which the growth rate in productivity goes back
to the U.S. level. The variable x represents the convergence in productivity expressed as a
fraction of the original productivity gap. The case x = 0 corresponds to no-convergence, and
x = 1 corresponds to full convergence in 35 years.

    Table 4 reports relative productivity in 1995, as well as the welfare gains from a pro-
ductivity catch-up ranging between 25 and 100 percent under Þnancial autarky. Emerging
countries are much less productive than the U.S., with an average relative productivity of
0.14, increasing with income. In that context, we Þnd that the gains from a productivity
catch-up are extremely large. A 25 percent reduction in the productivity gap yields welfare
gains of 135 percent on average. A full catch-up would yield the equivalent of an almost six
fold increase in consumption!




                                              11
            Equivalent Variation, µ (percent)                   productivity   catch-up
                                                                x (percent)
                                                A0 /Aus
                                                     0       25  50    75      100        Obs.
            Non-OECD countries                   0.14       135 258 377        494         82
            Low Income                           0.10       190 365 534        701         38
            Lower Middle Income                  0.14        99 188 273        356         25
            Upper Middle Income                  0.29        46  88 130        171         14
            High Income (non OECD)               0.48        19  37    55      72          5

              Africa                             0.12       260   504   742    979         44
              Asia                               0.26       116   222   323    421         16
              Latin-America                      0.12        55   106   156    205         22

             except China and India              0.18       150   291   428    563         80
             China and India                     0.11       120   229   332    433         2

Table 4: The beneÞts of a productivity catch-up.
The table reports the population weighted average of the equivalent variation µ for various values of the
productivity catch-up. Year is 1995.


2.3.2    A diﬀerent metric: output growth and convergence
As mentioned in the introduction, the empirical literature on the beneÞts of capital account
liberalization often focuses on domestic output growth. We can use our simple model to
revisit this issue. Table 5 reports the increase in output growth predicted by the model
at various horizons. The large increase in output growth at a one-year horizon reßects the
absence of any friction in the capital market. More realistically, the table shows that at the
5-year horizon the gain in output growth can be substantial, in excess of 2.5 percent per year
on average. The empirical literature reports somewhat smaller gains. For instance, Bekaert
et al. (2002) Þnd a 1 percent higher growth rate of output after 5 years, following an equity
market liberalization. In light of our welfare calculations, these growth improvements do not
necessarily have major welfare implications.
    The preceding table emphasizes that the impact on output growth can be substantial,
especially at short horizons. Yet, the overall impact on intertemporal output may be rel-
atively small. We illustrate this point in Figure 3. Panel A represents the impact of full
international Þnancial integration on the present discounted value of output. The horizontal
axis represents the present discounted value of domestic output per capita under autarky
(in thousand of international 1995 dollars) while the vertical axis represents the present dis-
counted value of domestic output per capita under Þnancial integration. For comparison,
the Þgure also includes a 45 degree line. The vertical distance between each point and the
45 degree line measures the permanent output gains from Þnancial integration. As we can
see from the Þgure, for most countries, the output gains are hardly discernible at all. For
the sake of comparison, Panel B of Þgure 3 shows the results under a domestic productiv-
ity catchup of 25, 50 or 75%, according to equation (9). By contrast with international
Þnancial integration, a productivity take-oﬀ has a Þrst-order eﬀect in reducing international
diﬀerences in permanent income per capita.




                                                   12
                           Change in domestic output growth   (percent, per annum)
                                                  Horizon
                                                      1          5     10      Obs.
                          Non-OECD countries       30.03      2.83    0.65      82
                          Low Income                39.59      3.59   0.81      38
                          Lower Middle Income       24.75      2.46   0.58      25
                          Upper Middle Income       11.63      1.26   0.31      14
                          High Income               -0.78     -0.10   -0.03      5

                           Africa                    41.29    3.52    0.78      44
                           Asia                      29.57    2.87    0.66      16
                           Latin-America             15.50    1.59    0.38      22

                          except China and India     28.88    2.64    0.58      80
                          China and India            31.07    3.02    0.70       2

Table 5: Impact on Growth.
The table reports the population weighted change in domestic output growth following Þnancial integration.
Year is 1995


2.4        Intuition and Robustness
The welfare gains from a technological catch-up dominate those from international Þnancial
integration by an order of magnitude. That the gains from a catch-up are large is not too
surprising once it is realized that a catch-up of 25 percent more than doubles the productivity
(and output per capita) of most non-OECD countries in the long-run. Rather, the surprise
is that the gains from international Þnancial integration are so low, given the very large size
of capital inßows predicted by the model when the typical non-OECD country opens itself
to foreign capital. This section provides the intuition for why the gains from international
Þnancial integration are low.

    To build up our intuition, we derive a simple expression for the welfare gain from a
marginal increase in international Þnancial integration. Let us assume that in a capital-
scarce country, a central planner authorizes the entry of a marginal amount of foreign capital
dκt+1 at time t (using quantitative capital controls, say). This increases the equilibrium real
wage and decreases the return on domestic savings. By the envelope theorem, we know that
the net welfare gain from the marginal capital inßow is the same as if dκt+1 were invested at
time t and the resulting increase in domestic net income were consumed in period t + 1. The
marginal increase in period t + 1 domestic net income is dyt+1 − R∗ dκt+1 , where the increase
in domestic output dyt+1 is equal to the marginal return to capital, Rt+1 , times the capital
inßows, dκt+1 . Hence, the welfare gain at time t + 1 can be written17

                                    dUt+1 = u0 (ct+1 )(Rt+1 − R∗ )dκt+1 .
The welfare gain from a small capital inßow in terms of current consumption is equal to the
return diﬀerential between the country and the rest of the world times the capital inßow.
    One can view Þnancial integration at time 0 as the result of an incremental process in
which the social planner continuously relaxes the capital controls in all subsequent periods.
  17
       Population growth is assumed away for simplicity.


                                                      13
Assume that at time 0 all the subsequent authorized capital inßows are increased by a small
fraction of consumption, i.e. dκt+1 = ct+1 dc/c. With log-preferences, the equivalent variation
is approximately:18
                                            ³       ´ dc
                                     µ ≈ β R̂ − R∗        ,                                (10)
                                                        c
                    P
where R̂ ≡ (1 − β) ∞      t
                       0 β Rt+1 represents the permanent value of the domestic interest rate.
    Starting from the capital ratio of the average non-OECD country (0.41), the initial do-
mestic return on capital is 15 percent, 10 percent above the world interest rate. But the
domestic return converges toward the world interest rate, and the permanent value R̂, at
6.9 percent, is only 1.46 percent higher than the world interest rate. Equation (10) then
implies that starting from autarky, a marginal capital inßow equal to 1 percent of domestic
consumption yields a welfare beneÞt equivalent to 0.0146 percent of consumption. Thus, the
welfare gain for the recipient country is a very small fraction of the face value of the capital
inßows.

    From that point of view, there is a signiÞcant diﬀerence between our results and those
of the calibrated literature on the welfare eﬀects of trade liberalization. The small welfare
gains in that literature–sometimes referred to as the ‘Harberger constant’–arise from the
elimination of small ‘triangular’ distortionary losses. Here, the large size of the capital inßows
unleashed by Þnancial integration might suggest that the welfare triangle is not small; yet,
the welfare losses from the distortion are found to be as small as in the trade literature. The
reason has to do with the intertemporal proÞle of the distortion. By contrast with trade
restrictions, the distortion induced by capital account restrictions tend to vanish by itself
over time, as countries converge toward the same steady-state level of capital under autarky
as under integration. The welfare cost of autarky is determined by the intertemporal level
of the distortion, which may be much smaller than the initial level.
    The small gains from international Þnancial integration are intuitive, conditional on the
return diﬀerential predicted by the model. This raises the question of whether this diﬀerential
is empirically plausible. The model predicts an average marginal return on capital of 15
percent for non-OECD countries in 1995. This seems consistent with some estimates of the
return to investment in less developed countries. For example, Isham and Kaufman (1999)
Þnd that the average economic rate of return on private projects Þnanced by the World Bank
is 14 percent.19

    Another issue is the speed at which the return diﬀerential decreases over time, which
is directly related to the conditional speed of convergence toward the steady state. As is
well-known, the convergence speed in the benchmark Ramsey model is excessively high. In
our model the speed of convergence–measured as the fraction of the output gap that is
eliminated every year–is 11.16 percent. This is much larger than the 2-3 percent reported
by Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992), and inside the 8-13 percent range estimated by Caselli,
  18
    See appendix A.
  19
    Banerjee and Dußo (2002)’s study of the Indian credit market reports much larger returns that are left
unexploited because of credit rationing. However, credit rationing will apply to foreign investors in the same
way as domestic lenders, unless one has a theory of how international Þnancial integration reduces domestic
Þnancial frictions. This is indeed an important question–as we argue at the end of the paper–but one
outside the scope of the neoclassical framework.

                                                     14
                  Equivalent Variation, µ (percent)
                                                                      γ
                                                          1      3         5      10     Obs.
                  Non-OECD countries                    1.24   2.49       2.43   2.14     82
                  Low Income                            1.71   3.99       4.15   2.18     38
                  Lower Middle Income                   0.98   1.45       1.04   1.31     25
                  Upper Middle Income                   0.23   0.11       0.25   4.22     14
                  High Income (non OECD)                0.05   0.65       2.57   12.51    5

                    Africa                              1.65   5.01       6.31   5.75     44
                    Asia                                1.27   2.17       1.75   1.00     16
                    Latin-America                       0.40   0.58       0.67   3.74     22

                   except China and India               1.06   2.72       3.21   4.04     80
                   China and India                      1.39   2.28       1.72   0.43     2

Table 6: Intertemporal Elasticity of Substitution.
The table reports the population weighted average of the equivalent variation µ for various values of the
intertemporal elasticity of substitution 1/γ


Esquivel and Lefort (1996), who correct some biases in earlier estimation methods. Given
that the model’s speed of convergence is close to the highest estimates obtained in the
literature, it would be reassuring to test the robustness of our results to modiÞcations of the
model that reduce the speed of convergence.20 We do this in the next section by introducing
human capital.21

    Finally, we close this section with a robustness test. Our results so far are derived under
log preferences. One could argue that lower elasticities of intertemporal substitution would
increase the gains from Þnancial integration by lowering welfare under autarky. However
a smaller elasticity of intertemporal substitution also makes households more reluctant to
accumulate capital. This increases the long run natural world interest rate R∗ = g ∗γ /β,
lowers our estimates of the capital gap, and consequently, the potential gains from Þnancial
integration.22 Table 6 presents results for values of γ between 3 and 10. We Þnd that the
welfare gains increase on average, from 1.24 to 2.49 percent of consumption when γ = 3,
then decrease as the second eﬀect dominates.
  20
      To see by how much our results could be aﬀected by the speed of convergence, consider the extreme
case where this speed is zero (i.e. if the return diﬀerential remained at its initial level forever). Then the
permanent value of the return diﬀerential would jump from 1.46 percent to 10 percent, a seven-fold increase.
This is large in relative terms, but note that a seven-fold increase would still leave the gains from integration
much below those from a productivity catch-up.
   21
      Of course, this is not the only way convergence could be slowed down in our model. For example,
we could introduce an external credit constraint as in Barro et al. (1995). This would reduce the speed
of convergence conditional on integration, and so thegains from integration. Alternatively, the convergence
speed could be reduced by introducing adjustment costs in capital accumulation. This would lower the speed
of convergence both under autarky and under integration, with an a priori ambiguous impact on the gains
from integration.
   22
      This puts some discipline on which elasticity of intertemporal substitution one should choose. For
instance, with γ = 10, we estimate an unreasonable capital ratio k0 /k∗ of 1.14 for non-OECD countries.




                                                       15
3     Extending the basic model
We now augment the model of section 2 in two ways. First, we introduce human capital
accumulation. Second, we allow for domestic distortions in the accumulation of physical and
human capital.

    Human capital is a basic element in growth theory. Diﬀerences in educational attainment,
or schooling rates translate into more or less productive labor force and have long been
described as a key element in cross-country income diﬀerences. Microeconomic studies also
document signiÞcant returns to education (Dußo (2001)). Second, human capital makes the
transition dynamics more realistic, both under Þnancial integration–where the dynamics
are no longer trivial–and under autarky –where the accumulation of human capital slows
down the convergence toward the steady state. Finally, human capital accumulation is a
channel through which domestic productivity is endogenous to the capital account regime.
Faster accumulation of physical capital could induce faster accumulation of human capital,
in particular by increasing the real wage.

    The motivation for introducing distortions in the accumulation of physical and human
capital is to give a better account of observed cross-country diﬀerences in investment rates.
The previous section assumed that diﬀerences between countries are summarized by their
initial level of productivity A0 and the growth rate of population n. This implies relatively
small cross country variations in capital accumulation rates. For instance, the model of the
previous section predicts steady-state physical investment rates between 20.8 and 29 percent
for non-OECD countries. This is at odds with the data, where average investment rates from
1985 to 1995 range from 2.80 percent (Madagascar) to 41.40 percent (Singapore). Similarly,
distortions in the accumulation of human capital allow us to account for observed educational
attainments ranging from 0.7 years (Mali) to 10.1 years (South Korea). Easterly, Kremer,
Pritchett and Summers (1993) report that accumulation rates for physical and human capital
are very persistent across decades.

3.1    The model
We assume that the labor employed in production Lt is homogenous and has been trained
with Et years of schooling, which we will interpret as educational attainment. As a result,
the domestic economy produces according to a ‘Macro-Mincer’ Cobb-Douglas production
function:                                 ¡              ¢1−α
                                 Yt = Ktα A0t eφ(Et ) Lt      ,
where A0t reßects the exogenous, non-human-capital-related, determinants of productivity.
The function φ0 (E) represents the marginal return to schooling estimated in a Mincerian
wage regression.

   Human capital accumulation depends upon the fraction of time devoted to education, st ,
according to
                               Et+1 = (1 − δe ) Et + θst                            (11)
where δ e is a depreciation rate for human capital and θ captures the eﬃciency of the domestic
schooling technology and accounts for steady state diﬀerences in educational attainment.

                                             16
This perpetual inventory speciÞcation is consistent with existing empirical work on human
capital stocks (see Barro and Lee (1993)). Because the problem is not concave in the level
of educational attainment, we must impose bounds on s to avoid corner solutions in which
the country invests 100 percent or 0 percent of its time in education. We impose that
0 ≤ s ≤ s ≤ s̄ < 1. Finally, labor market clearing implies Lt = (1 − st ) Nt .

    Investment in domestic capital is implicitly distorted at rate τ , so that the private return
to domestic capital is (1 − τ ) Rt . We refer to τ as the capital wedge. As discussed above, it
allows us to match the observed disparity in saving rates across countries. τ is a shorthand
for all the distortions that potentially aﬀect the return to domestic capital: credit mar-
ket imperfections, taxation, expropriation, bureaucracy, bribery and corruption... Diﬀerent
models would have diﬀerent implications for the implicit rents generated by the distortion,
zt ≡ τ Rt kt . For simplicity, we assume that they are rebated in a lump-sum fashion to the
representative agent. In this manner, we focus exclusively on the distortive aspects of the
capital wedge.

    The model with human capital is solved in appendix A in the case where catchup is
limited to human capital (A0t = A00 g ∗t ). The main features of the equilibrium are preserved.
Physical and human capital converge to steady state values that are independent of the
capital account regime. Human capital converges to a level that depends on the eﬃciency of
the domestic schooling technology (and not on the capital wedge). The investment in human
capital is bang-bang under Þnancial integration in the sense that s = s (s = s) if human
capital is above (below) its long-run level. It follows that human capital converges to the
steady state level in Þnite time.

    To illustrate the eﬀect of human capital accumulation, Figure 4 reports the convergence
paths to the steady state for education, consumption, physical and human capital, for an
economy calibrated to the U.S. when k0 = 0.5k ∗ and E0 = 0.6E ∗ .23 The convergence tra-
jectories are very diﬀerent depending upon the capital account regime. In this example,
the country has initially relatively more human than physical capital. Under autarky, it is
optimal to concentrate on accumulating physical capital. Hence the schooling rate s and
consumption c are low, while capital accumulates rapidly. Under Þnancial integration, by
contrast, it is always optimal to accumulate human capital as rapidly as possible. This
implies a smaller rate of accumulation of physical capital until s reaches its steady state.
Second, convergence–although not instantaneous–is much more rapid under Þnancial in-
tegration. The integrated economy reaches its steady state in about Þfteen years.
    Figure 4 illustrates that Þnancial opening need not be associated with large capital in-
ßows, at least initially. In this particular example, there are no capital inßows or outßows at
time 0. On the other hand, when human capital reaches its steady state, a large quantity of
labor becomes available for production and attracts correspondingly large amounts of capi-
tal. The Þgure also illustrates that long run consumption under integration c0 is lower than
steady state consumption under autarky c∗ .24
  23
     The parameters are set to the U.S. economy: τ = 0.66%; θ = 1.28; n = 0.73%; δ e = 2.76%. These values
imply k̃∗ = 9.62, s∗ = 0.29 and E ∗ = 13.49. We also impose s = 0 and s̄ = 0.5.
  24
     See appendix A for a closed-form expression for c∗ − c0 as well as some interpretation.



                                                   17
3.2     Calibration and results
The details of the calibration are presented in appendix B. We follow Hall and Jones (1999),
and adopt a piecewise linear representation of the returns to schooling consistent with the
empirical evidence in Psacharopoulos (1994). We construct estimates of the steady state
and initial human capital, by following closely the perpetual inventory method of Barro and
Lee (1993). Brießy, we construct a measure of total educational attainment for people over
age 25 using data on durations and educational attainment rates of primary, secondary and
higher schooling. This provides a stock measure Et , every Þve years from 1960 to 2000. We
assume further that s = 0 and s̄ = 0.5.25

    The capital wedge τ and the schooling eﬃciency θ were calibrated for each country as
follows. We construct the conditional steady state of each country by projecting forward the
observed enrollment and investment rates. We then infer the values of τ and θ by Þtting the
steady-state accumulation rates predicted by the model to the country’s conditional steady
state. This assigns some of the diﬀerences in long-run output per capita to diﬀerences in
physical and human capital accumulation rates. As discussed above, we see as empirically
plausible that countries have diﬀerent long-run accumulation rates. Therefore, this case
constitutes our benchmark.
    For the sake of the comparison, we also look at the results under the assumption that
there are no distortions, i.e. the capital wedge τ is equal to zero and the schooling eﬃciency
θ is the same as in the U.S. in all countries. This assumes that diﬀerences in long run output
per capital are solely explained by diﬀerences in productivity A0 and population growth n.
It corresponds more closely to the assumptions of the previous section with physical capital
only and allows us to check the plausibility of our results under–admittedly extreme–
assumptions.

     Table 7 reports relative human capital, E0 /E ∗ , as well as the projected steady-state
attainment level E ∗ and the eﬃciency of the schooling system relative to the U.S. while
table 8 reports the relative physical capital k0 /k∗ together with the estimated capital wedge
τ .26

    In the presence of distortions, we Þnd that countries are close to their steady state,
with an educational attainment ratio of 1.03 and a capital ratio of 0.68.27 The average
relative education parameter is 0.61, much below one, while the capital wedge is moderate
but positive, equal to 7.6%. The capital wedge is negative for the high income countries
because our method interprets the very large average saving rates of countries like Singapore
(41%) and Korea (37%) as evidence of an implicit subsidy to investment (-4.7%. and -4.%
  25
     This assumption inßuences the speed of convergence toward the steady state under Þnancial integration.
The assumption that s̄ = 0.5 ensures that no country is constrained in steady state.
  26
     The sample contains 60 countries. The following 22 countries do not have detailed educational data
and were dropped: Angola, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cape Verde, Chad, Comoros, Democratic Republic Of
Congo, Cote D’ivoire, Ethiopia, Gabon, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Madagascar, Mauritania, Morocco,
Nigeria, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand and Zimbabwe.
  27
     Such a high human capital ratio is partly driven by China and India, two very populous countries that
undertook signiÞcant education programs, and are estimated to be above steady state. Removing these
countries, the average human capital ratio drops to 0.68.


                                                    18
                                   Relative        Steady State            Attainment Ratio             Obs.
                                   Eﬃciency         Attainment
                                    θ/θus                E∗                   E0 /E ∗
   Steady State:                  benchmark         benchmark         benchmark no distortion
   Non-OECD countries                0.61              5.08              1.03         0.35               60
    Low Income                       0.49              4.16              0.95         0.27               21
    Lower Middle Income              0.66              5.11              1.17         0.40               21
    Upper Middle Income              0.78               7.47             0.75         0.42               13
    High Income (non-OECD)           1.01              11.20             0.88         0.72               5

   Africa                            0.76               6.44              0.64           0.29            25
   Latin-America                     0.75               7.08              0.76           0.40            22
   Asia                              0.57               4.56              1.13           0.36            13

   except China and India            0.94               6.95              0.68           0.34            58
   China and India                   0.69               3.90              1.26           0.36            2

Table 7: Human Capital parameters and Estimates. Population weighted averages. Year is 1995.




respectively). Conversely, Mozambique and Uganda, countries with the lowest average saving
rates (2.9% and 3% respectively) are associated with a large capital wedge (40% and 46%
respectively).
    It is noteworthy that in spite of the distortions, the capital ratio, at 0.68, remains low on
average. Our results do not indicate, as is sometimes presumed, that emerging economies
will not beneÞt from Þnancial integration because they are very close to their steady state.28
Unsurprisingly, countries are found to be even further below their steady states if the latter
are not lowered by distortions–with an average educational attainment ratio of 0.35 and
physical capital ratio of 0.27.

    Human capital accumulation slows down convergence toward the steady state. Figure 5
presents convergence paths for output relative to steady state in the simple model of section
2 (black solid line) as well as the models of section 3 with and without domestic distortions
(dashed and blue solid line respectively). To construct this Þgure, we set initial physical
and human capital so that the initial output ratio is 0.9.29 It is apparent that convergence
is much slower with human capital accumulation, with or without distortions. The speed
of convergence decreases from 11.16 percent in the model without human capital to 3.67
and 3.21 percent respectively in the model with and without domestic distortions. These
convergence speed are reasonably close to the lower range of existing empirical estimates
(Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992)).

   Table 9 reports the welfare gains. The benchmark case yields welfare gains that are very
similar to the simple experiment of the previous section. Non-OECD economies beneÞt, on
  28
      However, it is interesting to note that Latin America and Africa are above their steady state. These
regions are capital-abundant conditional on their productivity and their distortions.
   29
      The corresponding initial ratios are respectively: k0 /k∗ = 0.70 for the model with physical capital only,
k0 /k∗ = E0 /E ∗ = 0.90 for the model without distortions, and k0 /k∗ = E0 /E ∗ = 0.82 for the model with
distortions.

                                                      19
                                         Wedge (%)             Capital Ratio             Obs.
                                             τ                    k0 /k∗
            Steady State:                benchmark       benchmark no distortion
            Non-OECD countries              7.6             0.68          0.27            60
             Low Income                     12.0            0.66          0.17            21
             Lower Middle Income            4.8             0.63          0.30            21
             Upper Middle Income            5.4             1.03          0.47            13
             High Income (non-OECD)         -3.2            0.54          0.83             5

             Africa                         19.3             1.20          0.23           25
             Latin-America                  7.4              1.06          0.43           22
             Asia                           6.2              0.55          0.25           13

             except China and India         10.2             0.96          0.33           58
             China and India                6.0              0.51          0.23            2

       Table 8: Capital Ratio and Capital Wedge. Population weighted averages. Year is 1995.

average, to the tune of 0.95 percent of consumption from a complete Þnancial liberalization.30
The gains from integration are more than Þve times larger if the distortions are removed (5.51
percent instead of 0.95 percent). This suggests that the two changes we have made to the
simple model of section 2 (the accumulation of human capital and the distortions) oﬀset
each other. On the one hand, the accumulation of human capital, in and of itself, increases
signiÞcantly the gains from integration by slowing down convergence and by inducing a
catch-up in productivity. On the other hand, the distortions tend to reduce these gains
by bringing countries closer to their steady states. It turns out that on balance, the two
eﬀects cancel out and the average gain remains about the same as in section 2. However, the
geographic distribution of the gains is diﬀerent–low income countries now beneÞt less than
lower middle income countries from international Þnancial integration, because they are less
eﬃcient in the accumulation of (physical and human) capital.



3.3      Prosperity and Capital Mobility: Development Accounting
What are the implications of our analysis for the world income distribution? Our Þndings
indicate that international Þnancial integration, unlike a productivity catch-up, does not
signiÞcantly reduce the gap between developed and less developed countries. An equivalent
interpretation is that transitional convergence explains little of the world income distribution.
Consider a country like Togo. According to our calculations, Togo stands to gain 0.19% of
permanent consumption if it opens its capital account completely and foreign capital is free
to rush in. But perhaps this should not come as a surprise, once we realize that the gross
investment rate in Togo has been only 6.03% from 1985 to 1995, that the implicit distortion
on real returns to capital is 26.9% and the education eﬃciency of Togo relative to the U.S.
  30
    The number for high income non-OECD countries is negative. This is so since the model with distortions
does not satisfy the criteria of the Þrst welfare theorem. Countries can be made worse oﬀ by international
Þnancial integration. SpeciÞcally, this happens when countries subsidize capital returns (τ < 0). Capital
inßows mean that the subsidy goes to foreign investors.


                                                   20
                  Equivalent Variation, µ (percent)
                  Steady State:                 benchmark               no distortion
                                                mean s.d.               mean s.d.         Obs.
                  Non-OECD countries            0.95 0.65                5.51   2.52       60
                   Low Income                   0.96 0.51                7.29   2.41       21
                   Lower Middle Income          1.16 0.56                4.62   1.45       21
                   Upper Middle Income          0.35 0.27                2.80   1.27       13
                   High Income (non OECD) -1.38 0.96                    0.62    0.28       5

                   Africa                         0.83       1.13           6.14   5.22   25
                   Asia                           1.07       0.56           5.78   1.81   13
                   Latin-America                  0.32       0.30           3.24   1.55   22

                   except China and India         0.65       0.95           4.89   3.54   58
                   China and India                1.14       0.24           5.99   1.49    2

Table 9: The beneÞts of international Þnancial integration.
The table reports the population weighted average of the equivalent variation µ. Year is 1995.


stands at 0.6. In other words, Þnancial integration would only bring Togo much faster to a
much impoverished steady state.
   According to this interpretation, the diﬀerence between industrialized and emerging
economies is not that the latter start with a large capital deÞcit that can be Þlled by capital
inßows but rather that they are converging toward a much lower level of income. Although
capital account opening can accelerate this convergence, the welfare beneÞt appears small
when compared to the long-run inequality resulting from long run cross-country diﬀerences.
This interpretation does not imply that countries are close to their steady state, simply that
the steady states themselves are quite far from the steady state of a country like the United
States.
   Consider then, the gap between a country’s income per capita in some reference year–say
1995–and the steady-state income per capita in the U.S.: y0 /y0∗,us .We can think of economic
development as a process that closes the ‘development gap’ between standards of living in
emerging countries (y0 ) and their steady-state levels in the developed world (y0∗us ).
    A key question for economic development consists in identifying the sources of this devel-
opment gap. Do they reßect the fact that emerging countries are far away from their steady
state? Do they reßect lack of domestic saving, possibly caused by a high capital wedge?
Do they reßect high distortions or low returns in the accumulation of human capital? Or
do they reßect low domestic productivity? To asnwer these questions, we decompose this
‘development gap’ into three components as follows:
                                          y0          ỹ0 ỹ ∗ A00
                                                  =       .       .     ,                        (12)
                                         y0∗,us       ỹ ∗ ỹ ∗,us Aus0
                                                                    0

where ỹ denotes output per eﬃcient unit excluding the contribution of human capital (y/A0 ).
    The Þrst term reßects the gap coming from the fact that the country has not yet converged
to its steady state. We refer to this term as the convergence gap. This gap is eliminated
more quickly under Þnancial integration.

                                                        21
    The second term reßects the cross-country diﬀerences in the eﬃciency of (physical and
human) capital accumulation. We call it the distortion gap. It can be further decomposed
into a physical capital and human capital components. Countries with a large distortion gap
are poor because their domestic capital markets are distorted and/or because their human
capital accumulation technology is very ineﬃcient.31
    The third term in equation (12) reßects diﬀerences in productivity between the domestic
country and the United States that are not accounted for by human capital. We denote it
the productivity gap. Countries with a large productivity gap are poor because they have a
lower productivity than the United States after controlling for human capital.

    Our decomposition is related to Hall and Jones (1999) and Jones (1997). Hall and Jones
decompose relative output per worker into a relative capital, relative human capital and
relative productivity term. Implicitly, their method includes a relative convergence gap
term (the ratio of the convergence gap relative to the US convergence gap) that is allocated
between the capital-output component and human capital components. Jones decomposes
steady state relative output into its capital and productivity gap components. His focus on
steady state output excludes a convergence term.

    Table 10 reports summary development accounting statistics for each component in equa-
tion (12), in 1995. The Þrst column reports the development gap. It is large, with non-OECD
countries at only 11% of the U.S. steady state income per capita. The second, Þfth and sixth
columns report respectively the convergence, distortion and productivity gaps. Columns
three and four further decompose the distortion gap into its physical and human capital
components. It is immediate that while the convergence gap is substantial (0.74), it ac-
counts for a small fraction of the development gap compared with the distortion (0.45) and
productivity (0.3) gaps. These numbers imply that even with full convergence–so that
the convergence gap would be eliminated–the development gap would still equal only 0.14
(0.45*0.3) of the U.S. steady state. Looking at the components of the distortion gap, it is
also apparent that diﬀerences in schooling eﬃciency (0.54) account for a larger share than
diﬀerences in investment rates (0.83).
    To summarize, if capital mobility simply brings faster conditional convergence, it will not
succeed in closing the gap between poor and rich countries. Diﬀerences in standards of living
arise mostly from diﬀerences in productivity and human capital, especially for the poorest
countries.

    Figure 6 presents additional evidence on the role of the convergence gap. In each panel,
the horizontal axis reports the log development gap ln (y0 /y0∗,us ) against the log of each
component in Table 10. As the Þgure makes clear, the convergence gap is the only component
that is not positively correlated to the development gap.32 In other words, while poorer
countries are, on average, less productive, accumulate less human and physical capital, there
is no evidence that they are further away from their steady state.
 31
      See Appendix A.
 32
      An OLS regression yields a signiÞcant coeﬃcient of -0.08 and an R̄2 of 0.21.




                                                      22
                            Development        Convergence                  Distortions               Productivity
                                                                 physical    human        total
                               y0 /y0∗,us         ỹ0 /ỹ ∗       capital     capital ỹ ∗ /ỹ ∗,us     A0 /Aus
                                                                                                             0       Obs.
 Non-OECD countries              0.11              0.74            0.83        0.54       0.45           0.30         60
 Low Income                      0.07              0.68            0.74        0.48       0.36           0.28         21
 Lower Middle Income             0.10              0.76            0.89        0.55       0.49           0.27         21
 Upper Middle Income             0.23              0.87            0.86        0.64       0.55           0.49         13
 High Income                     0.44              0.74            1.20        0.82       0.98           0.61          5

    Africa                       0.13              0.88            0.66         0.60       0.40           0.35       25
    Asia                         0.09              0.70            0.86         0.52       0.45           0.27       13
    Latin-America                0.20              0.88            0.82         0.62       0.51           0.46       22

  except China and India         0.16              0.83            0.79         0.60       0.49           0.38       58
  China and India                0.07              0.68            0.86         0.50       0.43           0.26        2

             Table 10: Development Accounting. Population weighted averages. 1995.

4      Implications for Future Research
Based on a calibrated neoclassical growth model, we Þnd that less developed countries do
not beneÞt greatly from international Þnancial integration. Less developed countries have
far more to gain from improving their own domestic allocative eﬃciency than from an im-
provement in the allocative eﬃciency of the international Þnancial system. This does not
mean, however, that international Þnancial integration is irrelevant for development. Indeed,
it could be quite important, but if it is, this is through channels that are not captured by
the basic neoclassical framework.

    If most of the inequality in world income is explained by diﬀerences in productivity
or domestic distortions, then the question of how the capital account regime interacts with
domestic allocative eﬃciency seems quite relevant. Understanding the determinants of coun-
tries’ productivity is a central question in development economics, which considers a very rich
array of explanations: technological innovation and diﬀusion, the legal regime and property
rights, policies and institutions, and their political economy underpinnings. The neoclassi-
cal approach makes the strong assumption that these determinants are not aﬀected at all
by the capital account regime. It would be interesting to explore the alternative: i.e. the
channels by which international Þnancial integration could raise or lower the productivity
of less developed countries.33 In other terms, one might have to open the Pandora’s box of
development economics in order to really understand the beneÞts and costs of international
Þnancial integration.

    There are various economic channels through which a less developed Þnancially open
country could “import” foreign productivity. First, international Þnancial integration could
increase the productivity of less developed economies by allowing inßows of Foreign Direct
Investment (FDI) in industries where foreign Þrms enjoy a productivity advantage.34 The
  33
     See Prasad, Rogoﬀ, Wei and Kose (2003) for a general discussion of the eﬀects of Þnancial globalization
on developing countries.
  34
     See Borenzstein, de Gregorio and Lee (1998) and Carkovic and Levine (2002) for evidence (and opposite
conclusions) on the impact of FDI on growth.

                                                     23
entry of foreign capital could then increase the productivity of domestic labor both directly,
and indirectly by encouraging productivity gains in the domestic Þrms that compete with the
new entrants or by technological spillovers from foreign to domestic Þrms. One industry that
deserves special emphasis and separate consideration in this regard, is the banking sector. In
this case, the superior eﬃciency of foreign banks in allocating domestic saving could produce
eﬃciency gains in the whole economy (Levine (1996)). This channel comes with important
policy implications, since it would imply that the capital ßows that need to be preserved are
FDI, and not necessarily credit ßows.

    There are also more indirect channels through which international Þnancial integration
could aﬀect the policies and governance of less developed countries. Opening the capital
account could signal the quality of future policies (Bartolini and Drazen (1997)) or enhance
the domestic government’s commitment to good policies (Gourinchas and Jeanne (2003)).
International Þnancial integration induces countries to have good governance and a high
level of transparency in order to attract foreign investors ex ante, and to maintain these
good policies ex post in order to avoid a capital ßight. In that respect, a central dimension
of domestic policies is how respectful they are of private property rights–whose key role in
development is widely acknowledged in economic and political science. There is a sense in
which capital account openness deepens and extends the property rights of private agents,
since it gives them the freedom to move their property abroad (Quinn (2000)). We present in
Gourinchas and Jeanne (2003) a model where capital mobility ensures the respect of property
rights, which is necessary for the development of an eﬃcient, modern formal sector. On the
other hand, the disruption induced by volatile capital ßows could also have deleterious eﬀects
on domestic institutions, policies, and growth.

    Finally, a lot of research remains to be done to assess the empirical relevance of these
channels. While this can be done in many ways, the approach of this paper can be pursued at
the empirical level by looking closely at the countries that experienced a productivity miracle
in the postwar period. On the basis of our sample, we can identify eight countries that closed
more 30 percent of their productivity gap with the U.S. between 1960 and 1995.35 All these
countries had annual productivity growth in excess of three percent over this period. If the
channels above mentioned are relevant, one would expect that Þnancial integration played
an important role in the productivity performance of at least some of these countries. This
remains a question for further research.




 35
      The list includes Korea, Botswana, Barbados, Israel, Cyprus, Mauritius, Hong Kong and Singapore.

                                                    24
References
Athanasoulis, Stefano and Eric van Wincoop, “Growth Uncertainty and Risk-sharing,”
   Journal of Monetary Economics, 2000, 45, 477—505.
Backus, David, Patrick Kehoe, and Fynn Kydland, “International Real Business
   Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100, 747—775.
Banerjee, Abhijit and Esther Dußo, “Do Firms Want to Borrow More? Testing Credit
   Constraints Using a Directed Lending Program,” May 2002. mimeo M.I.T.
Barro, Robert and Jongwha Lee, “International Comparisons of Educational Attain-
    ment,” Journal of Monetary Economics, 1993, 32, 363—394.
     and       , “International Data on Educational Attainment: Updates and Implica-
    tions,” Oxford Economic Papers, 2001.
     and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Convergence,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100
    (2), 223—51.
    , Gregory Mankiw, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin, “Capital Mobility in Neoclassical
    Models of Growth,” American Economic Review, 1995, 85 (1), 103—115.
Bartolini, Leonardo and Alan Drazen, “Capital Account Liberalization as a Signal,”
    American Economic Review, 1997, 87, 138—154.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, “Does Financial Liber-
   alization Spur Growth?,” 2002. mimeo, Columbia University.
Bernanke, Ben and Refet Gürkaynak, “Is Growth Exogenous? Taking Mankiw, Romer
   and Weil seriously,” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., N.B.E.R. Macroeco-
   nomics Annual, MIT Press Cambridge MA 2001, pp. 11—72.
Borenzstein, Eduardo, Jose de Gregorio, and Jongwha Lee, “How Does Foreign
   Investment Aﬀect Growth?,” Journal of International Economics, 1998, 45.
Calvo, Guillermo and Carmen Reinhart, “When Capital Flows Come to a Sudden
    Stop: Consequences and Policy,” in Peter B. Kenen and Alexander K. Swoboda, eds.,
    Reforming the International Monetary and Financial System, International Monetary
    Fund Washington D.C. 2000.
Carkovic, Maria and Ross Levine, “Does Foreign Direct Investment Accelerate Eco-
   nomic Growth?,” 2002. mimeo, University of Minnesota.
Caselli, Francesco, Gerardo Esquivel, and Fernando Lefort, “Reopening the Conver-
    gence Debate: A New Look at Cross-Country Growth Empirics,” Journal of Economic
    Growth, 1996, 1 (3), 363—89.
Cohen, Daniel and Marcelo Soto, “Why are Poor Countries Poor? A Message of Hope
   which involves the Resolution of a Becker-Lucas Paradox,” September 2002. Center for
   Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper.

                                          25
de Melo, Jaime and David G. Tarr, A General Equilibrium Analysis of US Foreign
   Trade Policy, Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992.

Dußo, Esther, “Schooling and Labor Market Consequences of School Construction in In-
   donesia: Evidence from an Unusual Policy Experiment,” American Economic Review,
   2001, 91 (4), 795—813.

Easterly, William and Ross Levine, “It’s Not Factor Accumulation: Stylized Facts and
    Growth Models,” The World Bank Economic Review, 2001, 15 (2), 177—219.

    , Michael Kremer, Lance Pritchett, and Lawrence Summers, “Good Policy
    or Good Luck? Country Growth Performance and Temporary Shocks,” Journal of
    Monetary Economics, 1993, 32, 459—483.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum, “International Technology: Theory and Mea-
    surement,” International Economic Review, 1999, 40 (3).

Edison, Hali, Ross Levine, Luca Ricci, and Torsten Sloek, “International Financial
    Integration And Economic Growth,” 2002. mimeo, International Monetary Fund.

Eichengreen, Barry and Michael Mussa, “Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical
    and Practical Aspects,” International Monetary Fund, Washington DC 1998. with G.
    Dell’Ariccia, E. Detragiache, G.M. Milesi-Ferretti and A. Tweedie. Occasional Paper
    No. 172.

Fischer, Stanley, “Capital Account Liberalization and the Role of the IMF,” in “Should
    the IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility?,” Vol. 207, Essays in International
    Finance, Department of Economics, Princeton University, 1998, pp. 1—10.

Gollin, Douglas, “Getting Income Shares Right: Self Employment, Unincorporated En-
    treprise, and the Cobb-Douglas Hypothesis,” June 1998. mimeo Williams College.

Gourinchas, Pierre-Olivier and Olivier Jeanne, “Capital Mobility, Property Rights
   and Economic Development,” 2003. work in progress.

Hall, Robert and Charles Jones, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
    Output Per Worker than Others?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114 (1),
    83—116.

Henry, Peter B., “Capital Account Liberalization, The Cost of Capital, and Economic
   Growth,” American Economic Review (Papers and Proceedings), May 2003, forthcom-
   ing.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, and Bettina Aten, “Penn World Table Version 6.1,”
    October 2002. Center for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania
    (CICUP).

Hsieh, Chang-Tai and Pete Klenow, “Relative Price and Relative Prosperity,” 2003.
    mimeo, Dept. of Economics, Princeton University.


                                          26
Isham, Jonathan and Daniel Kaufman, “The Forgotten Rationale for Policy Reform:
    The Productivity of Investment Projects,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1999, 114
    (1), 149—84.

Jones, Charles, “Convergence Revisited,” Journal of Economic Growth, 1997, 2, 131—53.

Levine, Ross, “Foreign Banks, Financial Development and Growth,” in “International
    Financial Markets: Harminization cersus Competition” AEI Press Washington D.C.
    1996, pp. 224—54.

Lucas, Robert E., Models of Business Cycles, New-York: Basil Blackwell, 1987.

Mankiw, N. Gregory, David Romer, and David Weil, “A Contribution to the Empirics
   of Economic growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 1992, 107 (2), 407—38.

Mendoza, Enrique and Linda Tesar, “The International RamiÞcations of Tax Reforms:
   Supply-Side Economics in a Global Economy,” American Economic Review, 1998, 88
   (1), 226—45.

Obstfeld, Maurice, “Risk-taking, Global DiversiÞcation and Growth,” American Eco-
   nomic Review, 1994, 85, 1310—29.

     and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, “The Six Major Puzzles in International Macroeconomics:
    Is There a Common Cause?,” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoﬀ, eds., N.B.E.R.
    Macroeconomics Annual, MIT Press Cambridge MA 2000, pp. 73—103.

Pallage, Stéphane and Michel Robe, “On the Welfare Cost of Economic Fluctuations
    in Developing Countries,” International Economic Review, 2003, forthcoming.

Parente, Stephen and Edward Prescott, Barriers to Riches, Cambridge, MA: MIT
    Press, 2000.

Prasad, Eswar, Kenneth Rogoﬀ, Shang-Jin Wei, and M. Ayhan Kose, “Eﬀects of
    Financial Globalization on Developing Countries: Some Empirical Evidence,” March
    2003. mimeo, International Monetary Fund.

Psacharopoulos, George, “Returns to Investment in Education: A Global Update,” World
    Development, 1994, 22, 1325—43.

Quinn, Dennis P., “Democracy and International Financial Liberalization,” 2000. mimeo,
   McDonough School of Business, Georgetown University.

Rodrik, Dani, “Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility?,” in “Should the IMF Pursue
   Capital-Account Convertibility?,” Vol. 207, Essays in International Finance, Depart-
   ment of Economics, Princeton University, 1998, pp. 55—65.

Rutherford, Thomas F. and David G. Tarr, “Trade liberalization, product variety and
   growth in a small open economy: a quantitative assessment,” Journal of International
   Economics, 2002, 56, 247—72.


                                          27
                                  Appendix A
                           The model with human capital
  This appendix presents the model with accumulation of human and physical capital.


A.1     Assumptions
 1. The domestic economy produces a single homogenous good according to: Yt = Ktα (A0t Ht )1−α where
    A0t grows at a constant rate g ∗ .

 2. Human capital-augmented labor satisÞes: Ht = eφ(Et ) Lt .
 3. The representative Þrm in the economy acts competitively on factor markets. Assuming that
    physical capital depreciates at rate δ k ≥ 0, factor prices satisfy:
                                             ³       ´α−1
                                      Rt = α k̃t /ht      + 1 − δk                          (A.1a)
                                                   ³      ´α
                                      wt = (1 − α) k̃t /ht ,                                (A.1b)

      where Rt denotes the domestic gross real interest rate, wt the normalized wage per eﬃciency
      unit of labor, and e
                         k = k/A0 .

 4. The representative domestic agent is inÞnitely lived and has time separable preferences de-
    Þned over sequences of consumption per capita {cs }∞s=t :

                                                 ∞
                                                 X
                                          Ut =         β s Ns u (cs ) ,                      (A.2)
                                                 s=t
                    ¡         ¢
      where u (c) ≡ c1−γ   − 1 / (1 − γ), and u (c) = ln (c) when γ = 1.
 5. Human capital accumulation depends upon the fraction of time devoted to education, st ,
    according to
                                  Et+1 = (1 − δ e ) Et + θ st ,                     (A.3)

      where 0 < s ≤ st ≤ s̄ < 1. We adopt s̄ = 0.5 and s = 0.
 6. Labor market clearing imposes Lt = (1 − st ) Nt .
 7. There are two Þnancial assets: the domestic capital stock kt and a riskless foreign bond bt
    that pays a constant gross world interest rate R∗ , equal to the inverse of the growth-adjusted
    discount factor: g ∗γ /β.
 8. Investment in domestic capital is implicitly disorted at rate τ , so that the private return to
    domestic capital is (1 − τ ) Rt . The implicit rents generated by the distortion, Zt ≡ τ Rt Kt
    are rebated in a lump-sum fashion to the representative agent.
 9. The (normalized) ßow budget constraint of the household is
                        ³             ´
                    ng ∗ k̃t+1 + b̃t+1 = R∗ b̃t + (1 − τ ) Rt k̃t + wt ht + z̃t − c̃t .      (A.4)




                                                  28
A.2      Steady State
Under these assumptions, physical and human capital converge to steady state values that are
independent of the capital account regime, and satisfy36
                                                          R∗
                                         ∗                ng ∗    + δe − 1
                                        s      = 1−                                                        (A.5a)
                                                              θφ0 (E ∗ )
                                                  θ ∗
                                        E∗ =        s                                                      (A.5b)
                                                 δe
                                                                ∗
                                        h∗     = (1 − s∗ ) eφ(E )                                           (A.5c)
                                                 µ                 ¶1/1−α
                                                        sk (τ )
                                        k̃∗    =                          h∗ ,                             (A.5d)
                                                   δ k + n.g ∗ − 1

where:
                                                             δ k + n.g ∗ − 1
                                         sk (τ ) = α.                                                        (A.6)
                                                         δ k + R∗ / (1 − τ ) − 1
is the domestic autarky investment rate that would prevail in steady state for an economy with
capital wedge τ .


A.3      Financial autarky
Under Þnancial autarky, the economy must accumulate capital domestically (b̃t = 0 for all t ≥ 0).
The Bellman equation associated with consumer program is:
                               ³         ´                                  ng ∗ ³             ´
                              v k̃t , Et   =         max u (c̃t ) +             v k̃t+1 , Et+1
                                                     {c̃t ,st }             R∗
                                    ∗
                        s.t. ng k̃t+1 = (1 − τ ) Rt k̃t + wt ht + z̃t − c̃t
                                Et+1 = (1 − δ e ) Et + θ st                                                    (P )
                                                                       φ(Et )
                                       ht = (1 − st ) e
                                        s ≤ st ≤ s̄ ; kt ≥ 0
                                 k0 , E0 ≥ 0 given,
             ³    ´       ³      ´
    where v k̃, E = U k̃, E /A01−γ N denotes the normalized welfare function. In the log case,
             ³    ´ ³ ³           ´                     ´
we deÞne v k̃, E = U k̃, E − ln (A0 ) / (1 − nβ) /N.
                                                                                 ³     ´
    A competitive equilibrium consists of (1) a consumption function c k̃, E , an education policy
  ³     ´                             ³     ´
s k̃, E and a welfare function v k̃, E that solves the consumer problem (P ) given the domestic
real interest R and wage w; (2) factor prices that satisfy equation (A.1); (3) markets that clear.
    The Þrst order conditions are:
                                                       1     ³               ´
                                             c̃−γ
                                               t   =      vk  k̃t+1 , E  t+1
                                                      R∗
                  1    ³              ´               ng ∗     ³               ´
                                            φ(Et )
                    vk  k̃t+1 , Et+1    wt e       =        vE   k̃t+1 , E t+1   θ − µ̄t + µt ,
                 R∗                                   R∗
where µ̄t , resp. µt are the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraints with s ≤ st ≤ s̄.
                              R∗
  36                          ng∗+δs −1
    We assume that 1 − s̄ ≤    θφ0 (E ∗ )     ≤ 1 − s. Equations (A.5) are obtained as the steady state solution to
(A.7).

                                                                  29
    The equilibrium conditions for consumption and education satisfy (for an interior solution, and
after some manipulation)

                                      (1 − τ ) Rt+1 −γ
                           c̃−γ
                             t  =                    c̃t+1                                                 (A.7)
                                            R∗
                                      ng ∗ −γ                    £ 0                                 ¤
                 c̃−γ
                   t wt e
                         φ(Et )
                                =         c̃t+1 wt+1   eφ(Et+1 )
                                                                  φ  (Et+1 ) (1 − st+1 ) θ + 1 − δ e   .
                                      R∗
    The Þrst equation is the standard Euler equation for the intertemporal allocation of consump-
tion.
    The second equation characterizes the optimal intertemporal allocation of education. To under-
stand the intuition behind this equilibrium condition, consider the following experiment. Suppose
that at time t the household decides to increase the fraction of time devoted to education by ∆st .
At time t + 1, it adjusts education to revert to the optimal plan by time t + 2. The increase in edu-
cation today reduces eﬃcient labor supply by eφ(Et ) ∆st . This implies a decline in current income of
wt eφ(Et ) ∆st and a marginal utility loss of c̃−γ
                                                t wt e
                                                       φ(Et ) ∆s . This is the left hand side of the equilib-
                                                                t
rium condition. At time t + 1, educational attainment equals Et+1 + θ∆st . This increases eﬃcient
labor supply by eφ(Et+1 ) (1 − st+1 ) φ0 (Et+1 ) θ∆st . To revert to the optimal plan by t + 2, educa-
tion needs to be adjusted by −∆st (1 − δ e ) . This increases current hours by eφ(Et+1 ) (1 − δ e ) ∆st .
Adding these two terms, multiplying by the wage wt+1 and the marginal utility of wealth c̃−γ         t+1 and
                                        ∗   ∗
discounting back to today at rate ng /R , gives the marginal utility gain on the right hand side of
the equilibrium condition.
    One can verify that the log-linearized dynamic system admits two eigenvalues outside the unit
circle and is saddle-point stable.
                                ³ Starting  ´ from k̃0 and E0 the economy ³         evolves
                                                                                          ´ along the stable
                                                                            ∗   ∗
arm of the dynamic system in c̃, s, k̃, E and converges towards c̃ , s , k̃ , E .   ∗   ∗
                                                                                                ³     ´
    We solve numerically this dynamic system for equilibrium consumption rules c̃ k̃, E and
                 ³     ´                                                       ³      ´           ³      ´
education rule s k̃, E as well as the derivative of the value function vE k̃, E , on a grid k̃i , Ej
                          ³       ´                                                                        i,j
                             ∗  ∗
around the steady state k̃ , E . Figure 7 presents the optimal consumption and education rules
for various educational
                  ³      attainments.
                         ´
    Denote Uaut k̃0 , E0 the welfare of the representative agent with initial capital k̃0 and human
                                   ³       ´       ³         ´
capital E0 . By assumption, Uaut k̃0 , E0 = va k̃0 , E0 A01−γ    0  N0 .37


A.4         Financial integration
Assume now that the economy integrates Þnancially with the rest of the world at time 0. Assume
the economy is suﬃciently small so as not to inßuence the world interest rate R∗ .
    Equating domestic and foreign returns to capital pins down the ratio of physical to human
capital-augmented labor input:
                                                 µ                 ¶1/1−α
                                                      sk (τ )
                                        k̃t   =                             ht                             (A.8)
                                                  δ k + ng ∗ − 1
                                              ≡ ω (τ ) ht ,

and the —constant— domestic wage w = (1 − α) ω (τ )α .
   Equation (A.8) implies that capital ßows are determined by the ratio of physical to human
capital, not by the amount of capital relative to steady state.
                             ³        ´ ³ ³          ´                      ´
  37
       For the log case, Uaut k̃0 , E0 = v a k̃0 , E0 + ln (A00 ) / (1 − βn) N0 .



                                                          30
    Since the world interest rate equals the growth-adjusted discount rate, consumption also jumps
to a constant level, consistent with the intertemporal budget constraint:
                                             Ã            ∞ µ
                                                                        !
                                                   χ (τ ) X   ng ∗ ¶t
                            c̃ = (R∗ − ng ∗ ) k0 +                    ht ,
                                                    R∗ t=0 R∗

where χ (τ ) = (1 − α (1 − τ )) ω (τ )α + τ (1 − δ k ) ω(τ ). χ (τ ) ht represents labor income net of trans-
fers.
    This consumption level diﬀers from the steady state autarky consumption c̃∗ . Subtracting c̃
from c̃∗ , we obtain:
                                 ³        ´ µ   ng ∗
                                                     ¶    X∞ µ     ¶
                                                               ng ∗ t ∗
               ∗           ∗    ∗   ∗
              c̃ − c̃ = (R − g n) k̃ − k̃0 + 1 − ∗ χ (τ )            (h − ht ) .
                                                R         t=0
                                                               R∗

This expression has two terms. The Þrst one obtains in a model with physical capital only. It
represents the —growth-adjusted— annuity value of foreign debt if the country were to borrow im-
mediately the amount k∗ − k0 to attain its steady state. Consumption is lower since the country
needs to roll-over foreign debt permanently. The second term reßects the eﬀect of the accumula-
tion path for human capital on domestic labor income χ (τ ) ht . If human capital is increasing, the
country will borrow against higher future labor income. This second eﬀect tends also to depress
long run consumption.
    Convergence in h is not instantaneous, since human capital can only be accumulated domesti-
cally. Even if the economy starts with the correct amount of physical capital k̃0 = k̃ ∗ , consumption
can be lower than in the autarky steady state if initial human capital is also below steady state,
h0 < h∗ .                                    ³       ´
    Denote welfare under integration as Uint k̃0 , E0 . It is immediate that it satisÞes
                                        ³         ´      ³        ´
                                    Uint k̃0 , E0   = v i k̃0 , E0 A001−γ
                                                               u (c̃)
                                                      =                 A01−γ
                                                            1 − ng ∗ /R∗ 0

and depends³only upon´ the sequence of human capital-augmented labor inputs {ht } . Hence, max-
imizing Uint k̃0 , E0 is equivalent to solving the following problem

                                                      ∞ µ
                                                      X        ¶
                                                          ng ∗
                               W (Et ) = max                        (1 − st ) eφ(Et )
                                              {st }            R∗
                                                      t=0
                                             s.t. Et+1 = (1 − δ e ) Et + θst                             (Q)
                                             s ≤ st ≤ s̄
                                             E0 given

    The Þrst order and envelope conditions associated with this problem are
                               µ ∗¶
                      φ(Et )    ng
                    e        =        W 0 (Et+1 ) θ + µt − µ̄t
                                 R∗
                                                       µ ∗¶
                    0                   0     φ(Et )     ng
                 W (Et ) = (1 − st ) φ (Et ) e       +         W 0 (Et+1 ) (1 − δ e )
                                                          R∗

    where µ̄t , resp. µt are the Lagrange multiplier associated with the constraints with s ≤ st ≤ s̄.


                                                          31
     One can show that the optimal schooling policy is bang-bang and oscillates around the steady
state. The linearized system exhibits a negative root, so that the state variable Et ‘bounces’ around
its steady state value E ∗ . This feature of the discrete time problem would go away in the continuous
time limit (in continuous time, a predetermined variable cannot ‘jump’ over the steady state). We
directly use the solution to the continuous limit of the model that converges to the steady state in
Þnite time.
     The optimal education policy that solves problem (Q) then takes a simple form:
                             
                              st = s̄                           Et < E
                               st = (E ∗ − (1 − δ e ) Et ) /θ if E ≤ Et ≤ E
                             
                               st = s                            E < Et

where Ē = [E ∗ − θs] / (1 − δ e ) and E = [E ∗ − θs̄] / (1 − δ e ) .38

A.5         Welfare Gains
                                                                                            ³      ´
To compare welfare under the two scenarios, we deÞne the Hicksian equivalent variation µ k̃0 , E0
as the percentage increase in consumption that brings³ the welfare
                                                              ´    of the representative agent under
autarky up to its level under integration. That is, µ k̃0 , E0 satisÞes

                                               ∞ µ     ¶
                        u (c̃)    01−γ    01−γ
                                               X   ng ∗ t ³ ³        ³         ´´´
                                 A     = A               u c̃t 1 + µ  k̃0 , E0     ,
                     1 − ng ∗ /R∗ 0       0
                                                   R∗
                                                    t=0
                                                                           ∞
where e
      c denotes the -constant- consumption level
                                            ³ under´ integration and {c̃t }0 ³denotes´ the con-
                                          a
sumption proÞle under autarky. Replacing U k̃0 , E0 and solving out for or µ k̃0 , E0 ,

                                                     ³         ´ 1
                                                                    1−γ
                                    ³        ´    Uint k̃0 , E0
                                   µ k̃0 , E0 =      ³         ´      −1
                                                  Uaut k̃0 , E0

for γ 6= 1. In the log case, we obtain
                            ³       ´
                          µ k̃0 , E0 = e(1−βn)(Uint (k̃0 ,E0 )−Uaut (k̃0 ,E0 ))/N0 − 1.
                              ³        ´
    Similarly, we can deÞne µc k̃0 , E0 as the Hicksian compensating variation, that is, the percent-
age decrease in consumption that ³ makes ´ the agent    in the integrated economy indiﬀerent between
                               c               µ(k̃0 ,E0 )
the two convergence paths: µ k̃0 , E0 = µ k̃ ,E +1 . In general, the compensating variation is
                                               ( 0 0)
smaller than the equivalent variation.

A.6         Marginal Welfare Gains
Assume that at time 0 the capital inßow authorized at t + 1 is increased by dκt+1 = ct+1 dc/c. With
log-preferences the discounted welfare gain at time 0 is equal to
                                       Ã+∞                    !
                                         X                       dc
                                              t+1           ∗
                                dU0 =        β (Rt+1 − R )          ,                          (A.9)
                                         t=0
                                                                  c
  38
       That E ≤ E ∗ ≤ Ēderives from s ≤ s∗ ≤ s̄.



                                                          32
   and the resulting equivalent variation satisÞes:
                                               ∞
                                               X
                                                      β t ln (1 + µ) = dU0 ,
                                                t=0

so that, for small variations:
                                                        +∞
                                                        X                             dc
                                       µ ≈ (1 − β)             β t+1 (Rt+1 − R∗ )        .
                                                                                      c
                                                         t=0

Using the deÞnition of the permanent value of the interest rate R̂, equation (10) obtains.


A.7      Development Accounting
The convergence gap is equal to
                                                   µ                     ¶    α
                                           ỹ0         δ + n + g ∗ k0        1−α   h0
                                               =                  .                   .                   (A.10)
                                           ỹ∗           sk (τ )    y0             h∗

The steady state gap is equal to
                                       µ                                             ¶     α
                          ỹ ∗                  sk (τ )          sk (τ us )               1−α    h∗
                                   =                       /                                          .   (A.11)
                         ỹ ∗,us           δ k + g ∗ .n − 1 δ k + g ∗ .nus − 1                  h∗,us

The Þrst term on the right hand side reßects the steady state diﬀerences in capital-output ratio:
(k∗ /y ∗ ) / (k ∗us /y ∗us ) . The second term reßects diﬀerences in steady state human capital accumu-
lation h∗ /h∗,us .


                                             Appendix B
                                        Calibrating the model


B.1     Constructing human capital stocks
We adopt a piecewise linear representation of the returns to schooling consistent with the empirical
evidence in Psacharopoulos (1994). The marginal return to education is set to 13.4% for the Þrst
four years of education, to 10.1% for the next four, and to 6.8% subsequently.

    The concept of human capital we use is the average educational attainment for people over age
25, i.e. the average number of years of schooling in the population older than 25. This is a stock
measure, as needed for the theory. To measure Et , we rely on the Barro and Lee (2001) updated
dataset (see also Jones (1997)). This dataset constructs educational attainment every Þve years
from 1960 to 2000 for a sample of 138 countries, according to the following perpetual inventory
method:                                                        X
                              Et = (1 − δ 25,t ) Et−5 + δ 25,t   π j uj ,                    (B.1)
                                                                               j

where Et represents educational attainment in year t, π j represents the educational attainment rate
for cell j —i.e. the fraction of a school-age cohort enrolled in education cell j— and uj represents
the duration of cell j, i.e. the number of years of education for that cell. δ 25,t represents the
depreciation rate for educational attainment and is equal to the fraction of the population aged

                                                               33
25-29 (see Barro and Lee (1993) for a derivation). Barro and Lee provide data on six educational
categories: incomplete primary, primary, incomplete secondary, secondary incomplete higher and
higher education.

   Using equation B.1, steady state educational attainment E ∗ is deÞned as:
                                              X
                                        E∗ =      π ∗j uj .
                                                      j

We measure steady state enrollment rates π ∗j and durations u∗j using the latest available data.
Because this data is not directly available from the Barro and Lee dataset, we use data from the
UNESCO World Education Report, 2000 that reports data on duration for primary, incomplete
secondary and secondary education as well as net enrollment rates for primary and secondary
education and gross enrollment rates for tertiary education for the year 1996 (or the latest available
year when 1996 is not available). We assume, as Barro and Lee, that incomplete cycles have a
duration equal to half the full cycle and that higher education lasts four years. Gross enrollment
ratios refer to the total enrollment in a given education group, regardless of age, divided by the
population of the age group which oﬃcially corresponds to that education cell. The net enrollment
ratio only includes enrollment for the age group corresponding to the oﬃcial school age of primary
education. DeÞning P RI, SEC and HIGH as the UNESCO enrollment rates, we obtain:

                                        π ∗p = P RI − SEC
                                        π ∗s = SEC − HIGH
                                        π ∗h = HIGH.

    We split the UNESCO enrollment rates into complete and incomplete cycles using the Barro
and Lee rates of completion for primary, secondary and higher education.
    Lastly, we annualize the depreciation rate and enrollment rates as follow: DeÞne st the annual
investment in schooling that satisÞes:

                                        Et+1 = (1 − δ e ) Et + θst

as in the model. Assuming that st is constant between t − 5 and t, it follows that
                                                  θ h                i
                         Et+5 = (1 − δ e )5 Et−5 + st 1 − (1 − δ e )5 .
                                                  δe
   Identifying with (B.1), we obtain:

                                δ e = 1 − (1 − δ 25,t )1/5
                                      δe X
                                st =         π̃ jt−nj ũj
                                       θ
                                              j
                                          1 δe
                                    =              [Et − (1 − δ 25,t ) Et−5 ]
                                          θ δ 25,t
                                          δe X              δeE ∗
                                s∗ =               π j uj =
                                          θ                   θ
                                              j



   Given an estimate of E ∗ and δ e , an estimate for θ is obtained from equation (A.5) as
                                       R∗
                                                   £       ∗ 0  ∗
                                                                  ¤
                                       ng − 1 + δ e 1 + E φ (E )
                               θ=                                   .
                                                 φ0 (E ∗ )

                                                    34
B.2      Constructing steady state capital stocks
Using data from Heston et al. (2002) Mark 6.1, we measure the average investment share ŝk in
gross GDP from 1985 to 1995. We then assume that the observed average investment rate is a
good approximation to the investment rate that would obtain in steady state under autarky:

                                                    δ k + n.g ∗ − 1
                                     ŝk = α.                           .                          (B.2)
                                                δ k + R∗ / (1 − τ ) − 1

    This approach is similar to Mankiw et al. (1992) who assume constant saving rates in their
tests of unconditional and conditional convergence. Similarly, the literature on calibrated business
cycle models often interprets historical averages as equivalent to steady state values (see Mendoza
and Tesar (1998) for an application to tax reform).39
    The capital ratio then follows:
                            µ ¶             · µ ¶          µ ∗ ¶¸
                              k0        1        k0          k          h0
                         ln     ∗
                                   =         ln       − ln     ∗
                                                                   + ln ∗ .                    (B.3)
                              k       1−α        y0          y          h




  39
    It is important to emphasize that this assumption does not imply that countries are estimated to be
close to their steady state. As a famous counter example, consider the Solow model. It assumes a constant
saving rate, but imposes no restrictions on the proximity of countries to their steady state.

                                                      35
                                                                          Equivalent Variation
                                          14

                                          12

                                          10

                                               8        MOZ
                 percent




                                               6
                                                         RWA
                                                       SLE
                                                     MDG
                                               4    UGA
                                                      ETH
                                                        EGY
                                                           CAF
                                                             BDI MUSTCD
                                               2             SLV
                                                            GTM
                                                            SEN
                                                           BEN MLI   TTO
                                                                   LKA
                                                                 IND
                                                               BGD
                                                                BFA
                                                           GHATGO
                                                             MRT PAK
                                                                 BOL
                                                             NER
                                                             NGA
                                                            CIV CMR
                                                                 COMCOL URY
                                                                   PNG
                                                                    GAB
                                                                   AGO
                                                                          BRB
                                                                         CHN FJI
                                                                   PRY
                                                                  ZAR
                                                                    MWIZAF
                                                                      DOM
                                                                      GIN
                                                                        NPLCHL
                                                                         IDN
                                                                SYR        TUN
                                                                         MAR
                                                                         HNDCOG
                                                                             CPV
                                                                               CRI
                                                                                TUR
                                                                                NIC MYS
                                                                                     ARG
                                                                          BWA PHL   PAN
                                                                                    VENCYP
                                                                                        GNB
                                                                                      IRN
                                                                                       ECU
                                                                                       ZWEHKG
                                                                                         BRA GUY
                                                                                           PER                             SGP
                                               0                                         MEX
                                                                                        DZA
                                                                                        ZMB  LSO
                                                                                              JAM ISR        KOR
                                                                                                           THA TZA

                                                    0         .2          .4         .6          .8        1         1.2    1.4   1.6
                                                                               capital ratio (k/k*) 1995




Figure 1: International Financial Integration, benchmark case.
The thin solid line corresponds to the theoretical gains from international Þnancial integration as a function
of the capital ratio k/k∗ for a country with the same population growth rate as the U.S.




                                                                       Productivity Catch-Up
                                                                               HKG
                                               .8




                                                                               SGP


                                                                       CYP
                                               .6




                                                                               BRB         ISR
                 relative productivity, 1995




                                                                               MUS
                                                                                 GAB
                                                                                                               TTO
                                                                                                                ARG
                                               .4




                                                                    KOR                            URY
                                                                                 MYSCHL            ZAF
                                                                     BWA                 PRY                               VEN
                                                                               COL          MEX
                                                                    TUNBRAEGY GTMTUR
                                                                   SYR                                 SLV
                                                             THA          PAN FJI     IRN        CRI
                                               .2




                                                                         DZA     PNG
                                                                       DOM
                                                                       PER
                                                             MARIDN
                                                           CPV    ECU LKABOL
                                                                        JAM   GIN
                                                        ZWE               CIV
                                                                          PHL
                                                         CHN
                                                           PAK    UGAHNDSEN   CMR
                                                    COG GHAINDBGD
                                                                GUY
                                                                    BENMRT
                                                                        MDG          MOZ
                                                                                   AGO       NIC
                                                            TCDNPL TGO NGA NER    SLE
                                                                                 CAF
                                                       MWIZMB  BFA
                                                             BDI
                                                             ETHMLI       RWA LSO
                                                    GNB
                                                     TZA         ZAR
                                               0




                                                    0                     .2                  .4                     .6           .8
                                                                           relative productivity, 1960




 Figure 2: Relative Productivity Change, A0 /Aus
                                              0 for non-OECD economies, 1960 to 1995.




                                                                                                 36
                                                                Panel A: Financial Integration                                        Panel B: Productivity Catch-Up (25, 50 and 75%)
                                                                                                                                                                                                                         HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   SGP   HKG
                                                 1000




                                                                                                                                        1000
                                                                                                                HKG                                                                                                SGP   HKG
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                                       CYP         SGP
                                                                                                                                                                                                    BRB
                                                                                                                                                                                          KORGABMUS    CYP
                                                                                                          SGP                                                                                         ISR
                                                                                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                          T TO
         PDV of output, financial integr ation
                                                 800




                                                                                                                                                                                       URY




                                                                                                                                                   800
                                                                                                                                                                                      MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL           BRB
                                                                                                                                                                              BRA BWAZAF
                                                                                                                                                                                 MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                  VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                 PRY            MUS    CYP
                                                                                                                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                                                                                                          THATUR
                                                                                                                                                                           CRI
                                                                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                                                                            F JICOL
                                                                                                                                                                            TUN
                                                                                                                                                                           PAN
                                                                                                                                                                            GTM               GAB
                                                                                                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                                                                                                         DZASLV
                                                                                                                           PDV of output, catch-up
                                                                                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                                                                                       PNG
                                                                                                                                                                     ECU   EGY            KOR       BRB
                                                                                              CYP                                                                   M DOM
                                                                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                    JAM
                                                                                                                                                                     CPV
                                                                                                                                                                    GIN
                                                                                                                                                                   PHL
                                                                                                                                                                    LKA
                                                                                                                                                                    BOLAR                ARG
                                                                                                                                                                                          T TO
                                                                                                                                                                  ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                                                                                   CIV                 URY
                                                                                          BRBISR                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                               GUY
                                                                                                                                                             AGO
                                                                                                                                                            LSO
                                                                                                                                                                HND
                                                                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                                                              COGPAK
                                                                                                                                                               COM
                                                                                                                                                               NIC
                                                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                               SEN
                                                                                                                                                              GHA
                                                                                                                                                              BGD
                                                                                                                                                               UGA
                                                                                                                                                             NPL
                                                                                                                                                             BEN
                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                             CAF
                                                                                                                                                             MOZ
                                                                                                                                                             SLERT
                                                                                                                                                               DG
                                                                                                                                                                                      MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL       MUS
                                                                                                                                                           TGO
                                                                                                                                                           NER
                                                                                                                                                           BFA
                                                                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                                                                            TCD
                                                                                                                                                          ZMB
                                                                                                                                                            MLI
                                                                                                                                                          GNB
                                                                                                                                                          MWI
                                                                                                                                                          RWA
                                                                                                                                                           BDI
                                                                                                                                                          ETH
                                                                                                                                                         TZA                         ZAF
                                                                                                                                                         ZAR                      VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                  BWA
                                                                                                                                                                                 MEX          GAB
                                                 600




                                                                                        MUS
                                                                                                                                        600
                                                                                                                                                                              BRAPRY
                                                                                                                                                                            TUN
                                                                                                                                                                          THA
                                                                                                                                                                            GTMCOL
                                                                                                                                                                             TUR          KOR
                                                                                                                                                                                          T TO
                                                                                                                                                                           PAN
                                                                                                                                                                           CRI
                                                                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                                                                            F
                                                                                                                                                                            SLV
                                                                                                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                                                                                                           EGYJI         ARG
                                                                                    GAB                                                                                  DZA
                                                                                                                                                                       PER             URY
                                                                                                                                                                     ECUPNG
                                                                                                                                                                      DOM
                                                                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                                                                                                                     CPV              MYS
                                                                                                                                                                                      CHL
                                                                                                                                                                    JAM
                                                                                                                                                                    M
                                                                                                                                                                    GIN
                                                                                                                                                                    LKA
                                                                                                                                                                    BOL
                                                                                                                                                                   PHL AR            ZAF
                                                                                  TTO                                                                             ZWE
                                                                                                                                                                   CIV
                                                                                                                                                                 CHN
                                                                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                                                                HND
                                                                                                                                                                 PAK
                                                                                 ARG                                                                           GUY
                                                                                                                                                              COG
                                                                                                                                                               COM
                                                                                                                                                               NIC
                                                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                               SEN
                                                                                                                                                              BGD
                                                                                                                                                              GHA
                                                                                                                                                               UGA                VEN
                                                                                                                                                                                  BWA
                                                                               URYKOR                                                                        M
                                                                                                                                                             AGO
                                                                                                                                                             BEN
                                                                                                                                                             NPL
                                                                                                                                                             M
                                                                                                                                                             CAF
                                                                                                                                                             MOZ
                                                                                                                                                             SLE
                                                                                                                                                            LSO
                                                                                                                                                            TGO
                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                            BFA
                                                                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                                                                            TCD RT
                                                                                                                                                               DG                MEX
                                                                                                                                                                                 PRY
                                                                                                                                                           RWA
                                                                                                                                                            MLI
                                                                                                                                                          ZMB
                                                                                                                                                           BDI
                                                                                                                                                          GNB
                                                                                                                                                          MWI
                                                                                                                                                          ETH                 BRA
                                                                                                                                                                               COL
                                                                              CHL                                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                                         ZAR                TUN
                                                                                                                                                                             TUR
                                                                                                                                                                            GTM
                                                                                                                                                                            SLV
                                                 400




                                                                              MYS                                                                                         THA
                                                                                                                                                                           EGY
                                                                                                                                                                           SYR
                                                                                                                                                                           PAN
                                                                                                                                                                           CRI
                                                                                                                                                                           IRN
                                                                                                                                                                            F JI
                                                                                                                             400




                                                                             ZAF
                                                                                                                                                                         DZA
                                                                                                                                                                        PNG
                                                                                                                                                                       PER
                                                                                                                                                                      DOM
                                                                                                                                                                     ECU
                                                                                                                                                                      IDN
                                                                            PRY
                                                                            BWA
                                                                            VEN                                                                                     MCPV
                                                                                                                                                                    JAM
                                                                                                                                                                    GIN
                                                                                                                                                                    LKA
                                                                                                                                                                    BOLAR
                                                                            MEX                                                                                    PHL
                                                                                                                                                                   CIV
                                                                                                                                                                  ZWE
                                                                          COL                                                                                    CHN
                                                                                                                                                                CMR
                                                                                                                                                                HND
                                                                                                                                                                 PAK
                                                                        GTM
                                                                          BRA
                                                                         SLV
                                                                        TUN
                                                                         TUR
                                                                       EGY                                                                                     COM
                                                                                                                                                               GUY
                                                                                                                                                                IND
                                                                                                                                                              COG
                                                                                                                                                               NIC
                                                                                                                                                               SEN
                                                                                                                                                              BGD
                                                                                                                                                               UGA
                                                                       SYR
                                                                        FJI
                                                                        CRI
                                                                       PAN
                                                                       IRN                                                                                   M
                                                                                                                                                             MGHA
                                                                                                                                                             AGO
                                                                                                                                                             BEN
                                                                                                                                                             CAF
                                                                                                                                                             MOZRT
                                                                                                                                                               DG
                                                                                                                                                             NPL
                                                                                                                                                             SLE
                                                                       THA                                                                                  LSO
                                                                                                                                                            NGA
                                                                                                                                                            TCD
                                                                                                                                                            TGO
                                                                                                                                                            NER
                                                                                                                                                            BFA
                                                                                                                                                            MLI
                                                                                                                                                           RWA
                                                                                                                                                           BDI
                                                                     DZA                                                                                  ZMB
                                                                                                                                                          ETH
                                                                                                                                                          GNB
                                                                                                                                                          MWI
                                                                    PNG                                                                                  ZAR
                                                                                                                                                         TZA
                                                 200




                                                                                                                                        200




                                                                   DOM
                                                                    PER
                                                                   IDN
                                                                  ECU
                                                                  MAR
                                                                  CPV
                                                                 BOL
                                                                  GIN
                                                                 LKA
                                                                 JAM
                                                                CIV
                                                                PHL
                                                               ZWE
                                                              CMR
                                                               CHN
                                                               PAK
                                                              HND
                                                              IND
                                                             COM
                                                             UGA
                                                             SEN
                                                             COG
                                                              GUY
                                                             BGD
                                                             NIC
                                                           MGHA
                                                           BEN
                                                           MDG
                                                           MOZ
                                                           SLERT
                                                            AGO
                                                           CAF
                                                           NPL
                                                          TGO
                                                          NGA
                                                          TCD
                                                          NER
                                                          LSO
                                                          BFA
                                                          RWA
                                                          MLI
                                                         MBDI
                                                         ETH
                                                           WI
                                                         ZMB
                                                         GNB
                                                        ZAR
                                                        TZA
                                                                                                                                        0
                                                 0




                                                        0         200        400        600         800         1000                                     0          200         400        600               800         1000
                                                                          PDV of output, autarky                                                                             PDV of output, autarky




Figure 3: Domestic Output, Þnancial integration and productivity catch-up.Change in the PDV
of domestic output from Þnancial integration and a 25% productivity catch-up with the United States under
autarky. Year is 1995.




                                                                                                                      37
Figure 4: Sample Convergence Trajectories; Thick line: Autarky. Dashed line: Financial
Integration. k0 = 0.5k ∗ and E0 = 0.6E ∗ . Calibrated to the US economy. See footnote 23 for
parameter values.




                                            38
Figure 5: Relative Output Path; Solid black line: physical capital only; Dashed black line: model with
distortions; Solid blue line: model without distortions. Parameters are calibrated to the average developing
country.




                                                    39
                                       Panel A: Convergence Gap                                                            Panel B: Physical Capital Gap
                        1                                                                                     1
                                    Z MB
log convergence gap




                                     NER                      Z AF                                                                                      KOR    SGP
                                       CAF
                                     TGO     COG
                                              NICRBOL




                                                                                       log capital gap
                        0         MWIMLI
                                   RWA
                                    MOZ BEN
                                      SLE
                                    UGA
                                           SEN
                                         LSO
                                          BGD  GUY
                                               HND
                                              CM   PHL ECU
                                                     PNG  PAN
                                                          FJI
                                                        PER
                                                        GTM
                                                      JAM
                                                        SLV PRY
                                                          CRI
                                                           TURMEX
                                                              VEN
                                                             BRA  ARG
                                                                 TTO
                                                                URY  BRBISR HKG                               0               LSO CHN JAM
                                                                                                                              NPL IND    IDNPERIRN
                                                                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                                                              CRIBRA
                                                                                                                                                 BWA
                                                                                                                                                  ME MYS
                                                                                                                                                    CHL
                                                                                                                                                     XARG
                                                                                                                                                           CYP
                                                                                                                                                            ISRHKG
                                         NPL INDCHN DOM SYR
                                                         DZA
                                                          COL
                                                           TUN
                                                           IRN
                                                             BWA MYS
                                                                CHL KORCYP SGP
                                                                   MUS                                                               GUY
                                                                                                                                    HND    ECU
                                                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                                       PHL    PAN
                                                                                                                                             DZA
                                                                                                                                              FJI
                                                                                                                                               TUN
                                                                                                                                              COL VE
                                                                                                                                                PRY URYMUS
                                                                                                                                                     N BRB
                                                     IDN
                                                      EGY                                                                      BGD
                                                                                                                          MLIBEN
                                                                                                                        MWI        NIC
                                                                                                                                  COG
                                                                                                                                   CMRBOLPNGSYR
                                                                                                                                            SLV
                                                                                                                                            GTM   ZAFTTO
                                                                                                                         ZMBCAFSEN
                                                                                                                          TGO
                                                                                                                        RWA
                                                                                                                          NER
                                                                                                                          SLE             EGY
                                                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                                                         UGA
                        -1                                                                                    -1

                        -2                                                                                    -2

                        -3                                                                                    -3
                             -4            -3          -2       -1                 0                               -4           -3         -2        -1               0
                                             log development gap                                                                  log development gap


                                       Panel C: Human Capital Gap                                                             Panel D: Productivity Gap
                        1                                                                                     1
log human capital gap




                                                                                       log productivity gap




                        0                                                                                     0                                                 SGP
                                                                                                                                                                HKG
                                                                 URY KORCYPHKG
                                                                      BRB    SGP                                                                       MUS
                                                    PHLJAM
                                                       EGY PAN
                                                            IRNZ AF
                                                               MEX
                                                               VEN ARG
                                                                  TTO
                                                                 CHL
                                                                  MYS    ISR                                                                     BWA     BRBISR
                                                                                                                                                           CYP
                                                GUY
                                                  BOL IDN DZA
                                                         PERTUR
                                                           CRI
                                                         SLVTUN     MUS                                                                     GTM      TTO
                                  MWITGO LSO COG
                                             CMNICHN
                                                HND
                                                 CR     ECUCOL
                                                           FJI
                                                         SYR  BRA
                                                             PRY
                                                              BWA                                                                             COL
                                                                                                                                            SYRTUN
                                                                                                                                                PRY
                                                                                                                                                 BRACHL
                                                                                                                                                    URY
                                                                                                                                                     MYS
                                    Z
                                   RWAMB
                                    MOZ
                                    UGA
                                     MLI
                                     NER NPL
                                          BGD
                                        BEN
                                      SLE
                                       CAF   I
                                           SENND      PNG
                                                      DOMGTM                                                                              EGY
                                                                                                                                         DOM
                                                                                                                                         PNGSLV   VE
                                                                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                                                              CRI
                                                                                                                                               IRN
                                                                                                                                             DZA
                                                                                                                                              FJI ME
                                                                                                                                                  ZAFXARG
                                                                                                                                                     N  KOR
                        -1                                                                                    -1                         IDNPER
                                                                                                                                              PAN
                                                                                                                                  IND
                                                                                                                                   CMR     ECU
                                                                                                                                      BOLJAM
                                                                                                                         UGA SEN     CHN
                                                                                                                                    HND
                                                                                                                         MOZ
                                                                                                                          SLE  BGD
                                                                                                                             BEN   NIC
                                                                                                                                  COG  PHL
                                                                                                                              NPL
                                                                                                                            CAF      GUY
                        -2                                                                                    -2          NER
                                                                                                                          MLI
                                                                                                                        RWA
                                                                                                                          TGOLSO
                                                                                                                        MWI
                                                                                                                         ZMB
                        -3                                                                                    -3
                             -4            -3          -2       -1                 0                               -4           -3         -2        -1               0
                                             log development gap                                                                  log development gap




                                               Figure 6: Development Accounting.Year is 1995.




                                                                             40
Figure 7: Optimal Consumption and Education rules for various Educational Attainment.
Calibrated to the US economy. See footnote 23 for parameter values.




                                         41
