                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           MARIJUANA DECRIMINALIZATION:
                        WHAT DOES IT MEAN IN THE UNITED STATES?

                                          Rosalie Liccardo Pacula
                                             Jamie F. Chriqui
                                               Joanna King

                                           Working Paper 9690
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9690


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2003




Research presented in this paper was supported by a grant from the National Institute on Drug Abuse
(R01DA12724) to RAND. Additional support for analysis time of Dr. Chriqui and Ms. King was provided
by the ImpacTeen Project, A Robert Wood Johnson Foundation Initiative. The opinions expressed in this
paper are those of the authors and do not reflect the opinions of the authors’ institutions or funding agencies.
We gratefully acknowledge research assistance from Karen Ross, who spent considerable effort preparing
the NELS data for analysis. We also gratefully acknowledge helpful comments from Frank Chaloupka, Jon
Caulkins, Mark Kleiman, Peter Reuter, and Gary Zarkin on an earlier draft of this paper. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Rosalie Liccardo Pacula, Jamie F. Chriqui, and Joanna King. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.
Marijuana Decriminalization: What does it mean in the United States?
Rosalie Licardo Pacula, Jamie F. Chriqui, and Joanna King
NBER Working Paper No. 9690
May 2003
JEL No. I1, K4

                                           ABSTRACT

It is well known in the drug policy field that eleven states reduced the criminal sanctions associated
with possession of small amounts of marijuana. In this paper we review the eleven original
decriminalization statutes, documenting key dimensions of these laws and identifying their common

denominator. We then examine state laws in effect as of December 31, 1999, along the same key
dimensions and show that it is impossible to uniquely identify the so-called decriminalized states.

We show the extent to which non-decriminalized states have also reduced penalties associated with
possession of small amounts of marijuana as early as 1989, calling into question the interpretation
of studies evaluating this policy during the past decade. We conclude by showing that the inclusion
of legal dimensions of the policy does not diminish the association identified between

decriminalization and recent use, raising questions about how researchers should interpret such
findings.

Rosalie Liccardo Pacula                               Jamie F. Chriqui
RAND                                                  The MayaTech Corporation
1700 Main Street                                      1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 900
PO Box 2138                                           Silver Spring, MD 20910
Santa Monica, CA 90407-2138                           jchriqui@mayatech.com
and NBER
pacula@rand.org

Joanna King
The Maya Tech Corporation
1100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 900
Silver Spring, MD 20910
jking@mayatech.com
        A growing amount of attention has been given to the recent rise in marijuana arrests in

the popular press, with many articles mentioning that this increase in arrest rates has occurred

despite stable use rates. Critics of the federal government’s current marijuana policy interpret

the arrest and use trends as evidence of a crack-down by law enforcement against non-violent

drug offenders (Thomas, 1998; Gettman, 2000a). They argue that this policy position has placed

an unnecessary burden on the criminal justice system and introduced otherwise law-abiding

citizens to the criminal justice system. Advocates argue in favor of a change in the legal status

of marijuana, suggesting that legalization would save the criminal justice system while

minimally affecting demand. Claims regarding the impact of legalization on demand are based

on evidence from selected studies examining the effects of marijuana decriminalization on

marijuana use.

        The empirical evidence examining the effect of decriminalization policy on use rates in

the United States is actually quite mixed. A number of studies conducted shortly after the laws

took effect in the 1970s found either no change in marijuana use or an increase that was slight

and temporary (Single, 1989; Maloff, 1981; Johnston, O’Malley and Bachman, 1981).

Subsequent studies relying on cross-state variation in decriminalization status using more recent

data from the 1980s and 1990s had mixed results, with some studies showing no effect (Pacula,

1998; Thies and Register, 1993; DiNardo & Lemieux, 1992) and other studies showing a positive

and statistically significant effect (Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999; Chaloupka et al, 1999;

Chaloupka, Grossman and Tauras, 1999; Model, 1993). Although several hypotheses have been

offered for the inconsistency in findings, little empirical work has been done trying to explore

this issue.




                                                 3
        It is widely recognized in the drug policy field that eleven states enacted legislation

during the 1970s that reduced the criminal sanctions associated with possession of small amounts

of marijuana. In 1973, Oregon was the first to lower its penalties for marijuana. It was followed

by Colorado, Alaska, and Ohio in 1975; California, Maine and Minnesota in 1976; Mississippi,

New York and North Carolina in 1977; and Nebraska in 1978 (MacCoun and Reuter, 2001).1

These eleven states, with the addition of Arizona in 1996, have commonly been referred to in the

literature and policy debate as “decriminalized” states and are the states that are commonly

grouped together in empirical analyses. For ease of exposition, we too will refer to these states

as “decriminalized states.” Despite a common label, little work has been done documenting the

elements of these laws that actually differentiate them from the remaining state laws.

        In this paper we review the eleven original decriminalization statutes from the 1970s,

documenting key dimensions of these laws and identifying the common denominator across each

of these. We then examine state laws in effect as of December 31, 1999, along the same key

dimensions identified in the eleven original decriminalization statutes and show that it is

impossible to uniquely identify the so-called decriminalized states using the common

denominator of the statutes enacted during the 1970s. We show the extent to which non-

decriminalized states have also reduced penalties associated with possession of small amounts of

marijuana and show that many of these lower penalties existed as early as 1989, calling into

question the interpretation of studies evaluating the effects of decriminalization using data from

the past decade.     We then reconsider the association between decriminalization and use rates by

examining how this association changes with the inclusion of particular legal dimensions of the


1
  South Dakota also enacted a decriminalization provision in 1977, but it was immediately repealed. Only two states
have changed their status since these original laws were passed. In 1990, Alaska modified its statute and
recriminalized possession of marijuana. In 1996, Arizona decriminalized possession of small amounts of
marijuana.


                                                        4
policy using a nationally representative sample of high school students from the 1990 National

Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS).

I. The Data

         The information on state marijuana laws presented in this paper represents original

legislative data collected from state statutes by lawyers and policy analysts at The MayaTech

Corporation. State-level penalty information for first offence marijuana possession offences was

collected for all states from 1989 through 1999.2 In addition, historical statutes for the eleven

states that decriminalized during the 1970s were also collected and evaluated. Penalties that

were captured included the minimum and maximum jail term, minimum and maximum fine,

conditional discharge provisions, diversion provisions, and expungement provisions for the

lowest two quantity trigger amounts. States differ in the level of penalty applied based on the

quantity of marijuana an offender is caught possessing. For ease of comparison, we focus our

analyses in this paper on penalties applying to the lowest quantity amount specified in these

laws, typically specified as “any” amount. Certain states impose harsher penalties for possession

violations involving larger quantities, represented through higher trigger amounts (e.g. amounts

greater than one ounce).3

         State statutes on laws in effect as of December 31st of each year were obtained from

Westlaw and hard copies of state statutory compilations. For each state and year, a legislative

analyst reviewed and coded the provisions of the law using an analytic form designed to capture

consistent data across the states. The coding sheets and laws were then reviewed by an attorney

to validate and correct the coding, as necessary. In the case of the eleven original


2
  Throughout this paper, we use the term “state” to refer to the 50 states and the District of Columbia. In all but a
few specified cases, the data presented herein pertain to first-time marijuana possession offenses.
3
  For more information on the specific penalties associated with possession of higher quantities, see Illicit Drug
Policies: Selected Laws from the 50 States (Chriqui et al., 2002).


                                                           5
decriminalization statutes from the 1970s, an attorney examined each trying to identify common

elements applied in all eleven states using the same analytic form, although examining many of

the elements in greater detail.

         Our conditional discharge/diversion variable reflects instances where compliance with

the specified conditions leads to a dismissal of charges. For instance, if a state had a probation

provision and the outcome of successful completion of the conditions/terms of probation was to

discharge and dismiss the charges, then this would be captured under “Conditional Discharge--

Probation.” The rationale was to be able to illustrate the concept of a conditional discharge

whether or not something was strictly termed “conditional discharge,” “diversion program” or

the like.4

         When researchers found other penalties such as probation or expungement provisions for

which applicability to the lowest MJ categories of offenses was not made explicit, they were

presumed to be applicable. For expungement, the inquiry was whether records of arrest,

conviction, and/or other disposition could be expunged. Disincluded were the relatively rare

provisions authorizing expungement only if the prosecutor decided there was insufficient

evidence to justify proceeding with the charges, or the conviction was later overturned on appeal

or by reason of a subsequent pardon. In such cases, even when the provision was termed

expungement or expunction, the expungement variable was given a negative ascription and

explanations were provided.




4
  Situations in which a penalty option was termed probation and successful completion did not result in discharge
and dismissal were coded under “Other Penalties--Probation.” Variations were captured textually in comments
fields. In the few situations in which unconditional discharges were authorized, researchers were instructed to code
in the affirmative under “CD/Div” and to note in comments fields the fact that no conditions were attached as well
as the corresponding eligibility requirements and the end result, typically complete discharge and dismissal of
charges and that it does not constitute a conviction. Care was taken to differentiate this permutation from other CD
programs where enumerated conditions must be met.


                                                         6
II. Decriminalization during the 1970s

        The “Shaffer Commission,” formally known as the National Commission on Marijuana

and Drug Abuse, technically defined the term decriminalization in the United States in 1972.

Decriminalization was defined as those policies in which possession of marijuana for personal

use or casual distribution of small amounts for no remuneration was not considered a criminal

offense (National Commission on Marijuana and Drug Abuse, 1972). State laws that retained

the level of offense corresponding to a crime, which includes misdemeanor and felony charges,

but simply lowered the severity of penalties for possession of small amounts of marijuana were

not to be properly termed decriminalized.

        An examination of the state statutes passed by the original eleven decriminalized states

reveals that many states do not meet this narrow definition. Table 1 presents summary

information on the classification of the possession offense, the amount of marijuana the law

applied to, the applicability of the reduced penalties to subsequent offenses, and the maximum

fine and minimum jail time specified in these eleven statutes. A number of interesting findings

are evident from these original statutes. First, two of the original statutes retain marijuana

possession as a criminal offense (California and North Carolina).5 We find this particularly

interesting given that the policy of retaining a criminal offense contradicts the definition of

decriminalization espoused by the National Commission. Second, the definitions of what

constitutes a small amount of marijuana also vary significantly across these eleven state statutes.

For example, Ohio defines “small” as possession of less than 100 grams (almost four ounces)

while California, Maine, Mississippi, Nebraska and Oregon define small as generally an ounce or


5
 Both felony and misdemeanor classifications are legally criminal offenses and produce a criminal record.
However, Minnesota’s “petty misdemeanor” and Ohio’s “minor misdemeanor” offense statuses are not classified as
criminal offenses because their legal statutes clearly specify that the offense charge would not be considered a
criminal offense.


                                                       7
less. Maine, Minnesota, New York and North Carolina do not explicitly define “small” in their

statutes but leave it up to the courts to decide. Third, a number of the original decriminalization

states only allowed reduced penalties for first time offenders, not repeat offenders. States that

only reduced penalties for first time offenders often had much harsher penalties for second time

offenders, suggesting that they were not really softening their penalties against use but were

instead trying to reduce some of the burden on law enforcement and the courts.

        The only common denominator across these eleven statutes was the lack of imposition of

minimum jail/prison terms. In some cases these reduced penalties applied to first and subsequent

offenses (e.g., Alaska, California and Colorado) and in other cases the reduced penalties only

applied to first time offenders (e.g., Minnesota, Mississippi and North Carolina). The common

denominator of not specifying minimum jail or prison sentences for first-time possession

offenders caught possessing small amounts of marijuana represents a characterization of these

laws that is based on “depenalization,” rather than decriminalization. The problem with such a

characterization of the statutes, as will be illustrated in the next section, is that today it does not

allow us to uniquely identify those states commonly viewed as decriminalized.



III. Decriminalization today.

If we strictly apply the definition used by the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug

Abuse (1972) to each state’s 1999 penalty structure, four of the so-called decriminalized states

have retained first time marijuana offenses as a criminal offense (see Table 2).6 Arizona

specifies first time marijuana possession offenses as a felony, while Alaska, California, and

6
  There are 12 states labeled as decriminalized in the 1999 data because in 1996 Arizona decriminalized marijuana
possession offences in 1996 Drug Medicalization, Prevention and Control Act (Proposition 200). The act states that
first and second time marijuana offenders would not be imprisoned for simple possession or use, regardless of the




                                                        8
North Carolina specify it as a misdemeanor. Eight of the twelve decriminalized states lower the

offense status to a non-criminal characterization. What is important to note, however, is that

seven non-decriminalized states (Connecticut, Louisiana, Massachusetts, New Jersey, Vermont,

Wisconsin, and West Virginia) also specify first time marijuana possession offenses as non-

criminal offenses. Thus, reducing the criminal status of marijuana possession offenses clearly

does not uniquely identify the twelve “decriminalized” states.

        States can also reduce the penalties associated with an offense through conditional

discharge and expungement provisions. A conditional discharge provision enables convicted

offenders to choose participation in alternative diversion programs (e.g. community service, drug

treatment, drug education, etc) where, if the offender successfully completed the program, s/he

would be afforded the opportunity to have the original charges dismissed. With a few exceptions,

the charge, however, remains part of the individual’s criminal record. Some states include

expungement of the offense with their conditional discharge provisions (although expungement

provisions can exist outside of conditional discharge provisions as well) in essence removing the

incident from the individual’s criminal record, assuming that specific conditions are met (e.g.,

community service, probation, etc). The possible removal of the criminal charge through

expungement, therefore, may be the primary method by which some decriminalized states reduce

the criminality of the possession offense.

        Table 3 illustrates the number of states that provide the opportunity for expungement of a

criminal charge by decriminalization status and status offense. Twenty-one states (41%) allow

for expungement of the offense from the record, only four of which are decriminalized states.

More importantly, two out of the four decriminalized states that have retained marijuana


amount of marijuana with which they were caught; however, they could be subject to probation, a fine and/or
community service.


                                                        9
possession as a criminal offense do not allow for expungement. These findings further call into

question why some states are labeled decriminalized when (a) some of those states given the

label have not in fact reduced or rescinded the criminal status of these offenses, and (b) some

states that are not given the label also reduce the impact of criminal status of these offenses

either through changes in status offenses or through the inclusion of expungement provisions.

        One possible explanation for these findings is that original differences in state policies

that existed in the late 1970s became mute as non-decriminalized states changed their penalties

over time, looking more like decriminalized states. Evidence from statutes in effect in late 1989

suggests that any convergence in policies that might have occurred over time happened fairly

quickly (see Table 4). By December 1989, six non-decriminalized states had already lowered the

status offense of marijuana possession to a non-criminal offense and another twelve non-

decriminalized states had statutory conditions for expungement of the record.

        Perhaps the problem is our literal interpretation of “decriminalization” and reliance on the

definition provided by the National Commission. It was clear in the eleven original statutes

(Table 1) that the only common denominator across these original statutes was the removal of

jail time. If we use this as our alternative standard for identification of decriminalized states, or

look a little more generally at monetary fines and jail time imposed across decriminalized and

non-decriminalized states, we begin to see some minor differences across non-decriminalized

and decriminalized states in 1989. Table 5 reveals that decriminalized states have on average

lower minimum and maximum statutory jail terms specified, although only the differences in

maximum jail terms are statistically significant. Apparent differences in minimum and

maximum fines across decriminalized and non-decriminalized states are not statistically

significant.




                                                  10
        When we take into account conditional discharge provisions, which enable convicted

offenders to accept alternative sanctions (such as drug treatment, drug education, and/or

community service) prefatory to the dismissal of charges, we find that there are very few real

differences in mandatory jail time statutorily imposed across decriminalized and non

decriminalized states in 1989 (see Table 6). Thirty-one of the thirty-eight non-decriminalized

states that have statutory maximum jail terms greater than a day allow for conditional discharge

of first time offenders. Thus, only seven states statutorily impose jail time that cannot be

circumvented via diversion provisions, again reinforcing the conclusion that hypothesized

differences in decriminalized versus non-decriminalized states are not statutorily based.



IV. Decriminalization: why does it matter?

        Perhaps it is not surprising, in light of the previous discussion, that the current literature

examining the effect of marijuana decriminalization on marijuana use has generated such

inconsistent results (see Pacula et al., 2001, for a comprehensive review). The eleven (and since

1996 twelve) states that are typically considered decriminalized do not appear to be homogenous

in significant ways that enable them to be differentiable from non-decriminalized states, at least

from a statutory basis.7 What variation then does this variable capture in empirical analyses

conducted on data during the 1990’s and how should we interpret its significance or

insignificance?

        In an effort to try to answer these questions, we conduct our own analysis of the effect of

this policy and its principal dimensions on the use of marijuana using a nationally representative


7
  There may be other aspects of these policies, not captured herein, that make them differentiable from non-
decriminalized states, such as the implementation of these policies, the willingness to arrest and/or prosecute
offenders, and/or the symbolism of their enactment. These alternative hypotheses are discussed in greater detail
later in the paper.


                                                        11
sample of high school students from the National Educational Longitudinal Survey (NELS).

Annual and thirty-day prevalence measures of marijuana use are estimated using probit analysis,

controlling for a standard set of regressors typically included in marijuana demand equations (see

Pacula et al, 2001; Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999; Chaloupka et al. 1999; Thies and Register, 1993;

DiNardo & Lemieux, 1992). Systematically, different dimensions of marijuana depenalization

policies (e.g. change in status offense, reduced jail time, etc) are included in the empirical

specification to determine the effect these additional controls have on the findings of the

marijuana decriminalization dummy variable. By building the empirical models in this manner,

we can evaluate whether some of the inconsistencies in the previous literature are due to

differences in how the decriminalization policy was operationalized.8 In addition, these models

should provide some insight into what the decriminalized dummy variable actually represents.

        Data from the first follow-up wave of the National Educational Longitudinal Survey

(NELS), conducted in Spring of 1990, is being used for this analysis. The NELS is a large-scale,

school-based, longitudinal study that follows a nationally representative sample of American

eighth graders in 1988 as they move through the U.S. school system and into activities of early

adulthood. In spring of 1988, questionnaires and subject-specific achievement tests were given

to 24,599 students in more than 1,000 public and private schools in the spring of 1988. Separate

surveys were also administered to the students' parents, teachers, and school principals at this

time. Follow-ups of the respondents were conducted in the spring of 1990, when most of the


8
  Different studies operationalized the policy of decriminalization in different ways. Some analyses include only an
indicator for decriminalization (DiNardo & Lemiux, 1992; Thies and Register, 1993), while others include measures
of fines and/or jail time (Chaloupka et al, 1999; Chaloupka, Grossman and Tauras, 1999). These subtle differences
can have profound effects on the interpretation of the decriminalization dummy variable in particular analyses given
that the additional measures (e.g. jail time) capture key dimensions along which the general policy of
decriminalization is supposed to differ. In fact, a recent study by Williams and Dolemon (2000) in which they
examined the impact of different Australian depenalization regimes on consumption employing individual-level data
from the 1988, 1991, 1993, 1995 and 1998 National Drug Strategy Household Surveys (NDSHS) shows that the
impact of Australian decriminalization on demand is also sensitive to the inclusion of fine and incarceration data.


                                                        12
youth were sophomores in high school, and then in 1992, when most were high school seniors.

A fourth and fifth follow-up, conducted in spring of 1994 and 2000 respectively, have also been

conducted documenting post-high school educational and labor market experiences of student

respondents. Although the retention rate has been fairly high, refresher samples were added in

the second and third follow-ups to ensure that cross sectional analyses of 10th and 12th graders

could be conducted on nationally representative samples from these grades. The first follow-up

includes responses from roughly 22,500 students, including almost 1,000 early dropouts. Only

those remaining in high school (n= 19,602) in 1990 are being included in this analysis so that

findings can be easily replicated using other national school-based surveys.

        Although the focus of the NELS is clearly to track educational performance, achievement

and subsequent job market entry and outcomes, significant information pertinent to estimating

demand equations for illicit drugs is also collected, including general demographics,

socioeconomic status, religiosity, family composition and living situation, family cohesion and

stressors, time spent in other activities, part-time work experience and income, and students’

perceptions and attitudes. Unlike many national surveys, including the Monitoring the Future

study, the NELS includes respondents from all 50 states so it is possible to maximize the

variation in state level policies.

        One limitation of the NELS for conducting analyses of substance use is that information

on past year (past month) illicit drug use is only available in the first and second follow-up

surveys. In each of these surveys, respondents were asked “How many times have you used

marijuana in the past 12 months (last 30 days)?” Categorical responses provided for each of

these questions were 0, 1-2, 3-19, and 20+ . A dichotomous indicator signifying use in the past




                                                 13
year (month) was constructed from this measure, with students indicating any positive use

(greater than 0 occasions) being assigned a value of 1.

       Because marijuana use information is only available for two years, it is not possible to

construct a long enough panel to identify policy effects separately from unobserved state

heterogeneity. Although this is a limitation of the current analysis, most of the recent

econometric studies examining the impact of decriminalization on marijuana use rely on cross-

sectional variation for policy identification because there has been so little variation in the

decriminalization dummy variable over time. Thus, by limiting our analysis to a single cross-

section of data, we make our current examination of the policy consistent with previous

evaluations. However, future research should examine the extent to which findings obtained

from cross-sectional variation can be attributable to real policy affects.

       Table A1 in the appendix provides weighted descriptive statistics on the sample of 10th

grade students (1st follow up) who were included in this analysis. Observations are lost due to

missing information on various control variables (e.g. gender, ethnicity, parental education,

religious attendance, income, and hours worked), although approximately 1,500 observations are

lost due to missing information on marijuana use in the past year (month). Approximately 14%

of the students report having used marijuana in the past year, while 7.1% report having used it in

the previous 30 days. These estimates are slightly lower than those reported for 10th graders

from the Monitoring the Future (MTF) Study in 1991, the first year in which the MTF study

collected data on 10th graders.9 Approximately 30% of the 10th graders in our sample reside in a

so-called decriminalized state in 1990. Given that the NELS is conducted in the spring of each

school year, we matched statutory policy data in effect as of December 31, 1989 to the sample so




                                                 14
that we can reflect laws that were in effect over the same time period consumption is being

evaluated.10

         In addition to the state-level marijuana policy data discussed above, various prices have

been merged into the NELS data to capture the influence of these variables on the demand for

marijuana. State-level beer and cigarette taxes, obtained from Brewers’ Almanac and Tobacco

Institute respectively, are merged in based on the respondent’s state of residence.11 Marijuana

price information is obtained from various publications of the DEA Office of Intelligence or

Intelligence Division, which report quarterly price data for wholesale and retail level commercial

grade marijuana from nineteen regional division offices.12 Because the price data provided in

these reports is sparse for some location/quarters, missing data is imputed using regression

analysis on quarterly data from 1985 through 2000. The imputed annual and quarterly price

series are then merged into the sample based on the proximity of the respondent’s county of

residence to one of the 19 division offices. A continuous measure of the distance between the

respondent’s school and the 19 division offices is also included to capture the quality of the

match. Imputed annual price measures are used in analyses of use in the past year. Imputed

quarterly prices, matched to the date of interview, are used in analyses of use in the past thirty-

days.




9
  MTF reports annual and thirty-day prevalence rates of 16.5% and 8.7% respectively (source:
http:www.monitoringthefuture.org/ data/01data.html#2001data-drugs). However, Alaska and Hawaii are never
included in the MTF’s sampling frame.
10
   Only two states changed their penalty structures between 1989 and 1990 and both of these took effect some time
in late spring and/or early July of 1990.
11
   Frank Chaloupka graciously made these data available to us.
12
   The name of the publication including the price data has changed over time. In 1990, the publication was entitled,
“Illicit Drug Wholesale/Retail Price Report.” Price information for wholesale and retail level sinsemilla marijuana
is also available in this report.


                                                         15
V. Results from the NELS

         Table 7 reports findings from various models examining the association between

marijuana decriminalization and marijuana use. Each column represents a unique empirical

specification of the model. Panel A of the table reports marginal effects from a series of probit

models estimating the probability of using marijuana in the past year. Panel B reports similar

results from identical models that estimate the probability of using marijuana in the past thirty

days. All regression models include as additional regressors cigarette and beer tax, race

indicators, gender, parental education, parental socio-economic composite measure, age, earned

income, hours worked, high school program type, private/public schools, and religious

attendance. The findings with respect to these additional controls are suppressed in an effort to

conserve space, but a table of the full results from the basic model (M1) is provided in the

appendix (Table A2). All regressions are weighted and standard errors are adjusted for

clustering at the state level.13

         Given that we are only examining one year of data, we will not be able to disentangle a

true policy effect of any of these state variables from unobserved state factors that might be

correlated with them, such as sentiment regarding marijuana use. Although additional years of

data would be helpful for interpreting the real influence of the legal statute data, it would not

help in identifying the real effect of decriminalization, our main variable of interest. This is

because only two states have officially changed their status since the 1970s, so there is

insufficient variation in this policy across time. Nonetheless, by incrementally adding to the

regression dimensions of the criminal status and severity of penalties associated with marijuana


13
  Additional models were run adjusting standard errors for clustering at the school level, but there were no
significant differences in results from those presented here. Given that the focus of this paper is on the significance
of state-level policy variables, we considered it most appropriate to account for intra-class correlation at this more
aggregate level.


                                                          16
use in each state, we should still expect to see the association between marijuana use and

decriminalization diminish if the decriminalization variable reflects in any way a reduction in the

criminality of marijuana. That is the empirical strategy employed here.

        Model 1 (Column M1) simply evaluates the impact of living in a so-called decriminalized

state on marijuana prevalence rates for our sample of youth.14 We find that youths living in

decriminalized states are 2% more likely to use marijuana both in the past year and in the past

month, although the finding with respect to annual use is not statistically significant at

conventional levels. The finding of a statistically significant decriminalization effect in the past

month prevalence equation differs from findings obtained by Thies and Register (1993) and

Pacula (1998), who both show no statistical relationship between a marijuana decriminalization

dummy variable and thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use using the National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth (NLSY) . However, it is consistent with findings obtained by other researchers

using data from the Monitoring the Future (MTF) Study and the National Household Survey on

Drug Abuse (NHSDA) (Chaloupka et al., 1999a, 1999b Saffer and Chaloupka, 1999a and

1999b). For example, Chaloupka et al. (1999a) find that high school seniors living in

decriminalized states have a 4 to 5% higher probability of marijuana use in the past year using

data from the 1982 and 1989 cross-sections of the Monitoring the Future Study. Saffer and

Chaloupka (1999b) also showed a 4% increase for youth living in decriminalized states using

data from the 1988, 1990 and 1991 NHSDA.15 Our current estimate presented in Column M1,




14
   Arizona is not included as a decriminalized state because its decriminalization policy did not take effect until
1996.
15
   One reason why the estimate presented in Column M1 in Table 7 is smaller than previous estimates is the
inclusion of a measure of the monetary price of marijuana, which has been omitted from the previous studies
mentioned. The inclusion of this variable does reduce the size of the marginal effect on the decriminalization
dummy variable in some of the specifications, but not all of them. Further, the marginal effect drops by only a few
percentage points so the change is not substantial.


                                                        17
therefore, is lower than estimates obtained from the literature examining the influence of only

this variable.

          In light of our findings in the previous section, one has to wonder why this variable is

positive and statistically significant at all. There are at least two plausible explanations that we

can empirically test here. The first is that the marijuana decriminalization variable really does

capture, albeit poorly, some sort of differential legal treatment of marijuana possession

offenders. Although this is typically conceptualized as a reduction in the criminality of these

offences, our previous descriptive results suggest that it may be more strongly associated with

reductions in the penalties associated with use. We examine variations of this hypothesis in

Columns M2 through M5. The second plausible explanation is that the variable is simply

identifying states with relatively lower levels of enforcement of marijuana laws. We test this

hypothesis in Column M6.

         To examine the extent to which the decriminalization dummy variable might reflect

reduced penalties associated with marijuana possession, we begin by including as additional

regressors the statutorily-imposed minimum jail time and maximum fine associated with

possession of any small amount (the first quantity trigger) in Column M2. 16 This is a

specification similar to that employed by Chaloupka et al (1999b), Chaloupka et al (1999a) and

Williams et al., (2001), although the last two studies only included fines. Theoretically, the

inclusion of these variables should reduce the significance of the marijuana decriminalization

variable because they capture relevant domains along which decriminalization is supposed to

matter across states. We find that the inclusion of these penalty variables reduces the magnitude

of the decriminalization variable in both the annual and thirty-day prevalence specification by


16
   Alternative models were run using other combinations of min/max jail and fines as well. The inclusion of
alternative measures of jail time and fines does not significantly alter the finding for decriminalization status.


                                                           18
0.2 percentage points (or approximately 10%). However, marijuana decriminalization remains

statistically significant at the 1% level in the thirty-day prevalence specification, providing

empirical support for the hypothesis that the decriminalization variable is capturing something

other than lower penalties.

       Although maximum fines were not statistically associated with either annual or thirty-day

prevalence, higher minimum jail times were statistically associated with lower prevalence rates

for both measures. The marginal effect of a one-year change in minimum jail time is

substantially larger than a change in decriminalization status in all of the specifications,

demonstrating that marijuana use is in fact very sensitive to the statutory penalties imposed.

       In the next specification of the model (Column M3) we include measures of the criminal

status of marijuana possession offences, with felony status as the omitted reference group. Even

if a state lowers its penalties associated with possession of small amounts of marijuana, it may

still retain its status as a criminal offence (defined as either a felony or misdemeanor charge),

which raises the cost of being found guilty given that it can result in the denial of certain

privileges, loans, and employment opportunities. For most states, however, penalties are

determined by the classification of the offence, so there is a high degree of collinearity between

an offense’s criminal status and the penalties imposed for that offense.

       We see in Column M3 of Table 7 that lower criminal status is positively associated with

increased prevalence of marijuana use both in the past year and in the past thirty days, but these

results are not statistically significant. Furthermore, the inclusion of these measures does not

significantly reduce the association between decriminalization and marijuana use. Given the

results presented in Table 4, these regression results are not terribly surprising. They just

reinforce the conclusion that the so-called decriminalized states have been misnamed and any




                                                 19
policy effect obtained from this dummy variable cannot be attributed to a reduction in the

criminality of marijuana use.

       In Column M4 we consider the fact that many states can reduce penalties through

provisions that divert first time offenders from jail and/or remove the criminal record upon

successful completion of specified sanctions. To the extent that these represent a reduction in the

expected penalty associated with marijuana possession offenses, we need to evaluate whether

their inclusion reduces the association between decriminalization and marijuana use. We see in

Column M4 that there is no statistical association between expungement and marijuana use in

either the past thirty days or the past year, consistent with our findings regarding the actual

criminality of the offence. Conditional discharge provisions are positively associated with

marijuana use in both models, although the significance of the finding is greater in the model

predicting thirty-day use. The inclusion of these two variables substantially increases the

association between decriminalization and marijuana use, contrary to what we would expect if

the decriminalization variable were proxying legal penalties associated with use. Furthermore,

the decriminalization dummy variable is now statistically significant at conventional levels in the

annual participation model.

       In light of the substantial effect these two measures have on our main variable of interest,

it would be useful to verify that variables have the anticipated association with marijuana use

when evaluated by themselves. We therefore show in Column M5 a specification of the model

that excludes marijuana decriminalization and shows the effect of just the price and statutory

penalty variables. Findings from this specification suggest that there is some correlation

between the decriminalization dummy variable and these two policy dimensions. The sign on

the expungement variable changes from negative to positive, although it remains statistically




                                                 20
insignificant. Further, there is an enormous reduction in the significance and magnitude of the

coefficient on the conditional discharge variable. Other specifications, not shown here, reveal

that there is significant correlation between the decriminalization and conditional discharge

variables, that causes the coefficient on both of these variables to rise in magnitude and statistical

significance in Column M4.

       The combined findings from Columns M4 and M5 are perplexing. Conditional discharge

provisions, by themselves, appear to have no additional affect on marijuana use, as indicated in

Column M5 and additional analyses not reported here. This is not to say that a removal or

reduction in mandated jail time does not matter, however, because higher minimum jail times are

still associated with lower annual and thirty day prevalence rates in both columns. In fact, the

coefficient on minimum jail time is slightly larger (in absolute value terms) in Column M5 than

in Columns M2 and M4, suggesting that there may indeed be a small aspect of the marijuana

decriminalization dummy variable that is associated with reduced jail time. The association is

clearly small, however, because the minimum jail time variable only increases in absolute value

by 9% with the exclusion of the decriminalization variable.

       The fact that the coefficient on the conditional discharge variable becomes marginally

significant and larger in absolute value terms when marijuana decriminalization is included in

the regression suggests that the decriminalization dummy variable is picking up something that

would have otherwise been left in the error term and possibly biasing the coefficient on

conditional discharge downward, such as unobserved state sentiment toward marijuana use

caused by cultural, political, and social factors in these states that are associated with more

leniency toward marijuana use. This is further supported by the fact that the coefficient on the

marijuana decriminalization dummy variable becomes larger in absolute value in both the annual




                                                 21
and thirty-day prevalence equations. Thus, by including all aspects of the legal statutes that

might reduce or eliminate jail sentences imposed with marijuana possession offences, and hence

reduce marijuana use, the decriminalization dummy variable is left to reflect only the aspects of

the policy, sentiment behind the policy, or other unobserved state-level factors that increase

marijuana use. What is important to note is that these non-penalty aspects of the

decriminalization dummy variable are statistically associated with marijuana use in the past year

now as well, not just use in the past month.

       Fundamentally, the results from Columns M1 through M5 show that the marijuana

decriminalization dummy variable does not solely reflect lower statutory penalties associated

with marijuana possession offences. If it did, then this variable should become statistically

insignificant when these legal statutory variables were included in the model. Further, it does

not reflect a change in the criminal status of the offence, confirming results from the descriptive

statistics presented earlier. The evidence from the models presented in Column M4 and M5

suggest that it may be capturing unobserved state-level factors that are associated with lenient

attitudes toward marijuana use, but there are other aspects of this policy implementation that

remain unspecified in the model, such as enforcement, which we turn to examine now.

       In Column M6 we evaluate the extent to which the decriminalization dummy variable

reflects differences in the relative enforcement of marijuana possession offences. To capture

differences across states in the enforcement of marijuana possession offences, we construct a

ratio of state aggregated marijuana possession arrests per 10,000 residents to total arrests per

10,000 residents using county-level data from 1990 Uniform Crime Reports.17 Although this

measure does not accurately reflect the risk of getting caught, which is perhaps more relevant for

predicting demand and would be calculated as the ratio of marijuana possession arrests to use per




                                                 22
capita, it does provide us with a measure of the extent to which law enforcement activities are

focused on (or interested in) marijuana possession offenses versus other offenses. States that

have higher ratios of marijuana possession arrests to total arrests per 10,000 residents can be

viewed as having greater enforcement of this law.18

         Although we see in Column M6 that the arrest ratio is negatively associated with both

measures of marijuana use, it is not statistically significant in either model.               This is consistent

with what was found by Farrelly et al (1999). More importantly, however, the inclusion of this

variable does not reduce the coefficient estimate on the decriminalization variable suggesting

that it is not differences in the enforcement of the laws that is causing the marijuana

decriminalization dummy variable to be positive and statistically significant in the previous

models.

         Looking across all of the specifications presented in Table 7, there are a couple of

interesting things to note. First, although the decriminalization variable is consistently

statistically significant in the thirty-day prevalence model, it is only statistically significant at

conventional levels in the annual prevalence models when conditional discharge is also included

in the model. One hypothesis is that youth who report use of marijuana in the past thirty days are

more involved users and hence more likely to be aware of the policy (and whatever signal that

gives). However, if this is indeed the case, then one would expect that the marijuana

decriminalization variable would have a larger effect in the thirty-day prevalence equation than

in the annual prevalence equation, not just be statistically more significant. In most of the

models, however, the estimated coefficient on the decriminalization dummy variable in the


17
  Missing data in particular counties were imputed using an algorithm developed by RAND.
18
  An earlier analysis by Farrelly et al (1999) uses the same measure to proxy enforcement risk and finds that it is
negatively and statistically associated with past month marijuana use among 21 to30 year olds from NHSDA, but
not among 12 to 20 year olds.


                                                         23
annual prevalence model is nearly identical to that obtained for the thirty-day prevalence model.

Thus, it is not entirely clear what these different findings mean. However, it does provide at

least one possible explanation for some of the inconsistent findings in the literature. The

significance of the decriminalization variable obviously depends on the measure of use examined

as well as the inclusion of other legal sanctions in the model.

       Second, it seems clear from Columns M1 through M5 that statistically significant or

insignificant findings with respect to the marijuana decriminalization dummy variable should not

be interpreted as evidence supporting or refuting the impact of criminalizing or depenalizing

marijuana use. The models in columns M2, M4 and M5, as well as results in the literature, show

that higher penalties, particularly minimum jail times, are statistically associated with reductions

in annual and thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use. However, reductions in the criminal status

of marijuana or the expungement of criminal charges, as shown in Models M2 and M4 and M5,

do not appear to be statistically associated with marijuana use.

       There are several important limitations of the empirical analysis presented here that

moderate the conclusions that can be drawn from it. First, the analysis focuses on statutory

penalties, which may or may not reflect the actual penalties imposed within each state. Judges

may use their own discretion when determining appropriate sanctions for particular individuals,

which may or may not be influenced by the statutory penalties. Thus, variation in statutory

penalties may or may not reflect variation in actual penalties imposed. However, the fact that

specific aspects of these statutory laws, minimum jail time in particular, are statistically

significant in the direction that theory would suggest may indicate that there is at least some

positive correlation between the statutory penalties and the penalties actually imposed.




                                                 24
       A second limitation of the current analysis is that it only examines behavior among

youth. We do not know the extent to which these statutory laws apply to minors. Because of

their junior status, courts may take greater leniency on juveniles committing drug possession

offenses. Given that softer penalties may be imposed on minors and empirical estimates of the

effects of these laws are being evaluated on a sample of youth, the coefficient estimates

presented here are likely to suffer some downward bias. In addition, youth may have little

knowledge of the statutory laws and/or their state’s decriminalization status. This again suggests

that findings presented here might understate the actual effect of these laws on demand in the

general population (who presumably may have greater knowledge of the laws than the current

sample being evaluated). Further, youths have higher discount rates than adults, so penalties

received in the future (jail times) may have less of an impact for youths than for adults. All of

these facts suggest that the findings presented here are a lower bound of the impact the real

policies are likely to have on the demand for marijuana in the general population.

       A final limitation is that there is some potential that the estimated association between

state policy variables and marijuana use suffer from an omitted variable bias. As has been noted

elsewhere, this analysis relies on cross-sectional variation in the statutory law and

decriminalization policies for identification. The results from this analysis, therefore, may or

may not reflect true policy effects if these state law and policy variables are statistically

correlated with unobserved state factors that are not captured in the model.



VI. Discussion and Conclusions

       It is clear from the analyses presented here that “decriminalization” does not mean what

researchers and policy analysts thinks it means. Several non-decriminalized states have reduced




                                                  25
the criminal status of marijuana possession offenses either through changing the statutory offense

or through conditional discharge and expungement provisions. An even larger number of non-

decriminalized states have reduced the statutory penalties associated with marijuana possession

offenses. Hence, decriminalized states are not uniquely identifiable based on statutory law as has

been presumed by researchers over the past twenty years.

       What is also clear from this analysis is that the policy of decriminalization appears to

mean something, even if it is not an indication of reduced criminality or penalties. Exactly what

it means remains unclear. The results from Column M6 in Table 7 suggest that this variable is

not picking up differences in the willingness of law enforcement to enforce existing marijuana

laws. Two other possible explanations exist, however. First, formal decriminalization statutes

may be an indicator of a larger social acceptance of marijuana use within the state. Second, they

might be an indicator of greater public knowledge (or advertisement) of the reduced penalties

associated with possession of marijuana. Our data are insufficient to explore these two

alternative hypotheses; future work is clearly needed.

       Although it is not clear how we should interpret the findings for decriminalization, one

finding that is clear from this analysis is that demand for marijuana among youth is sensitive to

the penalties imposed with its use. Results presented in Table 7 suggest that a one-day increase

in statutorily imposed minimum jail time is associated with a 7 to 9 percentage point reduction in

annual marijuana prevalence and a 4 percentage point reduction in thirty-day prevalence. This

represents a change in predicted prevalence of over 50% for both measures of use. Higher

maximum fines are generally associated with reduced thirty-day prevalence of marijuana use and

higher annual prevalence, but none of these results is statistically significant.   This differs

substantially from previous findings that have generally shown fines to be negatively and




                                                  26
significantly associated with both the prevalence of marijuana use (e.g. Farrelly et al, 2001).

Future work evaluating these statutory data using panel data needs to be done to evaluate the

extent to which the findings reported here can be interpreted as real policy effects.




                                                 27
                                          References

Cameron L. and J. Williams. 2001. Cannabis, alcohol and cigarettes: substitutes or
   complements? Economic Record 77(236): 19-34.

Chaloupka, F.J., Grossman M., and J. Tauras. 1999a. “The Demand for Cocaine and Marijuana
   by Youth.” Published in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use an Abuse: An integration
   of econometric and behavioral economic research. Ed. Frank Chaloupka, Michael Grossman,
   Warren Bickel and Henry Safer. University of Chicago Press.

Chaloupka, F.J., Pacula, R.L., Farrelly, M.C., Johnston, L., and P. O’Malley. 1999b. Do higher
   cigarette prices encourage youth to use marijuana? NBER Working Paper no. 6938.
   Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.

Chriqui, J.F., Pacula R.L., McBride D.C., Reichmann, D.A., VanderWaal, C.J., and Y. Terry-
   McElrath. 2002. Illicit Drug Policies: Selected Laws from the 50 States. Berrien Springs,
   MI: Andrews University.

DiNardo, J. and T. Lemieux. 1992. Alcohol, marijuana, and American youth: The unintended
   effects of government regulation. NBER Working Paper no. 4212. Cambridge, Mass.:
   National Bureau of Economic Research.

Farrelly M.C. Bray J.W., Zarkin, G.A., and B.W.Wendling. 2001. The joint demand for
   cigarettes and marijuana: Evidence from the National Household Surveys on Drug Abuse.
   Journal of Health Economics 20: 51-68.

Farrelly, M.C., Bray J.W., Zarkin, G.A., Wendling, B.W. and R.L. Pacula. 1999. The Effects of
   Prices and Policies on the Demand for Marijuana: Evidence from the National Household
   Surveys on Drug Abuse. NBER Working Paper No. 6940. Cambridge, Mass: National
   Bureau of Economic Research.

Johnston L. D., P. M. O’Malley, and J. G. Bachman. 1981. Marijuana decriminalization: The
   impact on youth 1975-1980. Monitoring the Future Occasional Paper no. 13. Ann Arbor,
   Michigan: Institute for Social Research, University of Michigan.

MacCoun, R. and P. Reuter. 2001. Drug War Heresies: Learning from Other Vices, Times and
  Places. New York, Cambridge University Press.

Maloff, D. 1981. A review of the effects of the decriminalization of marijuana. Contemporary
   Drug Problems, Fall, 307-322.

Model K. 1993. “The effect of marijuana a decriminalization on hospital emergency room
  episodes: 1975-1978.” Journal of American Statistical Association 88 (423): 737-747.

National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse. 1972. Marihuana: A Signal of
   Misunderstanding. First Report of the National Commission on Marihuana and Drug Abuse.
   Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, March.



                                              28
Pacula, RL. 1998. Does increasing the beer tax reduce marijuana consumption? Journal of
   Health Economics 17 (5): 557-586.


Pacula, R.L.; Grossman, M; Chaloupka, F.J.; P. O’Malley; L.D. Johnston and M.C. Farrelly.
       2001. “Marijuana and Youth” in Jonathan Gruber’s An Economic Analysis of Risky
       Behavior Among Youths. University of Chicago Press.

Saffer H. and F.J. Chaloupka. 1999a. The demand for illicit drugs. Economic Inquiry 37(3):
       401-411.


Saffer H. and F.J. Chaloupka. 1999b. “Demographic Differentials in the Demand for Alcohol
    and Illicit Drugs” in The Economic Analysis of Substance Use an Abuse: An integration of
    econometric and behavioral economic research. Ed. Frank Chaloupka, Michael Grossman,
    Warren Bickel and Henry Safer. University of Chicago Press.

Single, E. 1989. The impact of marijuana decriminalization: An update. Journal of Public
   Health Policy, 10, 456-466.

Single, E., Christie, P. and R Ali. 2000. “The impact of cannabis decriminalisation in Australia
   and the United States” Journal of Public Health Policy 21(2) 157-186.

Thies, C.F., and C.A. Register. 1993. Decriminalization of marijuana and the demand for
   alcohol, marijuana and cocaine. Social Science Journal 30 (4): 385-399.

Williams J. 2002. The effects of price and policy on cannabis use: What can be learned from
   the Australian experience? University of Adelaide Working Paper.

Williams J., Pacula R.L., Chaloupka, F. and H. Wechsler. 2001. Alcohol and marijuana use
   among college students: Economic complements or substitutes? NBER Working Paper No.
   8401. Cambridge, Mass.: National Bureau of Economic Research.




                                               29
                                           Table 1
             Summary of the Original “Decriminalization” Statutes from the 1970’s
                                                                      First
State                          Offense                                Offense     Max    Min
(Citation)                     Classification Amount                  Only?       Fine   Jail
Alaska                           Not specified      Any amount of MJ in   No.    $100    NS
Laws of 1975, Ch. 110; ALASKA    (NS)               private place. One
STAT. §17.12.011 (Michie 1975)                      ounce or less in a
                                                    public place.
California                       Misdemeanor        One ounce             No.    $100    NS
Laws of 1975, Ch. 248;
CAL. Health & Safety CODE
§11357 (b) and (c) (West 1975)
Colorado                         Class 2 –petty     One ounce or less     No.    $100    NS
Laws of 1975, Ch. 115;           offense
COLO. REV. STAT. §12-22-412
(1975)
Maine                            Civil violation    NS. “usable amount”   No.    $200    NS
Laws of 1975, Ch. 499;
ME. REV. STAT. ANN. tit. 22, §
2383 (1975)
Minnesota                        Petty              NS. “small amount”    Yes.   $100    NS
Laws of 1976, Ch. 42;            misdemeanor
MINN. STAT. §152.15 (1976)
Mississippi                      Offense            One ounce or less     Yes.   $250    NS
Laws of 1977, Ch. 482;
MISS. CODE. ANN. §41-29-139
(1977)
Nebraska                         Infraction         One ounce or less     Yes.   $100    NS
Laws of 1978, Act No. 808;
NEB. REV. STAT. §28-416(9)
(1978)
New York                         Violation          NS                    No.    $100    NS
Laws of 1977, Ch. 360;
N.Y. Penal Law §221.05
(McKinney 1977)
North Carolina                   Misdemeanor        NS                    Yes.   NS      NS
Laws of 1977, Ch. 862;
N.C. GEN. STAT. §90-95 (1977)
Ohio                             Minor              Less than 100 grams   No.    NS      NS
Laws of 1976, Act No. 300;       misdemeanor
OHIO REV. CODE ANN.§
2925.11(C) & (D) (1976)
Oregon                           Violation          Less than one ounce   No.    $100    NS
Laws of 1973, Ch.680;
OR. REV. STAT. §167.207(3)
(1973)




                                                   30
                                          Table 2
                      State-level Decriminalization and Offense Status
                          For Marijuana Possession Offenses, 1999
               Decriminalization         Offense Status         Frequency
               Status
               Yes                       Felony                       1
                                         Misdemeanor                  3
                                         Other or not specified       8
               No                        Felony                       1
                                         Misdemeanor                 31
                                         Other or not specified       7



                                         Table 3
                      State-level Offense Status and Expungement
                        For Marijuana Possession Offenses, 1999
      Decriminalization                                    Expungement
      Status                      Offense Status          Yes       No
      Yes                Felony                             0       1
                         Misdemeanor                        2       1
                         Other or not specified             2       6
      No                 Felony                             0       1
                         Misdemeanor                       15      16
                         Other or not specified             2       5

* Note: states that do not specify (or clearly permit) expungement in their statutes are included in
the “No” category.


                                         Table 4
                      State-level Offense Status and Expungement
     For First-Time Marijuana Possession Offenses at Lowest Quantity Trigger, 1989
      Decriminalization                                    Expungement
      Status                      Offense Status          Yes         No
      Yes                Felony                             0         0
                         Misdemeanor                        2         2
                         Other or not specified             2         5
      No                 Felony                             0         2
                         Misdemeanor                       12        19
                         Other or not specified             2         4

* Note: states that do not specify (or clearly permit) expungement in their statutes are included in
the “No” category. Also note that Arizona in this table is categorized as a non-decriminalized
state because its decriminalization statute did not get enacted until 1996.


                                                31
                                     Table 5
      Average Minimum and Maximum Jail Terms and Fines for Possession
      of Any Positive Amount (1st Trigger) by State Decriminalization Status
                                      1989
  Penalty              Decrim States       Non-Decrim States          Significant
                          (n=11)                 (n=40)               Difference?
Minimum jail             0.00027                   .05                    No
   (years)
Maximum jail               .003                   .7694             Yes (1% level)
   (years)
Minimum fine              $72.73                 $30.00                   No
Maximum fine             $240.91                $4901.25                  No



                                       Table 6
State-Level Decriminalization Status, Maximum Jail Time and Conditional Discharge
     Marijuana Possession Offenses for Any Positive Amount (1st Trigger), 1989
   Decriminalization                                       Conditional
   Status                      Maximum Jail           Discharge/Diversion
                                                         Yes          No
   Yes                 Not specified                      3           7
                       0.03 years                         1           0

   No                 0                                   2           0
                      0.003 years                         1           0
                      0.04 years                          1           0
                      0.08 years                          1           0
                      0.082 years                         5           0
                      0.25 years                          1           0
                      0.493 years                         1           0
                      0.5 years                           6           2
                      1 year                             13           5
                      1.5 years                           1           0
                      6.0 years                           1           0




                                       32
                                                            Table 7
                                                NELS 10th Grade Sample, 1990
                          Marginal Effects From Probit Estimation of Likelihood of Using Marijuana
                                        Findings for Marijuana Penalty Variables Only
                                                 Panel A: Pr (Marijuana Use in the Past Year)
                                    M1               M2              M3                M4                            M5                  M6
                                              d                                d                 b                                                    b
Decriminalized state                    0.017            0.015           0.018             0.026                                             0.029
                                      (0.012)          (0.012)         (0.012)           (0.014)                                           (0.014)
                                              c                b               c                 b                               c                    b
Geometric Mean Price of MJ         -1.50E-03        -1.60E-03       -1.35E-03         -1.55E-03                     -1.58E-03           -1.65E-03
                                      (0.001)          (0.001)         (0.001)           (0.001)                       (0.001)             (0.001)
Maximum Fine                                         1.23E-07                          9.35E-08                      8.81E-08            6.48E-08
                                                   (1.27E-07)                        (1.26E-07)                    (1.33E-07)          (1.44E-07)
                                                               a                                 a                               a                    a
Minimum Jail                                            -0.072                            -0.074                        -0.081              -0.090
                                                       (0.012)                           (0.013)                       (0.012)             (0.020)
Misdemeanor                                                              0.012
                                                                       (0.031)
Non-Criminal Offence                                                     0.005
                                                                       (0.036)
Expungement                                                                               -0.004                         0.007              -0.009
                                                                                         (0.013)                       (0.012)             (0.013)
                                                                                                 d                                                    c
Conditional Discharge                                                                      0.019                         0.005               0.023
                                                                                         (0.012)                       (0.012)             (0.013)
MJ poss arrest/ Total arrests                                                                                                               -0.376
                                                                                                                                           (1.151)

Number of Observations                   13,383              13,383              13,383             13,383              13,383             12,469
Pseudo-R2                                 0.060               0.065               0.064              0.065               0.065              0.067
Observed Probability                      0.142               0.142               0.142              0.142               0.142              0.142
Predicted Probability                     0.126               0.126               0.126              0.126               0.126              0.125

                                                       Panel B: Pr (Marijuana Use in the Past Month)
                                       M1                   M2               M3              M4                      M5                  M6
                                                   a                  a                a                     a                                        a
Decriminalized state                       0.018                0.016            0.017           0.028                                       0.028
                                         (0.006)              (0.006)          (0.007)         (0.011)                                     (0.011)
                                                   b                  b                b                     c                   d
Geometric Mean Price of MJ            -2.87E-04            -3.04E-04        -2.92E-04       -2.72E-04               -2.69E-04           -2.16E-04
                                     (1.45E-04)           (1.47E-04)       (1.49E-04)      (1.48E-04)              (1.78E-04)          (1.67E-04)
                                                                                                                                 d
Maximum Fine                                               -5.84E-08                        -8.47E-08               -9.28E-08           -7.16E-08
                                                          (5.38E-08)                       (5.53E-08)              (6.08E-08)          (6.82E-08)
                                                                      a                                      a                   a                    a
Minimum Jail                                                   -0.043                           -0.042                  -0.049              -0.042
                                                              (0.009)                          (0.008)                 (0.011)             (0.013)
                                                                                       d
Misdemeanor                                                                      0.015
                                                                               (0.010)
Non-Criminal Offence                                                             0.018
                                                                               (0.014)
Expungement                                                                                     -0.010                   0.001              -0.011
                                                                                               (0.008)                 (0.008)             (0.009)
                                                                                                             c                                        c
Conditional Discharge                                                                            0.016               6.86E-05                0.015
                                                                                               (0.008)                 (0.007)             (0.009)
MJ poss arrest/ Total arrests                                                                                                               -0.341
                                                                                                                                           (0.686)
Number of Observations                     13,818            13,818               13,818              13,818           13,818               12,468
Psuedo-R2                                    0.075            0.075                0.075                0.076           0.074                 0.074
Observed Probability                         0.076            0.076                0.076                0.076           0.076                 0.075
Predicted Probability                        0.061            0.061                0.061                0.061           0.061                 0.061
Notes: (1) All probit regressions include as additional regressors the following variables: cigarette tax, beer tax, race indicators
(black, hispanic, asian, other), gender, parental education, parental socio-economic composite measure, age, earned income,
hours worked, high school program type, private/public schools, and religious attendance. (2) All probit regressions are weighted
and adjusted for clustering at the state level. (3) Superscripted letters indicate the following: "a" indicates significance at the 1%
level (two-tailed test), "b" indicates significance at 5% level (two-tailed test), "c" indicates significance at 10% level (two-tailed test),
and "d" indicates significance at the 10% level (one-tailed test).
                                                                        33
                                                                Appendix
                                                                  Table A1
                             Descriptive Statistics for 1990 10th Grade Sample from NELS
Variable                                                                    Mean    Std. Dev.   Min        Max
MJ use          Use in the past year                                          0.139     0.346         0          1
                Use in the past month                                         0.071     0.257         0          1
Demographics Hispanic                                                         0.109     0.311         0          1
& Background African American                                                 0.084     0.277         0          1
Variables       White, Non-Hispanic                                           0.737     0.440         0          1
                American Indian, Alaskan native                               0.009     0.098         0          1
                Asian, Pacific Islander (omitted category)
                Female                                                        0.520     0.500          0          1
                Age                                                          17.034     0.795         15         19
                Highest parent ed = HS grad                                   0.189     0.392          0          1
                Highest parent ed = some college                              0.392     0.488          0          1
                Highest parent ed = college graduate                          0.335     0.472          0          1
                Parental SES in 2nd Quartile                                  0.230     0.420          0          1
                Parental SES in 3rd Quartile                                  0.242     0.429          0          1
                Parental SES in 4th Quartile                                  0.329     0.470          0          1
                Occasional religious attendance                               0.177     0.382          0          1
                Infrequent/never religious attendance                         0.392     0.488          0          1
                Frequent religious attendance (omitted category)
                Income from work                                             55.999    71.411         0      600
                Hours worked                                                  1.301     1.436         0        5
School          HS program - College prep/academic                            0.375     0.484         0        1
Characteristics HS program- Vocationa/technical                               0.079     0.270         0        1
                HS program - Other specialized high                           0.051     0.220         0        1
                HS program - Special Ed program                               0.065     0.247         0        1
                HS program -Alternative / Drop out                            0.017     0.130         0        1
                HS program - regular (omitted category)
                Suburban                                                      0.396     0.489         0          1
                Rural                                                         0.324     0.468         0          1
                Urban (omitted category)
                Catholic School                                               0.059     0.236         0          1
                Other private school                                          0.080     0.271         0          1
                Public school (omitted category)
Prices          Real annual mean price of oz MJ (1982-1984 dollars)           76.64    22.498    33.13     135.22
                Real quarterly mean price of oz MJ (1982-1984 dollars)       92.689    18.782    59.40     127.96
                Distance btwn 19 city & R's school (miles)                  159.734   144.582        1       2350
                Real state and fed cig tax (1982-1983 dollars)               21.687     8.670        2         38
                Real state beer tax (1982-1983 dollars)                       0.487     0.507    0.045       2.37
MJ penalty      Decriminalization dummy                                       0.301     0.459        0          1
variables       Misdemeanor Offense                                           0.741     0.438        0          1
                Non-criminal offense                                          0.242     0.429        0          1
                Maximum fine                                               2342.830 14762.560        0     150000
                Minimum jail time                                             0.019     0.136        0          1
                Expungement provision                                         0.287     0.452        0          1
                Conditional discharge provision                               0.731     0.443        0          1
                Probability of arrest (MJ poss arrest / total arrests)        0.019     0.006    0.004      0.045




                                                        34
                                                         Table A2
                                                      Full Model (M1)
                                           Marginal Effects from Probit Analysis
                        Pr (Use in Past Year > 0)                                                  Pr (Use in Past Month > 0)
Variable                                 dF/dX    Std Err                 Variable                                    dF/dX    Std Err
                                                                                                                                                   a
Decriminalized state                        0.017    0.012                Decriminalized state                           0.018    0.006
                                                                     c                                                                             b
Annual avg real price MJ                   -0.001    0.001                Quarterly real price of MJ                -2.94E-04 1.43E-04
                                                                     c                                                                             d
Distance of DEA match                  -7.23E-05 3.86E-05                 Distance of DEA match                     -4.03E-05 2.56E-05
Cigarette Tax 1990                     -9.22E-05     0.001                Cigarette Tax 1990                        -1.11E-04     0.000
                                                                     b
Beer Tax 1990                               0.018    0.008                Beer Tax 1990                                  0.010    0.008
                                                                     c                                                                             c
Hispanic                                    0.059    0.036                Hispanic                                       0.045    0.029
African American                           -0.015    0.038                African American                              -0.013    0.019
                                                                     b                                                                             b
White                                       0.060    0.026                White                                          0.039    0.016
Other race                                  0.023    0.052                Other race                                     0.033    0.037
Female                                      0.003    0.009                Female                                        -0.003    0.006
Age                                         0.007    0.005                Age                                            0.005    0.004
                                                                     a                                                                             a
Income                                  3.53E-04 1.03E-04                 Income                                     2.29E-04 5.67E-05
Hours worked                                0.002    0.004                Hours worked                                  -0.003    0.003
                                                                     a                                                                             a
Occasional religious attendance             0.085    0.016                Occasional religious attendance                0.038    0.012
                                                                     a                                                                             a
Infrequent/never religious attendance       0.120    0.015                Infrequent/never religious attendance          0.069    0.008
Parent HS grad                             -0.004    0.028                Parent HS grad                                -0.023    0.017
Parent some college                         0.006    0.022                Parent some college                           -0.010    0.019
Parent college grad                        -0.011    0.024                Parent college grad                           -0.017    0.017
Parental SES 2nd Quartile                  -0.017    0.016                Parental SES 2nd Quartile                     -0.004    0.007
Parental SES 3rd Quartile                  -0.012    0.014                Parental SES 3rd Quartile                      0.004    0.008
Parental SES 4th Quartile                  -0.010    0.018                Parental SES 4th Quartile                  3.86E-04     0.010
                                                                     a                                                                             a
HS program college prep                    -0.053    0.008                HS program college prep                       -0.041    0.005
                                                                     c                                                                             b
HS program vocational                      -0.026    0.013                HS program vocational                         -0.019    0.008
Other HS program                           -0.004    0.017                Other HS program                               0.006    0.015
Don't know HS program                       0.025    0.021                Don't know HS program                          0.002    0.010
Missing HS program                         -0.032    0.024                Missing HS program                            -0.001    0.019
                                                                                                                                                   c
Suburban                                   -0.014    0.011                Suburban                                      -0.013    0.007
                                                                     b
Rural                                      -0.032    0.015                Rural                                         -0.016    0.010
                                                                                                                                                   c
Catholic school                            -0.020    0.023                Catholic school                               -0.023    0.012
                                                                     b                                                                             a
Other private school                       -0.052    0.024                Other private school                          -0.038    0.008

Obs Probability                                  0.142                    Obs Probability                                    0.074
Predicted Probability                            0.126                    Predicted Probability                              0.060
All probit regressions are weighted and adjusted for clustering at the school level. Superscripted letters indicate the following: "a" indicates
significance at the 1% level (two-tailed test), "b" indicates significance at 5% level (two-tailed test), "c" indicates significance at 10%
level (two-tailed test), and "d" indicates significance at the 10% level (one-tailed test).




                                                                         35
