                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF
                            LITIGATION AND THE LEGAL PROCESS

                                             Steven Shavell

                                         Working Paper 9697
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9697


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




Research support from the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Economic Analysis of Litigation and the Legal Process
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 9697
May 2003
JEL No. D00, D6, D8, K00, K4

                                              ABSTRACT

This paper contains the chapters on litigation and the legal process from a general, forthcoming

book, Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law (Harvard University Press, 2003). In chapter 17,

I consider the basic theory of litigation. Here I describe the three phases of litigation: its initiation

through suit, the determination of whether the parties will settle their case or proceed to trial, and,

if trial results, the trial expenditures. I also analyze the social desirability of their decisions, a major

theme being that the private incentives to litigate may diverge from what is socially desirable. In

chapter 18, I extend the basic theory of litigation, examining among other issues the bringing of

negative value suits, shifting of legal fees to losers at trial, lawyer-client fee arrangements, and the

influence of insurers on litigation. Then, in chapter 19, I discuss several general aspects of the legal

process not considered in the basic theory and its extensions, including private systems of

adjudication, the value of accuracy in adjudication, the appeals process, and the function of legal

advice.




Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu
                                    Table of Contents

              Economic Analysis of Litigation and the Legal Process



Chapter 17. Basic Theory of Litigation
      1. Bringing of Suit
      2. Fundamental Divergence Between the Private and the Socially Desirable Level of Suit
      3. Settlement versus Trial
      4. Divergence between the Private and the Socially Desirable Level of Settlement
      5. Trial and Litigation Expenditure


Chapter 18. Extensions of the Basic Theory of Litigation
      1. Negative Value Suits
      2. Sharing of Information Prior to Trial
      3. Forced Disclosure of Information Prior to Trial: Discovery
      4. Shifting of Legal Fees to the Loser at Trial
      5. Difficulty of Statistical Inference from Trial Outcomes
      6. Elements of Trial Outcomes Apart from the Judgment
      7. Role of Lawyers in Litigation
      8. Role of Insurers in Litigation


Chapter 19. General Topics on the Legal Process
      1. Public versus Private Legal Systems
      2. Accuracy of the Legal Process
      3. Appeals and the Legal System
      4. Legal Advice and the Role of Lawyers in the Legal System
                                        Summary Table of Contents of

                               Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law

                              (forthcoming 2003, Harvard University Press)

Chapter 1. Introduction

Part One. Accident Law
Chapter 2. Liability and Deterrence: Basic Theory
Chapter 3. Liability of Firms
Chapter 4. Extensions of the Basic Theory
Chapter 5. Liability, Risk-bearing, and Insurance
Chapter 6. Liability and Administrative Costs

Part Two. Property Law
Chapter 7. Definition, Justification, and Emergence of Property Rights
Chapter 8. Division of Property Rights
Chapter 9. Acquisition and Transfer of Property
Chapter 10. Conflict and Cooperation in the Use of Property: The Problem of Externalities
Chapter 11. Public Property
Chapter 12. Property Rights in Information

Part Three. Contract Law
Chapter 13. Overview of Contracts
Chapter 14. Contract Formation
Chapter 15. Production Contracts
Chapter 16. Other Types of Contract

Part Four. Litigation and the Legal Process
Chapter 17. Basic Theory of Litigation
Chapter 18. Extensions of the Basic Theory of Litigation
Chapter 19. General Topics on the Legal Process

Part Five. Public Law Enforcement and Criminal Law
Chapter 20. Deterrence with Monetary Sanctions
Chapter 21. Deterrence with Nonmonetary Sanctions
Chapter 22. Extensions of the Theory of Deterrence
Chapter 23. Other Functions of Sanctions: Incapacitation, Rehabilitation, Retribution
Chapter 24. Criminal Law

Part Six. General Structure of the Law
Chapter 25. The General Structure of the Law and Its Optimality

Part Seven. Welfare Economics, Morality, and the Law
Chapter 26. Welfare Economics and Morality
Chapter 27. Implications for the Analysis of Law
Chapter 28. Income Distributional Equity and the Law

Chapter 29. Commonly-Raised Questions about Economic Analysis of Law
                                   Economic Analysis of Litigation
                                       and the Legal Process
                                 (part of Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law)

                                                 Steven Shavell
                               ©2003. Steven Shavell. All Rights Reserved.


                                                     Chapter 17

                               BASIC THEORY OF LITIGATION

In this chapter, I take up the basic theory of litigation. Three stages will be considered. In the
first, the party who has suffered a loss decides whether to bring a suit. A party who brings a suit
is, of course, the plaintiff, and the party who is sued is the defendant. In the second stage, the
plaintiff and the defendant decide whether or not they will settle the case -- in the event of a
settlement, the plaintiff agrees to drop the suit, usually in exchange for a payment from the
defendant. If a settlement is not reached, the third stage, that of trial, occurs.
         In each stage, I discuss how the parties behave and then how this compares to what is
socially desirable. A theme that I emphasize is that the private incentives of parties in litigation
may diverge significantly from socially appropriate incentives, given that litigation is a costly
activity.

1. Bringing of Suit
        1.1 Definition of suit. By a suit, I will mean the taking of a costly initial step that is a
prerequisite to further legal proceedings and trial. One may interpret suit as a formal legal action,
such as the filing of a complaint, or as an action short of that, notably, the hiring of a lawyer.
Bringing a suit involves costs; the plaintiff will expend time and energy and possibly incur a bill
for legal services and filing fees.
        1.2 Private incentive to sue. The plaintiff will sue when his cost of suit is less than his
expected benefits from suit.1 The plaintiff’s expected benefits from suit involve possible
settlement payments or gains from trial. However, for the purposes of this and the next section
on suit, it will be sufficient to assume simply that there is an expected benefit from suit, without
inquiring into its determination.
        From the simple description of suit, note that suit is more likely the lower the cost of suit,
the greater the likelihood of winning at trial, and the greater the plaintiff’s award conditional on
winning. Suit is also more likely the less averse to risk the plaintiff is and the more averse the
defendant is.
       1.3 Volume of suit and its costs. About 2.3 million non-criminal cases were filed in
federal courts in 2000, and approximately 20.1 million non-criminal cases were filed in state


       1
        In this chapter it will be assumed that parties are risk-neutral unless otherwise noted.

                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 1
courts.2 These figures are probably underestimates of the truth, because many individuals who
threaten suit settle without without ever having filed suit in a formal sense and many disputes are
arbitrated.
        The total costs of litigation, including those of suit, are great, as is indicated by the facts
that legal services absorb approximately 1 percent of the labor force and 1.3 percent of gross
domestic production.3 The costs of suit, that is, of initiating legal action, are difficult to estimate,
but a simple calculation is suggestive. If the hourly rate of a lawyer is, say, $250 and suit would
require only 20 hours of the lawyer’s time, the cost would be $5,000, excluding the consideration
of the plaintiff’s time, which could well be significant.4 Thus, even if individuals are certain to
prevail in trials, they will not bring suit unless their losses surpass a fairly significant threshold.5

2. Fundamental Divergence between the Private and the Socially Desirable Level of Suit
        2.1 In general. I now take up the question of how the number of suits that parties are
motivated to bring compares to the socially optimal level of suit. The main point that will be
made is that the private incentive to bring suit is fundamentally misaligned with the socially
optimal incentive to do so, and the deviation between them could be in either direction. The
reasons for this conclusion may be understood as follows.
        On one hand, there is a divergence between the social and the private costs of suit that
can lead to a socially excessive level suit. Specifically, when a plaintiff contemplates bringing
suit, he bears only his own costs; he does not take into account the defendant’s costs or the
state’s costs that his suit will engender. Hence, the plaintiff might be led to bring suit when the
total costs associated with suit would make that undesirable.
        On the other hand, there is a difference between the social and private benefits of suit that
may lead to a socially inadequate level of suit or may reinforce the cost-related tendency toward
excessive suit. In particular, the plaintiff would not usually be expected to treat as a benefit to
himself the social benefits flowing from suit, notably, its deterrent effect on the behavior of
injurers (and more generally, other effects as well).6 What the plaintiff does consider as the
benefit from suit is the gain he personally would obtain from prevailing. This private gain is not
the same as the social benefit from suit -- the private gain is a transfer from the defendant and, as
will be seen, could be either larger or smaller than the social benefit from suit.
        2.2 The divergence in a simple model. To clarify these points, let us consider for
concreteness the model studied in Part 2 of the book, on accidents, in which injurers can exercise
         2
         See Ostrom, Kauder, and LaFountain 2001a, 13. The number of cases stated in text for state courts
excludes not only criminal cases, but also juvenile cases and traffic cases.
         3
             See Statistical Abstact of the United States 2001, Tables 596, 641, pp. 384, 418.
         4
         The average hourly rate of a partner in a law firm as of January 1, 2001, was $246; see The 2001 Survey
of Law Firm Economics, p. 11-39.
         5
          This statement applies as well if the lawyer is bearing his own costs, under a contingency fee (see section 7
of chapter 18).
         6
          One way of expressing this point about deterrence is to observe that by bringing suit, plaintiffs contribute to the
general impression that potential injurers have that they will be sued if they cause harm. Were the law only on the books,
but never to result actually in suit, potential injurers would have nothing to fear.

                                                    Chapter 17 – Page 2
care to lower the risk of accidents, and the social welfare goal is minimization of total social
costs, comprised of the costs of precautions, those of accidents that occur, and also the costs of
litigation. Thus, the socially optimal amount of suit is that which minimizes total social costs. We
want to show that the amount of suit that private parties find it in their interest to bring could be
above or below the socially optimal amount. Let us assume that liability is strict (I will comment
on the negligence rule below), and consider two examples.
         Example 1. To illustrate the possibility of socially excessive suit, suppose that the losses a
victim would suffer in an accident are $10,000, that a victim’s cost of bringing suit is $3,000 and
an injurer’s cost of defending is $2,000, that the probability of accidents is 10 percent, and that
there is no precaution that injurers can take to lower the accident risk.
         Victims will then bring suits whenever accidents occur, for suing will cost a victim only
$3,000 and yield him $10,000. From the social perspective, this outcome is undesirable. Suit
creates no beneficial deterrent, as injurers by assumption cannot do anything to lower risk. Yet
suit does generate legal costs: Expected legal costs are 10% H ($3,000 + $2,000) = $500. The
bringing of suits is not socially desirable in this example because there are no incentives toward
safety created by the suits. This fact is of no moment to victims, nor are other parties’ litigation
costs. Victims bring suits for their private gain of $10,000.//
         Although in this example there was no deterrent benefit whatever from the bringing of
suits, it should be obvious that the point of the example would hold if the deterrent benefit were
positive and not too large.
         Let us now illustrate the opposite possibility, that suits might not be brought even though
it would be best that they are brought.
         Example 2. Suppose here that the losses victims suffer in accidents are $1,000 and that an
expenditure of $10 by injurers will reduce the probability of accidents from 10 percent to 1
percent. The costs of suit and of defending against suits are as in the previous example.
         In this case victims will not bring suits, as doing so would cost a victim $3,000 but yield
him only $1,000. Because injurers will not be sued, they will have no reason to take care to
reduce risk, and total social costs will therefore be 10% H $1,000 = $100.
         It would be socially desirable for victims to bring suit, however. If they were to do so,
injurers would be led to spend $10 to lower risk from 10 percent to 1 percent, and total social
costs would thus be $10 + 1% H ($1,000 + $3,000 + $2,000) = $70. The bringing of suits is
socially worthwhile here ($70 being less than $100), because of the significant reduction in
accident losses that would result. (And observe that this is true even though the total legal costs
of $5,000 exceed the victim’s losses of $1,000.) But victims do not take the deterrence-related
benefits of suit into account. Each victim looks only to his own gain from suit, which is
negative.//
         As emphasized, a victim does not bring suit in this example because his private gain, the
harm he has sustained, is not sufficient to outweigh his legal costs, even though the general
deterrent that would be engendered by the bringing of suits would so reduce accident losses that
the bringing of suits would be socially worthwhile.7

         7
          A formal explanation of the points made in this section is as follows. Suppose that liability is strict.
Victims will sue if and only if cP < h, where cP is the victim’s (plaintiff’s) cost of suit and h is the harm suffered
and what he will collect if he sues. Let q be the probability of harm h if suit is not brought, let qN be the probability
of harm if suit is brought, and let x be the precaution expenditures that injurers will be induced to make if there is
suit. (Thus, qN will be less than q if x is positive.) If suit is not brought, total social costs will simply be qh. If suit is
                                                     Chapter 17 – Page 3
         2.3 The divergence continued; its importance and interpretation. I now mention a
number of issues that bear on the foregoing and its interpretation.
         (a) Negligence rule and the divergence between the private and the socially optimal level
of suit. Under the negligence rule, there is some reason to believe that the possible problem of
excessive suit is less serious than under strict liability. The main reason is that, under the
negligence rule, a harmful outcome is less likely to produce a suit than under strict liability
because negligence must be shown in order to prevail. Indeed, in a hypothetical, perfectly
working negligence system, a harmful outcome that is not the result of negligence would never
result in suit, and this turns out to imply that there will never be a problem of excessive suit, and
indeed that it would be desirable for the state to subsidize suits.8 Of course, the negligence
system does not operate perfectly in practice; victims sometimes bring suit against non-negligent
injurers and injurers sometimes act negligently. Therefore, problems of socially excessive suit
may well exist under the negligence rule, but it is plausible that they would be worse under strict
liability.
         (b) Generality of divergence between socially optimal and privately induced amount of
suit. It should be clear from the discussion in section 2.1 that the point that the private and the
social incentives to bring suit may diverge is robust. On one hand, it will always be the case
that the private cost of use of the system will be less than the social cost. And, on the other hand,
the private benefits from suit will be what the plaintiff will win from suit, usually money,
whereas the social benefits from suit will ordinarily be different: They will always include
deterrence benefits and may also include compensation of victims (if insurance is unavailable)
and the setting of precedent. Potential plaintiffs will tend not to take all of these social benefits
into account.
         However, the private and social incentives to bring suit may roughly coincide in contract
disputes. In such cases, the interested parties (with the exception of the state) are present at the
bargaining table and actively design their contracts before disputes arise. Hence, we would
expect contracting parties to set the terms of their agreement to minimize their expected
losses plus their joint litigation costs . For example, to avoid litigation costs, contracting parties
might stipulate that certain problems will not be deemed breaches of contract, or they might
require that disputes will be inexpensively arbitrated. Nevertheless, many contracts will not be
sufficiently detailed to include such remedies for problems of inappropriate suit, so that an

brought, social costs will be qNh + x + qN (cP + cD +cS), where cD is the injurer’s (defendant’s) litigation cost and cS
 is the state’s cost. Hence, the bringing of suit will lower total costs, be socially worthwhile, if and only if qN(cP +
cD +cS) < (q ! qN)h ! x. In other words, suit is socially worthwhile if the expected litigation costs are less than the
net deterrence benefits of suit. It is clear that this social condition for when suits should be brought, and the private
condition for when they will be brought, namely, cP < h are very different. Whether victims will sue does not
depend on the costs cD and cS . Moreover, the private benefit of suit is h, the amount of harm (conditional on harm
occurring), because this is what the victim will receive as a damages award; in contrast, the social benefit depends
on the harm weighted by the reduction in the accident probability, q ! qN, net of the cost of precautions x. Therefore
it is evident (as the examples illustrate) that victims might sue when suit is not socially optimal, and that victims
might not sue even when suit would be socially optimal.


         8
           If the state’s policy is to subsidize suit such that victims would always be willing to bring suit for
negligently caused harm, injurers would be led by the threat of suit to take due care. Hence, no suits would actually
result, just because injurers would take due care. Thus, no litigation costs would in fact be incurred by society.

                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 4
attenuated private-social divergence to sue may still exist.
         (c) Practical importance of the divergence. The difference in the private and the social
costs of suit is often large, at least in percentage terms. As emphasized, the private cost
divergence is that victims do not take into account injurers’ and the state’s litigation costs. Thus,
it is not unreasonable to expect that victims may fail to take into account around half of total
litigation costs.9
         The difference between the private and the social benefits of suit can also be substantial.
First, many harms are large in magnitude and give the victim significant incentives to sue, yet
deterrence effects may be relatively small for a variety of reasons. To illustrate, let us consider
two important areas of litigation: automobile accident litigation and product liability litigation.
         With regard to automobile accidents, we know that harms are sufficient to generate a
tremendous volume of suit: It is estimated that automobile accident disputes comprise at least
half of all tort litigation.10 However, intuition suggests that liability-related deterrence of these
accidents may be modest. Individuals have good reasons not to cause automobile accidents apart
from wanting to avoid liability: They may be injured themselves, and they face fines for traffic
violations and also serious criminal penalties for grossly irresponsible behavior (drunkenness,
excessive speed). Given the existence of these incentives toward accident avoidance, and given
that the deterrent due to liability is dulled by ownership of liability insurance, one wonders how
much the threat of tort liability adds to deterrence.11
         In the area of product liability, it also appears plausible that the incentives created by the
prospect of liability are not substantial in relation to litigation costs. Whether or not they will be
held liable, firms do not want their products to harm their customers because, if this occurs, firms
will tend to lose business and/or have to lower their prices as a consequence. It is true,
admittedly, that this inducement toward safety relies on the assumption that consumers will learn
about the risks of different product defects, whereas consumer information is almost never
perfect. But it may well be that consumer information is often tolerably good and that, on net, the
marginal deterrence engendered by the threat of product liability is not great. Although study of
the effect of product liability on accidents is, as with automobile accidents, surprisingly sparse, it
is not inconsistent with the hypothesis of low deterrence.12 The litigation costs of product
liability, however, are high. Therefore, it again appears conceivable that the private incentive to


         9
           For example, in 2000, victims’ fraction of total litigation expenditures by victims and defendants in tort
cases was approximately 52 percent; see Tillinghast-Towers Perrin 2002. Also, in 1986, victims’ fraction of total
litigation expenses in automobile litigation was about 54 percent, and their fraction of total litigation expenses in
non-automobile tort litigation was about 42 percent; see Hensler et al. 1987.
         10
             See Kakalik and Pace 1986, x, and Ostrom, Kauder, and LaFountain 2001b, 28.
         11
            Dewees, Duff, and Trebilcock 1996, 15-26, and Sloan 1998 survey empirical studies of the effects of
liability on automobile accidents; as they discuss, the evidence is mixed and in some respects contradictory.
         12
            For example, in one of the few empirical studies on product liability and deterrence, Priest 1988
examined aggregate statistics on accident and fatality rates; he found no evidence that the amount of litigation
activity influenced injury or death rates. Also, Dewees, Duff, and Trebilcock 1996, 205, conclude their survey of
empirical literature on product liability by saying that there is little evidence that strict product-liability has brought
socially desirable safety gains.

                                                   Chapter 17 – Page 5
sue has resulted in an excessive volume of suit.13
         The opposite possibility, that the volume of suit is socially inadequate, also seems to be
of practical significance. Recall Example 2 in which an individual’s losses were relatively low,
so that suit would not be brought, but in which the frequency of harmful events could be fairly
cheaply reduced. This example seems to be of real relevance. One can readily imagine situations
in which firms know that the harms that they cause will not be great enough to be worthwhile for
a typical victim to pursue, even though the incidence of the harms could be decreased
substantially by modest expenditures. (Consider low-level pollution damage, such as more
frequent peeling of paint in a neighborhood near a factory, that the factory could eliminate by
installing inexpensive smoke scrubbers.) One can also envision situations in which, even though
the magnitude of harm might be high, the expected value of suit is still low because of difficulty
in proving causation. (Suppose the pollution from the factory can produce cancer but its etiology
is hard to demonstrate.) If, once causation were established, many other suits could easily be
brought, then it might be socially valuable for suit to be filed in the case at hand even though that
would not be advantageous to the plaintiff.
         (d) Cost of suit leads to inadequacy of precautions. An issue that we have not adequately
discussed concerns the effect of the costs of suit on the level of precautions that injurers are led
to take. As a general matter, the costliness of suit means that injurers’ incentives to take
precautions will be too low, for two reasons. First, and obviously, injurers might not be sued due
to litigation costs faced by victims, and thus injurers’ expected liability will tend to be too low;
this is especially likely if the level of harm they tend to cause is lower than victims’ costs of suit.
Second, even if injurers expect to be sued when they cause harm for which they should be liable,
their level of precautions will still be too low: The damages that injurers have to pay equal the
direct harm they cause for their victims, but the full social costs include also the litigation costs
associated with suit -- the full costs that society incurs when harm leads to suit is not only the
direct harm but also the resources absorbed in the litigation process. Thus, for injurers’
incentives to be correct, injurers should bear, in addition to the direct harm caused to victims, the
litigation costs borne by victims and by the state (injurers bear their own litigation costs already).
If, for example, the harm is $10,000 and litigation costs of the plaintiff are $3,000 and those of
the state $1,000, the injurer should pay $14,000, not $10,000.14 This point is significant because
the litigation costs of plaintiffs are substantial; to ignore these costs is to omit perhaps a third of
the damages that are needed to provide injurers with proper incentives to reduce harm.15
         13
           Note that the argument of this paragraph does not apply with regard to product liability provisions that
the parties write into their contracts, but only to court-mandated product liability. Note also that the argument
obviously does not apply to harms to parties who are not injuring firms’ customers (such as people who live near a
factory and who are harmed by an explosion), for in the absence of liability firms will have no financial incentive to
avoid causing them loss.
         14
            It should be observed that the conclusion of this paragraph applies whether or not the volume of suit is
optimal. Even if suit is brought when it should not be, it is still the case that causing harm leads society to incur
litigation costs. Thus, the level of precautions should still reflect the harm plus total litigation costs, so that the
injurer should still pay for the defendant’s and the state’s litigation costs.
         15
            As previously mentioned with respect to tort litigation (section 1.1 of chapter 12), total litigation costs
appear to be about equal to amounts received by plaintiffs. Also, litigation costs may be borne roughly equally by
plaintiffs and defendants (note 9). Hence, for every dollar that defendants pay to plaintiffs, plaintiffs may spend 50
cents in litigation costs, and defendants need to pay this (and the state’s costs) as well in order for their incentives to
                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 6
         2.4 Corrective policy. It should be straightforward in principle for the state to remedy an
imbalance between the privately-determined and the socially best level of litigation. If there is
excessive litigation, the state can discourage it by imposing a properly chosen fee for bringing
suit or by some other device to make suit more expensive; the state could also refuse to allow
unwanted categories of suit to be brought. Conversely, if there is an inadequate level of suit, the
state can subsidize or otherwise encourage suit.
         However, the state requires a great deal of information to be able to assess the socially
correct volume of suit. To determine whether suit is socially desirable, the state must ascertain
not only the costs of litigation for both sides, but also the deterrent effect of suit. This means that
the state needs to deduce the cost of precautions and their effectiveness.
         It should be noted that, by contrast, for the state to ameliorate the problem of inadequate
precautions due to the cost of suit (as just discussed in section 2.3(d)), a corrective policy that
will be helpful is easily identified and should not be difficult to implement. Namely, when suit is
brought, liable defendants should have to pay more than the harm done; they should also have to
pay victims’ litigation costs and the states’ costs, for only then will they be bearing the full social
costs associated with harm.16
         2.5 Comments on the foregoing. Let me now make a number of remarks about the
divergence between the actual and the socially desirable amount of suit and about corrective
policy.
         (a) Policies wrongly thought generally to improve the volume of suit: making plaintiffs
pay the state’s litigation costs, and loser-pays fee-shifting. It follows from what has just been
said that two policies that are popularly suggested as cures for an improper volume of suit cannot
be taken to be so in any general sense. The first policy is making those who sue pay for the
state’s litigation costs, on the ground that it is economically rational for a party to have to
purchase the services that he uses.17 It is true, of course, that society would usually want a person
to pay for the cost of provision of any service that he enjoys. If a farmer uses the services of a
government veterinarian, we would want him to pay for the veterinarian’s time, for then the
farmer will use veterinary services when and only when he places a value on them exceeding
their cost. This is desirable because we assume the farmer’s benefit to be coincident with the
social benefit, so when he decides that his benefit exceeds the veterinarian’s cost, that is true for
society as well. But when a person brings suit, his benefit is, as stressed, generally different from
the social benefit. Hence, it is not clear that making him pay the full social costs of suit will lead
to a better decision from society’s perspective. (More to the point, perhaps, we know that the
policy of making plaintiffs pay for the state’s costs cannot be desirable in all cases, because we
know that it might discourage suit when suit would be socially beneficial.)
         The second policy that many find appealing is fee-shifting, under which the losing party
pays the fees of the winning party. This policy is sometimes advanced on the theory that it is just


take precautions to be appropriate.
         16
            If it is desirable to increase victims’ incentives to sue, then the augmented damages could be paid to
them; if it is best to discourage suit, certainly it would not be good to allow victims to collect more, and the extra
payments of defendants should thus be made to the state.
         17
           For discussion of this argument, see, for example, Lee 1985 and Posner 1985b, 136.

                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 7
or fair that someone who has been shown wrong in court should pay the other side’s legal
expenses.18 The question for us to consider, however, is whether loser-pays fee-shifting will have
a beneficial effect on the volume of suit.19 In the examples and the analysis that I presented
above, fee-shifting would simply serve to encourage litigation because victims -- whom we have
assumed to have good cases -- would always be able to lay off their litigation costs on injurers.
Thus, fee-shifting would tend to worsen any problem of excessive suit. Moreover, in situations
where those who bring suit do not win with certainty, it can also be demonstrated that there is no
general basis for a policy of loser-pays fee-shifting. This is not to deny that fee-shifting can have
socially desirable effects in particular circumstances. For instance, in the example in which it
was desirable for the state to subsidize suit, fee-shifting would equally induce suit; and in
contexts in which some individuals would bring unmeritorious suits to extract settlements, fee-
shifting might be desirable because it would discourage suits that are unlikely to succeed. But we
are here examining the issue of whether there is a systematic advantage of fee-shifting in regard
to controlling the volume of litigation, and there is not.
         The two policies just considered thus cannot serve as general correctives for problems
with the volume of suit. Furthermore, a little reflection reveals that there does not exist any
simple policy tool, any “magic bullet” for achieving that purpose, because appropriate social
policy depends inherently on assessment of the deterrent effect of suit, and this is intrinsically
complicated.
         (b) Practical use of corrective policy. Policies to correct the volume of suit in broad
categories of case may be desirable and feasible. If, for example, serious study of automobile
accidents and/or product accidents suggests that suit is excessive (see section 2.3(c)), one could
imagine imposition of fees on plaintiffs for bringing suit, or even a ban on suit, for these
accidents. Similarly, if it were concluded that we ought to encourage suit for certain types of
low-magnitude harms (see again section 2.3(c)), one could envision the adoption of subsidies or
loser-pays fee-shifting to stimulate legal action. Such policy responses are fairly easily envisaged
because they would not be difficult to implement and because we have observed their use before.
On one hand, worker’s compensation legislation20 and automobile no-fault statutes have
removed important categories of accident from the domain of tort law,21 New Zealand has barred
suit for all cases of personal injury,22 and certain jurisdictions have shifted legal fees to losing
plaintiffs to discourage litigation. On the other hand, legal aid programs have been employed to
subsidize litigation, statutes have authorized the award of multiplied damages to spur certain
types of litigation, and legal fee-shifting has been permitted in some areas for the same reason.23
         18
              For discussion of this fairness rationale, see, for example, Rowe 1982, 653-57.
         19
           The proper consideration of notions of fairness from the perspective of welfare economics is discussed in
chapters 26 and 27 below; the issue of relevance here, however, is the effect of fee-shifting on social welfare through its
influence on litigation costs and the volume of suit.
         20
              See, for example, Dewees, Duff, and Trebilcock 1996, 387-94.
         21
              See, for example, Joost 1992 and Carroll et al. 1991.
         22
              See, for example, Palmer 1994.
         23
          This is hardly to say that these policies have been adopted for the reasons that I have discussed. For
example, it seems that worker’s compensation legislation was enacted primarily because workers were not able to
                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 8
        Whether judges could reasonably decide to discourage or encourage suit in individual
cases is another matter. To do this, judges would need to obtain information about, or gain a
fairly good intuitive understanding of, the deterrent effect of bringing a specific type of case.
One suspects that judges would not usually be able to evaluate deterrence on such a refined
level. Unless they could do so, the most likely type of policy that could justifiably be employed
to correct the volume of suit would be legislative actions applying to whole categories of cases.
        Note on the literature. The subject of the private versus the social incentive to bring suit
was first developed in my article Shavell (1982b).24

3. Settlement versus Trial
Assuming that suit has been brought, I now take up the question of whether parties will reach a
settlement or instead go to trial. A settlement is a legally enforceable agreement, usually
involving a payment from the defendant to the plaintiff, in which the plaintiff agrees not to
pursue his claim further. If the parties do not reach a settlement, we will assume that they go to
trial, that is, that the court will determine the outcome of their case.25 I discuss here two different
models describing whether settlement occurs and then consider the socially optimal versus the
private decision of whether to settle.
         3.1 Simple model. Let us suppose for simplicity that the plaintiff and the defendant each
has somehow formed beliefs -- which may differ -- about the trial outcome. Then we can discuss
settlement possibilities in terms of two quantities. Consider first the minimum amount that the
plaintiff would accept in settlement. Assuming that the plaintiff is risk-neutral, this minimum
acceptable amount equals his expected gain from trial less the cost of going to trial. For instance,
if the plaintiff believes he will prevail with probability 70 percent, would obtain $100,000 upon
prevailing, and the trial would involve expenses to him of $20,000, the minimum amount he
would accept in settlement is 70% H $100,000 – $20,000 = $70,000 – $20,000 = $50,000; if he
were offered anything less than this amount, he would be better off going to trial. The other
quantity is the maximum amount that the defendant would be willing to pay in settlement; this is
his expected loss from trial plus his expense of going to trial. If the defendant believes the odds
of the plaintiff's winning are, say, only 50 percent, and the defendant’s trial costs would be
$25,000, then he would pay at most 50% H $100,000 + $25,000 = $50,000 + $25,000 = $75,000
in settlement.
         It is evident that if the plaintiff’s minimum acceptable amount is less than the defendant’s
maximum acceptable amount, a mutually beneficial settlement is possible -- a settlement equal to
any amount in between these two figures would be preferable to a trial for each party. Thus, if
the plaintiff’s minimum is $50,000 and defendant’s maximum is $75,000, any amount in

obtain compensation under the tort system, not because the litigation costs of the tort system were felt to outweigh
its deterrence benefits.
         24
          See also extensions and further developments in Kaplow 1986b, Menell 1983, Rose-Ackerman and Geistfeld
1987, and Shavell 1997, 1999; and see Ordover 1978 for related analysis.
         25
            The underlying assumption that there is either a settlement or a trial is to a degree an abstraction, because there
can be both: A trial can proceed and before it ends, the parties can settle. Taking this possibility into account would not
alter the qualitative nature of the conclusions to be reached, because it would remain true that settlement saves litigation
costs and occurs before the full judicial conclusion is reached.

                                                     Chapter 17 – Page 9
between, such as $60,000, would be preferred by each to going to trial. But if the plaintiff’s
minimum exceeds the most that the defendant will pay, settlement cannot occur. If, for instance,
the defendant thought the plaintiff’s chances of winning were only 20 percent, the defendant’s
maximum amount would be $20,000 + $25,000 = $45,000, so the most he would pay is less than
the minimum $50,000 that the plaintiff would be willing to accept, and settlement could not
occur.
         Can more be said about when a mutually beneficial settlement will exist? That is, under
what conditions will the plaintiff’s minimum acceptable demand be less than the defendant’s
maximum acceptable payment? It is clear that if the plaintiff and the defendant have the same
beliefs about the trial outcome, then there should always exist mutually beneficial settlements,
because they can each escape trial costs by settling. Suppose that they both believe that $50,000
is the expected judgment the defendant will have to pay if there is a trial. Then the trial costs that
the plaintiff would bear would lead to his willingness to accept a lower figure than $50,000; if
his trial costs would be $10,000, he would accept $40,000, and so forth. Conversely, any trial
costs that the defendant would have to bear would increase above $50,000 what he would be
willing to pay; if his trial costs would be $10,000, he would be willing to pay $60,000. Thus, the
settlement range would be from $40,000 to $60,000. For settlement possibilities to be eliminated,
the plaintiff’s minimum amount must rise far enough from $40,000 and/or the defendant’s fall
far enough from $60,000 such that the plaintiff’s minimum turns out to exceed the defendant’s
maximum. That can occur only if they have different beliefs about the trial outcome. This line of
thought suggests the following conclusion: A mutually beneficial settlement amount exists as
long as the plaintiff’s and defendant’s estimates of the expected judgment do not diverge too
much. Indeed, it can be shown that a mutually beneficial settlement exists as long as the
plaintiff’s estimate of the expected judgment does not exceed the defendant’s estimate by more
than the sum of their costs of trial.26 Let us illustrate.
         Example 3. Consider the situation that we have mentioned above in which the plaintiff’s
expected gain from suit is 70% H $100,000 = $70,000, his costs of trial are $20,000, the
defendant’s expected loss is 50% H $100,000 = $50,000, and his costs of trial are $25,000. Here,
we observed that mutually beneficial settlements exist, for the plaintiff would accept as little as
$50,000 and the defendant would pay as much as $75,000. Notice that it is also true that the
difference between the plaintiff’s estimate of the expected judgment and defendant’s is $70,000
– $50,000 = $20,000, and that that is less than the sum of their costs of trial, $20,000 + $25,000
= $45,000. This is consistent with the italicized statement above. Moreover, we observed that if
the defendant’s estimate of the expected judgment is $20,000, he would pay only $45,000, so
that no settlement exists. In this case, notice that the difference in the plaintiff’s and the
defendant’s estimates is $70,000 – $20,000 = $50,000, which exceeds the $45,000 sum of
litigation costs, so the nonexistence of a settlement amount is again consistent with the italicized
statement above.//
         3.2 Interpretation of the model. A number of comments may be made to help us
interpret and understand the foregoing model.

           26
              To be explicit, let pP be the plaintiff=s estimate of the probability of winning w at trial and pD be the
defendant=s probability estimate that the plaintiff will prevail; and let cP and cD be their respective trial costs. Then the
plaintiff=s minimum settlement amount is pPw – cP, and the defendant=s maximum settlement amount is pDw + cD. Hence,
a settlement is possible if and only if pPw – cP # pDw + cD, which is to say, if and only if, pPw – pDw # cP + cD.

                                                    Chapter 17 – Page 10
         (a) Does the existence of a mutually beneficial settlement amount imply that settlement
will occur? Although we know that there cannot be a settlement when a mutually beneficial
settlement amount does not exist, what can be said about the outcome when a mutually
beneficial settlement amount does exist? The answer is that there may or may not be a
settlement, depending on the nature of bargaining between the parties and the information they
have about each other. That will be discussed below, in sections 3.3 and 3.4.
         (b) Parties’ beliefs. The effect of parties’ beliefs on the existence of mutually beneficial
settlement amounts, and thus on the tendency toward settlement, can be easily understood from
the italicized conditions stated in the preceding section. Specifically, the greater the amount by
which the plaintiff’s estimate of the likelihood of winning exceeds the defendant’s, the smaller
the tendency toward settlement, as it is the excess of the plaintiff’s expected judgment over the
defendant’s expected payment that leads to trial, according to the italicized condition. It is
important to emphasize that what leads to trial is not that a plaintiff is confident of winning, but
rather that he is more confident than the defendant thinks he has a right to be. A plaintiff’s belief
that he is very likely to win does not itself suggest that trial will occur, as might naively be
thought. If the plaintiff is likely to win, it is true that he will ask for more in settlement from the
defendant than otherwise, but it is also true that if the defendant agrees that the plaintiff is likely
to win, the defendant will be willing to pay more in settlement. What makes for trial is a refusal
of the defendant to pay what the plaintiff demands, and this will be the case when the defendant
does not believe the plaintiff’s demand is warranted, which is to say, when the defendant holds
different beliefs about the expected trial outcome.
         Of course, if the plaintiff assesses his chances of winning as lower than the defendant
assesses the plaintiff’s chances, there will definitely be a range of mutually beneficial
settlements. If, for example, the plaintiff thinks his chances of winning are 30 percent and the
defendant thinks the plaintiff’s chances are 50 percent, then, given the figures mentioned above,
the plaintiff would accept any amount over $50,000, and the defendant would pay any amount up
to $80,000. (Note also that in such cases, the italicized condition automatically holds, as the
difference in the plaintiff’s expected gain and defendant’s expected loss is negative and therefore
definitely is less than the sum of trial costs.)
         What would we expect the parties’ beliefs about the likelihood of trial outcomes to be?
The parties may, and often will, be in possession of different information about a case when it
begins. For instance, the defendant may know more about whether he would be found liable than
the plaintiff knows. Also, the two sides may initially have in mind different legal arguments that
they can make. However, the parties may elect to share information or may be forced to do so
(through the discovery process, on which see section 2 of chapter 18), and parties often can
independently acquire information that the other side possesses (for instance, the plaintiff could
interview witnesses to an accident and learn more about the defendant’s behavior). To the degree
that the parties do come to similar beliefs, settlement becomes more likely.
         We would not expect, though, that beliefs will always tend to converge. For example, the
parties might not want to share certain legal arguments with each other, believing that if a trial
comes about, they would lose the advantage of surprise in making the arguments; yet in light of
these arguments, each party might believe it is more likely to win than the other. Another factor
standing in the way of convergence of beliefs is the element of natural optimism about one’s


                                          Chapter 17 – Page 11
chances.27 Additionally, a divergence of interests between the lawyer and the client (see section
7 of chapter 18) may lead the lawyer to tell the client less than the whole truth.
         But, by and large, especially because parties have legal counsel who are likely to be
familiar with the same body of law and because of opportunities for acquisition of information
about facts material to disputes, we would expect beliefs about trial outcomes to be relatively
close by the time of a trial, leading toward settlement.
         (c) Judgment amount. If the size of the judgment rises, then the likelihood of trial rises,
other things being constant. This is because the effect of a divergence in the assessments of the
likelihood of winning is magnified if the judgment that would be awarded becomes larger. If
there is, for instance, a 10 percent difference in beliefs and the judgment award would be
$10,000, the difference in expected judgments would be only $1,000, perhaps not enough to
exceed the sum of legal costs of trial and thus not enough to cause trial. But if the judgment
would be $1,000,000, the 10 percent difference in trial outcomes would signify a $100,000
difference in expected awards, and thus be more likely to exceed the sum of trial costs, leading
to trial.28
         Another point about the judgment amount is that, although we have assumed for
simplicity that the parties agree on what the judgment amount would be, that might not be so.
Differences in the parties’ beliefs about the amount that would be won affect their expected
judgments and thus the existence of mutually beneficial settlements, according to the italicized
condition. If the plaintiff thinks he would win a larger amount than the defendant thinks, then
again this would lead toward trial. Suppose, for instance, that although the plaintiff and the
defendant agree that the plaintiff has a 60 percent chance of winning at trial, the plaintiff thinks
the amount he would win would be $200,000 and the defendant thinks the amount would be only
$100,000. Then the plaintiff’s expected judgment is 60% H $200,000 = $120,000 and the
defendant’s expected payment is 60% H $100,000 = $60,000, a difference of $60,000. Thus, the
italicized condition indicates that unless the sum of their legal costs exceeds $60,000, there
exists no mutually beneficial settlement. This can be directly illustrated; if the plaintiff's trial
costs are $30,000 and the defendant’s are $20,000, the sum would be less than $60,000, and the
minimum acceptable settlement of the plaintiff would be $90,000 and the maximum the
defendant would pay would be $80,000, thus leaving no room for settlement.29
         (d) Legal expenses. The larger are the legal expenses of either party, the greater are the
chances of settlement, clearly, since the sum of legal costs will rise, and thus the greater will be
the likelihood that the sum of legal costs will exceed any excess of the plaintiff’ s expectation
over the defendant’ s expectation. One would expect legal expenses to rise with the size of the
potential judgment. This factor tends to increase the chances of settlement for large stakes cases,
and thus works opposite to the tendency just discussed in (c) toward litigation.
          (e) Risk aversion. When we introduce risk aversion into the basic model, we see that it
leads to a greater likelihood of settlement. The reason is simply that a trial is a risky venture
         27
              Loewenstein et al. 1993 and Mnookin 1993 suggest that overoptimism is plausible.
         28
          The condition for trial was seen to be that pPw – pDw > cP + cD. This is equivalent to (pP – pD)w > cP + cD,
from which it is apparent that if w rises, trial is more likely.
         29
             If we let wP and wD denote the amount that plaintiff and defendant respectively believe that they would win at
trial, then the condition for trial becomes pP wP – pD wD > cP + cD, from which the statements in text follow.

                                                   Chapter 17 – Page 12
because its outcome is unknown. This means that to a risk-averse party, settlement is more
attractive than it is to a risk-neutral party. Further, as the degree of risk aversion of either party
increases, or as the amount at stake increases -- the size of the judgment or the size of legal fees -
- settlement becomes more likely, other things being equal.
         3.3 Models with explicit bargaining and locus of information. The model that we have
discussed is simple in two important respects, among others. First, the bargaining process is not
explicit; the range of possible settlements is determined, but whether a bargain in the range will
be reached, and where so, is not predicted within the model. Second, the origin of differences in
beliefs is not explained by the model; it was assumed that the parties somehow come to their
beliefs. More sophisticated models of settlement versus trial attempt to remedy these gaps and
thus to provide additional insight into the settlement process (but, as will be remarked, they
achieve less success than might at first appear).
         The most basic version of such models is that in which bargaining consists of a single
offer, and the party who makes the offer lacks knowledge about the opposing side. For
concreteness, assume that the plaintiff makes a single offer to the defendant, but the plaintiff
does not know the probability of defendant liability, whereas the defendant does know this
(because, say, he has information about his own level of care). In this situation, we can
determine the rational settlement offer for the plaintiff to make, and then whether or not it will be
accepted. Consider the following illustration.
         Example 4. If the plaintiff prevails, he will obtain a judgment of $100,000. The cost of
trial for the plaintiff would be $10,000. There are three types of defendants, whom the plaintiff
cannot tell apart: a minority group of 10 percent, who would lose for sure; a large group of 60
percent, who would lose with probability 50 percent; and a remaining 30 percent group, who
would lose only with probability 20 percent. Thus, the expected gain from trial for a plaintiff
depends on which type of defendant the plaintiff in fact faces: If success against a defendant is
certain, the plaintiff’s gross gain from trial would be $100,000; if the likelihood of success is 50
percent, the expected gain would be $50,000; and if the likelihood of success is 20 percent, the
expected gain would be $20,000. If the legal costs for a defendant would be $10,000, the
plaintiff could demand and obtain as much as $110,000 from the first kind of defendant, $60,000
from the second type, and $30,000 from the third. If the plaintiff demands only $30,000, this will
be accepted by all types of defendants, so the plaintiff would obtain $30,000. If the plaintiff
demands $60,000, this will be accepted by the first two types of defendants but rejected by the
third, so that the plaintiff’s expected gain would be 70% H $60,000 + 30% H ($20,000 – $10,000)
= $45,000. If the plaintiff demands $110,000, this will be accepted only by the first type of
defendant, so the plaintiff’s expected gain would be 10% H $110,000 + 60% H ($50,000 –
$10,000) + 30% H ($20,000 – $10,000) = $38,000. Hence, the plaintiff will demand $60,000 in
settlement. A consequence of $60,000 being the rational demand for the plaintiff to make is that
in the 30 percent of cases where the defendant would lose only with a 20 percent chance, the
defendant will spurn the offer and there will be a trial.//
         Note that in this example, and in general, the rational settlement demand for the plaintiff
to make may be be such that there will be a chance of trial. In essence, the rational demand for
the plaintiff to make may not be so low as to produce a yes answer from any and all possible
types of defendants; to ask for so little is usually not in the expected interest of the plaintiff.30
         30
           The model under discussion and illustrated in the example is developed in Bebchuk 1984. Its formal nature is
roughly as follows. The plaintiff makes a single settlement demand x, knowing only the probability distribution over the
                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 13
This feature of the outcome, that trial may result, may be considered to be due to asymmetry of
information. For if the plaintiff knew the type of defendant he faced, he would ask for a different
amount for each type, namely, the maximum amount that that type of defendant would be willing
to pay rather than go to trial. It is therefore the asymmetry of information that leads the rational
plaintiff to ask for more than some defendants are willing to pay, and thus to the possibility of
trial.
         3.4 Comments on and interpretation of the foregoing models. (a) Variation of
assumptions about the bargaining process. If the bargaining process is different from that in the
model just discussed, complications may arise, but the fundamental conclusion that trial may
result, and that it is due to asymmetry of information is not altered. Important changes in
assumptions that have been studied involve the making of offers by parties who possess private
information (in the model just discussed, the party who did not possess private information made
the offer), sequences of offers and counteroffers, and possession of private information by both
the defendant and the plaintiff. In these more complex models, the main conclusion about trial
does not change because, as in the model sketched in the previous section, a rational bargainer
chooses his offer or demand to obtain the highest expected payoff, meaning that he may have the
bad luck to be facing an opponent who will reject his offer. However, a new element that arises
in the more complicated models is that parties may learn something about their opponents’
information from their bargaining behavior.
         (b) Nature of private information. Any kind of information that one side does not observe
that could affect the other side’s willingness to pay has the same general significance as private
information about the trial outcome, and in particular, can lead to trial. The information might be
about a party’s costs of trial, his willingness to bear risk, or his need for funds. If, for instance,
the plaintiff does not know what the defendant’s trial costs will be and thinks they are probably
high, when in fact they are low, the plaintiff may ask for too much and a trial might result.
         (c) Relationship to simple model. The simple model of section 3.1 is roughly consistent
with the explicit models of bargaining and asymmetric information now under discussion. In the
simple model, trial resulted if parties’ beliefs were sufficiently different, and in the explicit
models of bargaining here, trial also results from differences in beliefs, where the differences are
due to asymmetry of information. Moreover, the influence of trial costs and of other factors on
trial outcomes is similar in both models.31
         The main difference between the models is, as emphasized, that an explicit account of
bargaining -- and thus of the magnitude of settlements and their probabilities -- and of the source
of differences in beliefs is given in the explicit models. However, the definiteness of the account

probability p that he will prevail over a particular defendant, who does know his p.Thus, if pw + cD < x, the defendant
will reject the demand and the plaintiff will therefore obtain only pw – cP; but if pw + cD $ x, the defendant will accept
the demand and pay x. Let z(x) =(x – cD)/w, the p at which defendants will just accept the offer x rather than go to trial.
Therefore, the plaintiff=s expected payoff as a function of x is
z(x)
I(pw – cP)f(p)dp + (1 – F(z(x))x,
a
where a is some minimum probability of plaintiff victory (it is assumed that aw – cP > 0, so the plaintiff will always want
to go to trial), f is the density of p, and F is the cumulative distribution of p. The plaintiff chooses x to maximize this
expression.
         31
              See Bebchuk 1984.

                                                  Chapter 17 – Page 14
of settlement versus litigation in these explicit models is to some extent misleading. First, the
models make use of essentially arbitrary assumptions about whether it is the informed or the
uninformed party who makes the offer and about the number of rounds of bargaining; these
assumptions substantially influence the probability of settlement and the settlement offers.32
Second, the reasons for the differences in information between the parties are largely
unexplained in the models, even though parties often have strong motives to share information
(in order to reach settlement) and may be forced to do so (see sections 2 and 3 of chapter 18).
         3.5 Actual amount of trial versus settlement. In fact, the vast majority of cases settle.
Data on state courts show that over 96 percent of civil cases do not go to trial.33 Similarly,
recent data on federal courts demonstrate that, for fiscal year 2001, almost 98 percent of federal
civil cases were resolved without trial.34 These figures, however, may either overstate or
understate the true rate: because cases that are not tried may have been dismissed by a court, 96
percent or 98 percent is the settlement rate plus the dismissal rate, not the settlement rate; but
because many disputes are settled before any complaint is filed, 96 percent or 98 percent may
understate the settlement rate. In any event, it is evident that the vast majority of cases settle.
         Note on the literature.35 The simple model used to explain settlement and trial, based on
the minimum amount the plaintiff would accept and the maximum that the defendant would pay,
was first put forward in Friedman (1969), Landes (1971), and Gould (1973), and further
articulated in Posner (1972a) and Shavell (1982c). The explicit models of bargaining and
asymmetric information were strongly influenced by Bebchuk (1984), and have been developed
by, among others, Reinganum and Wilde (1986), Schweizer (1989) and Spier (1992a).36

4. Divergence between the Private and the Socially Desirable Level of Settlement
        4.1 In general.37 The private and the social incentive to settle may diverge for a number
of reasons that are related to those explaining the difference between the private and the social
incentive to sue (see section 2).
        First, the litigants may have a socially insufficient motive to settle because they do not
take all of society’s trial costs into account. In particular, the parties involved in litigation do not

         32
           However, Daughety and Reinganum 1993 attempt to explain what the nature of the bargaining process
governing settlement negotiation will be.
.
        33
           See Ostrom, Kauder, and LaFountain 2001a, 29.
         34
              See U.S. Department of Justice, 2001a, 154, Table C-4.
         35
           For general surveys of the literature on settlement, see Cooter and Rubinfeld 1989, Daughety 2000, and Hay
and Spier 1998.
           36
              See also Hay 1995. See as well Farmer and Pecorino 1996 for a survey of asymmetric information models of
litigation, and Kennan and Wilson 1993 for a general survey of asymmetric information models of bargaining. See Farber
and White 1991, Osborne 1999, and Sieg 2000 for empirical investigations of litigation emphasizing asymmetric
information, and see also Ramseyer and Nakazato 1989, and Viscusi 1986a.
         37
           The subject of the social desirability of settlement as opposed to trial, and of possible divergence between
private and social incentives to settle, has received very little attention (as opposed to the description of the private
incentives to settle, the subject of section 3). However, a mainly informal discussion of the topic is contained in Shavell
1997, and some formal analysis is undertaken in Polinsky and Rubinfeld 1988, Shavell 1999, and Spier 1997.

                                                   Chapter 17 – Page 15
bear the salaries of judges and of ancillary personnel, the value of jurors’ time, the implicit rent
on court buildings, and the like; the parties thus save less by settling than society does. For this
reason, they may proceed to trial more often than would be socially desirable.
         A second reason that the private incentive to settle may be socially inadequate concerns
asymmetric information. As discussed in sections 3.3 and 3.4, asymmetric information leads
parties to fail to settle because they may misgauge each others’ situations. But that a party may
incorrectly estimate the other’s situation does not imply that social resources should be expended
on trial.
         A third factor suggesting that private incentives to settle may diverge from social
incentives is that settlement affects deterrence. The parties themselves would usually not be
thought to consider deterrence as an important factor in deciding between settlement and trial;
for them, the event giving rise to a legal action has occurred and it might seem irrational to them
to give deterrence of others any weight. (In the standard models, they would give it no weight.)
Thus, if settlement were to reduce deterrence, and that were thought undesirable, we would
conclude that there is a reason for parties to settle too much. But does settlement reduce
deterrence? One would suppose that settlement exerts a diluting effect on deterrence because
defendants want settlement. Yet the prospect of settlement is also an advantage to potential
plaintiffs (because it means that they do not bear litigation costs or risk) and may, at least in
principle, result in suits that would not otherwise occur; thus it seems possible that settlement
might increase deterrence. A further complication is that even if we know in what direction
settlement will affect deterrence, that does not tell us if the effect is socially desirable, for, as
explained in section 1, the private incentive to bring suit could be socially excessive or socially
inadequate. Still another complication is that the information brought out at trial may improve
incentives as well as affect the expected judgment, and in different ways.38 In the end, therefore,
we can say that the effect of settlement on deterrence may result in a divergence between the
private and the social motive to settle, but for a variety of reasons we cannot generalize about the
nature of the divergence.
         Thus, the conclusion to this point is that there are two underlying factors suggesting that
parties have an inadequate incentive to settle -- they do not consider the full social costs of trial,
and they may misgauge each other’s situation -- and an underlying factor of unclear consequence
-- that settlement affects deterrence.
         4.2 The divergence between private and social incentives to settle continued. Let me
review several other factors bearing on the comparison between private and socially desirable
settlement incentives that go somewhat outside the type of model that we have been implicitly
considering in our discussion.
         One issue not so far mentioned is settlement as a means of securing privacy. When
parties settle, various facts that would have emerged at trial do not come to the notice of the
public. The privacy and secrecy that is achieved by settlement in these cases often constitutes an
advantage to the settling parties and helps to explain why they settle. For example, a defendant
firm whose product was defective may not want this information to come to light and may be
willing to pay an extra amount for that reason in order to achieve settlement (the victim may not
much care whether the information is revealed). A victim might be embarrassed by the facts of a
dispute (suppose the suit is for sexual harrassment) or not want to acquire a reputation as a
       38
            I discuss aspects of this point in section 5.3 below and in section 2 of chapter 19.

                                                    Chapter 17 – Page 16
troublemaker, and so wish to settle for that reason. In some cases, the parties’ desire for privacy
may be socially beneficial, but many times it seems that society would benefit from the
information that would be revealed through trial. This would be the situation with regard to the
firm that wants to keep its product defect secret; if the public learns about the defect, perhaps
people can take precautions to reduce harm, and further, the firm will suffer adverse
consequences, leading to improved deterrence. In circumstances like this, then, the private
motive to settle may be excessive.
         Another issue is that valuable interpretations of the law may be made and new precedents
established through trial. However, many trials do not make new law: Trials are often the result
of disagreements about facts, not about law, and where trial is the product of disagreement about
law, published opinions that create new law are not automatic. Furthermore, a natural conjecture
is that the number of cases the courts need to hear in order to modify the law is trivial in relation
to the total volume of cases that do go to trial.39 Therefore, it would seem that in the great
majority of cases, the issue of the elaboration of the law will not be of real importance to the
social versus the private incentive to go to trial.
         A similar issue is that social norms may be validated through trial in the sense that they
may be publicly invoked to justify legal outcomes. Thus, the importance of the norms may be
reinforced by the trial process. Because this factor is not one that individuals would tend to count
as a private benefit of trial, it suggests a tendency toward insufficient trial. However, in assessing
the relevance of the factor, one must consider not only the limited value of trials (as opposed to
parents, schools, religious institutions) in teaching morality, but also that, as with the
development of law, the number of trials necessary to meet this goal is probably not large.40
         Finally, it is often said that trial is socially desirable because it helps to keep peace in
society and promotes solidarity by allowing individuals to air grievances and express their views
about issues in dispute. However, this social benefit of trial appears often to be in alignment with
the private benefit (when the social peace would be compromised if a person did not air his
grievance, he would want to do so). Nevertheless, the social benefit under discussion is not
coincident with the private benefit (social peace benefits more than just the aggrieved party), and
suggests that the social incentive to have a trial may sometimes exceed the private incentive.
         4.3 Legal policy bearing on settlement versus trial. The legal policies that we observe
bearing on settlement versus trial predominantly foster the former. This is accomplished by
allowing parties to engage in discovery, sometimes requiring them to participate in non-binding
arbitration prior to trial, holding settlement conferences, and so forth. These devices work
principally by increasing the information that parties have about each other and thus tend to
reduce the possibility of bargaining impasses. In addition, the law promotes settlement
negotiations by prohibiting settlement offers from being introduced as evidence at trial, and by
the basic policy of making settlement agreements binding on the parties (otherwise the
meaningfulness and value of settlements would be compromised). Further, courts often use their

         39
           Moreover, there are arguments for not viewing trial as necessary for the development of the law: Courts
could issue advisory opinions interpreting the law in the absence of particular disputes; in principle, there is no
reason why courts require the occasion of a legal dispute in order to interpret the law.
         40
           It seems that the potential for teaching morality lessons from trials can be well achieved through
adjudication of a small, select group of cases.

                                                Chapter 17 – Page 17
powers of suasion to encourage settlement.
         The justification that one usually sees offered for the general promotion of settlement is
that it clears dockets and saves public and private expense. This justification comports with
economic analysis in the obvious sense that the parties do not consider the court’s time and other
public costs associated with trial as a saving from settlement. The policy of fostering settlement
is also justified by a factor that is not usually mentioned by commentators, that parties may want
go to trial for reasons that often are not socially relevant, notably, because of disagreement about
the likely trial outcome. The possibility that trial ought to be held despite the parties’ wishes to
settle receives relatively little attention. One wonders, for example, about the wisdom of
promoting settlement, let alone allowing it, in situations in which deterrence is likely to be
compromised by the fact that in a settlement the identity of defendants, the fact of harm, and/or
important aspects of the defendants’ conduct do not become public knowledge.
         4.4 Comment: A chief social purpose of the institution of trial is paradoxical -- to
foster settlement. Finally, let me add a number of comments about the social purposes of
maintaining our system of trial adjudication that deserve empahsis although they are
restatements of what has been discussed above. First, the socially desirable fraction of trials
relative to settlements is probably small, given the high costs of trials and the often limited and
unclear benefits of trials over settlements. That the actual fraction of settlements is about 98
percent is consistent with this point. At the same time, there would be no settlements, and the
great social benefits derived from them (notably, deterrence of unwanted behavior and
compensation of victims), would not be achieved in the absence of the ability of parties to go to
trial (as was discussed at length in section 3). Hence, it may be said that an important
justification for society’s having established the legal apparatus for the holding of trials is,
paradoxically, not actually to have trials occur. Rather, it is to provide victims with the threat
necessary to induce settlements.

5. Trial and Litigation Expenditure
        5.1 Private incentives to spend on litigation. For a variety of reasons, expenditures will
tend to increase a litigant’s chances of prevailing at trial or will influence beneficially the
magnitude or character of the judgment. A party will generally make a litigation expenditure as
long as it costs less than the expected benefit it yields. To assess the expected benefit due to a
particular legal step, a party will often have to consider not only the court’s reaction to it, but
also the reaction of the other litigant to it.41
        5.2 Actual litigation expenditures. Amounts spent on litigation are substantial, as
indicated by the statistic that about 1.25 per cent of our gross domestic product is spent on legal
services.42 It should be noted that much of these expenditures are made before trial, in
anticipation of possible trial (it is for expositional convenience that I often speak of them as trial
expenditures).
        5.3 Social versus private incentives to spend on litigation. There are several sources
of divergence between social and private incentives to spend during litigation. First, litigants
may well be spending in ways that fully offset each other, and thus that have no social value. A

         41
          For analysis of expenditures of the two sides during litigation, see Braeutigam, Owen, and Panzar 1984, Katz
1988, and Posner 1972a; these writings are mainly descriptive in character.
         42
              See Statistical Abstract of the United States 2001, 418.
                                                    Chapter 17 – Page 18
classic instance is when both parties devote effort to legal arguments of roughly equivalent
weight but supporting opposite claims, or when both hire experts who produce equally
convincing reports favoring opposite assertions.
        Second, expenditures that are not offsetting may mislead the court rather than enhance
the accuracy of outcomes. For example, a guilty defendant may be able to escape liability for
harm for which he was responsible, and this possibility dilutes deterrence. Legal expenditures
resulting in such outcomes have a negative social value even though they have positive private
value.
        Third, expenditures that are not offsetting and that do not mislead courts may not be
socially optimal in magnitude. By analogy to what was stressed in section 1 about the bringing
of suits, the parties decide on their level of expenditures based on how the expenditures will
influence the litigation outcome, without regard to the effect (if any) on incentives to reduce
harm. This could lead to expenditures that are too great or that are too small, relative to what is
socially correct. Consider a victim’s decision to hire an expert to produce a report on his behalf.
The victim will not consider the cost that his expert’s report imposes on the injurer: The injurer
may need to hire an expert of his own to limit the impact of the victim’s expert. Nor will the
victim consider the cost due to the increased time the court will devote to listening to his expert
and the injurer’s expert should there be a trial. The victim will also fail to consider the effect of
his expert’s report on deterrence. Victims’ ignoring the costs they impose on others may lead
them to spend socially excessively on experts, while their not considering the deterrence
produced by their experts’ reports could result in their not spending enough on experts. Similar
observations apply to virtually any type of legal expenditure, whether made by victims or by
injurers. Thus, although non-offsetting expenditures do by definition help the parties who make
them, we cannot say in theory whether or not they are socially excessive or inadequate; which is
so depends on the particulars.
        An important instance of the possibility that expenditures could be socially excessive
concerns the assessment of damages.43 Suppose that the presently estimated harm deviates from
the truth by $100. Then one of the litigants will be willing to spend up to $100 to prove the
correct amount (the defendant will do so if the estimate exceeds the correct level, and the
plaintiff will do so if the estimate is too low). It can be shown that the social value of the more
accurate estimate tends, however, to be lower than $100, because the social value of accuracy is
based on its effects on incentives. Indeed, there will sometimes be no beneficial incentive effect
from more accurate assessment of harm, such as when errors are unbiased and not predictable ex
ante by potential injurers. Consider, for example, the precise extent of harm the victim suffered
in an automobile accident. Much may be spent establishing the magnitude of harm by presenting
evidence on medical bills, the time lost from work, and the victim’s wages. But these
expenditures will not improve the incentives of drivers to prevent accidents presuming that they
do not know ahead of time the magnitude of harm that will result in the event that they cause an
accident (that is, if all that they know is the probability distribution of possible harms, depending
on who is in the car they strike, the nature of the impact, and so forth). If this is the case,
injurers’ incentives to prevent accidents will be essentially identical to what they are now if
instead there is no real inquiry into the scale of harm, and damages are simply set equal to the

       43
            This point is developed in Kaplow and Shavell 1996a.

                                                 Chapter 17 – Page 19
average harm that victims sustain in that kind of automobile accident.44
        5.4 Legal policy bearing on litigation expenditure. There are several means of
influencing litigation expenditures that exist, given the basic form of legal rules and legal
procedure. Expenditures can be encouraged through subsidy and discouraged through monetary
disincentives such as fees or taxes, and they can also be regulated through constraints on the time
parties are given to prepare for trial, restrictions on discovery, limits on the length of permitted
submissions and the number of testifying experts, and so forth. In fact, controls on expenditures
seem to be made largely through such forms of regulation of the pretrial and trial process rather
than through financial inducements.
        In addition, litigation expenditures could be controlled through changes in substantive
legal rules. A notable example of such a change is one under which damages would be based on
a table rather than on an elaborate presentation of evidence. As was suggested above, it may well
be that incentives toward desirable behavior would not be much affected were damages based on
tables of expected values rather than on invidual assesssment of harm, so that this rule change
could substantially reduce the private expenditures on litigation with little change in deterrence.
        Finally, litigation expenditures can be modified through revision of legal procedure. A
possibility that would be desirable in some circumstances is for certain types of evidence to be
produced not by the parties but by court-appointed experts. Especially where private knowledge
of the parties is not needed in order to develop evidence, court direction of the acquisition of
information might be more beneficial than the parties’, which might both mislead courts and
result in duplication of efforts.




         44
            For example, suppose that all that injurers know when deciding on a precaution is that if an accident occurs, it
will result in harm of $1,000, $2,000, or $3,000, each with equal probability -- injurers thus do not know the particular
magnitude of the harm that would occur. If damages are set equal to actual harm (after a perhaps costly legal
determination), injurers obviously will not know ex ante what their liability will be if an accident occurs; they will know
only that their expected liability given an accident will be $2,000 (that is, (1/3) H $1,000 + (1/3) H $2,000 + (1/3)
H $3,000). If instead damages are simply set equal to the average harm of $2,000, injurers= expected liability given an
accident will be the same. Therefore, injurers will behave identically.
                                                   Chapter 17 – Page 20
                                                       Chapter 18

                      EXTENSIONS OF THE BASIC THEORY OF LITIGATION

I discuss here various extensions of the basic theory discussed in chapter 17. In particular, I
investigate negative value suits, voluntary and required disclosure of information prior to trial,
shifting of legal fees depending on the outcome at trial, inference from trial outcomes, elements
of trial outcomes apart from the judgment, and the roles of lawyers and insurers in litigation.
Consideration of these topics should help to round out our understanding of litigation.45

1. Negative Value Suits
         1.1 Definition and a puzzling aspect of negative value suits. It is often noted that
plaintiffs sometimes bring suits that they would not in fact be willing to proceed to litigate.
These suits are called negative value suits because, for the plaintiffs who bring them, the
expected benefits of litigation would be outweighed by the costs of litigation. The reason that the
suits are said to be brought nevertheless is that plaintiffs may be able to extract settlements from
defendants. This claim about negative value suits raises an immediate question: Why would a
defendant pay a positive amount in settlement to a plaintiff who would not actually go through
with trial? That is, if the plaintiff does not have a credible threat to proceed to trial, why would a
defendant rationally pay a settlement, and if the defendant would not be willing to pay, why
would the plaintiff bring suit in the first place? Two basic answers to this question, resting on
different assumptions, may be offered.46
         1.2 Explanations for negative value suits. The first answer concerns the possibility that
defendants do not know whether a plaintiff would or would not be willing to go to trial. If a
defendant lacks this information, then it may be rational for him to settle with a plaintiff because
of the possibility that the plaintiff might be one who would be willing to go to trial. The
defendant will be willing to pay a positive settlement if the proportion of plaintiffs who would be
willing to go to trial (because they would obtain a positive expected return from trial) is
sufficiently high relative to those plaintiffs who are masqueraders. In other words, the
masqueraders ride on the coattails of those plaintiffs who are willing to go to trial. Let me
illustrate.
         Example 1. There are two groups of plaintiffs: a minority of 10 percent for whom losses
are low, say 20, and the other 90 percent for whom losses are 100. Plaintiffs will collect their
losses in judgments if they go to trial. The cost of trial is 30 for all plaintiffs. Thus, the low-loss
plaintiffs are not willing to go to trial, for the cost of 30 outweighs their judgment of 20. The
other plaintiffs, who would net 70 from trial, will be willing to go to trial.
         Defendants are assumed to be unable to tell whether a plaintiff is a low-loss plaintiff or a
high loss one -- and thus whether a plaintiff would be willing in fact to go to trial. Let us show
that a defendant would rationally offer 70 in settlement in order to achieve settlements with the

         45
            However, there are obviously many other topics not discussed here that are of interest in respect to litigation,
for example, class actions, and sequential versus joint adjudication of the issues in a case. My object is not to be
comprehensive but rather to illustrate how the basic analysis of the last chapter can be elaborated to take into account
additional factors of relevance and to treat some of the more important factors.
         46
              For a survey of literature on negative expected value suits, see Bebchuk 1998.
                                                     Chapter 18 – Page 1
High-loss plaintiffs. Assume that defendants’ trial costs would be 25. If a defendant offers 70, he
knows that all plaintiffs will settle, so his cost will be 70. A defendant will not offer a positive
settlement amount less than 70, for any positive amount less than 70 will be refused by the high-
loss plaintiffs, so would only benefit the low loss plaintiffs, who would not have gone to trial. If
the defendant offers nothing, then all high-loss plaintiffs will go to trial, so his expected cost will
be 90% H 125 = 112.5, which exceeds 70. Hence, it is better for the defendant to offer 70,
meaning that he pays the 10 percent of low-loss plaintiffs 70 even though they would not go to
trial, in order to achieve settlement savings from the 90 percent of plaintiffs who would go to
trial.
         If, however, the fraction of low-loss plaintiffs who are masquerading as high-loss
plaintiffs is sufficiently large (above 44 percent in fact), defendants will not make a positive
settlement offer.47//
         More generally, the presence of masqueraders will tend to lower the settlement offers that
defendants make, and this means that there will be more trials than otherwise, because more
plaintiffs who would be willing to go to trial will refuse the lower settlement offer and go to
trial.48
         A second explanation for negative value suits arises when the plaintiff would be able to
win a judgment if the defendant does not spend an amount on defense (for instance, to develop
evidence to defeat a groundless claim) -- even though the plaintiff would lose if the defendant
does spend this amount (because the claim is groundless). In such a situation, the defendant will
rationally pay a positive amount in settlement in order to avoid the defense cost. Thus, even
though the plaintiff would not bring the suit if there were no chance of extracting a settlement,
the plaintiff will bring the suit. An example will clarify this point.49
         Example 2. A plaintiff can bring suit at a cost of 10. If the plaintiff does bring suit, he
will obtain a judgment of 100 if the defendant does not defend himself. If the defendant does
defend himself, at a cost of 30, he will prevail and the plaintiff will obtain nothing. Note,
therefore, that if there were no settlement negotiations, the plaintiff would not bring suit: For if
he did so, he would spend 10, then the defendant would rationally defend, and the plaintiff would
definitely lose.
         However, once the plaintiff brings suit, he will be able to extract as much as 30 from the
defendant in a settlement. The defendant would, for example, pay 25 in order for the plaintiff to
drop the case, for otherwise the defendant would have to spend 30 to avoid paying the plaintiff
100. Knowing that he can extract a positive settlement from the defendant, the plaintiff may
bring suit, and he will do so as long as the settlement he can extract exceeds the cost of bringing
suit of 10.//
         The key assumptions here that allow the plaintiff to extract a settlement, even though he

         47
           At 44 percent, the expected cost to a defendant who offers nothing is 56% H 125 = 70, just equal to his cost if
he offers 70.
         48
            In our example, this phenomenon did not occur because there was only one group of plaintiffs who would be
willing to go to trial. But if there had been more than one group, or a continuum, then the presence of plaintiffs who are
unwilling to go to trial can be shown generally to reduce the magnitude of any positive offer the defendant would
otherwise make. This is shown in Bebchuk 1988, who first developed the point under discussion; see also Katz 1990a.
         49
              The point under discussion, as illustrated in the example, is developed in Rosenberg and Shavell 1985.

                                                     Chapter 18 – Page 2
would lose if the defendant spent on defense, are two: first, that it is cheap for the plaintiff to
bring suit and thereby create the threat to win, and second, that it is relatively expensive for the
defendant to defend himself. This is the situation in a significant number of contexts, but is not
the situation in many others, where the plaintiff would not win easily just because he brought
suit and would have to go to considerable additional expense to prevail at trial.50
        1.3 Are negative value suits socially undesirable? Although negative value suits often
are socially undesirable, it cannot be said that they are necessarily socially undesirable.
        Consider first a suit that is without merit in the sense that the plaintiff definitely would
not prevail if the facts were known. For example, imagine that the plaintiff did not really suffer
injury. If such a plaintiff brings a negative value suit (as he might for either of the reasons
discussed above), this is socially undesirable. Notably, it tends to distort incentives, for example,
makes parties who might face negative value suits take excessive precautions or discourage them
from engaging in activities for which the benefits exceed the true social costs. Such suits also
generate litigation costs, and impose risk, to no social purpose.
        Next consider suits that have possible merit, and perhaps suits that the plaintiff is certain
to win, but which are nevertheless negative value suits because the trial costs exceed the
expected judgment. These suits may or may not be socially undesirable. As was discussed in
section 2 of chapter 17, the private incentive to bring suit may diverge from the social, and it is
possible that suits that victims would not be inclined to bring, because their harm and thus their
awards would be less than their trial costs, would be socially good for them to bring because of
the beneficial incentives that they would create. If it so happens that such victims find that they
can in fact bring suits because, say, they can pretend to be high-loss victims and obtain positive
settlements, this may be socially desirable because it compensates implicitly for the
underdeterrence of low harms that would ordinarily occur due to litigation costs. This illustrates
that negative value suits might be socially desirable, even though the usual expectation is that
they would not be.51

2. Sharing of Information Prior to Trial
        2.1 Motive to share information. In the discussion of settlement versus trial of chapter
17, I assumed that the information of parties was somehow exogenously determined: Either
information was in the background and influenced parties’ perhaps disparate beliefs, or else
information was explicitly presumed to be asymmetric. However, litigants in general have strong
motives to share information with each other prior to trial, in order to foster settlement and to
improve its terms.52 A plaintiff, for example, would want to show the defendant information

         50
            Although the two explanations given in this section are the major ones for negative value suits, there are others.
Bebchuk 1996 shows that the fact that legal expenses are made in stages over time may lead to negative value suits. In
particular, if a plaintiff brings suit and spends funds prior to trial, then just before trial, having already spent some funds,
the remaining trial cost may be less than the expected judgment. Hence, at the point just before trial, he may have a
credible threat to sue. This implies that, at the beginning, he may have a credible threat to sue and be able to extract a
settlement even though, were he to go to trial, his total cost would exceed his expected judgment.
         51
           For examination of how negative value suits might be discouraged, see Katz 1990a and Polinsky and
Rubinfeld 1993, 1996.
        52
           The motive to share information prior to trial was first analyzed in Shavell 1989, which this section largely
summarizes.

                                                     Chapter 18 – Page 3
establishing that his losses were in fact higher than the defendant believes, so as to secure a
settlement and a higher one than he could otherwise obtain. If a defendant thinks that a plaintiff
who does not reveal information about his losses probably suffered losses in the neighborhood of
$10,000, but the plaintiff really experienced losses of $20,000, the plaintiff will want to establish
to the defendant that his losses are $20,000 in order to induce the defendant to pay more in
settlement and perhaps avoid an impasse leading to trial. (An essentially equivalent way of
expressing this point is to observe that the plaintiff will want to reveal that his losses are $20,000
in order to avoid a negative inference that the defendant would make from his failure to disclose
information that his losses were relatively high.53) Likewise, a defendant would want to show
the plaintiff evidence pointing toward the defendant’s lack of legal responsibility in an accident,
in order to convince the plaintiff to accept a lower settlement offer.
         The incentives that parties have to reveal information to one another tend to produce
significant voluntary disclosure of information. Indeed, it can be shown that, due to rational
voluntary disclosure of information, there will always be settlement in a benchmark model of
litigation in which there is one-sided private information that that side can choose to disclose.54
In other words, the fact that there is initial asymmetry of information will not lead to trial when
the party with private information is able to share it.55 This point means that the explanation for
the occurrence of trial must rest on a deeper understanding of the litigants’ situation than the
observation that one side possesses private information.




         53
          The revelation of information to avoid a negative inference from silence is sometimes referred to as the
unraveling phenomenon. On this, see the survey in Gertner 1998.
         54
             Suppose for concreteness that plaintiffs have private information about the magnitude of their losses. In the
model, the assumptions are as follows. The plaintiff first decides whether or not to reveal his losses to the defendant. The
defendant then makes a settlement offer. The plaintiff either accepts the offer or goes to trial. Of course, each side acts
rationally in his self-interest. One aspect of rationality is that, when the defendant decides how much to offer to a silent
plaintiff, the defendant takes into account the probability distribution of losses among silent plaintiffs (which is to say,
makes a negative inference about their true losses -- why else did they remain silent?).
         55
             This is true even though, in general, the sharing of information is not complete. Consider the following
illustrative example. Plaintiffs’ losses are distributed between $10,000 and $50,000, plaintiffs’ trial costs are $3,000, and
defendant’s trial costs are $5,000. Now it is true that a situation in which too large a range of plaintiffs are silent cannot
occur, because the putatively silent plaintiffs with relatively high losses would choose to disclose their losses in order to
obtain a higher amount. For instance, suppose that all plaintiffs with losses between $10,000 and $30,000 are silent and
that silent plaintiffs receive an offer of $18,000 (the defendant will choose his offer knowing the probability distribution
of losses of silent plaintiffs). Then plaintiffs at the high end, such as those whose losses are $30,000, would choose to
reveal their losses, for if such a plaintiff revealed his losses, he could obtain at least $30,000 ! $3,000 (his litigation costs)
or $27,000 from the defendant. This “unraveling” effect, however, will not result in the topmost silent plaintiffs revealing
their losses if the silent group is sufficiently small. For instance, suppose that the silent group is plaintiffs between $10,000
and $15,000 and that the defendants offer silent plaintiffs $12,000. Then the topmost plaintiff whose losses are $15,000
would not benefit by revealing his losses -- for he would then receive an offer of $15,000 ! $3,000, or $12,000. Moreover,
it can be shown that the defendant might well not want to reduce his offer below $12,000, because even though this would
save him money from the majority of silent plaintiffs, he would lose more on account of the minority who would reject and
go to trial, as he would then have to pay his own litigation costs.

                                                     Chapter 18 – Page 4
          2.2 Why some information is not shared and trial may result. In spite of the
incentives to share information, some information will not be shared and this may lead to trial.56
There are two principal reasons why information might not be shared. The first is simply that
information may be difficult to share in a credible way, even though a party wants to do that. For
instance, a plaintiff might know that his losses are $20,000, but not be able to demonstrate this
during settlement negotiations (because, say, experts will have to be hired by the time of trial to
demonstrate the losses). Hence, trial could result because the defendant might make an offer
based on his belief that the plaintiff’s losses are only $10,000.
          A somewhat subtle coattails effect follows when some parties are unable to share
information credibly: Certain parties who are able to reveal their information will decide to
remain silent, so that they can be mistaken for those who are unable to reveal their information.
For example, if the group of plaintiffs who are unable to demonstrate their information credibly
have losses that average $20,000, then a plaintiff whose losses are only $5,000 and who is able
to reveal them might well choose to remain silent, so that he will be treated more like the
plaintiffs with losses that average $20,000 and thus will be offered more in settlement than he
would obtain if he revealed his low losses. Therefore, as a general matter, when some parties are
unable to reveal information, it will become advantageous for other parties who could reveal
their information to remain silent.57
          The second major reason why information might not be revealed is that revelation of
information may reduce its value to a party because the opposing party may be able to counter it
at trial once that party has foreknowledge of it. For example, the plaintiff might not reveal
information showing that his losses are $20,000 because the defendant will then have the time to
find an expert who can cast doubt on the plaintiff’s evidence so as to reduce what he can collect
at trial to $15,000. The plaintiff’s withholding of this information could lead to trial.58

3. Forced Disclosure of Information Prior to Trial: Discovery
The courts may require that a litigant disclose certain information to the other side; that is, one
litigant may enjoy the legal right of discovery of information held by the other side.
         3.1 Effect of discovery is only in addition to that flowing from voluntary disclosure.
It is commonly believed that the right of discovery significantly increases the likelihood of
settlement because it reduces differences in parties’ information. But, as just emphasized in
section 2, there may well be substantial voluntary sharing of information, so that the influence on
settlement of compulsory disclosure through discovery will not necessarily be significant.
Indeed, the effect of discovery on settlement is nonexistent in the benchmark model in which the
         56
          The reasons to be given here for why parties do not reveal information are distinct from that discussed in the
previous note, which was a reason for failure to disclose, but not one that leads to trial.
           57
              This in turn can increase the amount of trial. In the example of the low-loss plaintiffs who decide to remain
silent and join the group who are unable to reveal their information, the rational offer that defendants make will be lower
than otherwise (since defendants will know that some silent plaintiffs are silent just because their losses are low). And this
reduced settlement offer will be rejected by more of the silent plaintiffs who cannot reveal their losses, so the likelihood of
trial will rise.
         58
             Note in particular that if the plaintiff reveals the information, his threat becomes one of winning only $15,000 at
trial, so the defendant could offer him as little as $12,000 (that is, $15,000 less his $3,000 of litigation costs). If the
plaintiff is silent and goes to trial, he is better off because his net gain is $17,000.

                                                    Chapter 18 – Page 5
party with private information is able to disclose it, for in that situation settlement always occurs
due to voluntary disclosure.59
        To understand how discovery affects outcomes, consider the reasons why information
might not be voluntarily shared. The first reason that I noted above, in section 2.2, was that a
party might be unable to demonstrate his information credibly, such as a plaintiff who is unable
to establish his losses until an expert is hired. Discovery cannot have an effect on this type of
plaintiff because, by hypothesis, he is unable to establish his losses (since he does not yet
possess an expert’s report). However, I also noted the coattails effect, that some parties who are
able to disclose information would choose not to do so (such as low-loss plaintiffs who could
reveal their losses). These parties would be forced by discovery to reveal their information.
Moreover, just because these parties would reveal their information, there would be an indirect,
complex effect on settlement offers that would tend to raise the settlement rate.60
        Next consider the more direct effect of discovery on parties who are able to disclose
information but do not do so because it could be countered at trial. These parties will be forced
to reveal their information by discovery, and that will clearly lead to more settlement.
        3.2 Discovery as a costly threat. An important point about discovery that is wholly apart
from its effects on information transmission is that obeying discovery requests is often expensive
because significant time and resources may be needed to produce the desired information. This
raises questions about the use of discovery requests as a threat, for the costs of compliance with
discovery requests are, under our current system, generally borne by the side asked to comply.
        3.3 Discovery and social optimality. The question of the social optimality of discovery
involves a number of issues. As just noted, to the extent that the side requesting discovery does
not bear its costs, there is reason to believe that the private incentive to engage in discovery may
be socially excessive. Also, the private incentive to obtain discovery may diverge from the social
benefits of discovery. The social benefits of discovery involve, among other elements, the
promotion of deterrence through development of better information (which will affect both
settlements and trial outcomes), and more effective and lower cost trials, owing to the parties’
having relevant information in advance of trials. Because the private and social benefits
generally diverge, the suspicion is that the private incentives to engage in discovery may often be
socially undesirable, either excessive or insufficient, depending on the particulars of the
situation.61


          59
             The first model of discovery was Sobel 1989, but his analysis does not determine behavior of parties who
voluntarily disclose information, so the effect of discovery against the background of voluntary disclosure is not
ascertained. The first model to determine the difference that discovery makes, given that there will be voluntary disclosure
of information without discovery is Shavell 1989, the main points of which are noted here. See also subsequent related
work of Cooter and Rubinfeld 1994, Hay 1994, Mnookin and Wilson 1998, Schrag 1999, and Shepherd 1999, and see the
survey Rubinfeld 1998.
         60
           Because low-loss plaintiffs who can reveal their losses would be forced to do so, defendants would raise their
settlement offers to plaintiffs who cannot supply information about their losses. That will raise the settlement rate because
more of the plaintiffs who are unable to disclose their losses will accept the settlement offer rather than go to trial.
         61
          One occasionally encounters the view that discovery is socially undesirable if its costs exceed the benefit to the
party who obtains discovery. This is not a correct view, for the private benefits to the party seeking discovery, an
improvement in settlement terms or the trial outcome, have only a weak connection to the social benefits of discovery.

                                                    Chapter 18 – Page 6
4. Shifting of Legal Fees to the Loser at Trial
         Thus far we have assumed that parties bear their own legal fees, which is often referred to
as the American rule for the allocation of legal fees. By contrast, the bearing of legal fees can be
made to depend on the outcome of trial.62 A major form of such fee-shifting is the so-called
English rule, under which the loser at trial bears his opponent’s legal fees as well as his own. We
will restrict our attention here to this form of fee-shifting.63
         4.1 Effects of fee-shifting on the bringing of suit. Fee-shifting has implications for the
incentive to sue. Fee-shifting leads to more suit in situations in which plaintiffs are likely to win,
for this means that plaintiffs are unlikely to have to pay their legal expenses. Suppose that the
probability of plaintiff victory is 70 percent, that the judgment amount would be $100,000, and
that the plaintiff’s trial costs and the defendant’s would each be $80,000. Then under the
American rule, the plaintiff would not bring suit because his costs of $80,000 exceed his
expected gain of $70,000. Under the English rule, however, he would bring suit because his
expected costs would be only 30% H $160,000 or $48,000.
         Conversely, fee-shifting leads to less suit in situations in which plaintiffs are unlikely to
win. Suppose that the plaintiff’s probability of victory is now only 30 percent, that the judgment
amount would be $100,000, that the plaintiff’s legal costs would be $10,000, and that the
defendant’s legal costs would be $80,000. Under the American rule, the plaintiff would sue,
$10,000 being less than the $30,000 expected gain, but under the English rule the plaintiff would
not sue because his expected expenses would be 70% H $90,000 = $62,000.
         As a general matter, the range of high probabilities of prevailing for which fee-shifting
increases suit (and the complementary range of low probabilities for which fee-shifting reduces
suit) depends on the legal costs that the parties would bear at trial. If they would each bear equal
trial costs, then 50 percent is the threshold probability: suit is more likely under the English rule
when the likelihood of victory exceeds 50 percent. And if the plaintiff’s costs are less than the
defendant’s, the threshold probability is higher.64
         The foregoing analysis presumes that plaintiffs are risk neutral. If plaintiffs are risk
averse, then superimposed on the effects just mentioned is a disinclination to bring suit, because
the risk of trial is increased by the fact that the sum of the legal fees depend on the trial outcome.
          62
           For a survey of economic literature on fee-shifting, see Hughes and Snyder 1998. For empirical study of
fee-shifting, see, for example, Hughes and Snyder 1995, Kritzer 1984, and Snyder and Hughes 1990.
          63
           There are other forms of fee-shifting, and the analysis of them would in many respects follow in a
straightforward way from what will be said here about the English rule. Under plaintiff-favoring fee shifting, the defendant
has to pay the plaintiff s fees if the plaintiff prevails, but the plaintiff does not have to pay the defendant’s fees if the
defendant wins. Under defendant-favoring fee-shifting, the converse is true. Fees may also be shifted in a more
complicated way, depending on whether the amount of the award at trial exceeded or fell below a settlement offer; for
economic analysis of such “offer-of-settlement” rules, see Bebchuk and Chang 1999, Miller 1986, and Spier 1994a. For a
general description of the actual use of fee-shifting, see Derfner and Wolf 1995.
          64
            To amplify, let p be the probability of plaintiff victory, x the judgment amount, and cP and cD the plaintiff s and
the defendant s trial costs respectively (and let us abstract from issues relating to settlement). Under the American system,
the plaintiff will sue if cP < px or, equivalently, if x > cP/p. Under the English rule, the plaintiff will sue if (1 ! p)(cP + cD)
 < px, or equivalently, if x > (1! p)(cP + cD)/p. Hence, there will be more suit (a greater range of x will result in suit)
under the Engish rule if and only if (1! p)(cP + cD)/p < cP/p, which is to say, if and only if p > cD/(cP + cD). In particular,
if cP = cD, there will be more suit under the English rule if p > .5. The effects of fee-shifting on the incentives to bring suit
are examined in Shavell 1982a.

                                                      Chapter 18 – Page 7
If the judgment amount is $100,000 and the legal fees of each side are $80,000, the plaintiff
obtains $100,000 if he wins and loses $160,000 otherwise -- meaning a difference of $260,000 in
result under the English system. Under the American system, the difference in result is only
$100,000, a significantly smaller risk. Another factor (to be discussed below) is that the English
system may turn out to increase legal fees, and this in turn also works to reduce the frequency of
suit.
         4.2 Effects on settlement versus trial. Given that suit has been brought, fee-shifting has
an underlying tendency to increase the likelihood of trial. The reason, in essence, is that fee-
shifting magnifies the effects of differences of opinion about the trial outcome. If a plaintiff is
more optimistic about the chances of winning than the defendant thinks is correct, then fee-
shifting will raise the plaintiff’s demand relative to the defendant’s offer because a plaintiff
victory will now mean not only a judgment for him, but also escaping legal fees.
         Example 3. Suppose that the plaintiff thinks his chances of winning $100,000 are 80
percent, that his trial expenses would be $50,000, that the defendant thinks the plaintiff’s
chances of prevailing are only 30 percent, and that his trial expenses would be $40,000. Then
under the American rule, there would be room for settlement: The plaintiff’s minimum
acceptable amount is $80,000 ! $50,000 = $30,000, which is less than the defendant’s maximum
acceptable amount of $30,000 + $40,000 = $70,000. Under the English rule, however, there
would be a trial, for the plaintiff’s minimum acceptable amount is $80,000 ! 20% H $90,000 =
$62,000 (note that $90,000 is the sum of the parties’ legal costs), whereas the defendant’s
maximum acceptable amount is $30,000 + 30% H $90,000 = $57,000.//
         This example illustrates that when the plaintiff’s estimate of the probability of winning is
higher than the defendant’s estimate, fee-shifting means that each side believes it is relatively
likely to lay off its legal expenses on the other side, which widens the difference between them
and may lead to trial.65
         However, the factor of risk aversion counters the tendency toward trial. Because fee-
shifting makes trial a more risky proposition, fee-shifting tends to promote settlement. Also, the
likelihood that fee-shifting leads to larger legal fees also makes settlement more likely.
Therefore, the effect of fee-shifting in the end might not be to increase trial, even though that is
its influence on risk-neutral parties.
         4.3 Effects on trial expenditures. Fee-shifting will generally lead parties to spend more
on legal fees than they otherwise would, for two reasons. First, fee-shifting means that a party
will not necessarily have to pay the bill for legal services that he orders, making legal services
         65
            To show this result in the simple model of settlement versus litigation, let pP be the plaintiff’s estimate of the
probability of winning w at trial and pD the defendant’s probability estimate, and cP and cD their respective trial costs.
Under the American system, the plaintiff’s minimum settlement amount is pPw ! cP, and the defendant’s maximum
amount is pDw + cD. Hence, a trial occurs if pPw ! cP > pDw + cD, which is to say, if pPw ! pDw > cP + cD. Under the
English system, the plaintiff’s minimum settlement amount is pPw ! (1 ! pP)(cP + cD) and the defendant’s maximum is
pDw + pD(cP + cD), so that trial occurs if pPw ! pDw > (1 ! pP)(cP + cD) + pD(cP + cD). We want to show that trial occurs
more often under the English rule. Hence, assume that trial occurs under the American rule. Then it must be that pP > pD,
which implies that cP + cD > (1 ! pP)(cP + cD) + pD(cP + cD), from which the conclusion follows.This conclusion was
demonstrated by Posner 1973a and Shavell 1982a. The same conclusion holds in the asymmetric information bargaining
model for closely related reasons; see Bebchuk 1984. Similar conclusions hold for fee-shifting favoring defendants and
fee-shifting favoring plaintiffs, as shown in Shavell 1982a.


                                                    Chapter 18 – Page 8
effectively cheaper. If the plaintiff has a lawyer spend $1,000 more of time and expects to win
with a probability of about 70 percent, the odds that he will have to pay for the extra $1,000 of
services are only 30 percent, so their effective cost to him is only $300. Hence, if the expected
payoff from the services is $500, he would spend the $1,000 under fee-shifting, but he would not
have done so in its absence.
         The second reason that fee-shifting leads to greater expenditures is that fee-shifting
increases the payoff from winning, because the fees themselves are at stake in the trial outcome.
This can be a significant factor when the fees are substantial in relation to the judgment. Recall
the example where the judgment amount is $100,000 and the legal fees of each side are $80,000.
Here, because the plaintiff obtains $100,000 if he wins and loses $160,000 otherwise, there is a
$260,000 difference between winning and losing under the English system, as opposed to only a
$100,000 difference under the American system. Hence, the value of an expenditure to increase
the chance of winning is 2.6 higher than its value under the American system, reinforcing the
other effect that leads to higher spending under the English system.66
         4.4 Social desirability of fee-shifting. It is not possible to draw general conclusions
about the social desirability of fee-shifting, although statements can be made in particular
circumstances. To illustrate that fee-shifting could be beneficial, suppose that victims of low
magnitude harms are not bringing suit even though they would win, because legal fees exceed
the damages they would collect; and suppose that because injurers escape suit, they fail to take
cheap precautions that would be socially desirable. Then fee-shifting might well be socially
beneficial, because it would result in victims bringing suit, knowing that they would not have to
bear legal fees, and this threat would induce injurers to exercise precautions. To show that fee-
shifting might be socially undesirable, suppose that in an area of litigation, the major effect of
fee-shifting would be to increase the volume of suit but that this would not affect injurers’
incentives because there is little more that they can do to reduce risk. Then fee-shifting would be
socially undesirable because it would increase the litigation costs that society incurs without
producing a social benefit. It is apparent, therefore, that the social desirability of fee-shifting will
depend very much on the context.67
         It may be noted that a commonly mentioned argument that is made about fee-shifting is
that if a party prevails at trial, he has been revealed to be right by the court, and therefore, being
right, should not be penalized by having to pay legal fees. This argument, note, makes no
reference to the effects of fee-shifting on behavior -- on suit, settlement, or trial expenditures --
so that it is manifestly incomplete.68

5. Difficulty of Statistical Inference from Trial Outcomes
A question of interest is whether cases that go to trial are representative of the underlying
population of cases, and notably, whether the likelihood of plaintiff victory at trial or the
amounts won are similar to those that characterize the cases that settled. This question is

         66
          The effects of fee-shifting on expenditures at trial are discussed in Braeutigam, Owen, and Panzar 1984, Hause
1989, and Katz 1987.
         67
              This point is emphasized by Gravelle 1993.
         68
           The relevance of such arguments as this, based on notions of fairness of outcomes, will be discussed generally
in chapters 26 and 27.

                                                  Chapter 18 – Page 9
important because, often, the most readily available data is on cases that go to trial, whereas the
great majority of cases settle. Unfortunately, as I am about to explain, the cases that go to trial
may be very different from the population of cases that settle, so that generalizing from trial
cases is difficult and may be misleading.
         Consider two examples. First, suppose that 99 percent of defendants are guilty of
negligently causing $100,000 of harm, and that 1 percent are not and have exonerating evidence,
but the plaintiffs cannot tell who is guilty and who is not. Then in settlement negotiations,
plaintiffs’ settlement demands would reflect their belief that virtually all defendants would be
liable, and let us say the demands would approximate the $100,000 judgments that the 99 percent
of liable defendants would have to pay. Thus, we would expect that essentially all of the 1
percent of defendants who would not be found liable would go to trial rather than accept the
$100,000 demands of plaintiffs, whereas essentially all of the 99 percent of defendants who
would be found liable would accept plaintiffs’ settlement demands to avoid litigation costs. In
this situation, then, only 1 percent of cases go to trial, and all of them are won by defendants.
Obviously, it would be a gross mistake to extrapolate from the uniformity of trial results in favor
of defendants to conclude that, in the entire population of cases, defendants are usually not
negligent, for the truth is that 99 percent of them are negligent.
         Second, suppose that all defendants are liable, that 99 percent of plaintiffs suffered losses
of $100,000, and that 1 percent of plaintiffs suffered losses of $200,000, but defendants cannot
tell them apart at the time of settlement negotiations. Then, by similar logic to that of the
previous paragraph, we might expect defendants to offer around $100,000 as a settlement, that
the 99 percent of plaintiffs with $100,000 losses will settle, but that the other plaintiffs will reject
the settlement offer, go to trial, and obtain judgments of $200,000. In this situation, it would
again be a mistake to infer from the $200,000 judgments made in all the trials that this amount is
the typical loss of plaintiffs, when the truth is that $100,000 is the typical loss.
         These examples illustrate how dramatically trial outcomes can diverge from the actual
statistics characterizing the population of all cases, both in terms of who wins and in terms of the
amounts awarded. The differences between trial outcomes and the population of cases have to do
with the fact that the cases that go to trial are not a random sample from the population of cases,
but rather are those cases in which there was a reason -- something not anticipated by one of the
sides to the litigation, and thus something atypical -- that led to a bargaining impasse.69

6. Elements of Trial Outcomes Apart from the Judgment
We have assumed that the only outcome of a trial is a judgment paid by the defendant and
received by the plaintiff, but there are other possibilities that affect litigation. First, a trial
outcome may have implications for a litigant beyond the immediate judgment. For example, a
firm may believe that a loss at trial would invite a string of future lawsuits; thus, a loss would be


         69
            The general point that cases that go to trial are not representative of the underlying population of cases was first
emphasized by Priest and Klein 1984. (They also suggested that cases that go to trial would be won by plaintiffs
approximately 50 percent of the time, regardless of the underlying population of cases. This somewhat surprising
conclusion of theirs is correct given their assumptions; but it is not borne out in fact, and it does not hold theoretically (as,
for example, the text illustrates) under general assumptions about the population of cases and bargaining over settlement
and trial.) See also Eisenberg 1990, Eisenberg and Farber 1997, Hylton 1993, Shavell 1996, Waldfogel 1995, and
Wittman 1985. For a survey of literature, see Waldfogel 1998.

                                                    Chapter 18 – Page 10
more costly for it than the judgment.70 This would tend to make settlement more likely than
otherwise, as it would raise the amount the defendant firm would be willing to pay in settlement.
Another possibility is that a trial might prevent future lawsuits, by revealing the defendant to be
tough-minded. This would make trial more likely than we had suggested.
       Second, a litigant may care whether a trial is held per se: A plaintiff might, say, wish the
defendant to be exposed to public scrutiny. This would make both suit and trial rather than
settlement more likely. Or a party might want to avoid a trial because it would result in the airing
of embarrassing facts or the disclosure of valuable business information, which would tend to
make trial less likely. In all, it is apparent that the consequences of trial apart from the literal
judgment may affect the tendency to sue and the decision over settlement versus litigation.

7. Role of Lawyers in Litigation
Although we have so far spoken of “the” plaintiff and “the” defendant, each litigant is typically
represented by a lawyer, and the lawyer and his client are distinct individuals. Let me briefly
indicate how recognition of the lawyer as distinct from the client affects the prior analysis of the
bringing of suits, of settlement versus trial, and of trial effort. I will assume that the lawyer has
superior information about the law and about the likely outcome of a case than does the client,
and, to begin with, that parties are risk neutral. Two basic payment arrangements will be
considered: hourly fees for services, and an outcome-based or contingency fee arrangement,
under which the plaintiff’s lawyer’s fee equals a percentage of the judgment or settlement
amount (and the lawyer receives no fee for time worked).
         7.1 Description of lawyer’s decisions. Regarding the incentive to sue, it is clear that
under an hourly fee arrangement, lawyers will have incentives to accept cases in which the
expected gains are less than the legal costs, for lawyers will be paid regardless of the outcome.
Under contingency fees, this effect will be dulled because, if a case is not promising, the lawyer
will not want to spend his time on it for a low expected fee. However, the lawyer might be
unwilling to take a case for which the expected gain exceeds the legal costs, as the lawyer
obtains only a fraction of the gains but bears the full costs. In summary, relative to the
benchmark of maximizing the expected gain minus legal costs, the incentive to take cases under
the hourly fee is excessive, and the incentive to take cases under the contingency, outcome-based
arrangement is inadequate.
         Next, consider settlement negotiations. In this context, the lawyer who obtains hourly
fees will have an incentive to go to trial if the lawyer wants more work, so that he will be
inclined to go to trial more often than he would were the goal to maximize expected gains minus
legal costs. (However, if trial work is less attractive than other available work -- perhaps because
trial is a more intense type of work -- then the incentive would be in the opposite direction and
the lawyer would push the client to settle.) Under contingency fee arrangements, the lawyer’s
incentives are different, leading the lawyer to press for settlement more often than when the
settlement offer exceeds the expected judgment net of litigation costs, as the lawyer bears all the
litigation costs but obtains only a percentage of the settlement. Thus, relative to the benchmark
of maximizing the expected gain minus legal costs, the incentive to go to trial under the hourly
fee is excessive, and the incentive to go to trial under the contingency fee contract is too low.
         For similar reasons, if a case has gone to trial, then under the hourly fee arrangement, the

       70
         See Che and Yi 1993.
                                         Chapter 18 – Page 11
lawyer will want to work more than may be worthwhile in terms of the expected judgment. And
under the contingency fee arrangement, this is not likely; the lawyer will tend to work less than
would be worthwhile in terms of the expected judgment, for, again, the lawyer obtains only a
fraction of that for himself but bears the entire litigation costs.
         7.2 Mutually beneficial lawyer-client arrangements. What can be said from the
foregoing description about mutually beneficial contracts between lawyers and clients? We would
expect contracts to gravitate toward those that result in maximization of the expected gains less
litigation costs, for that is the pie that lawyers and clients have available to share. From this
perspective, it appears that either hourly fee or outcome-based contingency arrangements could
be superior to the other, because either could lead to a higher expected gain minus litigation costs.
In particular, the hourly fee arrangment would be superior if the excess incentives under it -- to
take cases, and then to go to trial and work more during trial -- is not as important a drawback as
the inadequacy of incentives under contingency fees.
         However, it should be noted that the incentive problems facing clients are reduced by their
 ability to obtain information about lawyer behavior. Clients can seek second opinions, and
sometimes lawyer behavior will become apparent and harm a lawyer’s reputation or even result in
suit for malpractice. These factors mitigate the incentive problems under different fee
arrangements.
         When risk-bearing is taken into account, additional considerations become relevant. Under
hourly fees, lawyers bear little risk relative to what they bear under outcome-based contingency
fees. Hence, if lawyers are more risk averse than clients, the mutual appeal of hourly fees will be
increased, whereas if lawyers are less risk averse than their clients, the mutual appeal of
contingency fee arrangements will rise. With regard to the latter, it is often emphasized that, when
clients’ assets are limited, having to bear legal fees (or the inability to pay them) would
discourage suits under an hourly fee arrangement, and only under contingency fee arrangements
will they be brought.
         In any event, in fact, hourly fee arrangements seem to be the dominant form of
compensation, and contingency fees seem to be limited mainly to tort actions. Moreover,
contingency fee arrangements are regulated and seem to be frowned upon.71 Thus, the relative
absence of contingency fees, based on trial outcomes, may not really reflect the desires of
lawyers and clients.72
         7.3 Socially desirable arrangements. We can also inquire about the social welfare
implications of lawyer-client arrangements. Of course, the general argument that contracts raise
the well-being of the contracting parties suggests that it is socially desirable to allow lawyers and
clients to make the fee arrangements that they wish.
         However, as we also know, it may be socially desirable to limit private contracting when
contracts have external effects (see section 9 of chapter 13).73 Hence, if lawyer-client fee

         71
         See, for example, Brickman, Horowitz, and O’Connell 1994, Rubinfeld and Scotchmer 1998, 415-16, and
Wolfram 1986, 526-42.
         72
           Literature on the effects and the mutual desirability of lawyer-client fee arrangements includes Dana and Spier
1993, Danzon 1983, Emons 2000, Hay 1996, Miller 1987, Rubinfeld and Scotchmer 1993, and is generally described in
the survey by Rubinfeld and Scotchmer 1998.
         73
           Another major reason for intervention in private contracting is lack of information by contracting parties. This
applies only if disclosure requirements and/or public provision of information about fee arrangements do not function
                                                  Chapter 18 – Page 12
arrangements have external effects, it might be advantageous to regulate them. Suppose that
contingency fee arrangements lead to more suit because they enable risk-averse clients to bring
cases that they would not otherwise have brought, and suppose also that the level of suit is felt to
be excessive. Under these assumptions, it might be thought desirable to regulate contingency fee
arrangements. Yet such a conclusion overlooks the possibility of using other policy tools to cure
externality problems. If the volume of suit is excessive, that can be corrected by imposing fees
for bringing suit. This kind of approach, being tailored to a specific externality problem, may
often be superior to intervention in contractual relations, for that is likely to deny parties benefits
of a broader nature (contingent fee arrangements will help parties for many types of suit, not just
those that are excessive).

8. Role of Insurers in Litigation
        Insurers tend to have interests in the outcome of litigation. First, plaintiffs may be insured
against the losses for which they are suing, and their insurance policies often have clauses
allowing the insurers to be reimbursed from payments made by defendants. For example, a
plaintiff who sustains losses of $100,000 due to a negligently caused fire may have a fire
insurance policy providing $60,000 of coverage and thus will be able to collect this amount
immediately from his insurer. But the policy may also stipulate that, if the plaintiff wins a
judgment or obtains a settlement, the insurer will have the right to up to $60,000 of that amount
(this feature of fire insurance policies would lower insurer costs and thus premiums).
Accordingly, the insurer may have an interest in the plaintiff’s suit. Second, defendants
frequently own liability insurance policies, and defendants’ insurers therefore obviously have an
incentive to defeat plaintiffs in litigation or to pay them less rather than more in settlements.
        8.1 Description of effects. In discussing the effects of insurance, let us consider the
example just mentioned, of a plaintiff’s policy giving him $60,000 of coverage against his
$100,000 loss, and allowing the insurer to collect up to $60,000 from suit or settlement. We also
will assume for concreteness that the defendant’s liability insurance coverage is in the amount
$70,000. Further, we will suppose that the insurers will bear all legal costs and make litigation
decisions. Examination of this example will reveal important aspects of the effects of insurance,
and I will offer some comments later about how the conclusions would be altered were one to
relax various assumptions of the example. The example in consideration, note, has the feature
that the insurance coverage is not full.74 This case is significant because, as will be evident, it
means that the interests of the insurer and of the insured are each positive and generally
different.
        Consider first the effects of plaintiffs’ insurance on incentives to sue. If the plaintiff’s
losses are $100,000 and he collects $60,000 from his insurer, his gain from suit will only be
$40,000, not $100,000. Likewise, his insurer’s gain from suit will be only $60,000. Thus, the
gain of the plaintiff and of his insurer from suit is, for each separately, only partial when the
insurance coverage is less than the plaintiff’s losses. Because of the assumption that the insurer
bears all the litigation costs, the insurer will have a reduced incentive to bring suit, relative to the

well.
         74
          As I have discussed in chapter 5, coverage is often partial, due to moral hazard, the judgment-proof possibility,
and administrative costs of insurance.

                                                  Chapter 18 – Page 13
standard case of a single plaintiff who would gain $100,000 from suit. However, the plaintiff
would very much want to bring the suit to win the extra $40,000, for he does not have to bear
any of the costs of suit. This creates a conflict between the plaintiff and the insurer. 75 In any
event, the incentive to bring the suit is dulled relative to the standard case because the
assumption is that the insurer decides whether the suit goes forward.
         There is also an important, and opposite, effect of defendants’ liability insurance on the
plaintiff’s incentive to sue: The existence of liability insurance is a spur to suit, for otherwise
many defendants would be unable to pay judgments and thus not be sued -- plaintiffs and their
insurers will not bring suit if they know that defendants do not have the assets or liability
insurance to pay the judgments that they seek.
         With regard to the decision about settlement versus trial once a suit has been brought, the
situation is complicated, as the following illustration shows.
         Example 4. Assume that litigation costs for the plaintiff’s side would be $15,000, that he
and his insurer believe the chance of victory is 50 percent, that his insurer would bear litigation
costs, and that the insurer would receive the first $60,000 of any settlement or judgment and the
plaintiff the remainder. What would be the plaintiff’s minimum acceptable settlement? If there
is a trial, the plaintiff’s expected return would be 50% H $40,000 = $20,000, as he does not bear
legal costs. Thus, the settlement would have to be at least $80,000 to satisfy him (as the insurer
would obtain the first $60,000 of a settlement). Now consider the insurer’s minimum acceptable
settlement offer. The insurer would net 50% H $60,000 ! $15,000 = $15,000 from trial, so it
would be willing to accept any amount over $15,000 in settlement. Hence, the insurer would
accept a lower settlement than the plaintiff, owing to its bearing the legal expenses and also to its
obtaining only the first $60,000 of any settlement. Note also that, were the plaintiff a single
uninsured party, the plaintiff’s minimum settlement offer would be 50% H $100,000 ! $15,000 =
$35,000, which is in between the insured plaintiff’s and the insurer’s minimum acceptable
settlement offers.
         Now consider the defendant’s side. As the defendant’s liability insurance coverage is for
$70,000, his exposure is for $30,000. Assume that the defendant’s legal expenses would be
$10,000 and would be paid by the liability insurer, and also that the first $70,000 of any
settlement or judgment is to be paid by the insurer. The defendant’s expected loss from trial
would thus be 50% H $30,000 = $15,000. Therefore, the defendant would agree to any settlement
amount up to $85,000 (recall that the liability insurer pays the first $70,000 of any settlement).
The liability insurer would lose 50% H $70,000 + $10,000 = $45,000 at trial, so would pay up to
$45,000 in settlement. Thus, the liability insurer would be less willing to settle than the
defendant. If there were a single uninsured defendant, that defendant would pay up to 50% H
$100,000 + $10,000 or $60,000 in settlement, which also exceeds what the liability insurer
would be willing to pay.//
         We have seen that each litigant and his insurer have disparate interests in this example.
The plaintiff’s insurer is more likely to want to settle than the plaintiff, and the defendant’s

         75
           Such conflict can sometimes be resolved through bargaining between insurer and insured. For example, if
the insurer does not want to press a suit and the plaintiff does, it may be that if the plaintiff makes a contribution
toward the cost of suit, then the insurer would agree to go forward with it. Of course, bargaining costs and
asymmetry of information may hinder such renegotiation, so that conflicts often remain even where mutually
beneficial changes exist. (Comments similar to this one will apply to most of what is said below about differences
between insureds and their insurers.)
                                                  Chapter 18 – Page 14
insurer is less likely to want to settle than the defendant -- the plaintiff’s insurer will demand less
than the plaintiff would, and the defendant’s insurer will pay less than the defendant would.76
The same relationship holds between the insurer’s demands and offers and those in the standard
case of plaintiffs and defendants who do not possess insurance. Thus, it is not evident, in the
circumstances of the example, whether settlement will be more likely or less likely than in the
standard case.
        The effect of insurance on incentives to spend at trial is generally to reduce it. This is for
the simple reason that the insurers have less at stake than the full $100,000, yet bear the entire
legal costs. Of course, the plaintiff and the defendant would each like their insurers to spend
more than the insurers wish, as the plaintiff and defendant each have some stake in the outcome.
        To summarize, we can see that, given our assumption that insurers bear legal expenses
and make litigation decisions, insurance coverage leads to conflicts between insurers and
insureds, a reduced incentive to sue, and a lower incentive to spend at trial. The specific
conclusions about the direction of effects may well be altered if we were to consider different
assumptions about the nature of the insurance contract, especially about who bears legal costs
and about who makes litigation decisions or about whether agreement about litigation decisions
between insurer and insured is necessary.77
        An important assumption that we implicitly made should be mentioned: that insurers and
insureds do not renegotiate during litigation. This assumption might be justified where the costs
of renegotiation are significant, or when asymmetry of information between insured and insurer
(especially about the likelihood of the trial outcome) would often result in failure to come to an
agreement. In any event, if the parties are able to renegotiate and come to an agreement, they
would tend to act approximately in the same way that a single litigant would, so that the
conclusions of the standard case would be maintained. For instance, it was stated above that the
the plaintiff’s insurer has a lower incentive to sue than in the standard case because the insurer
will gain only $60,000 of the $100,000 judgment, whereas the insurer bears all the legal costs. If,
though, the plaintiff cooperates and contributes toward legal costs, his interest in obtaining
$40,000 will make their joint willingness to bring suit similar to that in the standard case.78
        8.2 Mutually desirable insurance contract terms regarding litigation. The parties will
tend to elect a type of insurance contract that, in its terms regarding litigation, is jointly
beneficial to them. Such contracts will reflect several factors. One is that it is often efficient to
have just one party control the litigation and bear the litigation costs, for that reduces the need
for costly negotiation and coordination during litigation. An additional factor is that the insured

         76
          In our example, it so happens that there will be settlement, for the plaintiff s insurer will accept any amount
over $15,000, and the defendant s insurer will pay up to $45,000. Of course, if beliefs were different, or if information
were asymmetric, settlement might not occur.
           77
              For example, if the legal fees are divided pro rata between insurer and insured and they make a joint decision
on litigation, their incentive to bring suit would be the same as in the standard case. A systematic account of the
conclusions as a function of the type of insurance policy is, however, beyond our scope, and has not been undertaken in
the literature to my knowledge. Only a few papers examine litigation-related conflicts of interests between insureds and
insurers from an economic perspective; see Meurer 1992 and Sykes 1994. These papers are suggestive, but are limited in
nature, focusing on aspects of liability insurer incentives to settle.
         78
           It might not be identical to that in the standard case because the plaintiff is risk averse and thus would be less
likely to want to engage in the risky venture of suit than the risk-neutral party of the standard case.

                                                    Chapter 18 – Page 15
will, being risk averse, want coverage not only against loss and liability, but also against legal
expenses; this favors insurers bearing legal expenses and controlling litigation. Another factor is
that the party with the most experience with litigation is the natural one to assume the
responsibility of decisionmaking about litigation and thus to bear litigation costs; this party is
generally the insurer, not the insured. These factors all suggest the mutual desirability of insurer
control and expenditure on litigation. A factor working in a different direction is that it tends to
be jointly beneficial for the litigation decisions to maximize joint expected returns for the
plaintiff and his insurer, or to minimize joint payments for the defendant and his insurer. If,
however, the insurer is in control of the litigation and bears all the litigation costs, then, as was
seen in the last section, the incentives of the insurer generally diverge from those of the standard
case in which joint net returns are maximized for plaintiffs or joint costs are minimized for
defendants. The character of the mutually desirable terms of the insurance contract thus reflects
concerns that are competing in some respects.
        8.3 Social desirability of the foregoing contractual terms. The main point to be made
about the social desirability of the contractual terms that insurers and insureds select is the
analogue of that of section 7.3: Because contractual terms of insurance policies raise the well-
being of insureds and insurers, these terms are socially desirable unless they have unwanted
external effects (such as on the volume of suit) that cannot be alleviated through some other
policy (typically they can be).79
        It is sometimes suggested that the fact that insurers often display different interests from
their insureds is socially undesirable and calls for legal intervention. Consider the situation in
which a plaintiff would like the insurer to sue for $100,000, but the insurer hesitates to do so
because it would gain only $60,000 and would pay the entire legal fees. The reluctance of the
insurer to sue when the insured wants suit, and when the expected total gain exceeds the cost of
suit, might be seen as justifying a legal response to force the insurer to do what the insured
wants.80 Such a view overlooks the point that the insurance contract is elected by the insured and
the insurer, and that the conflict of interests at the time of possible suit is a byproduct of their
contractual terms, which were chosen for their beneficial joint purposes. In the example in
question, the terms that give the insurer control over litigation decisions may be warranted
because the insurer is best suited to control legal expenditures efficiently (given the scale of its
business), and the terms that limit coverage of the insured to $60,000 (which is what gives rise to
the conflict) may be best because they combat moral hazard and fraud. For the courts to
intervene, such as to prevent the insurer from maintaining control over litigation, is effectively to
hurt the insured ex ante by preventing him from obtaining certain types of contractual terms,
which would tend to raise insurance prices and lower insureds’ expected utility.




         79
           Again, lack of information by contracting parties, here by insureds about the nature of insurance contracts,
may also justify intervention in contracts. That may be so if requirements to disclose clearly the nature of terms in
contracts and publicly provided information do not function well.
         80
            Indeed, in many jurisdictions, liability insurers have a duty in settlement negotiations not to act in their own
narrow interests but effectively to act as if they were covering the entire liability, not just an amount up to the coverage
limit of the policy. See Sykes 1994.
                                                    Chapter 18 – Page 16
                                                    Chapter 19

                     GENERAL TOPICS ON THE LEGAL PROCESS

By the legal process, I refer to the set of rules governing the actual exercise of legal rights of
parties and the manner in which opposing parties defend themselves. Thus, the legal process
comprehends the rules of procedure, evidence, lawyer conduct, and other factors bearing on the
application and adjudication of legal rights. The legal process is often contrasted to the
substantive law that lays out the underlying legal rights of parties (such as a rule of tort liability
giving a victim of harm the right to collect from an injurer) but that does not state how these
rights are to be exercised.81 In this chapter, we will address several important general issues
concerning the legal process and certain related aspects of the substantive law.

1. Public versus Private Legal Systems
         1.1 Introduction. A basic question about the design of the legal system is whether the
state-authorized legal system should be the sole system of substantive law and of the legal
process or whether, and in what circumstances, private legal systems should be allowed a role.82
  In fact, we observe that the public legal system provides the default system of substantive rules
and adjudication but that private systems, notably arbitration and trade association regimes, have
substantial importance.
         1.2 Socially optimal legal system. To analyze the desirable relationship between public
and private legal systems, it will be helpful to have in mind the socially optimal legal system,
that is, the system with the socially optimal substantive legal rules and also the socially optimal
system of adjudication. The socially optimal legal system will also have to be enforced to be
effective, of course, and that may require use of state power to collect funds, to transfer property,
and the like.
         Of importance for us is that this optimal system -- both the substantive legal rules and the
method of adjudication -- will vary with the characteristics of the involved parties. For example,
the best set of legal rules and adjudicaton for breach of contract may be different for businesses
in some industry from what they are for other types of parties.
         1.3 Assumptions about public and private legal systems. Let us make the following
simplifying assumptions about the public and private legal systems. First, the state=s goal, as
reflected in the public legal system, is to maximize social welfare. Second, the state can employ
its various powers to enforce the law. Third, however, the state may suffer from lack of

         81
           The definition of the substantive law, as opposed to the legal process, is not always clear. For example,
would we say that joint and several liability -- allowing a plaintiff to collect from any of the defendants when more
than one injured him -- is an element of the substantive law or of the legal process? The question of rigorous
definition of the two notions need not detain us, however, for what is of interest, of course, is the analysis of the
rules of the legal system, not the headings under which its rules are placed.
         82
            One of the first economically-oriented articles on this subject is Landes and Posner 1975. This section
builds on their article and on Shavell 1995a, which emphasizes the distinction that will be made here between ex
ante and ex post choice of private judicial systems. For economic literature focusing on private arbitration (but not
on it as an alternative to public adjudication), see, for example, Ashenfelter 1998, Ashenfelter and Bloom 1984, and
Benson 2000.

                                                 Chapter 19 – Page 1
information about the best legal system, either about the best rules or the best method of
adjudication, for certain groups of parties. Fourth, private parties themselves will have at least as
good -- and sometimes better -- information about what legal system is best for them than the
state will have. And fifth, private legal systems will typically have less power to enforce their
decisions than the state enjoys, because they lack the power to appropriate funds and to
imprison, but they may still sometimes possess methods of enforcement, such as expulsion from
a group.
         1.4 Public legal system as the sole system. If the public system is the sole legal system,
the outcome will deviate from the optimal because of the state=s lack of information of what is
best for certain groups of parties. Such deviations from what is best suggests that if the state can
harness parties= superior knowledge about the best legal system for them and allow the public
system to be appropriately modified, the altered system will be superior to the public system
alone. We now turn to consider the conditions under which the public system would and would
not be expected to be changed in a beneficial way.
         1.5. Choice of private system by a single party is undesirable. We can first dispense
with the possibility that unilateral choice of a private legal system by a party to a dispute would
tend to be socially desirable. It would not, for the party would select a system that favored him,
reducing or eliminating the law of its ability to channel behavior or to remedy loss desirably. For
example, a rule of tort law requiring injurers to pay for harm, which could be beneficial due to
the incentives it provides to take care, would be robbed of force if defendants could select their
own legal system. They would choose a different rule that allowed them to escape responsibility,
or if they were permitted only to elect the method of adjudication, they would select a tribunal
that watered down the ability of plaintiffs to collect. Converse problems, involving excessive
liability, would arise if plaintiffs could unilaterally choose liability rules or methods of
adjudication. It is plain, therefore, that permitting unilateral modification of the public system of
law is socially undesirable.
         1.6 Choice of private system by affected parties is desirable if made ex ante. By
contrast, it will be socially desirable to allow modification of the public legal system in many
circumstances where the decision is made by the parties who are affected by legal system. An
important example is where the parties to a contract stipulate that they want a private system to
govern contractual problems that may arise. The reasons that allowing them to choose a private
system is socially desirable are twofold. First, if each of the contracting parties agrees to the
private system, it must make each of them better off. Second, no one else will be made worse off,
presuming that the parties to the contract are the only people affected by it.
         This argument applies more generally than just to contracts -- it applies whenever all the
parties who are affected by some type of behavior make an ex ante agreement about a private
legal system. Suppose that the trucks owned by a company present the risk of accidents to
citizens of a community, and the company and the community agree to their own legal system to
govern accidents. Perhaps they choose strict liability with agreed-upon formulas for damages,
rather than the negligence rule and the complicated and costly methods of adjudicaton that we
generally employ, in order to give truckers good incentives to take care in many dimensions and
also to streamline dispute resolution. Here, as in the contracting context, the use of the private
legal system will be socially beneficial. For if the parties agree to a private system as an
alternative to the public system, they must be made better off, and others are not made worse off,
as by hypothesis the group in question includes all potentially affected parties.
                                         Chapter 19 – Page 2
         Two comments may be made about the foregoing. First, the private system that the
parties elect may differ from the public system in its substantive legal rules (such as employing
strict liability rather than negligence for truck accidents) or in its methods of dispute resolution
(such as in the manner of determining damages). Second, the private system may or may not use
its own system of enforcement. Typically, private parties will not have a good way to enforce the
decisions of a private system, such as of arbitrators, and will wish to rely on the state to
accomplish this. Thus, it will be desirable for the state to lend its enforcement apparatus to the
private system; otherwise the private system would be rendered ineffective.
         1.7 Choice of private system by affected parties may or may not be desirable if made
ex post. The parties to a dispute may mutually desire to choose a private system of adjudication
over the public system. Notably, they may want to do this to lower the costs of dispute resolution
and to reduce risk. However, allowing them to choose a private system does not necessarily raise
social welfare.83 Consider an accident between an individual and a firm. They may decide that it
is in their joint interests to elect arbitration for its simplicity and speed, but that may mean that
the firm escapes with inadequate liability or that the firm=s fault is never properly investigated
and made known to the public. And if firms anticipate often being able to reach such agreements
to arbitrate, they may not be properly deterred. In other words, because the ex post incentives of
parties to use private adjudication are naturally divorced from considerations of deterrence, their
use of private systems may be undesirable.84 By contrast, when parties make agreements ex
ante, and all potentially affected parties are involved in the agreements, deterrence is not
overlooked; in the case of truck accidents in a community, if the citizens make an agreement to
use a private legal system, it can only be because the system does not result in too much dilution
of deterrence.
         Of course, ex post agreements to use private legal systems may also be socially desirable,
because their potentially undesirable effect on deterrence is outweighed by their value in

         83
           The argument to be made is in some respects similar to the point made in section 2.6 of chapter 17 about
the possibility that settlement may be socially undesirable; here the decision to use a private legal system (often
because it is less costly than the public one) is analogous to the decision to settle.
         84
            An example may clarify this point. Suppose that if firms exercise care at a cost of $10, accidents causing
harm of $15 will be prevented, so that the exercise of care is desirable. Suppose too that liability is strict and that the
probability that a firm will be sued is only 50 percent -- there is difficulty in proving causation; that the costs of use
of the public legal system would be $6 each for the plaintiff and the defendant, and only $2 each for use of a
streamlined private arbitration system. Then, if an accident occurs for which causation is clear (and for which there
is thus a threat of suit under the public legal system), the parties would elect the private system, in order to save $4
each in adjudication costs. This, however, means that the expected liability of the firm if it does not take care will be
50% H ($15 + $2) = $8.50, so it will not be led to spend $10 on care. But if the public system were employed, the
firm=s expected liability if it does not take care would be 50% H $21 = $10.50, so it would be led to take care (in
which case, note, there would never be any litigation expenses, as no accidents would occur). Thus, social welfare,
and the well-being of the victims of accidents, are lowered because of the ability of the victims and the firms to make
ex post agreements that reduce firms’ incentives to take care.
          The reader might wonder whether the point of the example depends on the fact that not all of the affected
parties participate in the decision to employ the private system of adjudication -- for the 50 percent of victims who
are not able to prove causation are left out of negotiations. However, this feature of the example is not intrinsic to it.
For instance, one could alter the example by assuming that all individuals sue but that a fraction of losses cannot be
proved due to difficulties in establishing causation, and the same point could be made even though all victims would
be participating in the decision to use a private legal system.

                                                  Chapter 19 – Page 3
reducing the costs of dispute resolution and perhaps in increasing its accuracy. Therefore, it is
possible, if not plausible, that ex post agreements to employ private legal systems are often
socially desirable.
        An observation that should be made about ex post agreements to use private legal systems
is that such agreements will generally be limited to the method of dispute resolution and will not
alter the basic thrust of the legal rules of the state, for that would be against the interests of one
or the other of the parties. For example, if the subsantive legal rule is the negligence rule, then a
non-negligent injurer would be unlikely to agree to a private system in which liability would be
strict. However, were victims and injurers to choose a private system ex ante, they might opt for
strict liability.
         1.8 The notion that selection of legal rules and adjudication are natural functions of
the state. The foregoing analysis helps to answer the question of whether the choice of
substantive legal rules and the system of adjudication are natural functions of the state, as some
seem to think is so.85 The answer, we have seen, depends importantly on whether the parties that
are affected by some type of behavior are likely to bargain with one another ex ante about the
choice of a private legal regime. When they are likely to do so, and when they have superior
information to the state about the legal rules or manner of adjudication that best serves their
purposes, it is best for them to select it. In this circumstance, the idea that the state is naturally
the entity that should choose the legal system is incorrect (although the state may still play a role
in enforcement).
         When affected parties cannot bargain with each other ex ante, which is the case when
they are strangers to one another, the state will play a natural role in the selection of substantive
legal rules. Thus, in the usual tort context, for instance, the state must make the substantive legal
rules in order for there to be any rules that will influence parties= behavior. However, there still
may be scope for private parties to beneficially elect a private system of adjudication after harm
is done, as discussed in section 1.7.
         1.9 Actual practice in the light of the theory. Actual practice conforms broadly to what
has been described above as socially desirable. In particular, we observe that private parties
often opt out of the state-authorized legal system, as noted at the outset. There is significant use
of arbitration and of other private means of adjudication, such as those of trade associations,
employers, and religious organizations.86 Also, as stated above, the private systems that are
chosen ex ante often involve procedural and substantive legal rules that depart significantly from
those of the public system.87 However, there does not appear to be a tendency in practice to
distinguish between ex ante agreements to use private systems and ex post agreements, even
though the case in theory for respecting agreements made ex post is less strong.
         One point to note is that, at least in the United States today, there is a tendency of
commentators, and of the state itself, to encourage use of alternatives to the public system of

         85
           See, for example, Couture 1999.

         86
          See for example Benson 2000, 159-62, Bernstein 1998,Cooley and Lubet 1997, 20-23, and Goldberg, Sander,
and Rogers 1999, 10-11.

         87
            See, for example, Bernstein 1998, Goldberg, Sander, and Rogers 1999, 233-34, and Ware 2001, 21, 80-86, and
for case studies, Bernstein 1992, 2001.

                                                 Chapter 19 – Page 4
adjudication, and even to subsidize it or require private parties to employ it. The only apparent
justification for encouragement or subsidy of private alternatives to the public system is that
parties do not pay legal fees that cover the actual costs of use of public courts, so that the public
system may appear cheaper relative to private systems than it should; fostering the use of private
systems might correct this distortion.88

2. Accuracy of the Legal Process
        2.1 Introduction. By the accuracy of the legal process is meant the absence of error.
Error may arise in the determination of whether or not a person is liable -- an innocent person
may mistakenly be found liable or a guilty person not found liable -- or in the determination of
the level of sanctions to be imposed on a liable person.
        The accuracy of the legal process is influenced by its design; indeed, the entirety of the
rules of legal procedure and of evidence bear on the incidence of error. And the accuracy of the
legal process is also affected by the actions of litigants; their gathering of information, selection
of evidence, and use of legal procedure influence the likelihood of error.
        Here I will discuss first the social value of accuracy of the legal process: the increase in
social welfare that greater accuracy brings about. The social value of accuracy inheres in its
effects on outcomes, and notably in its effects on the behavior of parties who anticipate greater
accuracy of the legal process; accuracy is not valued in itself. As will become evident, the social
value of accuracy depends in significant ways on context.
        Given the social value of accuracy, the socially optimal level of accuracy can be
determined. As a general matter, increasing accuracy is socially costly, as it requires a lengthier
and higher quality legal process. Therefore, the level of accuracy that maximizes social welfare
will reflect a compromise between the value of increasing accuracy and the cost of achieving it.
        I will then turn to examine the private value of accuracy, for example, the value to a
plaintiff of establishing that the defendant is the party who harmed him. It will be seen that the
private value of accuracy generally diverges from the social value, calling in principle for the
legal process to include features that remedy the divergence.89
        2.2 Social value of accuracy. The social value of accuracy can usefully be divided into
three components.
        Improved control of behavior. It is intuitively clear that greater accuracy of the legal
process should tend to bring about improved control of behavior, but why exactly should this be
true?
        Consider first accuracy in the determination of liability. Greater accuracy in imposition
of liability on truly guilty parties clearly leads to an enhanced incentive to obey the law, for it
means that the expected sanction for violations is higher. Not so obvious, however, is that greater
accuracy in respect to exonerating innocent parties enhances deterrence. The reason is that the
incentive to obey the law is not simply equal to the expected sanction if one violates the law, but

         88
             But a better answer to this distortion in relative prices would seem to be to price the public system
appropriately, not to subsidize the private system, for that may lead to excessive litigation. Yet this whole issue is
complicated by the concern, discussed at length in chapter 17, that the private incentive to use the legal system differs from
the social, so that pricing legal services at cost is not generally optimal in the first place.

         89
              This section is largely a synthesis of Kaplow and Shavell 1994a, 1996a, and Kaplow 1994.

                                                    Chapter 19 – Page 5
rather to the difference between the expected sanction if one violates the law and the expected
sanction if one does not. If the expected sanction suffered by the innocent, due to error, is 20,
and the expected sanction experienced by the guilty is 60, then the effective sanction for a
violation is 40, not 60, for 40 is the added sanction brought about by a violation. Hence, the
incentive to obey the law is enhanced by reducing errors that penalize the innocent (if, for
instance, the expected sanction suffered by the innocent fell from 20 to 10, the effective sanction
for violations would rise from 40 to 50).90
        An additional social benefit from increased accuracy in the determination of liability is
improved decisions about whether to engage in an activity (such as to operate a motor vehicle)
that would expose innocent parties to the risk of liability. Greater accuracy implies that fewer
parties will be undesirably discouraged from engaging in such an activity because of mistakenly
imposed liability. It also means that fewer parties will be undesirably encouraged to engage in
the activity because of mistakenly escaping liability.
        Another, more particular social benefit from increased accuracy applies when liability is
based on whether or not a party=s level of care falls below a fault standard. In these situations, as
was discussed in section 1.1 of chapter 10, error in the assessment of care may lead to the
exercise of excessive care (such as defensive medical practices) to reduce the chance of
mistakenly being found liable. Here greater accuracy in the assessment of care will lead to less
excess in precautions.91
        Next, consider accuracy in the assessment of damages. Here accuracy tends to improve
behavior. The reason is that, if an actor knows that the harm he might cause will be accurately
assessed, he will tend to take steps to prevent harm commensurate with its magnitude; he will
appropriately do more to prevent harm the larger its magnitude. However, it is important to note
that the actor can only take these harm-appropriate steps if he knows what the harm will be at the
time he decides on precautions. And in many contexts, actors will have relatively little
knowledge about the particular harm they would cause in an accident when they exercise
precautions. For instance, a driver will typically have relatively little knowledge of the harm he
would cause in a collision (the harm would depend on the speed of the other vehicle, where it
was struck, the number of occupants in it, and so forth). This possibility reduces the social value
of accuracy in the assessment of damages.92
        Reduced social costs from litigation and from imposition of sanctions. Another social
advantage of accuracy is a higher frequency of settlement, and thus of savings in litigation costs.
         90
           The point under discussion may be stated algebraically. Let sI be the expected sanction if a person is
innocent, obeys the law, and let sG be the expected sanction if a person is guilty and violates the law. Then if b is the
benefit from violating the law, a person will violate the law if b ! sG > !sI, that is, if b > sG ! sI, so that the incentive
to obey the law is the difference between the expected sanctions. This point was initially emphasized in Png 1986.

         91
              There is no conflict between this point and the point above that greater accuracy increases deterrence, for the
presumed contexts are different. It was assumed above that a party chooses between two actions, obeying the law or not,
whereas here the assumption is that a party chooses a level of care that is continuously variable (or has many levels), and it
is possible for the party to choose a higher level than is called for and thereby to lower the chance of erroneous imposition
of liability.
         92
            See Kaplow and Shavell 1996a, but see also Spier 1994b for a qualification to this point: that there is
social value in accuracy in assessing damages even when an actor does not know the magnitude of harm in advance,
if the level of his precautions lowers the probability distribution of harm given that an accident occurs.

                                                    Chapter 19 – Page 6
Specifically, if greater accuracy of the legal process means that litigants are more likely to agree
on their estimates of trial outcomes, settlement will be promoted. Additionally, accuracy may
reduce the need to impose sanctions and thus the costs of so doing.93 Greater accuracy leads to
reduced imposition of sanctions when the accuracy results in better identification of the innocent.
(Of course, greater accuracy in identification of the guilty results in more frequent imposition of
sanctions, and thus greater costs from imposing sanctions.)
         Lowered costs of risk-bearing. Greater accuracy in outcomes tends to lower risk, for it
means that outcomes as to whether parties are liable and the amount that liable parties pay are
more predictable. The reduced risk is socially valuable in itself, to the extent that parties are risk-
averse and uninsured against the risks in question.
         2.3 Socially optimal degree of accuracy. As indicated above, the socially optimal level
of accuracy will depend on a tradeoff between its social value and its cost. For example, where
potential injurers have relatively little knowledge of the precise magnitude of harm when they
choose their levels of care (plausibly the case with drivers, as suggested above), the social value
of accuracy in assessing harm will be low. Thus, the best policy might call for little to be spent
on accuracy, meaning that streamlined methods (such as simple tables) to ascertain damages
might be best. The optimal degree of accuracy will depend generally on context, as the social
value and the costs of accuracy will depend on the particulars of the area of behavior at issue.
         2.4 Traditional view of accuracy versus the economic view. The traditional view of
legal scholars about accuracy has several features. One is that accuracy is of intrinsic value; this
is inconsistent with the economic view. A second strand of traditional thinking is that accuracy is
necessary in order to maintain the legitimacy of the legal process. The economic view is not
inconsistent with this point (although I have not mentioned it above), for if individuals respect
the legal system and cooperate in its application, it will work more effectively to further social
ends. A third element of traditional writing on accuracy is that it serves instrumental purposes.
This, of course, is entirely consistent with the economic view, but the instrumental purposes of
accuracy are rarely analyzed in a sustained way by traditional scholars, whereas these purposes
are the focus of economic analysis.
         2.5 Private versus social value of accuracy, and implications. Let us now turn to the
value of accuracy to private parties themselves, as opposed to its social value.
         Perhaps the first point to note is simply that accuracy may not be desired -- may have
negative value -- to a private party. A plaintiff may want to conceal facts in order to prevail
against a defendant who is in fact innocent or may want to exaggerate his losses; a defendant
may have similarly perverse incentives to prevent the truth from becoming known.
         Of course, private parties may also have incentives to prove the truth. A plaintiff will
want to show that he is really the victim of harm and that the named defendant is the liable party,
or a defendant will want to establish that the plaintiff was truly contributorily negligent, and the
like. However, the incentives of private parties to establish the truth will tend to diverge from the
socially optimal, and in either direction. The private reason to spend in order to establish a fact
is, for the plaintiff, to increase his expected judgment, and for the defendant, to reduce it. From
the social perspective, however, the justification for expenditures lies in improved control of
         93
            These costs are the various administrative costs associated with settlements and judgments, which were noted
to be large (see section 1.3 of chapter 17). In the criminal context, which will be considered later in the book, the costs of
imposing sanctions also include the expenses of incarceration.

                                                    Chapter 19 – Page 7
behavior and the other factors mentioned in section 2.3; these social benefits may be quite
different from the private ones. For example, it may be that increased accuracy in determining
liability would be socially very valuable in deterring negligent behavior, but that the private
value of establishing negligence is too low to induce a plaintiff to do so.94 Or it might be that
increased accuracy in ascertaining liability has small social value, because there is little that
potential injurers can do to reduce risk, yet the private value of establishing liability may be quite
high, because of the damages that the plaintiff can collect, so that more would be spent
establishing accuracy than is socially desirable.95 In general, the reasons for the private-social
divergence in the value of accuracy are analogous to those discussed in chapter 17 on the
private-social divergence in the value of bringing suit. Indeed, a factor stressed there, that each
side generally fails to take into account the litigation costs that it induces the other side to incur,
is also relevant in the present context.
         An additional point relating to the private incentive to establish the magnitude of harm
should be recalled (see section 5.3 of chapter 17). Namely, there is a systematic tendency for
private parties to value accuracy in determining the magnitude of harm above its social value.
This is suggested by the observation that a plaintiff will be willing to spend up to $100 to prove
that his losses are in fact $100 higher (or a defendant to spend up to $100 to prove that the losses
he caused are in fact $100 lower), but the social value of establishing that losses are $100 higher
is generally less than $100.
         What are the implications of the divergences between the social and the private values of
accuracy? When private parties have incentives to withhold information, the state should attempt
to prevent that if the information’s social value outweighs its cost. Of course, much of the law of
procedure is designed to address this problem. When private parties have incentives to supply
information rather than to conceal it, the state should encourage its provision if parties=
incentives are inadequate, but limit its provision if parties= incentives are excessive. The latter
may be accomplished through the use of procedural rules that, for instance, restrict the number of
witnesses or that simplify the calculation of damages. A conjecture is that the problem of
excessive private incentives to establish facts is considerable -- especially in respect to the proof
of the magnitude of damages -- and that it is not properly appreciated.

3. Appeals and the Legal System

         94
             Suppose that defendants can reduce the risk of harm of $1,000 from 100 percent to 1 percent by exercising a
precaution at a cost of $100, and that proving negligence -- that the precaution was not taken -- would cost a plaintiff
$2,000. Then a harmed plaintiff would not spend the $2,000 to prove negligence, and since defendants would anticipate
this, they would not take the $100 precaution; thus, social costs would be $1,000. However, it would be socially desirable
that plaintiffs spend $2,000 to prove negligence whenever accidents occur, for then defendants would expect that
negligence would be found out and would be led to spend the $100. As a consequence, if, say, plaintiffs were given free
legal services costing $2,000 to investigate possible defendant negligence, social costs would be only $100 + 1% H $2,000
= $120 (and thus lower than $1,000).
         95
            Suppose that liability is strict, that losses of $1,000 occur with probability 10 percent , that nothing at all
can be done to prevent the losses, and that plaintiffs must spend $100 to prove causation, and thus to establish
liability accurately, if a loss occurs. Clearly plaintiffs will do that, as $100 is less than the $1,000 they will collect;
yet socially that is undesirable because social costs would be only 10% H $1,000 = $100 if suit is not brought, but
social costs are 10% H $1,100 = $110 if suits are brought (actually, they would be higher if we take into account the
defendant’s litigation costs and the state’s).

                                                   Chapter 19 – Page 8
         3.1 Introduction. An important feature of our legal system is the inclusion of an appeals
process, whereby a disappointed litigant can make a request for reconsideration of the initial trial
result.96 It should be emphasized, however, that a legal system might not include an appeals
process -- whether it does so is an element of the design of the system -- and in some contexts
there is no appeals process. 97 Notably, when parties elect binding arbitration, they are usually
choosing to forgo an appeals process.98
         Here I will ask why the appeals process may be socially desirable. In answering the
question, one must explain, among other things, why society (or an organization) may find the
appeals process superior to the alternative of enhancing the quality of the trial process. Society
enjoys the option, after all, of investing in more skilled trial court judges, of lengthening trial
proceedings to allow for more evidence and argument to be considered, and the like. Moreover,
one must say why, if society does decide to employ a tribunal that supersedes the trial courts, it
should wish to grant disappointed litigants the right to instigate action by the higher tribunal --
rather than, say, permit the higher tribunal to reconsider trial outcomes on its own initiative.
         The theme to be advanced here is that the appeals process may function to correct errors
in an economic way (other functions of appeals will be noted in sections 3.3 and 3.4). The kernel
of the argument to be developed is that if litigants tend to possess information about the
occurrence of error and appeals courts can frequently verify it, then litigants may tend to bring
appeals when errors are likely to have been made but not otherwise. Under these circumstances,
not only may the appeals process result in error correction, it may also do so cheaply, for the
legal system will be burdened with reconsidering only the subset of cases in which errors were
more probably made. This may render society=s investment in the appeals process economical in
comparison to an investment in improving the accuracy of the trial process -- an approach that,
by its nature, would require extra expenditure in every case rather than only in a subset of cases.
The appeals process, in other words, may allow society to harness information that litigants have
about erroneous decisions and thereby to reduce the incidence of mistake at relatively low cost.99
         3.2 Basic model: the appeals process and error correction. Suppose in this section that
litigants are able to recognize when error occurs at trial, that the state chooses whether or not to
establish an appeals court, and that the state can increase the accuracy of adjudication at both the
trial court level and the appeals court level by making appropriate expenditures. If there is an
appeals court, then, by definition, a disappointed litigant may bring an appeal if he chooses. To
bring an appeal, the litigant must pay his private legal costs. In addition, the litigant may have to
pay a fee, or possibly will receive a subsidy. Thus, the total cost to a litigant for bringing an

         96
          That all developed legal systems generally recognize some form of appeal process is discussed, for
example, in chapter 8 of Herzog and Delmar 1982 and Platto 1992.

         97
           A number of legal systems, for example, those of France and Italy, do not allow appeal of cases for which the
amount at stake is below a threshold; see Byrd and Barbier 1992, 160, and Beltramo 1995, 470.

         98
            Decisions of arbitrators generally may not be appealed to the legal system; see, for example, Goldberg,
Sander, and Rogers 1999, 235, and Ware 2001, 21. Moreover, the arbitration process itself ordinarily does not allow
for appeal to other arbitrator; see, for example, the website of the American Arbitration Association at www.adr.org.
         99
            The analysis that follows is based on Shavell 1995b. For studies of the appeal process emphasizing factors
other than error correction, see Daughety and Reinganum 2000 and Spitzer and Talley 2000.

                                                  Chapter 19 – Page 9
appeal is his private cost plus a potential fee or minus a possible subsidy.
        The state=s objective is assumed to be minimization of total social costs: the sum of the
social costs of adjudication -- the costs of trial together with the expected costs of appeal, if there
is an appeals process -- plus the social harm from erroneous decisions.
        Consider first the best that the state can do if it does not allow appeals. In this situation,
the state=s problem is simply to select the level of trial court accuracy so as to minimize trial
costs plus expected harm from trial court error. The optimal level of accuracy will be dictated by
the effectiveness of legal resources in promoting accuracy and by the magnitude of harm from
error.100
        Now suppose that the state establishes an appeals court and, provisionally, take its
accuracy as given, but assume that it is minimally accurate in the sense that it is more likely to
reverse trial court errors than to reverse correct decisions. Hence, a disappointed litigant=s
expected gross return from an appeal will be higher if an error occurred than if it did not,
because the reversal probability is greater under the former circumstance than under the latter.
For example, if the reversal probability following a mistake is 80 percent but is only 30 percent
following a correct decision, then if a litigant=s gain from reversal would be $100,000, the
expected gross return from an appeal would be $80,000 after a mistake but only $30,000 after a
correct adverse decision.
        Accordingly, there may be separation of disappointed litigants, wherein those who are
the victims of error find it worthwhile to bring appeals and those who are not victims of error do
not find it worthwhile to bring appeals. There will be such separation of disappointed litigants if
the private cost of an appeal is less than the expected return given mistakes but exceeds the
expected return given correct decisions. In the example just mentioned, there will be separation
if the cost of an appeal is, say, $50,000; $50,000 is less than $80,000, meaning that there will be
appeals after mistakes, but $50,000 exceeds $30,000, meaning that there will not be appeals after
correct adverse decisions.
        If separation of disappointed litigants would not occur naturally, due to whatever happens
to be the private costs of appeal, the state can ensure that separation occurs by selecting the right
fee or subsidy. If appeals would be made even after correct decisions, because the private cost of
an appeal is lower than the expected return, the state can impose a fee in order to achieve
separation.101 Conversely, if appeals would not be made even after mistakes, because the private
cost of an appeal is higher than the expected return from appeal, the state can grant a subsidy to
induce separation.102

         100
              Let x be the investment in trial court accuracy, p(x) the probability of trial court error, where p is decreasing
and convex in x, and h the social cost of error. Then, in the absence of an appeals process, the state should choose x to
minimize x + p(x)h; let the optimal x be x*. (This notation will be used in later notes without further comment). Observe
that, in a formal sense, the state=s problem is identical to that of choosing the optimal level of precautions in the model of
accidents considered in chapter 8; the level of precautions to prevent accidents in that model corresponds here to the level
of investment in the accuracy of trial courts to prevent errors.

         101
             Appeals would be made in the example even after correct decisions if the private cost of an appeal were
$10,000, for this is less than the $30,000 expected return from an appeal. Hence, if a fee of, for instance, $40,000 were
imposed, the total cost of making an appeal would become $50,000, and appeals after correct decisions would be
discouraged (but appeals after mistakes would still be brought, as the return from them is $80,000).

         102
               In the example, appeals would not be made after mistakes if the private cost of an appeal were $100,000
                                                    Chapter 19 – Page 10
         Moreover, it is clear that the state would want to achieve separation of disappointed
litigants when it has an appeals process. On one hand, if litigants never bring appeals, the
appeals process can hardly achieve good. On the other, if litigants bring appeals even when
correct decisions are made, society incurs needless costs in the appeals process and also, to its
detriment, finds that a certain number of these correct decisions are reversed.
         Knowing that separation of disappointed litigants is socially desirable and that the state
can, if need be, accomplish separation through an appropriate fee or subsidy scheme, we can
easily determine whether the appeals process will be socially helpful. If the appeals process is
not used, then when an error is made, the associated social harm will definitely be suffered. But
if the appeals process is utilized, an error will result in an appeal, so that the social costs incurred
will instead be those of the appeal and the expected harm due only to the possible failure to
reverse error. It follows that the appeals process will be socially desirable to establish if and
only if the social harm from certain error exceeds the social cost of an appeal plus the expected
harm from failure to reverse error, the latter being the probability of failing to reverse error
multiplied by the harm from error.103 If the social harm from error is $500,000, the social costs
of an appeal are $150,000, and the probability of reversal of error is 80 percent, then the appeals
process will be advantageous because it will reduce the certain harm from error of $500,000 to
$150,000 + 20% H $500,000 or $250,000. In general, therefore, the appeals process is more
likely to be socially desirable the lower the cost of the appeals process, the greater the chance of
reversing error, and the greater the social harm from error. In particular, and other things being
equal, the appeals process will be desirable if the social harm exceeds a certain threshold and
will not be desirable if the harm lies below this threshold.
         To this point, we have taken the cost and accuracy of the appeals process as given, as
well as those of the trial process, but as the reader knows, these are variable. What can be said
about their optimal choice? With regard to the appeals process, it is socially desirable to invest
in accuracy as long as the increase in costs is outweighed by the increase in the expected gain,
that is, the increase in the probability of reversal of error multiplied by the social harm from
error.
         With regard to the trial process, it is socially advantageous to invest in accuracy as long
as the increase in costs is outweighed by the increase in the expected gain from a lower
probability of error. But the social harm from error at trial, it should be emphasized, is less than
the harm flowing from a sure error. The social harm from error at trial is instead measured by
what follows trial court error, namely, the cost of the appeals process plus the expected harm
from failure to reverse error; this amount is lower than the sure harm from error (in the example
because this exceeds $80,000. If, however, a subsidy of, say, $50,000 were employed, appeals would be made after
mistakes (but not after correct decisions).
          More generally, to show that separation of disappointed litigants is always possible, let g be the gain to a litigant
from winning an appeal, a be the litigant=s private cost of making an appeal, and b be the fee (a positive b) or subsidy (a
negative b). Also, let q be the probability of reversal of an error and r the probability of reversal of a correct decision, and
assume that q > r. Then there will be separation of disappointed litigants if rg < a + b < qg. It is clearly always possible to
find a b satisfying that inequality because q > r.

         103
              To amplify, given that the state can ensure that disappointed litigants sue if and only if an error was made,
social costs under an appeals process will be x + p(x)[y + (1 ! q(y))h], where y is the state=s expenditure on the appeals
process. If there is no appeals process, social costs will be x + p(x)h. Hence, it will be desirable to append an appeals
process to a trial process if and only if y + (1 ! q(y))h < h, which corresponds to the italicized statement in the text.

                                                    Chapter 19 – Page 11
of the appeals process above, the cost of that process plus the expected harm from failure to
reverse was $250,000, much less than the $500,000 harm from error in the absence of the
appeals process). Hence, the optimal investment in, and accuracy of, the trial process is less than
it would be if there were no appeals process and no opportunity to correct errors.104 In other
words, we have argued that it is optimal for trial courts to be less accurate on account of the
existence of appeals courts than the trial courts would otherwise need to be.
         3.3 Qualifications and extensions to the basic error correction model. Let me briefly
consider a number of qualifications to, and modifications of, the foregoing model.
         Factors limiting error correction under the appeals process. Two important factors
reduce the ability of the appeals process to correct errors as described in the model. One is that
the degree of separation will in reality be less than perfect, and the appeals process will thus
function less well, to the degree that separation of disappointed litigants does not naturally occur
and the state does not employ fees or subsidies to accomplish separation. Another limiting factor
is that litigants may not be able to tell when errors were made at trial, so that the likelihood that
errors result in appeals is lowered, and the likelihood that correct decisions are appealed is
raised.
         Multiple levels of appeal. The basic model can be extended in a straightforward manner,
whereby the state chooses the number of levels of appeal and the resources and accuracy of the
process at each level. The conclusions about this extended model are natural generalizations of
those for the basic model. In particular, given any number of levels of appeal, an additional level
of appeal will be desirable if, for some investment in the accuracy of the next level, the cost of
that level of appeal plus the expected harm from failure to reverse error at that level is less than
the certain harm that would be incurred if that level appeal were not allowed. Additionally, under
certain conditions, the optimal level of investment in, and the accuracy of, appeals courts
increases with their level. This reflects the point that the higher the level of appeal, the fewer the
number of opportunities that remain to correct error, so the more valuable is accuracy.
         Judges= incentives to avoid reversal. In the basic model, the appeals process increased
accuracy through correcting errors in trial court decisions, but the appeals process may also
increase the accuracy of trial courts by influencing the behavior of judges who dislike being
reversed (because reversal may harm their reputation, lower their salaries, and the like). In
particular, judges who fear reversal will have a greater incentive to avoid error the more likely
erroneous decisions are to be appealed and reversed than are correct decisions. (Note, therefore,
that if the errors were no more likely to be reversed than correct decisions, judges would have no
incentive (on these grounds) to decide cases accurately; hence improving judges’ incentives
cannot alone justify the appeals process but is instead a byproduct of the error correction
function of the appeals process.)
         Inference from the fact that an appeal is brought. In the basic model, because litigants
bring appeals if and only if errors are made at trial, an appeals court can infer that everyone who

         104
              To demonstrate this, denote the x that minimizes x + p(x)z by x*(z) and observe that x*(z) is increasing in z
(this is readily shown to follow, given convexity of p). Let y* be the optimal investment in the appeals process, so that
social costs under the appeals process are x + p(x)[ y* + (1 ! q(y*))h]. Hence, the optimal x given that there is an appeals
process, denoted by x**, must equal x*(y* + (1 ! q(y*))h). But the optimal x without the appeals process, x*, equals x*(h)
(see note 20). And because x*(z) is increasing in z, and y* + (1 ! q(*y))h < h (this must be true, by note 23 for the
appeals process to be desirable to employ), it thus follows that x** < x*.

                                                   Chapter 19 – Page 12
comes before it ought to obtain a reversal. But I implicitly assumed that appeals courts do not
employ this knowledge; rather, they use their usual rules of decision, and they thus fail to reverse
with some positive frequency. If appeals courts were to reverse all decisions, on the basis of their
inference that all appellants are the victims of error, then disappointed litigants who are not the
victims of error clearly would have an incentive to bring appeals, for they could obtain sure
reversals. Thus, the separation of disappointed litigants would unravel, and the utility of the
appeals process in error correction would be diminished. This suggests that it is not socially
desirable for appeals courts to use inferences from the fact that appeals are brought in their
decisionmaking. Appeals courts can (and apparently do) refrain from using inferential
knowledge by following certain legal procedures, notably, by restricting evidence considered on
appeal to the trial record.
        3.4 Functions of the appeals process other than error correction: harmonization of
the law; and law-making. Two purposes of the appeals process apart from error correction that
are frequently emphasized are harmonization of the law -- reconciliation of conflicting
interpretations of the law by different trial courts -- and law-making -- amplification of the law
through new interpretations. The main observation to be made about these two functions is that,
although they in fact are carried out by appeals courts, the appeals process does not seem
necessary to accomplish them. A higher level court could readily accomplish harmonization on
its own initiative, for conflicts among trial courts are self-evident in nature, meaning that there is
no reason to give disappointed litigants the right of appeal in order to have conflicts brought to
the attention of a higher court. Similarly, it would seem that the need for amplification of the law
is generally fairly clear to higher level courts, so that these courts would not require that litigants
bring cases to their attention in order to know where amplification is in the social interest; higher
level courts could by themselves choose where to amplify the law and do that in declaratory
rulings.

4. Legal Advice and the Role of Lawyers in the Legal System
         4.1 Introduction. A basic aspect of the legal system is that lawyers provide clients with
advice. The advice may be about the nature of legal rules, about the probability and magnitude of
sanctions for violations, and about litigation and legal procedure.105 I have already mentioned
some specific aspects of legal advice, concerning the bringing of suit and settlement decisions
(see section 7 in chapter 18), and here I consider the topic more generally.106
         A client may obtain legal advice ex ante -- when he is contemplating an action -- or he
may secure it ex post -- after he has acted or someone has been harmed, which is to say, at the
stage of possible or actual litigation. I will consider these two types of advice separately because
of their distinctive aspects. A notable difference between these types of advice is that ex ante
advice can channel behavior directly in conformity with law, whereas ex post advice comes too
late to accomplish that, although, as will be seen, ex post advice has indirect effects on


         105
             The provision of legal advice is not taken to be coextensive with the provision of legal services in general,
however. Some legal services (such as the making of arguments in court) are better regarded as the performance of
specialized tasks than as the provision of information to clients.

         106
               Indeed, most of what is said here will apply to the context of public law enforcement as well as civil litigation.

                                                     Chapter 19 – Page 13
behavior.107
         Several assumptions will be maintained in most of the discussion in this section: that
legal advice is not purposely subversive of the law (for instance, that advice is not intended to
enable a person to perpetrate a fraud), that lawyer-client communications and legal work product
are confidential, and that lawyers are truthful to clients and endeavor to provide them with good
advice. However, each of these assumptions will be examined in section 4.4.
         4.2 Ex ante advice: advice about contemplated acts. Advice will have private value to
a party who is considering taking some action with a possible legal consequence if the advice
might lead him to alter his decision. Suppose that a firm is deciding whether to release waste
from a holding tank into a river, rather than to spend on transporting the waste to a dump site,
but the firm does not know whether a discharge of this particular waste would constitute a
violation of law allowing some class of victims to sue for harm. One possibility is that, without
advice, the firm would elect to discharge the waste into the river (suppose the firm thinks
discharge probably would not be a violation). In such situations, advice would have private value
if it might lead the firm instead to transport the waste to the dump site (the advice might be that a
discharge would in fact constitute a violation), because advice would then enable the firm to
avoid liability. Also, advice might have value to the firm if, in the absence of advice, the firm
would decide to transport the waste to the dump site (suppose the firm believes that a discharge
probably would constitute a violation). Here advice would have value to the firm if it might lead
the firm instead to discharge the waste into the river (the advice might be that a discharge would
not constitute a violation), because advice would then save the firm the transport costs. In
general, the private value of legal advice is the expected value of the private gain from possible
changes in a party=s decisions. This notion of the private value of legal advice is, it may be noted,
just an application of the conventional definition of the expected value of information to a
decisionmaker.108
         The social, as opposed to the private, value of ex ante legal advice inheres in the social
desirability, or lack thereof, of advice-induced changes in parties= behavior. Suppose that it is
socially desirable for the waste not to be discharged, and thus discharging it would constitute a
violation (because the harm from a discharge would exceed the cost of transport to the dump
site). Then if advice would result in the firm deciding against discharging the waste, the advice
would be socially desirable. But if advice would lead the firm to discharge the waste (say,
because the firm would learn that the probability of suit is low), the advice would not be socially
desirable. The social value of advice is the expected value of the potential social gains and losses
produced by the advice.
         The comparison between the social and the private values of legal advice depends,
among other factors, on the form of liability: whether it is strict or based on the negligence rule.
In the consideration of these rules, it will initially be assumed that suit always occurs and that a
sanction equal to harm is imposed whenever parties are supposed to be liable for harm.
         When parties are strictly liable, the private value of legal advice is the same as its social

         107
            Ex ante legal advice was first studied from an economic theoretical perspective in Shavell 1988 and Kaplow
and Shavell 1992; ex post legal advice was initially investigated from this standpoint in Kaplow and Shavell 1989, 1990.
Legal advice is further studied from an economic viewpoint in Bundy and Elhauge 1991 and in Fischel 1998.

         108
               See, for example, Raiffa 1968.

                                                 Chapter 19 – Page 14
value. This basic and important conclusion follows essentially because a party=s liability burden
will equal the harm he causes. If a party learns through advice that taking some precaution will
reduce his liability by $10,000, say from $15,000 to $5,000, this also means that the precaution
will lower harm by $10,000. Hence, it should not be surprising that the private and social values
of advice are equivalent.
        Under the negligence rule, however, the private value of legal advice tends to exceed its
social value. The explanation is suggested by two points. First, if a party avoids negligence
because of advice, the party=s liability saving will generally be larger than the reduction in
expected harm he accomplishes. Suppose that, without advice, the party just mentioned would
not take the precaution and would be found negligent and be liable for the harm of $15,000. And
suppose that, with advice, the party would take the precaution and thereby avoid liability for
negligence. Thus the advice would lead to a reduction in liability for the party of $15,000 -- an
amount exceeding the $10,000 reduction in harm. The reason that the private liability saving
from advice is larger than the reduction in harm is that, under the negligence rule, a party
escapes having to pay for any harm caused when he acts nonnegligently (the party escapes
having to pay for the $5,000 of harm he still generates if he takes the precaution). The second
point is similar. If a party would learn from advice that he can relax somewhat his level of
precautions and will still not be found negligent, his saving will be the full amount of the
reduction in precautionary costs. However, society will not save as much as the party, for when
precautions decline, expected harm rises.
        It should be emphasized that, whatever may be the difference between the private and the
social value of ex ante legal advice, such advice does have positive social value because it can
only change private decisions in socially desirable ways, to better conform with the law (or with
lawyers= understanding of the law, which is assumed to be superior to clients’). This statement
presumes that the law is properly enforced and that decisions that conform with the law are
socially desirable. However, what if the law is underenforced or is not socially desirable?
        When legal rules are underenforced, that is, when the probability of having to pay for
harm is less than 100 percent or when the level of damages is less than harm, legal advice might
have negative social value because it may lead parties to disobey the law when they otherwise
would not. Likewise, when legal rules are incorrectly formulated, legal advice tends to have
negative social value. Suppose, for example, that an environmental authority mistakenly omits a
truly harmful waste from its list of substances for which discharge would be considered a
negligent act. Then legal advice that gives a party foreknowledge of this error might cause the
party to discharge the harmful waste, when it would not otherwise have done so.109 Thus, the
social value of advice is negative -- it would be best for parties not to obtain advice -- even
though its private value is positive.
        4.3 Ex post advice: advice about acts already committed. The private value of ex post
legal advice, advice provided after acts have been committed, is analogous to the private value of
ex ante legal advice. It resides in the possibility that the advice will lead a party to change his
decisions, but now about whether to sue or how to conduct litigation (including settlement
negotiation) rather than about the party=s earlier, substantive behavior. Ex post legal advice can
affect not only what legal arguments to pursue, but also how to develop evidence, what evidence
to present and not to present, and how to challenge false arguments. It is virtually inevitable that
109
   The relevance of this case is mainly hypothetical, for if a social authority understands that the law is undesirable,
it would make more sense for the authority to alter the law than to seek to influence the giving of legal advice.
                                                Chapter 19 – Page 15
ex post legal advice will have substantial private value because of the complicated nature of
legal procedure and the unlikelihood that potential litigants will know the law in real detail.
        Advice about the bringing of suit. In considering the social value of ex post advice and
comparing it to the private value of ex post advice, let us begin with advice about whether a
harmed party should bring suit. The social value of this advice derives principally from the effect
of suit on the prior behavior of parties who might be sued, that is, on their precautions and
participation in potentially harm-producing activity. This incentive effect of suit could be small
or large, and it could be either greater or less than the expected private gain from suit, as was
explained in section 2 of chapter 17. Hence, the private and social value of advice about suit
could diverge from each other in either direction.
        Advice about the course of litigation. Now consider the social value of legal advice that
defendant parties obtain during litigation. As noted in the introduction to this section, because
such advice is, by its nature, imparted to parties only after they have acted, it cannot have aided
them in conforming with the law, in choosing how to act if they were uncertain about the law.
(The firm that does not know whether discharging a waste into a river will constitute a violation
of law cannot be led to behave appropriately by learning what the law is after it decides about
discharging the waste.) This simple but fundamental observation means that ex post advice to
defendants does not raise social welfare in the direct way that ex ante advice to potential
defendants does. Nonetheless, ex post advice certainly may influence prior behavior and social
welfare.
        One way that ex post advice may affect prior behavior and social welfare is by diluting
sanctions and thus deterrence of undesirable conduct. Lawyers may lower expected sanctions by
their advantageous use of legal strategy and, importantly, by counseling defendants on the
selection of evidence to present and to suppress. Given that individuals anticipate that expected
sanctions for causing harm will be reduced due to the subsequent availability of legal advice,
fewer individuals will be deterred from engaging in undesirable behavior. Thus, legal advice
may have negative social value.110 (In principle, though, a partial remedy for this problem would
be for the state to raise sanctions overall to offset the dilution of deterrence due to legal advice.)
        However, ex post advice may also enhance social welfare by raising otherwise
inadequate sanctions. Advice may raise expected sanctions because lawyers may help plaintiffs
to obtain higher judgments, better reflecting the harms they have sustained, than they would
receive if they did not have legal advice.
        Additionally, ex post advice may raise social welfare by lowering sanctions for
defendants who did not violate the law, or who face higher sanctions than they should. If parties
anticipate that, if they ever incorrectly face a legal sanction, advice will help them to avoid that
sanction, they will not be undesirably discouraged from engaging in many useful activities or be
led to take expensive and inordinate precautions.
        In sum, ex post advice may be either socially desirable or socially undesirable, depending
on context. Moreover, when advice is socially desirable, its social value could be different from
its private value.
        4.4 Other factors bearing on advice. Let me now consider several additional issues
bearing on the effects and value of legal advice.
        Subversion of the law. It has been assumed for the most part that legal advice is

110
  The point of this paragraph was early emphasized by Bentham 1827.
                                              Chapter 19 – Page 16
informational in character, conveying knowledge about the law and legal sanctions but not
altering expected sanctions. Yet lawyers are sometimes able to subvert the law by effectively
lowering sanctions or their probability. As mentioned above, lawyers may inappropriately reduce
expected sanctions by suppressing or destroying unfavorable evidence to present, by helping
clients to hide assets, and the like. Such legal assistance is to be distinguished from advice that
lowers expected sanctions for bona fide reasons, for example, by demonstrating that an asserted
harm was not a true harm. Of course, lawyers are not supposed to thwart law enforcement, but
they have an economic incentive to do so and can fairly easily avoid punishment for it (lawyers
give advice in private and can phrase their advice in hypothetical but readily understood terms).
From the social perspective, legal advice that frustrates law enforcement is obviously
undesirable.
        Confidentiality of advice. The legal system protects the confidentiality of
communications between lawyers and their clients under wide circumstances, and this protection
has been implicitly assumed in the above discussion. Confidentiality of legal advice will benefit
clients when there is positive probability that disclosure of advice would lower its value. This
would usually be true of advice about the selection of evidence to present in litigation: Such
advice generally would be robbed of effectiveness if it were disclosed to the opposing side and
the court. Confidentiality is also of obvious importance to those obtaining advice subversive of
the law. By contrast, confidentiality often should not matter to parties obtaining ex ante advice
about the legality of an act or about magnitude or likelihood of sanctions, because disclosure of
such advice will usually not disadvantage them. For example, disclosure of the ex ante advice
that a party obtains about what is considered negligent behavior ordinarily should not matter to
the party.
        Still, whatever is the character of legal advice, maintaining the confidentiality of much
information about clients that is revealed to lawyers in the course of their dealings with clients
will frequently be important to the clients. For instance, a firm would usually not want
information pertaining to its business plans revealed to others, and an individual would
ordinarily not want information of a personal nature disclosed to outsiders.
        Because protection of confidentiality can benefit clients (and never is a disadvantage to
them), it encourages clients to consult with and reveal information to their lawyers. This in itself
 is sometimes thought to imply that confidentiality is socially desirable. That reasoning,
however, is mistaken: Confidentiality is socially desirable only if the legal advice that
confidentiality encourages is socially desirable, and as has been explained above, that may not be
the case.
        Protection of legal work product. The legal system also protects the confidentiality of
legal work product -- documents and other records of lawyers= effort -- that they generate on
behalf of clients in expectation of litigation. The protection of work product is accomplished
principally by denying opposing litigants the legal right to discover work product (that is, the
right to order the party with work product to produce it). The effect of work product protection is
similar to that of protection of confidentiality, so it can be considered very briefly. Protection of
work product encourages lawyers to engage in research on and development of their clients=
cases, for much of the value of such research and development would be lost if it became
immediately known to the other side.111 (Thus, this protection functions analogously to
       111
             On this point, see for example Easterbrook 1981.

                                                 Chapter 19 – Page 17
copyright.) Because protection of work product raises the value and quality of legal advice, it
inures to clients= benefit. But whether protection of work product is socially desirable is not
evident a priori, for it depends on whether or not the advice that the work product supports is
socially desirable. A further complication is that, even when the advice is socially desirable, the
private value of advice, and thus the amount of work product, may be socially excessive.
        Quality and truthfulness of advice. The issue of lawyers= incentives to supply good
advice and to be truthful to clients has not been addressed above. To the degree that poor or
dishonest advice would be discovered and that lawyers would suffer penalties for having
provided such advice, they will have reason not to give bad advice. There are two basic types of
penalties that lawyers face for furnishing unsound legal advice: loss of business because of
damage to reputation; and legal sanction, in the form of a damage judgment arising from a
malpractice action, a fine assessed by a court, or a punishment imposed by a professional
association.112




       112
             For a general treatment of these ways of regulating lawyer conduct, see Wilkins 1992.
                                                  Chapter 19 – Page 18
                                           References

Ashenfelter, Orley. 1998. Arbitration. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the
      Law, edited by Peter Newman, 1:88-93. London: Macmillan.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and David E. Bloom. 1984. Models of Arbitrator Behavior: Theory and
      Evidence. American Economic Review 74:111-24.
Bebchuk, Lucian A. 1984. Litigation and Settlement under Imperfect Information. Rand Journal
      of Economics 15:404-15.
----- 1988. Suing Solely to Extract a Settlement Offer. Journal of Legal Studies 17:437-50.
----- 1996. A New Theory Concerning the Credibility and Success of Threats to Sue. Journal of
        Legal Studies 25:1-25.
----- 1998. Suits with Negative Expected Value. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
        and the Law, edited by Peter Newman, 3:551-54. London: Macmillan.
Bebchuk, Lucian A., and Howard Chang. 1999. The Effect of Offer-of-Settlement Rules on the
      Terms of Settlement. Journal of Legal Studies 28:489-513.
Beltramo, Mario. 1995. Italy. In International Civil Procedures, edited by Christian T.
       Campbell, 419-94. London: Lloyd’s of London Press.
Benson, Bruce L. 2000. Arbitration. In Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, edited by
      Boudewijn Bouckaert and Gerrit De Geest, 5:159-93. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Bentham, Jeremy. 1827. Rationale of Judicial Evidence. Vol. 5. London: Hunt and Clarke.
Bernstein, Lisa. 1992. Opting Out of the Legal System: Extralegal Contractual Relations in the
       Diamond Industry. Journal of Legal Studies 21:115-57.
-----1998. Private Commercial Law. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law,
        edited by Peter Newman, 3:108-14. London: Macmillan.
Braeutigam, Ronald, Bruce Owen, and John Panzar. 1984. An Economic Analysis of Alternative
       Fee Shifting Systems. Law and Contemporary Problems 47:173-85.
Brickman, Lester, Michael Horowitz, and Jeffrey O’Connell. 1994. Rethinking Contingency
      Fees. New York: Manhattan Institute.
Bundy, Stephen McG., and Einer R. Elhauge. 1991. Do Lawyers Improve the Adversary
      System? A General Theory of Litigation Advice and Its Regulation. California Law
      Review 79:313-420.
Byrd, Robert W., and Marion Barbier. 1992. France. In Civil Appeal Procedures Worldwide,
       edited by Charles Platto, 158-68. London: Graham and Trotman.

                                        References – Page 1
Carroll, Stephen J., James S. Kakalik, Nicholas M. Pace, and John L. Adams. 1991. No-fault
        Approaches to Compensating People Injured in Automobile Accidents. Santa Monica:
        Rand Institute for Civil Justice.
Che, Yeon-Koo, and Jong Goo Yi. 1993. The Role of Precedents in Repeated Litigation. Journal
      of Law, Economics, & Organization 9:399-424.
Cooley, John W., and Steven Lubet. 1997. Arbitration Advocacy. South Bend, Ind.: National
      Institute for Trial Advocacy.
Cooter, Robert D., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1989. Economic Analysis of Legal Disputes and
       Their Resolution. Journal of Economic Literature 27:1067-97.
----- 1994. An Economic Model of Legal Discovery. Journal of Legal Studies 23:435-63.
Couture, Tony. 1999. State. In The Philosophy of Law, edited by Christopher Berry Gray, 2:834-
      37. New York: Garland Publishing.
Daughety, Andrew F. 2000. Settlement. In Encyclopedia of Law and Economics, edited by
      Boudewijn Bouckaert and Gerrit De Geest, 5:95-158. Cheltenham: Edward Elgar.
Daughety, Andrew F., and Jennifer F. Reinganum. 1993. Endogenous Sequencing in Models of
      Settlement and Litigation. Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 9:314-48.
----- 2000. Appealing Judgments. Rand Journal of Economics 31:502-25.
Derfner, Mary Francis, and Arthur D. Wolf. 1995. Court Awarded Attorney Fees. New York:
       Matthew Bender.
Dewees, Don, David Duff, and Michael Trebilcock. 1996. Exploring the Domain of Accident
      Law: Taking the Facts Seriously. New York: Oxford University Press.
Easterbrook, Frank H. 1981. Insider Trading, Secret Agents, Evidentiary Privileges, and the
       Production of Information. Supreme Court Review 1981:309-65.
Eisenberg, Theodore. 1990. Testing the Selection Effect: A New Theoretical Framework with
       Empirical Tests. Journal of Legal Studies 19:337-58.
Eisenberg, Theodore, and Henry S. Farber. 1997. The Litigious Plaintiff Hypothesis: Case
       Selection and Resolution. Rand Journal of Economics 28:S92-S112.
Farber, Henry S., and Michelle J. White. 1991. Medical Malpractice: An Empirical Examination
        of the Litigation Process. Rand Journal of Economics 22:199-217.
Farmer, Amy, and Paul Pecorino. 1996. Issues of Informational Asymmetry in Legal Bargaining.
      In Dispute Resolution: Bridging the Settlement Gap, edited by David A. Anderson, 79-
      105. Greenwich, Conn.: JAI Press.
Fischel, Daniel R. 1998. Lawyers and Confidentiality. University of Chicago Law Review 65:1-
       33.
                                       References – Page 2
Friedman, Alan E. 1969. An Analysis of Settlement. Stanford Law Review 22:67-100.
Gertner, Robert H. 1998. Disclosure and Unravelling. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of
       Economics and the Law, edited by Peter Newman, 1:605-08. London: Macmillan.
Goldberg, Stephen B., Frank E. A. Sander, and Nancy H. Rogers. 1999. Dispute Resolution:
      Negotiation, Mediation, and Other Processes. Third edition. Gaithersburg, Md.: Aspen
      Law and Business.
Gould, John P. 1973. The Economics of Legal Conflicts. Journal of Legal Studies 2:279-300.
Gravelle, H. S. E. 1993. The Efficiency Implications of Cost-Shifting Rules. International
       Review of Law and Economics 13:3-18.
Hause, John C. 1989. Indemnity, Settlement, and Litigation, or I=ll Be Suing You. Journal of
       Legal Studies 18:157-79.
Hay, Bruce L. 1994. Civil Discovery: Its Effects and Optimal Scope. Journal of Legal Studies
      23:481-515.
----- 1995. Effort, Information, Settlement, Trial. Journal of Legal Studies 24:29-62.
Hay, Bruce L., and Kathryn E. Spier. 1998. Settlement of Litigation. In The New Palgrave
      Dictionary of Economics and the Law, edited by Peter Newman, 3:442-51. London:
      Macmillan.
Hensler, Deborah R., Mary E. Vaiana, James S. Kakalik, and Mark A. Peterson. 1987. Trends in
       Tort Litigation. R-3583-ICJ. Santa Monica: RAND Institute for Civil Justice.
Herzog, Peter E., and Delmar Karlen. 1982. Attacks on Judicial Decisions. Chapter 8 in volume
      16, Civil Procedure, edited by Mauro Cappelletti. International Encyclopedia of
      Comparative Law. Tübingen: J. C. B. Mohr.
Hughes, James W., and Edward A. Snyder. 1995. Litigation and Settlement under the English
      and American Rules: Theory and Evidence. Journal of Law and Economics 38:225-50.
----- 1998. Allocation of Litigation Costs: American and English Rules. In The New Palgrave
        Dictionary of Economics and the Law, edited by Peter Newman, 1:51-56. London:
        Macmillan.
Hylton, Keith N. 1993. Asymmetric Information and the Selection of Disputes for Litigation.
       Journal of Legal Studies 22:187-210.
Joost, Robert H. 1992. Automobile Insurance and No-fault Law. Second edition. Deerfield, Ill.:
        Clark Boardman Callaghan.
Kakalik, James S., and Nicholas M. Pace. 1986. Costs and Compensation Paid in Tort
       Litigation. Report R-3391-ICJ. Santa Monica: RAND Institute for Civil Justice.
Kaplow, Louis. 1986b. Private versus Social Costs in Bringing Suit. Journal of Legal Studies
                                        References – Page 3
       15:371-85.
----- 1994. The Value of Accuracy in Adjudication: An Economic Analysis. Journal of Legal
        Studies 23:307-401.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell. 1989. Legal Advice About Information to Present in
      Litigation: Its Effects and Social Desirability. Harvard Law Review 102:565-615.
----- 1990. Legal Advice about Acts Already Committed. International Review of Law and
        Economics 10:149-59.
----- 1992. Private versus Socially Optimal Provision of Ex Ante Legal Advice. Journal of Law,
        Economics, & Organization 8:306-20.
----- 1994a. Accuracy in the Determination of Liability. Journal of Law and Economics 37:1-15.
----- 1996a. Accuracy in the Assessment of Damages. Journal of Law and Economics 39:191-
        210.
----- 1996b. Property Rules versus Liability Rules: An Economic Analysis. Harvard Law Review
        109:713-90.
Katz, Avery. 1987. Measuring the Demand for Litigation: Is the English Rule Really Cheaper?
       Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization 3:143-76.
----- 1988. Judicial Decisionmaking and Litigation Expenditure. International Review of Law
        and Economics 8:127-43.
----- 1990a. The Effect of Frivolous Lawsuits on the Settlement of Litigation. International
        Review of Law and Economics 10:3-27.
Kennan, John, and Robert Wilson. 1993. Bargaining with Private Information. Journal of
      Economic Literature 31:45-104.
Kritzer, Herbert M. 1984. Fee Arrangements and Fee Shifting: Lessons from the Experience in
        Ontario. Law and Contemporary Problems 47:125-38.
Landes, William M. 1971. An Economic Analysis of the Courts. Journal of Law and Economics
      14:61-107.
Landes, William M., and Richard A. Posner. 1975. The Private Enforcement of Law. Journal of
      Legal Studies 4:1-46.
Lee, Rex E. 1985. The American Courts as Public Goods: Who Should Pay the Costs of
       Litigation? Catholic University Law Review 34:267-76.
Loewenstein, George, Samuel Issacharoff, Colin Camerer, and Linda Babcock. 1993. Self-
      Serving Assessments of Fairness and Pretrial Bargaining. Journal of Legal Studies
      22:135-59.

                                        References – Page 4
Menell, Peter S. 1983. A Note on the Private versus Social Incentives to Sue in a Costly Legal
       System. Journal of Legal Studies 12:41-52.
Meurer, Michael J. 1992. The Gains from Faith in an Unfaithful Agent: Settlement Conflicts
      between Defendants and Liability Insurers. Journal of Law, Economics, & Organization
      8:502-22.
Miller, Geoffrey P. 1986. An Economic Analysis of Rule 68. Journal of Legal Studies 15:93-
        125.
Mnookin, Robert H. 1993. Why Negotiations Fail: An Exploration of Barriers to the Resolution
     of Conflict. Ohio State Journal on Dispute Resolution 8:235-49.
Mnookin, Robert, and Robert Wilson. 1998. A Model of Efficient Discovery. Games and
     Economic Behavior 25:219-50.
Ordover, Janusz A. 1978. Costly Litigation in the Model of Single Activity Accidents. Journal of
      Legal Studies 7:243-61.
Osborne, Evan. 1999. Who Should Be Worried about Asymmetric Information in Litigation?
      International Review of Law and Economics 19:399-409.
Ostrom, Brian J., Neil B. Kauder, and Robert C. LaFountain. 2001a. Examining the Work of
      State Courts, 1999-2000. Williamsburg, Va: National Center for State Courts.
----- 2001b. Examining the Work of State Courts, 2001. Williamsburg, Va: National Center for
        State Courts.
Palmer, Geoffrey. 1994. New Zealand=s Accident Compensation Scheme: Twenty Years On.
       University of Toronto Law Journal 44:223-73.
Platto, Charles, editor. 1992. Civil Appeal Procedures Worldwide. London: Graham and
        Trotman.
Png, Ivan P. L.1986. Optimal Subsidies and Damages in the Presence of Judicial Error.
       International Review of Law and Economics 6:101-05.
Polinsky, A. Mitchell, and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1988. The Deterrent Effects of Settlements and
       Trials. International Review of Law and Economics 8:109-16.
----- 1993. Sanctioning Frivolous Suits: An Economic Analysis. Georgetown Law Journal
        82:397-435.
----- 1996. Optimal Awards and Penalties When the Probability of Prevailing Varies Among
        Plaintiffs. RAND Journal of Economics 27:269-80.
Posner, Richard A. 1972a. Economic Analysis of Law. Boston: Little, Brown.
----- 1973. Strict Liability: A Comment. Journal of Legal Studies 2:205-21.

                                       References – Page 5
----- 1985a. An Economic Theory of the Criminal Law. Columbia Law Review 85:1193-1231.
----- 1985b. The Federal Courts: Crisis and Reform. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
        Press.
Priest, George L. 1988. Products Liability Law and the Accident Rate. In Liability: Perspectives
        and Policy, edited by Robert Litan and Clifford Winston, 184-222. Washington, D.C.:
        Brookings Institution.
Priest, George L., and Benjamin Klein. 1984. The Selection of Disputes for Litigation. Journal
        of Legal Studies 13:1-55.
Raiffa, Howard. 1968. Decision Analysis: Introductory Lectures on Choices Under Uncertainty.
        Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley.
Ramseyer, J. Mark, and Minoru Nakato. 1989. The Rational Litigant: Settlement Amounts and
      Verdict Rates in Japan. Journal of Legal Studies 18:263-90.
Reinganum, Jennifer F., and Louis L. Wilde. 1986. Settlement, Litigation, and the Allocation of
      Litigation Costs. Rand Journal of Economics 17:557-66.
Rose-Ackerman, Susan, and Mark Geistfeld. 1987. The Divergence Between Social and Private
      Incentives to Sue: A Comment on Shavell, Menell, and Kaplow. Journal of Legal Studies
      16:483-91.
Rosenberg, David, and Steven Shavell. 1985. A Model in Which Suits Are Brought for Their
      Nuisance Value. International Review of Law and Economics 5:3-13.
Rowe, Thomas D., Jr. 1982. The Legal Theory of Attorney Fee Shifting: A Critical Overview.
      Duke Law Journal 1982:651-80.
Rubinfeld, Daniel L. 1998. Discovery. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the
      Law, edited by Peter Newman, 1:609-15. London: Macmillan.
Rubinfeld, Daniel L., and Suzanne Scotchmer. 1993. Contingent Fees for Attorneys: An
      Economic Analysis. RAND Journal of Economics 24:343-56.
----- 1998. Contingent Fees. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law, edited
        by Peter Newman, 1:415-20. London: Macmillan.
Schrag, Joel L. 1999. Managerial Judges: An Economic Analysis of the Judicial Management of
       Legal Discovery. RAND Journal of Economics 30:305-23.
Schweizer, Urs. 1989. Litigation and Settlement under Two-Sided Incomplete Information.
      Review of Economic Studies 56:163-77.
Shavell, Steven. 1982a. On Liability and Insurance. Bell Journal of Economics 13:120-32.
----- 1982b. The Social versus the Private Incentive to Bring Suit in a Costly Legal System.
        Journal of Legal Studies 11:333-39.
                                        References – Page 6
----- 1982c. Suit, Settlement, and Trial: A Theoretical Analysis Under Alternative Methods for
        the Allocation of Legal Costs. Journal of Legal Studies 11:55-81.
----- 1985b. Uncertainty Over Causation and the Determination of Civil Liability. Journal of
        Law and Economics 28:587-609.
----- 1988. Legal Advice about Contemplated Acts: The Decision to Obtain Advice, Its Social
        Desirability, and Protection of Confidentiality. Journal of Legal Studies 17:123-50.
----- 1989. Sharing of Information Prior to Settlement or Litigation. RAND Journal of Economics
        20:183-95.
----- 1995a. Alternative Dispute Resolution: An Economic Analysis. Journal of Legal Studies
        24:1-28.
----- 1996. Any Frequency of Plaintiff Victory at Trial Is Possible. Journal of Legal Studies
        25:493-501.
----- 1997. The Fundamental Divergence Between the Private and the Social Motive to Use the
        Legal System. Journal of Legal Studies 26:575-612.
----- 1999. The Level of Litigation: Private versus Social Optimality of Suit and of Settlement.
        International Review of Law and Economics 19:99-115.
Shepherd, George B. 1999. An Empirical Study of the Economics of Pretrial Discovery.
      International Review of Law and Economics 19:245-63.
Sieg, Holger 2000. Estimating a Bargaining Model with Asymmetric Information: Evidence
       from Medical Malpractice Disputes. Journal of Political Economy 108:1006-21.
Sloan, Frank A. 1998. Automobile Accidents, Insurance, and Tort Liability. In The New
       Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the Law, edited by Peter Newman, 1:140-44.
       London: Macmillan.
Snyder, Edward A., and James M. Hughes. 1990. The English Rule for Allocating Legal Costs:
       Evidence Confronts Theory. Journal of Law, Economics & Organization 6:345-80.
Sobel, Joel. 1989. An Analysis of Discovery Rules. Law and Contemporary Problems 52(no.
        1):133-59.
Spier, Kathryn E. 1992a. The Dynamics of Pretrial Negotiation. Review of Economic Studies
        59:93-108.
----- 1994a. Pretrial Bargaining and the Design of Fee-Shifting Rules. RAND Journal of
        Economics 25:197-214.
----- 1994b. Settlement Bargaining and the Design of Damage Awards. Journal of Law,
        Economics & Organization 10:84-95.
----- 1997. A Note on the Divergence between the Private and the Social Motive to Settle under a
                                        References – Page 7
       Negligence Rule. Journal of Legal Studies 26:613-21.
Spitzer, Matthew, and Eric Talley. 2000. Judicial Auditing. Journal of Legal Studies 29:649-83.
Statistical Abstract of the United States 2001. 2001. Economics and Statistics Administration,
        U.S. Census Bureau. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Commerce.
Sykes, Alan O. 1994. ABad Faith@ Refusal to Settle by Liability Insurers: Some Implications of
       the Judgment-proof Problem. Journal of Legal Studies 23:77-110.
Tillinghast-Towers Perrin. 2002. U.S. Tort Costs 2000: Trends and Findings on the Costs of the
        U.S. Tort System. February 2002. Chicago: Tillinghast-Towers Perrin.
U. S. Department of Justice. 2001a. Judicial Business of the United States Courts, 2001 Report
       of the Director. Administrative Office of the United States Courts, Statistics Division.
       Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of Justice.
Viscusi, W. Kip. 1986a. The Determinants of the Disposition of Product Liability Claims and
       Compensation for Bodily Injury. Journal of Legal Studies 15:321-46.
Waldfogel, Joel. 1995. The Selection Hypothesis and the Relationship between Trial and
      Plaintiff Victory. Journal of Political Economy 103:229-60.
----- 1998. Selection of Cases for Trial. In The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics and the
        Law, edited by Peter Newman, 3:419-24. London: Macmillan.
Ware, Stephen J. 2001. Alternative Dispute Resolution. St. Paul, Minn.: West Group.
Wilkins, David B. 1992. Who Should Regulate Lawyers? Harvard Law Review 105:799-887.
Wittman, Donald. 1985. Is the Selection of Cases for Trial Biases? Journal of Legal Studies
      14:185-214.




                                        References – Page 8
