                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF
                                     WELFARE ECONOMICS,
                                    MORALITY AND THE LAW

                                             Steven Shavell

                                          Working Paper 9700
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9700


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




Research support from the John M. Olin Center for Law, Economics, and Business is gratefully
acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Steven Shavell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given to the source.
Economic Analysis of Welfare Economics, Morality and the Law
Steven Shavell
NBER Working Paper No. 9700
May 2003
JEL No. D00, D6, K00

                                              ABSTRACT

        This paper contains the chapters on welfare economics, morality, and the law from a general,
forthcoming book, Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law (Harvard University Press, 2003). I
begin in chapter 26 with a discussion of the normative foundations of economic analysis, namely,
the subject of welfare economics. I also describe notions of morality and fairness, which play an
important, if dominant, role in much normative discourse about law, and I discuss the connections
between welfare economics and morality. A theme of this discussion is that notions of morality have
functional aspects, and that, for a complex of reasons, they also take on importance in their own
right to individuals.
        Then in chapter 27, I consider the observed relationship between law and morality, and
comment on what might be thought to be the optimal relationship between law and morality.
        In chapter 28, I discuss issues concerning income distributional equity and the law, including
the question of whether the distributional effects of legal rules should influence their selection. The
answer to this question will be a qualified no, given that society has an income tax system that can serve
to redistribute income or to correct problems with distribution that arise due to the effects of legal rules.


Steven Shavell
Harvard Law School
1575 Massachusetts Avenue
Hauser Hall 508
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
shavell@law.harvard.edu
                                   Table of Contents

             ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF WELFARE ECONOMICS,
                     MORALITY, AND THE LAW

                                     Steven Shavell

                      (part of Foundations of Economic Analysis of Law)




Chapter 26. Welfare Economics and Morality
      1. Welfare Economics
      2. Notions of Morality Described
      3. Functionality of Notions of Morality
      4. Origins of Notions of Morality
      5. Welfare Economics and Notions of Morality

Chapter 27. Implications for the Analysis of Law
      1. Observed Relationship between Law and Morality
      2. Optimal Domain of Law and of Morality
      3. Optimal Design of the Law Taking Morality into Account
      4. The Nature of Normative Discourse about Law and Morality

Chapter 28. Income Distributional Equity and the Law
      1. The Distribution of Income and Social Welfare
      2. The Income Tax System, Income Distribution, and Social Welfare
      3. Effect of Legal Rules on the Distribution of Income
      4. Should Income Distributional Effects of Legal Rules Influence Their Selection?
                                   Summary Table of Contents

                 FOUNDATIONS OF ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF LAW

                                            Steven Shavell



Chapter 1. Introduction

Part One. Property Law
Chapter 2. Definition, Justification, and Emergence of Property Rights
Chapter 3. Division of Property Rights
Chapter 4. Acquisition and Transfer of Property
Chapter 5. Conflict and Cooperation in the Use of Property: The Problem of Externalities
Chapter 6. Public Property
Chapter 7. Property Rights in Information

Part Two. Accident Law
Chapter 8. Liability and Deterrence: Basic Theory
Chapter 9. Liability and Deterrence: Firms
Chapter 10. Extensions of the Analysis of Deterrence
Chapter 11. Liability, Risk-bearing, and Insurance
Chapter 12. Liability and Administrative Costs

Part Three. Contract Law
Chapter 13. Overview of Contracts
Chapter 14. Contract Formation
Chapter 15. Production Contracts
Chapter 16. Other Types of Contract

Part Four. Litigation and the Legal Process
Chapter 17. Basic Theory of Litigation
Chapter 18. Extensions of the Basic Theory
Chapter 19. General Topics on the Legal Process

Part Five. Public Law Enforcement and Criminal Law
Chapter 20. Deterrence with Monetary Sanctions
Chapter 21. Deterrence with Nonmonetary Sanctions
Chapter 22. Extensions of the Theory of Deterrence
Chapter 23. Incapacitation, Rehabilitation, and Retribution
Chapter 24. Criminal Law

Part Six. General Structure of the Law
Chapter 25. The General Structure of Legal Intervention and Its Optimality

Part Seven. Welfare Economics, Morality, and the Law
Chapter 26. Welfare Economics and Morality
Chapter 27. Implications for the Analysis of Law
Chapter 28. Income Distributional Equity and the Law

Chapter 29. Concluding Observations about the Economic Analysis of Law
                   ECONOMIC ANALYSIS OF WELFARE ECONOMICS,
                           MORALITY, AND THE LAW


                                                     Chapter 26
                           WELFARE ECONOMICS AND MORALITY
                                                    Steve Shavell
                                   © 2003. Steven Shavell. All Rights Reserved.



In this chapter, I first discuss the framework of welfare economics that, as sketched in
Chapter 1, has been used throughout the book in undertaking normative analysis of law.
Then I define and describe the role of notions of morality and, at the end of the chapter,
relate these notions to welfare economics.1 This will enable us, in the succeeding chapter,
to discuss the relationship between law and morality and to understand the connections
between normative evaluation of legal rules that is based on welfare economics and that
relying, at least in part, on ideas of what is right and just.

1. Welfare Economics
        1.1 General framework. The term welfare economics refers to a general
framework for normative analysis, that is, for evaluating different choices that society
may make. Under the framework, the social evaluation of a situation consists of two
elements: first, determination of the utility of each individual in the situation, and second,
amalgamation of individuals’ utilities in some way. I will now discuss each of these
elements.
        1.2 Individual utility. The utility of a person is an indicator of his well-being,
whatever might constitute that well-being.2 Thus, not only do food, shelter, and all the
material and hedonistic pleasures and pains affect utility, but so also does the satisfaction,
or lack thereof, of a person’s aesthetic sensibilities, his altruistic and sympathetic feelings
for others, his sense of what constitutes fair treatment for himself and for others (a point
that will be of particular importance for us), and so forth. It is important to note too that if
there is uncertainty about the future and thus about the utility that individuals will turn
   1
    I am, of course, well aware that, in dealing with the general subject of morality, which has been intensively
and continuously debated for more than two thousand years, no position that a writer advances is likely to be
viewed as free from difficulty. A writer can, however, endeavor to be clear, especially about separating the
description of moral notions from the prescription of behavior and social decisions on the basis of their
agreement or disagreement with moral notions.
   2
    More precisely, a utility indicator or utility function attaches a number to each situation in which a person
could find himself, and in such a way that higher numbers are associated with higher well-being. Thus, if
situation x is preferred to situation y by a person, the utility associated with x must be higher than that associated
with y. For instance, 2 might be the utility of x and 1 that of y, or 20 that of x and 12 that of y. Many different
possible utility functions can represent the same ordering of possible situations by an individual according to his
well-being. However, for concreteness, the reader might sometimes find it convenient to imagine (whether or
not it is true) that there is a measurable level of a chemical, or of electrical activity in a region of the brain, that is
higher the higher the person’s reported well-being is, and that this particular quantity serves as utility.




                                                  Chapter 26 – Page 1
out to experience, individuals will have a prospective evaluation of their well-being,
which can be expressed as their expected utility, that is, as probability-discounted utility.3
As the reader knows, this has the implication that the existence of insurance may benefit
individuals because insurance raises their expected utility.
         It is apparent, then, that the idea of utility is of encompassing generality; by
definition, utility is advanced by anything that raises a person’s well-being.
         1.3 Amalgamation of utilities through the social welfare function. According
to the welfare economic framework, the social evaluation of situations is assumed to be
based on individual well-being. In particular, it is presumed that the social evaluation,
labeled social welfare, depends positively on each and every individual’s utility – social
welfare is raised when any individual’s utility increases -- and does not depend on factors
apart from their utilities.4
         There is a vast multitude of ways of aggregating individual utilities into a measure
of social welfare, and no single way is endorsed under welfare economics. One possible
measure of social welfare is that of classical utilitarianism, the sum of individuals’
utilities. Under other measures, not just the sum but also the distribution of utilities
generally matters, and more equal distributions of utility may be superior to less equal
distributions.5 Under welfare economics, the assumption is not that the evaluation of
social states is guided by one particular view about the proper way of amalgamating
individuals’ utilities (within the general class of ways of so doing), but only that there is
some way of doing this.


   3
     A person must have some way of evaluating situations involving uncertainty, because the supposition is that
he can always state his well-being and state a preference for one situation over another, and some situations
involve uncertainty. Thus, the statement in the text that a person has a prospective evaluation is merely an
observation about his having well-formed preferences, not a distinct claim about their nature. However, that a
person’s prospective evaluation of an uncertain situation can be expressed as a probability-discounted sum of
utilities -- as an expected utility -- is a distinct claim about preferences, and it can be proved under very weak
assumptions (see in particular Savage 1972), but these assumptions need not detain us here.
   4
     To express the framework formally, suppose that there are n individuals, and let the utility of the first
individual be denoted U1, that of the second U2, and so forth. Also, let x stand for an exhaustive description of a
situation. Then social welfare, W(x), can be written as W(x) = F(U1(x), U2(x),...,Un(x)). Here, W(x) > W(xN) is
interpreted to mean that situation x is socially preferred to situation xN. As noted, it is assumed that W(x) increases
as each person’s utility (U1, U2, etc.) increases. It should be noticed that social welfare, W(x), is influenced by x
only insofar as x affects the utilities of individuals; it is solely the utilities of individuals that determine social
welfare. It should also be observed that the mathematical form of the social welfare function W depends on the
utility functions Ui that are chosen to represent the well-being of individuals; if, for instance, for person i we
altered the utility function Ui by doubling it to Ui*(x) = 2Ui(x), then W would be modified such that half of Ui*
would play the role of Ui in W.
   5
       For example, suppose that W equals the sum of square roots of utilities, and consider a situation where there

are two individuals, and each has the same utility, 100. Then social welfare is 20, namely, %100 + %100 = 10 +
10. This equal distribution of utility is superior to the unequal distribution where one person has utility of 50 and

the other 150, in which case social welfare is 19.32 (for %50 + %150 = 7.07 + 12.25), and this distribution is
superior to the extreme distribution in which one person has all the utility of 200, in which case social welfare is

14.14 (for %200 = 14.14).




                                                 Chapter 26 – Page 2
        Comments. (a) Distribution of income. Considerations about equity in the
distribution of income can be expressed in the measure of social welfare. Notably, the
distribution of income affects the distribution of utilities, and this distribution, as just
stated above, may influence social welfare in any way. For further discussion of why the
distribution of income affects social welfare, see section 1 of chapter 28.
        (b) Exclusion of factors unrelated to individuals’ utilities. The assumption that
social welfare does not depend on factors apart from the utilities of individuals can be
formally defined in the following way. Suppose that in two different social situations, say
x and y, every single individual says, “I am as happy in situation x as I am in situation y.”
Then situations x and y must be accorded the same level of social welfare.6 (If this x and
this y were said to possess different levels of social welfare, it would have to be that
something apart from the profile of utilities across the population matters to the
evaluation of the social situations.) I will sometimes call this kind of measure of social
welfare, the kind that is studied under welfare economics, a utility-based measure of
social welfare in order to differentiate it from a measure of social welfare that depends on
something else as well.7
        (c)_Exclusion of “objective” notions of well-being as the basis of social welfare.
Consider an objective notion of well-being, for example the notion that any enjoyment
derived from the unhappiness of others ought not count as objective utility. Such an
objective notion of utility cannot be employed as the basis of social welfare under welfare
economics, given the assumption that social welfare is a function solely of individuals’
(subjective) utilities.

2. Notions of Morality Described
        2.1 Definition of a notion of morality. There are numerous conceptions of what
actions are said to be correct, right, fair, just, or moral (I will use these words
interchangeably, for convenience). These conceptions are, at least implicitly, ways of
evaluating situations; the correct, right, fair, or moral behavior or action is ranked above
the incorrect, wrong, unfair, or immoral behavior or action.
        Some conceptions of fairness concern equity in the distribution of things. Thus if
there is a cake to be divided between two individuals, it might be said that it is generally
right for each to be allocated an equal share. Many such ideas of fair distribution may be
viewed as methods of evaluation based on the distribution of utilities of individuals. (In
the cake example, the idea of fair division of the cake corresponds to a distribution of the
cake such that each individual derives the same utility from his portion of the cake.) Any
idea of distributional fairness can be expressed as a utility-based social welfare function
and is thus comprehended under the framework of welfare economics.
        Other conceptions of fairness and morality involve factors distinct from, or in
addition to, the distribution of utility among individuals. For example, it is said that if a
person makes a promise, it is correct for him to keep it; that if one person wrongly injures

   6
    Formally, the assumption is as follows. Suppose in two situations x and y, for each individual i, U1(x) =
U1(y). Then W(x) = W(y). This assumption may easily be verified to be equivalent to the assumption (see note 4)
that social welfare W(x) may be expressed in the form W(x) = F(U1(x), U2(x),...,Un(x)).
   7
   In economics, what I am calling a utility-based measure of social welfare is usually called individualistic, or
sometimes welfaristic.




                                              Chapter 26 – Page 3
another, fairness requires that he compensate the victim for his losses (the classic notion
of corrective justice); or that if a person commits a bad act, it is right that he be punished
in proportion to the gravity of the act. On reflection, the reader can verify that these
examples of nondistributional moral notions share a basic feature: They are all means of
evaluating behavior, and thus social situations, that do not depend at all, or at least do
not depend exclusively, on the utilities of individuals -- they depend on something else.
Promises are supposed be kept not because, or not only because, this raises the well-being
of those who make and benefit from promises (even though that may generally happen);
compensation is supposed to be paid for harm wrongly done not because, or not only
because, this will insure victims, discourage future harmful behavior, and keep the peace
(even though these things will tend to occur); punishment is supposed to be imposed in
proportion to the seriousness of the bad acts not because, or not only because, this will
lead to reasonable deterrence of bad acts and raise potential victims’ utility (even though
that may generally happen). Rather, promise-keeping, compensation for wrongs, and
correct punishment are important, as moral notions, because they are intrinsically good,
or for some underlying reason (such as that they are in accord with a system of natural
justice), but in any case not solely, if at all, because of their effects on the well-being of
individuals.8 I will henceforth focus on these nondistributional ideas of fairness and, for
expositional ease, will mean by fairness or morality, and the like, a nondistributional
conception.9
         Now to say that a moral notion is a means of evaluating behavior that does not
depend exclusively on the utilities of individuals is not enough to define what is usually
meant by a moral notion. Consider a rule of behavior such as “Do not wear a hat when
butterflies can be seen.” This principle of behavior does not depend on individuals’
utilities, but the principle is not one that we would call moral. The reason is that what is
said to be a moral notion is one that is accompanied by particular types of sentiments on
our part, so a second element of a definition of a moral notion that comports with
ordinary usage of that term is that a moral notion is associated with these sentiments.10 I
now turn to a description of the sentiments, of the psychological aspects of moral notions.


   8
    Formally, a notion of morality that does not depend exclusively on the utilities of individuals is associated
with a social welfare function W(x) that is not individualistic, cannot be written in the form F(U1(x),
U2(x),...,Un(x)). That is, given W, there must exist situations x and y such that for each individual i, U1(x) = U1(y),
yet W(x) does not equal W(y).
   9
     Although I am calling notions of fairness that do not depend exclusively on utilities nondistributional, some
writers occasionally use the term “distribution” in connection with these notions. For example, corrective justice
requires that a wrongdoer compensate his victim, and a writer might say that the compensation paid is a matter of
just distribution. I am reserving the term distribution to refer to the allocation of utilities across the population
and hope that the reader will not be confused by my usage (which is not idiosyncratic).
   10
     One observation about moral notions (but this is not part of the definition in the text) is that they apply
primarily where the well-being of more than one person is at issue. Promise-keeping, note, involves a promisor
and a promisee; punishment involves a wrongdoer and a victim; and so forth. A principle that affects only one
individual (such as “go on a diet”) would not tend to fit with our use of the term “moral.” (There are some
exceptions, having to do with ideas of prudence, temperance, and self-control, but the reasons for these principles
having the attributes of the other moral principles are, it can be argued, similar to those that will be adduced for
the latter, conventional moral principles.)




                                                Chapter 26 – Page 4
         2.2 Definition continued: psychological attributes associated with notions of
morality. One psychological attribute associated with what we tend to call a notion of
morality is a feeling of virtue, of pleasure of a type, that a person experiences when he
obeys a notion; and an opposite psychological attribute is a feeling of guilt or remorse, of
displeasure, that a person suffers when he disobeys a notion. Thus, when a person keeps a
promise, he may feel virtue, and if he breaks a promise, he may feel guilt.
         Moreover, it is not just the individual who acts morally or who fails to act morally
who may experience an increase or a decrease in utility, as the case may be; it is also
other parties, including onlookers, who know about the event, who may experience an
increase or a decrease in well-being. For example, if we learn that a person has
committed a wrong but has been properly punished, we may feel good about that; and if
we learn that he has not been punished at all, or has been punished too severely given the
gravity of his act, we may feel worse for that reason.
         It is also true that onlookers will sometimes derive utility from taking certain
actions in the light of behavior that obeys moral notions -- onlookers may praise and
otherwise reward good behavior, and obtain utility from so doing (otherwise they
wouldn’t do it) -- and in the light of actions that violate moral notions -- onlookers may
disapprove and otherwise punish bad behavior.11
         To summarize, then, I am defining a (nondistributional) notion of morality to be a
principle for the evaluation of situations that (a) does not depend exclusively on the
utilities of individuals, and that (b) is associated with the distinctive psychological
attributes leading, as described above, to virtue and guilt, praise and disapproval.12
         2.3 Tastes for notions of morality and individual utility. It is apparent from
what was said in the foregoing section that individuals possess, in connection with a
notion of morality, a set of tastes that affect their utility. A person will feel happier, his
utility will be higher, if he feels virtue because he kept a promise, or if he learns that
punishment of a wrongdoer was correct; and a person will feel worse if he experiences
guilt because he broke a promise, or if he learns that punishment of a wrongdoer was
harsh. That such sources of utility and disutility are different in their character from
conventional springs of utility and disutility (such as satisfying one’s hunger and skinning
one’s knee) is of no moment from the perspective of welfare economics. I will address
later the implications of the point that individuals’ utility is affected by the satisfaction or
failure to satisfy moral notions; here my object is just to make that observation.13
         2.4 Comment: the existence of tastes for satisfying notions of morality is
different from their possible deontological significance. When philosophers discuss
moral notions and urge that they be adhered to, they do not generally give as the reason
that individuals will be made happy by so doing. Philosophers do not say that individuals
should be punished in proportion to the badness of their acts because this will make

         11
           The connection between morality and feelings of virtue and guilt, the moral sentiments, has been
developed over the years by, among others, Hutcheson [1725-1755] 1994, Hume [1751] 1998, Smith [1790]
1976, Mill [1861] 1998, and Sidgwick [1907] 1981.
         12
           It should be remarked that purely distributional notions of fairness and morality (such as act so
as to ensure that the utilities of individuals are equal) are also often associated with guilt and virtue, praise
and disapproval.
         13
              This point was, to my knowledge, first made by Mill [1861] 1998, 82-84.


                                              Chapter 26 – Page 5
victims and onlookers happy in a direct sense. They recommend moral actions on other
bases, which may be broadly described as deontological. Indeed, they often are explicit in
saying that the justification for a conception of morality is not dependent upon the tastes,
the sources of happiness, of individuals in the population; but instead they insist that the
justification for the notion derives from independent factors. Otherwise, the answer to the
question whether an action is recommended as right by philosophers would depend on
the contingency of what the inclinations, the preferences, of the population happen to
be.14 Similarly, when individuals themselves (as opposed to philosophers) explain why a
moral notion should be respected, they usually will not say that it is only because that
will make them happy; rather, part of their rationale ordinarily is that obeying the notion
is correct per se.
         2.5 Analysis is descriptive. The reader should bear in mind that what I have said
to this point is entirely descriptive; it is what a social scientist would report about notions
of morality. I have not stated what role moral notions ought to have in the evaluation of
social situations, and in particular in the choice of legal policy. Rather, I have attempted
to describe a certain class of evaluative principles, the moral ones, and have pointed out
that they are associated with a particular set of tastes (those producing feelings of virtue,
guilt, and so forth).

3. Functionality of Notions of Morality
        3.1 Notions of morality tend to advance our well-being. It has been long
observed, and has been articulated in considerable detail, that the satisfaction of our
broadly-held notions of morality tends to advance our well-being. The keeping of
promises allows people to plan and leads to cooperative ventures that raise our well-
being; punishment according to the gravity of acts deters bad behavior in an effective
way and thus raises our well-being; and so forth.15
        3.2 Comment: fostering our well-being is different from the deontological
significance of notions of morality. That obeying notions of morality fosters our well-
being is not the justification for such notions, according to deontologists. They may
admit, and think it good, that obeying promises promotes our welfare, but that is not the
warrant for obeying promises in their eyes; they would want promises obeyed even if that
did not advance our well-being.16
        3.3 One reason why obeying moral notions tends to advance our well-being:
socially undesirable self-interest is curbed. One general reason why obeying moral
notions promotes our well-being is that this means that individuals will not behave in
self-interested, opportunistic ways when doing so would be socially undesirable. If I
adhere to the principle of keeping promises, then I will not break my promise whenever
that becomes advantageous to me, whereas if I were to break promises for any personal
gain, the value of promises would be diluted and the social benefits associated with
promises would diminish. If I follow the principle of punishing in proportion to the
gravity of the bad act, I will be less likely to shy away from punishing a person because
of fear of retaliation or because of squeamishness, nor will I allow anger to result in

           14
             See, for example, Kant [1785] 1997, 21-22.
    15
         See especially Hume [1751] 1998 and Sidgwick [1907] 1981, and see also Mill [1861] 1998.
    16
         See, for example, Kant [1785] 1997 and Ross 1930.


                                             Chapter 26 – Page 6
excessive punishment; were I to act otherwise, the purposes of deterrence might not be
well served.
        3.4 Another reason why obeying moral notions tends to advance our well
being: myopic decisions are prevented. A second way in which following moral
notions may advance our well-being is by serving as guides for behavior in situations
where it may be difficult to perceive what would maximize our own utility. For example,
breaking a promise may be tempting, but keeping promises tends to be in our self-interest
in the long run, because doing so means that those with whom we interact now and in the
future will come to trust us, and that this trust will benefit us in manifold ways (promises
will be made and kept with us, we will be honored and admired, and so forth). Or, it may
be that punishing in proportion to the badness of an act will serve our self-interest
because we will be dealing with the punished person repeatedly in the future (suppose the
punished person is our child). By following a set of relatively simple moral principles,
individuals may, to a degree, promote their self-interest without having to think carefully
about how they should act to do that.
        3.5 Why we tend to obey moral notions: internal and external incentives
associated with the psychological attributes of moral notions. For individuals to obey
moral notions, they must want to do so.17 Otherwise, they would follow their self-
interest, or their apparent, myopic, self-interest.
        There are two fundamental reasons why individuals will often desire to obey
moral notions, connected with their associated psychological attributes described in
section 2.2. One is that individuals have internal incentives to do so, namely, they will
feel virtuous if they adhere to them, and experience guilt if they do not. Second,
individuals have external incentives to obey moral notions in that they will be praised by
others for that behavior and admonished, scolded, or otherwise punished for immoral
behavior.
        3.6 Moral notions themselves must also be of particular nature to be
functional; in strict logic they could be perverse. The above argument that our well-
being is advanced by our adhering to moral notions depends, of course, on the
assumption that the particular moral notions to which we subscribe are beneficial ones. If,
for instance, there was a moral notion that we should break promises rather than keep
them, then adhering to this moral notion would lower our welfare. In that case, if we
curbed our self-interest when self-interest would lead us to keep promises, and instead
broke promises in order to adhere to the moral notion, the moral notion would tend to
reduce our well-being. The question arises, therefore, why, if the class of moral notions
that exists tends to advance our well-being, that it is this class, and not a perverse set of
moral notions, that we observe. A suggested answer to that question is given below.

4. Origins of Notions of Morality
        4.1 Inculcation. It appears that many notions of what is right are taught to us,
especially as children, by our parents, teachers, religious figures, and other authoritative
individuals, as well as by our peers (notably, in play, when we are children). To a degree,
the teaching occurs through example, sometimes it occurs through pronouncement and
command, and sometimes it occurs through a species of reasoning referring to the
functionality of moral rules. Regarding the latter, it might, for instance, be said to a child
       17
         This basic point was early stressed by Hume [1751] 1998.


                                        Chapter 26 – Page 7
in explaining that promises should be kept: “Think of where the world would be if no one
kept his promises.” The process of teaching, and of reinforcing, notions of morality
continues beyond childhood as well. The claim that moral notions are to an important
degree taught is clear, not only because we know from common experience that teaching
does occur, but also from the manifest fact that there is, within a society, substantial
homogeneity of moral notions, and that there is among different societies, significant
heterogeneity in moral beliefs (compare the norms of the orthodox Muslims of Saudi
Arabia to those of present-day Americans, or those of either to the norms of the Aztecs).
It is hard to explain why moral notions within a given society are similar, and why those
among different societies may display real variation, if moral notions are not to an
important extent learned and instilled.
         4.2 Evolutionary advantage. Some notions of what is correct may have an
evolutionary basis, at least in part.18 A possible example is the principle that punishment
should be imposed, and in proportion to the seriousness of the transgression, for this
principle has an evolutionary advantage. In particular, if a person is harmed, say if food is
taken from him, this will reduce his chances of survival. Thus, a behavior that reduces the
incidence of harm like theft of food will be favored in an evolutionary sense; the genes
leading to behavior that prevents theft of food will tend to predominate in the population
over the course of time. But the pattern of behavior of punishing, of retaliating, when
harm has been done is often against the narrow, momentary self-interest of a person,
because after harm is done, it may be too late to undo it, and retaliation may also absorb
effort and subject the retaliating person to risk. Thus, a person is likely to retaliate and
punish only if he has a desire to punish per se. Therefore, we would expect the desire to
punish those who have caused harm to be selected as a trait in an evolutionary sense.
Further arguments along these lines can be offered for why the desire to punish should be
calibrated to the level of harm done. Evidence for the claim that this desire has an
evolutionary basis in man is not only theoretical; behavior that suggests that animals are
motivated to retaliate in proportion to harm done has been widely observed.19
         Other moral notions that arguably have an evolutionary basis include altruism
(certainly for family members; broader forms of altruism may also have an evolutionary
basis, or may be a sublimated form of that for relatives).20
         Of course, only a subset of our moral notions can have an evolutionary basis, or
they can only have a rough basis, for otherwise they could not be malleable, as they are,
and could not be learned.
         However, it may well be that our generalized capacity to learn and to obey moral
notions has an evolutionary basis. People who are capable of learning and, of desiring to
adhere to, a set of moral beliefs are likely to survive better than those who are not. In the
mists of time, such individuals could have learned a set of behaviors that would, given
        18
         On the general theme of this section, see Darwin [1874] 1998, chapters 4, 5, and, for example,
Frank 1988, Hirshleifer 1977, Wilson 1980.
        19
         On the biological origins of retribution, see for example, Daly and Wilson 1988,
chapters 10, 11, and Trivers 1971, 49; on the retributive urge in animals, see, for
example, Waal 1980, 205-207.
        20
          On altruism, seeTrivers 1971 and Wilson 1980.



                                          Chapter 26 – Page 8
their circumstances, lead them to survive better, cooperate in ways that were good in their
environment, and the like. Thus, a certain blank-slate character of the capacity to learn
moral notions must be valuable, as it allows the notions to develop in a way that is
beneficial for persons in a given environment. This capacity to learn a somewhat flexible
set of moral notions, in combination with the inherited, genetic predisposition to want to
adhere to the learned notions (to feel virtuous if they are obeyed, to feel guilty if not),
whatever they are, is highly functional and should have been favored in an evolutionary
sense. (If so, then the fact that we appear to have an ability to inculcate moral notions, as
just described in section 4.1, is explained.)
         4.3 Comments. Several additional remarks about notions of morality are worth
making.
         (a) Simple character of moral notions. From what has been said, it seems to
follow that moral notions must be the way that they are observed to be, namely, relatively
simple in character. In particular, for moral notions to be taught, especially to children at
an early age, they have to be fairly basic in nature. If moral notions were too nuanced,
they could not be readily absorbed by children nor by the mass of individuals whose
ability to ratiocinate is not high. In addition, if we consider the ways in which moral
notions function to raise our welfare, it is apparent that the notions cannot be too
complicated. In general, to be practically useful, moral notions have to be capable of
being applied quickly, without great deliberation, for many decisions in which they are
needed have to be made rapidly. In addition, to serve to curb opportunism, it is
advantageous for moral notions to be of a relatively unqualified nature, for otherwise they
would be vulnerable to manipulation by individuals who could find reasoning supporting
their self-interest. For example, if the moral notion about promise-keeping includes the
qualification that promises can be broken for a substantial range of excuses, a person
would be able, and perhaps likely, to fashion excuses to validate breaking his promise
when that would not be socially desirable.21
         (b) Imperfect functional nature of moral notions. The simplicity of moral notions
implies that they will only imperfectly serve to advance social welfare. Because they are
simple, they will inevitably fail to induce socially desirable behavior in some
circumstances.22 For example, in some situations, it will be desirable for a promise to be
broken, because the cost of satisfying it exceeds the benefit it brings about (as I explained
at length in chapters 13 and 15), yet this will not agree with the moral notion because the
moral notion, being simple, requires that the promise be kept. Another reason, apart from
simplicity, that moral notions will not perfectly advance social welfare (whatever that
measure may be) is that the notions are learned. This implies that they will have a certain
inertia about them, possibly lasting generations, even though they may lose their
functionality as circumstances change. Likewise, to the extent that moral notions are
inherited due to the evolutionary pressures of the eons, reflecting factors that may no
longer exist, they may not be functional, or not perfectly so. The desire to retaliate when
we have been wronged may be an example in point, for although there are still benefits

        21
          The general view that moral notions must be of a fairly simple character is developed by Austin
[1832] 1995, lecture 2, and is emphasized, among others, by Sidgwick [1907] 1981 and Hare 1981.
        22
         This point is stressed by the authors cited in the previous note, and by Baron 1993, 1994, among
many others.


                                           Chapter 26 – Page 9
associated with this desire, it may be too strong for our purposes, so that if we could mold
it, we would reduce its power.

5. Welfare Economics and Notions of Morality
         5.1 In general. In this section, I want to sketch the relationship between welfare
economics and notions of morality in the light of what has been said above. The main
points are, first, that because of the functionality of notions of morality, they should be
inculcated and fostered -- this raises social welfare overall.23 Second, because individuals
have a taste for the satisfaction of the notions of morality (whether inculcated or
inherited), there is a direct sense in which the notions have importance in the social
welfare calculus; their satisfaction matters apart from the benefits they bring us through
effects on our behavior. But third, the notions should not be given importance in social
welfare evaluation beyond that associated with their functionality and with our taste for
their satisfaction -- no deontological importance should be accorded them -- for doing so
would conflict with social welfare and lead to its reduction.
         5.2 Functionality of notions of morality implies that society should invest in
their inculcation. The arguments given in sections 2 and 3 explaining how notions of
morality advance social welfare imply that it is worthwhile for social resources to be
devoted to instill and reinforce these notions. Social resources are in fact directed toward
teaching moral notions through the efforts of parents and other authority figures, religious
institutions, and the like, as described in section 4.1, and possibly through the law as well,
as will be discussed in the next chapter. Altogether, the investment of social resources in
inculcation of morality is substantial, and may well be justified by the social benefits
thereby derived; indeed, greater investment may be warranted. In any case, the point of
emphasis here is that, from the perspective of welfare economics, investment in fostering
the learning of notions of morality is investment in a valuable form of social capital.
         5.3 Notions of morality as tastes affects social welfare. Given that individuals
attach importance to notions of morality as tastes, the notions of morality exert a direct
effect on social welfare. For example, if I keep a promise and feel virtuous as a result,
this feeling, which augments my utility, thereby raises social welfare. Other things being
equal, that in turn means that to maximize social welfare, promises should be kept
somewhat more often than would be optimal if the measure of social welfare did not
reflect this utility that individuals experience from keeping promises. In other words,
satisfying notions of morality is itself a component of social welfare, even though it
happens to be the case, under the view advanced here, that the reason for the existence of
these notions is also to advance social welfare. To put the point differently, the notions of
morality have, and must have, importance to individuals in order to induce them to act
against their narrow self-interest to advance social welfare. But once this is true, it
happens, as a kind of byproduct of their ultimate purpose, that the notions affect social
welfare themselves, in their own right.24 (I will sometimes use the term conventional
social welfare to refer to the measure of social welfare in which tastes for morality do not
enter, and will use the term morally-inclusive social welfare to refer to the measure of
social welfare in which the tastes are reflected.)
            23
          Kaplow and Shavell 2002b investigates the optimal inculcation of moral notions, and the
optimal use of guilt and virtue to enforce the notions, in a formal model of social welfare maximization.
   24
        As noted above, essentially this view was advanced by Mill [1861] 1998, 82-84 .



                                               Chapter 26 – Page 10
         5.4 Ascribing independent importance to notions of morality reduces social
welfare. The point that satisfying notions of morality influences social welfare by
affecting individuals’ utilities should be sharply distinguished from the assumption that
the notions have independent importance, regardless of the degree to which they raise the
utility of individuals. The view that a moral notion, such as the duty of promise-keeping,
matters in itself to the evaluation of social welfare is (see section 2.4) the deontological
view that is shared, at least in part, by virtually all philosophers. Such views conflict with
a fundamental assumption of welfare economics, which is that social welfare depends
exclusively on the utilities of individuals.
         If a notion of morality is given independent significance in the evaluation of
social welfare, it is clear to the intuition that a utility-based measure of social welfare will
tend to be reduced, for that measure will be compromised to some extent in order to
adhere to the notion of morality. For example, if promise-keeping is granted independent
significance, more promises will be kept than would be best if the goal were to keep
promises only to advance individuals’ utilities, and whatever utility-based measure of
social welfare one endorses will likely be lower than it could be.
         5.5 Pareto Conflict Theorem. The point just discussed, that according weight to
a notion of morality per se tends to lower social welfare, is reflected in the following
conclusion: If independent weight is given to a notion of morality under a measure of
social welfare, then in some situations the utility of every single individual will be
lowered as a result of advancing that measure of social welfare.25 That this claim should
be true is not surprising, for if the notion of morality has independent weight, this weight
will exceed the importance of individuals’ utilities between two possible social states if
the utility differences between the two social states are sufficiently small. Suppose, for
instance, that independent weight is given to promise-keeping, and that all individuals
very slightly prefer that promisors be able to break promises when a certain type of
difficulty arises.26 Now if the preference of each individual for being able to break
promises when this difficulty arises is small enough, the fact that promise-keeping has
independent weight implies that social welfare will be promoted by insisting on promise-
keeping when the difficulty arises. Thus, all individuals will be made worse off -- their
utilities will be reduced -- as a result of the independent weight placed on promise-
keeping. Such situations in which all individuals are made worse off can be shown
definitely to arise; whatever is the notion of morality, and whatever is the strength and

   25
     The conclusion can be more precisely expressed. Let W be a social welfare function that is not
individualistic. Then the assertion is that it is possible to find two social situations x and y such that Ui(x) > Ui(y)
for each individual i (that is, x is Pareto preferred to y), yet W(y) > W(x). The proof of this requires only very
weak assumptions, essentially that there is some good, such as a consumption good, that all individuals like to
possess and that W is continuous in the amounts that individuals have of this good (a much weaker assumption
than that W is continuous in many, or all, components of social situations). The conclusion is informally
discussed in Kaplow and Shavell 1999 and formally demonstrated in Kaplow and Shavell 2001a.
   26
     The reason that all individuals -- promisors and promisees -- might prefer that promisors be able to break
promises if a difficulty arises is that this may raise the value of contracts to both parties. As explained in chapter
15, if the cost of performance in the difficulty exceeds the value of performance, allowing nonperformance will
raise the value of the contract to the promisor and to the promisee; the latter will gain because the promisor will
be willing to lower the price by more than the decline in value to the promisee due to the increased likelihood of
nonperformance.




                                                Chapter 26 – Page 11
character of its independent significance, there will always exist situations in which
maximizing the measure of social welfare reflecting this notion will reduce the utility of
all individuals. Let me call this conclusion the Pareto conflict theorem, as it states that
giving weight to a notion of morality leads to conflict with the Pareto principle -- that if
all individuals prefer one situation to a second, the first should be socially preferred to the
second.
         Several comments should be made about the Pareto conflict result. First, the result
implies that any person who endorses the principle that a measure of social welfare
should rise whenever the utilities of all individuals rise -- the Pareto principle -- must
abandon any view that ascribes independent importance to a notion of morality, which is
to say, any deontological view. This is forced upon the person by the requirements of
logical consistency. If a theory about the social good conflicts with a principle that one
endorses in any situation, the theory must be rejected for that reason.
         Second, a response that I have sometimes encountered to the Pareto conflict result
is that, in actual fact, one social choice will rarely, if ever, be preferred by all individuals
to another, so that, it is said, what would be true were there unanimity of preference can
be ignored. This response suffers from a non-sequitur. The premise that, in reality, one
social choice will rarely, or never, be preferred by all to another may well hold. But it
does not follow from this premise that what would be true in that situation is irrelevant.
For if what would happen under a deontological principle would contradict unanimous
preferences in a hypothetical situation, such a principle must be abandoned provided that
we endorse the Pareto principle (the point just made in the previous paragraph). A
hypothetical situation that never arises can be quite relevant, because it can reveal a
property of a view that leads us to abandon the view; that the situation never really arises
hardly means that we cannot draw implications from what would occur in that situation.
If we know that a theory of addition implies that, were we on the planet Pluto, two plus
two would equal five, we must abandon that theory even if we know we will never be on
Pluto.

       Note on the literature. The views presented in this chapter are synthetic, and are
based, as indicated in the notes, on sometimes long scholarly traditions. The general
conception that moral notions are associated with feelings of virtue, a form of utility, if
one obeys them, and are associated with guilt and other emotions creating disutility if one
disobeys them, is developed especially by Hume ([1751] 1998), Mill ([1861] 1998),
Sidgwick ([1907] 1981), and Smith ([1790] 1976). The fundamental idea that moral
notions serve functional purposes is also advanced by these authors, among many others.
The observation that moral notions are to a degree inculcated is discussed, for example,
by Austin ([1832] 1995) and Mill, and by Hare (1981); and the point that the notions are
in some ways produced by evolutionary forces is stressed by Darwin ([1874] 1998) and
in much modern day sociobiological literature, for instance, by Trivers (1971) and
Wilson (1980). The point that, although moral notions advance social welfare, they do so
only imperfectly, due in part to their relative simplicity, is emphasized by Austin and
Sidgwick, and see also Baron (1993) and Hare. Regarding the implications of the moral
notions for social welfare, the point that it is socially worthwhile to invest in fostering
them is consistent with the view of all who see functionality in the notions. The point that
moral notions do enjoy importance because individuals derive utility from their



                                      Chapter 26 – Page 12
satisfaction, and thus for that reason constitute a part of the social welfare calculus, is
made by Mill. The conflict between utility-based social welfare and deontological views
of morality has in a general sense been the stuff of debates about utilitarianism and
related issues in philosophy; the point that all deontological views necessarily conflict
with the Pareto principle, and thus are in deep tension with individual well-being, is
demonstrated in Kaplow and Shavell (2001a).




                                    Chapter 26 – Page 13
                                       Chapter 27

                 IMPLICATIONS FOR THE ANALYSIS OF LAW
Having discussed welfare economics and morality in general, let me now examine some
of their implications for the legal system. In particular, I here consider the observed
relationship between law and morality; the optimal domain and design of the law, taking
morality as a regulator of conduct into account; and the nature of normative discourse
concerning law and morality.

1. Observed Relationship between Law and Morality
        1.1 Rough congruence exists. Most legal systems appear to reflect, in a broad
and approximate manner, the moral notions of the societies in which the legal systems
apply. In our own country, we see that many acts that the law penalizes are considered
wrong, violative of shared ideas of what is moral. Consider murder, rape, robbery, and
most crimes; much negligent, tortious behavior; opportunistic breaches of contract; or the
creation of nuisances.
        Moreover, not only do the acts about which the law is concerned often seem to be
wrongful, the legal sanctions that are imposed in response appear to be in rough accord
with basic moral remedial principles. In the area of civil law, the general character of the
legal remedy is that the wrongdoer pays the victim for harm sustained; notably, tort
damages are supposed to indemnify victims for losses and contract damages to make the
victim of a breach whole.This central tendency of the civil law is interpretable as that of
classical corrective justice, that wrongdoers compensate their victims for harm suffered.
In the area of criminal law, penalties rise in some fashion with the gravity of the bad act;
roughing someone up in a brawl is penalized less than stalking him and beating him
severely, and this less so than his murder. That is to say, criminal punishment tends to
bear a proportion to the degree of wrongdoing, which is the underlying principle of
retributive justice.
        Additional evidence for the claim that the law reflects morality is that legal
systems vary over time and among countries in a way that comports with differences in
notions of morality. For example, laws concerning the permissibility of types of sexual
relations (out of marriage, homosexual) have changed in character over the years in our
country, and are much unlike those of conservative Islamic countries, such as Saudi
Arabia.
        1.2 But substantial differences between law and morality are apparent.
Notwith-standing what has just been said, there are important respects in which legal
systems do not reflect the notions of morality that a society holds. First, many acts
considered to be wrong are not sanctioned by the law. Lying is generally considered
immoral, yet it often is not legally punishable (a vast range of false statements that are
made in social settings, at the workplace, and in commerce are not actionable). Changing
one=s plans for modest personal advantage, but to the greater detriment of others, is also
often considered wrong but does not give rise to legal sanctions (suppose that I say that I
will teach a much needed course, but then bow out because I would slightly prefer to do
something else). Also, acting in a grossly negligent way (such as leaving a live wire


                                     Chapter 27 – Page 1
exposed where children are playing) is wrong, but will probably not result in a legal
action unless somebody actually comes to harm. It is evident, therefore, that there is a
substantial domain of behavior that is wrong but is not addressed by our formal legal
system.
         Second, many acts that are penalized under the law are not considered wrong, or
only in a very attenuated way. Where liability is strict, parties face sanctions even if they
take all reasonable precautions and thus even if their behavior is not wrongful.27 Another
general example is provided by legal rules that most would describe as technical in
character, especially those concerned with finance and business -- consider the
requirements for registration of securities with the Securities and Exchange Commission
and fine points of the doctrines governing the permissibility of mergers under the
antitrust laws. These rules cannot easily be linked to our notions of morality. It is
possible, though, that because individuals understand such technical rules to have been
designed to promote the common good in some way, however indirect and ramified
(registration of securities promotes trade in securities, which allows firms to raise capital
and individuals to invest, which leads to more economic activity and ultimately to greater
welfare), there does exist a refined sense in which individuals feel a duty to obey the
technical rules. Nevertheless, I believe the reader will agree that these technical areas of
the law do not have a clear moral basis.28
         Third, the magnitude and character of legal sanctions sometimes departs
significantly from what our moral sense would require. Tort damages are often different
from what would seem to be an actor=s just deserts. A firm that knowingly acts
negligently and in such a way as is likely to cause great harm (including many deaths) but
that turns out to cause only modest harm may be required to pay just for that harm,
whereas we might well believe that the firm deserves to be punished severely and that
responsible individuals within it should bear strong penalties. A party who decides to
break a contract because a more advantageous opportunity has arisen may only have to
pay modest damages, whereas the moral duty to keep promises might seem to call for
more serious legal sanctions. Fines and other criminal penalties also often deviate from
retributive principles of proportionality. For example, fines for parking violations may be
many multiples of harm done (consider a $25 fine for parking too long at a metered
space), whereas the punishment for murder may be less than the harm done (a few years
in jail arguably translates into less than the loss of a life).
         1.3 Explanation of the foregoing. The descriptions of the preceding sections
make basic sense from the point of view of economic analysis and what has been said in
chapter 26 about notions of morality.

   27
     Sometimes, however, it is asserted that our sense of morality would lead to liability for harms arising from
engaging in the activities for which strict liability applies (such as transporting wastes across a lake). If this be so,
then I would say that the sense of the moral obligation is a weak one, but the reader can judge that issue for
himself.
   28
     It is no answer to say that individuals feel a moral obligation to obey all our laws, whether technical or not.
This may be true (in which case, note, any rule whatever would be considered to have a moral basis). The
question under consideration here is whether legal rules have an independent moral basis -- a basis such that,
were they not part of our legal system, there would be a moral reason to adhere to them (virtue would be felt if
they were obeyed, guilt if not; see section 2 of chapter 26).




                                                 Chapter 27 – Page 2
        Specifically, we would expect to observe substantial, if rough, congruence
between law and morality for two reasons. The first is simply that individuals want moral
notions to be obeyed; as discussed in section 2 of the last chapter, individuals attach
importance to the moral notions themselves and desire that they be satisfied. Because the
law is designed by individuals, it is not surprising that the law should be influenced by
the value that individuals place on adherence to the moral notions. Thus, for instance,
because we believe that promise-keeping is desirable, we wish contract law to promote
the keeping of contracts, and because we desire punishment to be in proportion to the
seriousness of bad acts, we want criminal sanctions to be fashioned in that way.
        The second reason that an observer would expect there to be a degree of
resemblance between morality and law is different. If morality and law have the same
underlying objective, to promote social welfare, we would predict that these two systems
of rules would display similarities. For example, we would expect both morality and our
legal system to foster the keeping of promises because that promotes social welfare
through inducing cooperative efforts, trade, and production. In other words, it is not just
that the law fosters the keeping of contracts because of the moral value people place on
promise-keeping, rather, the law has also evolved to foster the keeping of contracts
because of the functional value of so doing, and the moral notion of promise-keeping has
evolved because of the same functional value.
        We would also expect there to be substantial differences between our system of
morals and law. The first difference that I mentioned, that there are many immoral acts
(like lying) that the law does not sanction, is understandable from the economic
perspective. As will be discussed below (see section 2), it is impractically costly for
society to attempt to govern a significant domain of undesirable human behavior through
the legal system, whereas it is relatively inexpensive and generally sufficient to control
much such behavior through our notions of morality alone. Additionally, some immoral
behavior is not socially undesirable, so that we would not want to control it through use
of the legal system; because our notions of morality are, and must be, relatively simple in
character character (as was discussed above in section 4 of chapter 26), certain acts that
are socially desirable will be seen as immoral, and it would be unwise policy to make
them illegal.
        The second difference that I noted was that there are many acts that are punished
under the law (like improper mergers of businesses) but which are not immoral, or not
obviously so. The main explanation for this being the case is that there is much behavior
that is worthwhile controlling in order to raise social welfare, and which the law therefore
does control. At the same time, some of this behavior is not offensive to our system of
morality, because, again, our notions of morality are relatively simple in character. This
point will be amplified in section 2 below.
        Similarly, the third difference that I noted, concerning deviations between legal
punishment and what seems meet from a moral perspective, can be explained by the fact
that the law is fairly flexibly designed to promote social welfare, whereas our system of
morality has a simple character. For a variety of reasons, sanctions that advance our
welfare will not necessarily be set in proportion to the gravity of bad acts. Notably, the
social welfare-optimal magnitude of sanctions will reflect the likelihood of their
imposition and the costs of their imposition (as was spelled out in chapters 20 and 21),




                                     Chapter 27 – Page 3
but these factors are largely independent of the moral quality of acts. This too will be
discussed below, in section 3.
         1.4 Effect of law on morality. To this point in my consideration of the
relationship between law and morality, I have not mentioned the possibility of an effect
of the law on our notions of morality and its force,29 but it is probable that this effect
exists and I mention here two possible ways in which it may come about.
         First, it is plausible that the law influences the moral beliefs that individuals hold.
As mentioned in section 4 of chapter 26, our moral views seem to a significant extent to
be inculcated and learned. Thus, the law might influence our moral beliefs if it plays a
role in instilling and teaching individuals moral values, and one can see that this may be
so. For example, a parent or a minister, in trying to impress on a child the lesson that theft
is wrong or that discrimination based on skin color is wrong, could mention to the child
that the law holds that theft and discrimination are wrong and result in sanctions. This
statement about the law could lend authority to the message and make it more likely that
the child would learn the lessons and ultimately adopt them as moral values. There is also
a possibility that legal rules would exert a similar effect on adults and help to alter their
moral beliefs. (But to me this seems a less important factor, given what I perceive to be
the small degree to which adults change their fundamental moral beliefs.)
         Second, the law can enhance the effectiveness of our moral beliefs by changing
our willingness to impose social sanctions on those who have violated notions of
morality; this in turn will enhance deterrence of immoral behavior. Consider the
inclination of a person who believes that discrimination is wrong to chastise those who
engage in it and otherwise impose on them sanctions of a social type. It seems plausible
that such a person would be more likely to impose these social sanctions if there exists a
law penalizing discrimination. The person might infer from the existence of the law that
the view that discrimination is wrong is more widely held in the population than he
otherwise believed, and thus that more individuals would join him in condemning this
behavior, or would give silent approval, or at least would not resist his condemnation.
The existence of the law might also reduce the chance of retaliation against the person
contemplating admonishing the discriminator, for the latter could be threatened with legal
sanctions. In other words, the rational calculus of a person who holds moral beliefs
against a type of behavior, and who contemplates imposing social sanctions on those who
engage in the bad behavior, changes in favor of so doing when there is a law against the
behavior. In this way, without altering intrinsic moral beliefs, the law can influence their
effectiveness because the law increases the likelihood of social sanctions for immoral
behavior.

2. Optimal Domain of Law and of Morality
I now consider the question of the optimal domain of morality and of the legal system.30
That is, what is the set of behaviors that it is socially advantageous to control solely
through use of our notions of morality, what is the set of behaviors that it is best to

   29
    What has been noted so far is the influence of morality on law -- in that we design the law to reflect our
moral tastes -- and an influence on both law and morality of the underlying goal of advancing social welfare.
         30
           This section is based largely on Shavell 2002.



                                              Chapter 27 – Page 4
control jointly through morality and law, and what is the set that it is desirable to control
through law alone? In examining these issues, I will assume that our notions of morality
are as described generally in section 2 of chapter 26, and that the social goal is to employ
morality and law so as to maximize social welfare, taking into account the costs and
effectiveness of morality and of law as social regulators of conduct.31
         2.1 General comparison of law and morality as regulators of conduct. As I
discussed in section 3 of chapter 26, notions of morality can serve to govern behavior so
as to further social welfare by means of internal incentives -- the reward of the feeling of
virtue, the penalty of guilt – and also by means of external incentives -- the reward of
praise, the penalty of chastisement. The legal system of course governs behavior through
use of external incentives, principally monetary sanctions and imprisonment. Let me now
compare morality and law as methods of social control of behavior. After doing so, I will
make use of the comparison in an examination of the optimal domains of law and
morality.
         Establishment of rules. The establishment of legal rules ordinarily is not a very
expensive process, requiring only that a law be passed by a legislative body or that a
judge make a decision that helps to articulate a rule, and that the rule be properly
communicated. However, the establishment of moral rules is evidently very expensive
from a social perspective, assuming that this occurs through socialization and inculcation.
To instill the moral rules that one should not litter, or lie, or cheat, and the like, requires
constant effort over the years of childhood (and reinforcement thereafter). If we regard
the duties of parents, schools, and religious institutions as comprised importantly of the
teaching of children in the moral dimension, then we can appreciate that society’s
investment in imbuing moral rules is substantial. Yet one should also note that where
moral notions are inborn, or virtually so, establishment of the notions is essentially free
from a social perspective.
         Specificity and flexibility of rules; degree to which rules reflect socially desirable
conduct. Legal rules can be as specific as we please because they are consciously and
deliberately fashioned by us. Hence, legal rules can in principle be tailored to promote
socially desirable conduct and to discourage undesirable conduct at a highly detailed
level. Legal rules are also flexible in the sense that they can be changed essentially at
will, as circumstances require. Hence, if what is socially desirable or undesirable
changes, so can legal rules change.
         By contrast, it seems that moral rules cannot be highly detailed and finely
nuanced in character. As discussed in section 4.3 of Chapter 26, these rules need to be
inculcated in children, be easy to apply in everyday life, and not be vulnerable to self-
interested manipulation. Also, to the degree that moral rules have an evolutionary basis,
they will often tend to be simple in character, because very specific rules are generally
not ones that have functional value over the long periods of time during which the forces

         31
            To amplify, in this section the object is to maximize social welfare where, for convenience, I focus on
the effectiveness and the costs of the law and of morality, without taking into explicit account that our notions of
morality themselves enter into individual utility and thus into social welfare. This simplification will not affect
the qualitative nature of the conclusions reached. For example, were I to take into account how adherence to
moral notions itself raises utility and thus is a source of welfare, the conclusion that it is socially desirable
sometimes to regulate conduct solely through moral notions, because they are cheapest, would not change (only
the boundaries of the domain of behavior over which the sole use of morality would be optimal would change).




                                               Chapter 27 – Page 5
of natural selection operate. Additionally, moral rules are not very flexible. Rules that are
inculcated are not subject to alteration in the short run, and when the moral rules have a
biological basis, they obviously cannot be changed.
         The implication of the lack of specificity and flexibility of moral rules relative to
legal rules is that moral rules will more often lead to errors in conduct than legal rules.
For instance, a person may decide to honor a contract due to the moral obligation to keep
the promise it represents, even though breaching the contract would be socially preferable
under the circumstances (perhaps the expense of performance greatly outweighs its value
to the promisee) and the law would allow breach. Or a person might refrain from
reporting the bad behavior of a friend out of a moral duty of fidelity, even though it
would be socially desirable for the friend to be reported (perhaps his bad behavior would
otherwise continue), and the law might allow or require reporting.
         Magnitude of sanctions. Legal rules can be enforced by monetary sanctions and
by imprisonment, with no limit in principle save for the wealth of an individual and his
remaining lifetime. As such, the potential magnitude of legal sanctions is great.
         What is the magnitude of the moral sanctions? I will assume here that the moral
sanctions are, over most of their range and for most individuals, weaker, and perhaps
much weaker, than high legal sanctions. This is based on the judgment that, at least for
the great mass of individuals in modern industrialized nations, the disutility due to losing
one’s entire wealth or going to jail for life outweighs, and probably by a significant
amount, the sting of guilt and of disapproval (or rather, that plus the utility from virtue
and praise).32 This is not to deny that for some individuals, the moral sanctions might
have greater weight than the legal (a person might fear burning in Hell forever, or find
the disapproval of the public to be almost intolerable), nor is it to deny the possibility that
in some future world, moral socialization could be such that doing the right thing
mattered much more than it now does. But in the type of society in which we find
ourselves, where internal moral sanctions appear limited and external ones are diluted by,
among other things, the ability of individuals to move, away from those who might
reproach them, the assumption that moral sanctions are weaker seems to be the correct
one. Another point that should be made is that moral sanctions are unable to prevent bad
conduct through incapacitation of individuals, which is something that is accomplished
by the legal sanction of imprisonment. Thus, an important tool for reducing bad conduct
that is available under the law is absent from the moral arsenal.
         Probability of sanctions. The probability of legal sanctions depends on
circumstances; the imposition of sanctions for violations is not automatic. For a legal
sanction to be imposed, the violation of law needs to be observed by someone, and then it
has to be reported. Even where it is observed by the victim and he can bring suit, such as
might be the case with a tortious harm and would usually be the case with a breach of
contract, the victim might not find legal action worthwhile given its cost. Also, for many
violations for which enforcement is public, the likelihood of sanctions is notoriously low.


       32
         The true incentive to act in a moral way is the difference between one’s position
when one acts morally and when one does not; it is thus the sum of the utility of the
reward for acting morally -- the utility from virtue and praise -- and the disutility from
doing otherwise -- the disutility from guilt and disapprobation.



                                      Chapter 27 – Page 6
        In contrast, the probability of imposition of the internal moral sanctions is one
hundred percent, as previously noted (self-deception aside). A person who believes that it
is immoral to cheat on his taxes will definitely feel guilty for so doing, and will definitely
feel virtuous for paying the proper amount, because he will know whether he honestly
paid his taxes.
        The probability of imposition of the external moral sanctions, of disapprobation
and praise, is a different matter, and may or may not be higher than that of imposition of
legal sanctions, depending on the context. For instance, the likelihood that a person
would be seen cutting into a line and would suffer the external moral sanction of sour
looks is presumably high (for others in the line would notice), but the likelihood of being
found out and of experiencing disapproval for cheating on ones taxes might be lower than
that of being caught in a tax audit, for tax cheaters are unlikely to be caught by their
fellow citizens.
        Availability of information for the application of rules. In the application of legal
rules, certain information is needed. But information can be difficult to acquire or verify,
such as that concerning whether a person committed a crime and, if so, what exactly the
circumstances were. The difficulty associated with substantiation of information has two
disadvantageous implications. One is that errors may be made, such as when a person is
found guilty of murder when he really acted in self-defense, or when he is found to have
acted in self-defense when he in truth did not. The other is that legal rules are sometimes
designed in a less refined manner than would be desirable if more information were
available. For example, bartenders might be held strictly liable for serving liquor to
minors because information about bartenders’ true opportunities to determine the age of
customers is generally hard to obtain.
        These disadvantages due to difficulties in obtaining information do not apply in
regard to the enforcement of moral rules with internal sanctions, because a person will
naturally know what he did and why. If a person kills someone, he will know whether he
acted in self-defense; if he serves liquor to a customer, he will know whether he
suspected that the customer was underage. The virtually perfect quality of the
information that a person has about himself means that the internal moral sanctions will
not be erroneously applied and that the moral rules need not exclude any potentially
relevant information.33
        The conclusion is somewhat different, however, with respect to enforcement of
moral rules with external sanctions. Here there may be informational difficulties, for the
observer of conduct may not have all the relevant information or may make errors.
Nevertheless, these problems are often less serious than those faced by the legal system.
When a person’s conduct is observed by another person, such as when one person catches
another in a lie, the observing party who chides or reprimands the wrongdoer does not
have to establish what he knows to the satisfaction of a tribunal. Additionally, there is a


       33
         The point of this paragraph may be compared to the point made above that
moral rules may lead to socially worse outcomes than legal rules because of the limited
complexity of moral rules. Here, the point is that moral rules may lead to socially
superior outcomes than legal rules do, because of the greater information that may be
available for the application of the moral rules.



                                      Chapter 27 – Page 7
peculiar self-correcting mechanism at work in respect to the imposition of external
sanctions: If a person is mistaken in his criticism of another, the reproval may be dulled
in its impact, for it seems to be a psychological fact that disapproval will not register as
much if it is not deserved.
         A further point about external moral sanctions, but working in favor of legal
sanctions, is that parties who observe the conduct of others may sometimes not possess
certain relevant information that could be acquired in a legal setting. For instance, if one
person observes that another breaks a promise to him and is given an excuse as the
rationale, the victim of the broken promise might not be able to determine whether the
excuse is the truth. However, in a legal setting, an excuse offered for breaking a contract
could be investigated; witnesses could be forced to come forward and to testify under
oath.
         Costs of enforcement. The costs of enforcement of legal rules have to do with the
expenses of identifying violators and of adjudication, which can be substantial, especially
when public enforcement agents are involved. By contrast, the costs of enforcement of
moral rules are non-existent in regard to internal sanctions. In regard to external
sanctions, costs of enforcement are probably lower on average than those of legal rules,
even though there might be some adjudication in the form of gossip and discussion of the
propriety of acts.
         Costs of imposition of sanctions. Legal rules involve sanctioning costs, and these
depend on whether the sanctions are monetary or are terms of imprisonment. As has been
discussed in chapters 20 and 21, monetary sanctions are sometimes said to be socially
free, or at least much less expensive than imprisonment.
         Regarding moral sanctions, consider first guilt. Because guilt does not involve
administrative expense to effect, it appears to be a socially cheaper form of sanction than
imprisonment. Disapproval is much like guilt as a sanction, except that the consequences
of its use for those who express it need to be incorporated into the social calculus, and
what should be assumed about this matter is not entirely obvious. Virtue and praise
obviously differ from guilt and disapproval in that they are sanctions that create utility,
rather than lower it.34
         The conclusions about the costs of imposing sanctions may be expressed as
follows: The legal sanction of imprisonment appears to be the most costly to impose,
monetary sanctions may or may not be more costly to impose than guilt and
disapprobation depending on administrative expense, and virtue and praise actually
increase social welfare when employed as incentives.




       34
         For an economically oriented analysis of the moral sanctions of guilt and virtue,
taking into account that guilt is costly and that virtue creates utility, see Kaplow and
Shavell 2001b.



                                     Chapter 27 – Page 8
         Amoral individuals. To this point, we have been considering general factors
bearing on legal versus moral rules, but a particular factor of potential significance bears
mention. Namely, there may be individuals in the population for whom moral incentives
are not very important. Indeed, this group may not be small in size, especially in
societies, like that of the present-day United States, where families and other social
institutions that provide stable environments for the socialization of children are often
weak. The existence of a relatively amoral subgroup of the population implies that, for
them, moral sanctions will fail to prevent much immoral behavior. Members of this
subgroup will, by assumption, not be affected by the internal moral incentives of virtue
and guilt, and will probably also not care as much as others about the external incentives
of disapproval and praise. Moreover, these individuals will be unlikely themselves to
impose the external moral sanctions called for by the misconduct of others, exacerbating
the breakdown of the power of moral incentives. The presence of amoral individuals is
thus a factor that favors legal rules over moral rules.
         Firms (and other organizations). Another special factor worthy of note is that the
power of moral incentives may be diluted within firms (and other organizations).
Consider first the internal moral incentives, and let me note initially the familiar point
that, because a firm is not in fact a person, but rather a collective comprised of different
individuals, we cannot speak in a literal sense of internal moral incentives in respect to a
firm. However, individuals within a firm can feel guilt or virtue in regard to their own
behavior. A reason for thinking that the internal moral incentives may be less effective in
the setting of the firm than outside that setting is that decisions within firms are often
made jointly by groups, or influenced by orders from above, or acted upon and influenced
by subsequent decisions made below; this serves to attenuate the sense of personal
responsibility for one’s acts. Another factor is that firms often attempt to establish their
own norms of loyalty (consider the corporate ethos at companies like IBM), which may
tend to offset the usual moral incentives when the latter come into conflict with the
objectives of the firm.
         Second, the external moral incentives have unclear force in relation to employees
of firms. One reason is that, as just remarked, responsibility within a firm is often
diffused, so that there often will not be specific individuals within firms whom outsiders
will be able to identify and punish for wrongful behavior. Another reason is that a firm
may have an incentive to conceal the identity of responsible individuals within it, just so
they can escape external social sanctions. However, outsiders may impose external
sanctions on a firm even though they have not identified a responsible individual within
it. For example, they might refuse to make purchases from a firm that acted in a grossly
negligent manner.
         Summary. The discussion of this section shows that law and morality each has
advantages over the other in certain respects, which may be summarized (I omit
qualifications) as follows. Law may enjoy advantages over morality due to the ease with
which legal rules can be established, their flexible character, and the plausibly greater
magnitude of legal sanctions over moral sanctions. Also, the presence of amoral
individuals is a factor favoring reliance on law, as is the presence of firms, for whom
moral forces are likely to be relatively weak. However, morality may possess advantages
over law because moral sanctions are often applied with higher likelihood than legal ones
(notably, internal moral sanctions apply with certainty), may reflect superior and more



                                     Chapter 27 – Page 9
accurate information about conduct, and may involve lower costs of enforcement and
imposition.
         2.2 Domain in which morality alone is optimal. It will be best to control
behavior solely through use of morality when three conditions hold: first, that morality
functions reasonably well by itself; second, that morality is not worthwhile
supplementing with law, given the social benefits that would flow from that and the
added costs; third, that law alone is not as desirable to employ as morality alone.
         These conditions will tend to apply when two things are true: The expected
private gain from undesirable conduct is not too great, and the expected harm due to such
conduct is also not too great. For if the expected private gain from bad conduct is not too
great, then the moral sanctions, even though not as strong as legal sanctions, will very
often be sufficient to discourage the conduct. And if the expected harm from bad conduct
is not too great, then on those occasions when moral sanctions fail to prevent the conduct,
the social effects will not be so serious, and thus would not warrant the added expense of
the legal system as a supplement to morality. However, the question remains whether it
might be more desirable to employ law alone than morality alone. The points just made
imply that the social value of law over morality will not be great, so that use of morality
alone will be superior to use of law alone when the added expense of the law exceeds its
modest marginal social value.
         Let us now examine the domain in which behavior is in fact controlled primarily
by morality. This area of behavior is, as indicated above, comprised of a great multitude
of acts that we undertake in everyday life. Consider the keeping of promises about social
engagements, acting so as to refrain from creating minor nuisances, or lending a helping
hand when that is not difficult to do. I suggest that this domain of behavior where mainly
morality applies is broadly consistent with the theory advanced above. In particular, the
expected private gains from bad conduct are in fact typically small or modest. If a person
breaks a lunch date, cuts into a line, or fails to keep quiet in a movie theatre, the benefits
that he obtains are not usually of large magnitude. This being so, the moral sanctions will
often be enough to deter bad conduct; the automatic functioning of the internal moral
sanction of guilt, combined with the external sanctions, will frequently be sufficient to
dissuade individuals from acting incorrectly. Further, when that is not so and individuals
do engage in bad conduct, the harms they cause appear on average to be minor. Again, if
a person breaks a lunch date, cuts into a line, or talks in a movie theatre, the social
detriment will usually not be significant. Hence, the claim is that it would not be socially
worthwhile to append the legal system to the moral system in order to help prevent this
residuum of bad acts from occurring. That is, it would not be advantageous to subsidize
civil suit to bring about legal actions for such harms as broken lunch dates, or to employ
public enforcement authorities to hand out tickets for cutting in line or talking in movie
theatres, because the cost of doing so would outweigh the benefit from the not-too-great
additional harms that would be prevented.
         Moreover, the disadvantage of appending the legal system to the moral one in the
domain under discussion is not limited to the direct costs of use of the legal system; it is
also likely that many mistakes would be made under the legal sysem relative to that under
the moral one. When an individual breaks a lunch date or cuts into a line, he will know
about this and, as noted above, will not make errors in judging the correctness of his own
behavior. Also, the assessments of those around him will tend to be reasonably accurate,



                                     Chapter 27 – Page 10
at least by comparison to those that would be made under the legal system. The legal
system could not hope to sort out, in the way we do ourselves, broken lunch dates due to
valid excuses (suppose that a truly good friend appeared unannounced from out of town)
from those that are not. The mistakes that would inevitably be made under the legal
system, especially punishment that is not merited, constitute a separate cost that
reinforces the argument against use of the law in the domain of everyday conduct.
         It remains to consider whether it might be desirable to employ the law alone
instead of morality alone in the area of behavior in question. In order to assess how law
alone would function, we must imagine a world in which people are unlike people as we
know them -- we must envision individuals who are devoid of compunctions about
breaking promises, lying, and the like, who essentially do not care about each other, who
are sociopathic. And we must ask in this notional world how well law would control the
behavior and about the expense of control. A strong surmise is that it would be
enormously expensive to control the behavior at issue because of its variousness and
extent, that society might be bankrupted by a serious attempt to do so, and, as mentioned
in the previous paragraph, that many mistakes would be made. The conclusion is that use
of law alone would be clearly inferior to use of morality alone in the domain where
morality is observed to be relied upon.
         2.3 Domain in which morality and law are optimal. It will be best to use law to
supplement morality where the cost of so doing is justified by the extra social benefit.
This will tend to be true when two conditions hold: The expected private gains from
undesirable conduct are often large, and the expected harms due to such conduct are also
often large. For if the expected gains from bad conduct are great, then the moral sanctions
may not be enough to prevent it. And if the expected harms from bad conduct are
substantial, then failure to prevent bad conduct will be socially serious, and thus make
worthwhile the additional expense of the legal system as a supplement to morality.
         Let us now consider the range of behavior that is regulated both by morality and
by law. This area covers most acts that are criminal; murder, rape, robbery, fraud, and
like acts are not only crimes but also are generally said to be immoral. Additionally,
many torts, including most acts of negligence, many breaches of contract, and many
violations of regulations are not only legally sanctionable but also are considered not to
be moral.
         It appears that this domain of behavior is characterized by the condition that the
private gains from bad conduct are often large. The utility obtained by those who commit
criminal acts tends to be significant; the murderer, the rapist, and the thief generally have
strong motivations to act. Also, the private benefits obtained by those who commit many
torts or breaches of contract are substantial, especially because large amounts of money
are frequently at stake. Hence, the internal moral sanctions alone will often not be
enought to prevent the bad conduct.
         Another reason for failure of moral incentives to control conduct in the domain is
that the external moral incentives are often unlikely to apply, because the bad actor will
not be noticed or, if noticed, will not be reprimanded. This is obviously so of many
criminal acts. Similarly, behavior that can give rise to torts often goes unspotted, or at
least does not result in disapproval. For example, consider improper driving behavior,
such as speeding or going through a red light. If a driver does these things, he often won’t
be noticed, and if he is, how is it that other drivers are going to have the opportunity to



                                     Chapter 27 – Page 11
scold him? The external sanction of disapprobation is unlikely to be brought to bear in
many other situations in which accidents might occur, and in which tort law and safety
regulation are in fact brought to bear. This point should not be overstated, however.
There are important situations, such as breaches of contract, in which problematic
conduct will be noticed and there will be ample opportunity for observers to express their
disapproval of it.
         It also seems true that the condition concerning the harm from bad conduct
applies in the domain in question. The social consequences of failure to control crimes
and torts, which often result in injury and death, as well as breaches of contract and
many of the other acts to which our legal system applies, are manifestly great (especially
in comparison to the consequences of broken lunch dates, cutting in line, and other
quotidian misbehavior). Hence, the benefits from preventing these harms through use of
the law, when they are not prevented by morality, are significant, and these benefits
outweigh the costs of employing the legal system.
         Additionally, the problem of amoral individuals is of obvious relevance to the
issue at hand. Because the magnitude of harm from the undesirable conduct that we are
considering is great, the existence of amoral subgroups is of special significance. Even if
small, such subgroups, if unchecked, can wreak great social harm, especially through
repeated crimes, but also through extremely negligent behavior, failure to obey contracts,
and other bad acts.
         The presence of firms further supports the thesis that law is needed as a
supplement to morality in the realm of behavior under discussion. As suggested earlier,
the force of moral sanctions, both internal and external, is diluted in respect to the
behavior of firms. Firms, though, are often in a position to do large harm by virtue of
their size and importance in modern economies; they mediate most production and
exchange and can cause much physical and economic injury from misconduct. Hence, if
society attempted to control the behavior of firms only by resort to moral sanctions,
substantial harm would result. Legal rules, however, do alter the behavior of firms for the
good, either directly, by fiat, or by threat of monetary sanctions.
         Thus, altogether, my conclusion is that for most of the acts that society has chosen
to control through the law and through morality, the use of moral incentives alone would
not function well due to some combination of the following factors: substantial private
benefits from committing bad acts, inadequacy of internal and external moral sanctions to
counter the private benefits, the presence of amoral subgroups, and the activity of firms.
The imperfect performance of our moral system as a regulator of conduct, together with
very high social costs of failure to control conduct, warrants the use of our costly legal
system.
         A different reason why law may be socially useful in controlling conduct where
morality also applies is, in a sense, the opposite of what has been discussed so far in this
section. Namely, it may happen that a notion of morality is socially counterproductive,
and legal rules are needed to channel behavior in a different, and socially desirable,
direction (rather than that legal rules are needed to steer behavior in the direction that
morality already points).35 For example, I mentioned the possibility that a person might
refrain from reporting a friend’s bad conduct because of a feeling of loyalty, even though
       35
            This is a theme of E. Posner 1996.



                                      Chapter 27 – Page 12
reporting the conduct might be socially desirable, or that a person might not want to
breach a contract, even though breaching might be socially desirable given the high cost
of performance. If so, legal intervention, requiring the reporting of the friend or
permitting breach, might be socially desirable. Although these situations in which law
may be needed to offset the effect of morality are not typical, neither are they rare, and
this should not be considered surprising. As stressed above, moral notions cannot be too
complex for various reasons, and thus we would predict that they would come into
conflict with socially desirable behavior in some circumstances.
          Having considered why it is beneficial to supplement morality with law to
control the behavior under discussion, let me address the question of why would it not
make sense for society to rely solely on the law to control the behavior -- that is, why it is
beneficial to supplement law with morality. For example, why should society not rely
solely on criminal law to combat murder? A primary answer must be that law will only
imperfectly deter murder, and given the seriousness of that act, society will find it
advantageous to employ morality also as an instrument of control. There will be many
occasions in which a person would be unlikely to be caught for a murder that would
advantage him, but if he thinks murder is a moral evil, he might not even contemplate
that act, much less commit it. As a general matter, legal rules do not always apply, and
even when they do apply with high likelihood, the sanctions may not be strong enough to
deter bad behavior. For this reason, and because the harm from the acts in question tends
to be large, society will find it worthwhile to buttress legal rules with moral ones,
presuming that the cost of so doing is not too large. (And as I will explain below, the cost
of these supporting moral rules may be quite low, possibly zero.)
         A second rationale for supplementing law with morality is that legal rules may not
reflect certain information that is relevant to achieving socially desirable outcomes,
whereas moral rules can reflect such information. For example, the law might award low
damages for breach of a contract to photograph an important event, since proving its
significance to a court might be difficult. However, the photographer might well realize
from personal observation that the event is important, and thus if he feels it is his moral
duty to keep promises, he will not breach the contract even though he can do so by law
and it may be in his self-interest to do so. This is an example of what was discussed in
part in section 2.1, that the information that is available to apply moral rules may be
superior to that available to apply legal rules. On reflection, there are many cases in
which the law does not take into account factors of relevance, due to difficulty of proof,
but the involved parties know of these factors and, spurred by moral considerations,
might act in a socially desirable way even though the law would not lead them to do this.
         A third consideration is that moral rules may often be inexpensive supplements to
legal ones. Let us consider the moral rule against murder as an example. The act of
murder falls into a general category of conduct -- that of intentionally harming others --
that it is socially desirable to treat as wrongful. It is desirable to treat this general
category of conduct as immoral because the acts in it tend to be socially undesirable and
because much of the category is not controlled by law: There are innumerable ways in
which individuals may intentionally harm each other in everyday life that we do not want
to occur and that the broad moral rule at issue discourages, but which the law does not
affect. Moreover, a refined moral rule under which murder would not be viewed as
immoral would probably be unnatural and psychologically jarring, because of the evident



                                     Chapter 27 – Page 13
underlying similarity between murder and many of the other acts that involve intentional
harm and that are classified as immoral. Additionally, for the various reasons given
earlier moral rules cannot be too nuanced and thus could not accommodate such
distinctions. In sum, then, the argument concerning the moral rule against murder is this:
Given that society finds it advantageous to have a general moral rule against intentionally
harming individuals, society enjoys, as a byproduct, the application of the general moral
rule to murder, as a supplement to criminal law. Similar arguments can be given for many
other acts that are in the domain controlled by both law and morality; these acts fit under
the head of some general moral rule that society has good reason to establish.
         2.4 Domain in which law alone is optimal. It will be best to control behavior
solely through use of law when, among other things, morality does not function well
alone and law is needed to control behavior. These two conditions will tend to hold when
the expected private gains from undesirable conduct are large and the expected harms due
to such conduct are also large. For, as has been discussed above, if the expected private
gains from bad conduct are large, then the moral sanctions may not be enough to prevent
it; and if the expected harms from bad conduct are substantial, then failure to prevent bad
conduct will be socially serious, and thus will justify use of the legal system. A third
condition that must hold in order for law alone to be optimal is that law is not worth
supplementing with moral rules in view of the cost of so doing.
         Before considering the relevance of the foregoing to what is observed, let us ask
whether there does exist a domain of behavior in which primarily the law applies, in
which morality is only weakly or not at all relevant. It was suggested earlier that many of
our technical, often fairly detailed, legal rules have this character, such as a rule requiring
that a company have at least a stipulated amount of capital to be allowed to sell securities
on an equity market. Another example is a rule mandating the use of a particular
accounting convention for valuation of inventories (such as last-in-first-out), or a rule
proscribing the planting of an apparently innocuous species of tree in an area. What I am
claiming is that it would not strike a person as intrinsically immoral -- as immoral in the
absence of a law bearing on the matter -- for a company to sell securities when the
company possesses less than the stipulated amount of capital, or for a company to use
some other accounting practice for valuing inventories, or for a person to plant the
species of tree that is mentioned as prohibited. (Although I do not think that people would
view such conduct as intrinsically immoral, that is, as immoral were the conduct legal,
individuals would be likely to think this conduct immoral just because it is illegal; there
is a general moral duty to do what the law asks. I am, however, excluding this particular
moral rule from consideration, for otherwise the question that I think it natural to
examine here would be mooted.)
         Now let us consider whether the two conditions about gains and harm that I
mentioned above hold in the domain at issue. Regarding the first, it is fairly clear that the
private gains from undesirable conduct are frequently large enough that legal sanctions,
as opposed to merely moral sanctions, are needed to obtain a tolerably good level of
compliance with rules. Consider the often substantial gains that can be obtained from
improper sale of securities, or from a self-serving choice of method for the valuation of
inventories. Moreover, the actors whose conduct needs to be controlled are often firms,
which, as noted, dilutes the force of moral sanctions. It seems doubtful on the whole that
many of the regulations now enforced through use of the legal system, many times



                                     Chapter 27 – Page 14
through public enforcement effort and the threat of criminal sanctions, could be
reasonably well enforced by moral sanctions alone.
         The second condition that we want to verify is that the harm that would follow
from failure to comply with the rules in question would be substantial. This becomes
evident from reflection on the purposes of the rules. Consider the minimum capital
requirements for the registration of securities. If these are not met, there may ultimately
be non-trivial consequences for the functioning of securities markets (for instance,
erosion of investor confidence in the quality of securities). As the securities markets
contribute greatly to the health and productivity of our economy, it is very valuable for
the rules about the registration of securities to be satisfied. Likewise, if there are not
uniform accounting rules for the valuation of inventories, investors and lenders will have
to spend more time than they now do unraveling the meaning of financial statements,
which would impede the functioning of our capital and credit markets. The general claim,
in other words, is that our somewhat detailed technical rules are often like these
examples; upon examination, one finds that they have real and significant rationales, and
therefore that substantial social harm will result if they are violated. Thus, I have
suggested that, when one considers the two conditions in the domain in question, it does
indeed seem that legal rules are needed as a mechanism of control.
         The question remains, however, why morality is not desirable to employ as a
supplement to the law in the domain we are discussing. For morality to function in this
way, one approach that could be taken would be to teach as individual moral rules the
various legal rules at issue. Thus, we could teach children that it would be immoral for a
firm to sell securities unless the firm’s capital is higher than X, that it is immoral to plant
species Y of tree, and so forth. But it is manifestly impractical to accomplish this task,
and it would be nonsensical to think that we could, or would, try to instill rules like this in
our children. The sheer number and the changing nature of the rules would bar our
teaching them to children, and in any case the specific nature of the rules would often
render them difficult for children to absorb (what does a child know about the sale of
securities, particular species of trees, and so forth?).
         Another approach that society could employ to use morality to reinforce the law
in the domain in question is to instill in children some overarching moral principle that, in
its application by adults, would yield the many particular rules under consideration as
subsidiary, implied moral rules. Arguably, the only overarching principle that could
rationalize all these diverse rules is that of a general utilitarianism, of social welfare
maximization. It does seem true that a form of this principle not only could be, but in fact
is, imbued in us: the general obligation to do good, to do whatever it is that helps society.
However, the force of this moral rule is attenuated when it is not clear how it applies, and
this tends to be the case with regard to the legal rules under consideration; identifying
them as being in the social interest involves a fairly complicated train of thinking. Recall
the argument given above for why a firm ought to have at least X in assets before it can
sell securities; the logic behind the social desirability of this rule is not transparent (it is
far more complex than that behind the typical moral rule, such as that one ought not hit
someone, or one ought not lie). In other words, I am suggesting that the only overarching
moral rule that could resolve itself into the body of technical legal rules in question is the
general moral rule to maximize social welfare, and while we do have this general rule
instilled in us as a moral rule, it is rendered weak in the domain in question because it is



                                      Chapter 27 – Page 15
too difficult to apply, owing to our inability easily to recognize which of the technical
rules are or are not in the social interest.36 Thus, we must rely primarily on the law to
induce compliance with such rules.

3. Optimal Design of the Law Taking Morality into Account
Having discussed in general terms the optimal domains of law and of morality, I now
want to focus on the area of behavior in which both law and morality apply, and to
examine the more specific question of how the law should be designed in the light of
morality. For instance, how should tort liability be determined given our ideas of
wrongful behavior? Although it is this type of question that is the major issue below, I
will also briefly consider, at the end (in section 3.5), the question of how law should be
designed if it can influence morality.
        3.1 In general. In fashioning legal rules to maximize social welfare, the moral
system must be taken into direct account to the extent that individuals have a taste for
satisfaction of moral notions. That is, legal rules should be designed to maximize
morally-inclusive social welfare. However, as I emphasized in section 5 of chapter 26,
moral notions should not be given weight per se, independently of the importance
individuals place on them as tastes, for that would lower social welfare. To appreciate the
significance of these distinctions, it will be helpful to reconsider briefly several of the
major subject areas of law examined in this book and to comment on how taking morality
into account would, or would not, affect the previous analysis of them, which was based
on conventional, not morally-inclusive, social welfare.
        3.2 Torts. The main notion of morality that bears on tort law appears to be that of
classical corrective justice -- the wrongdoer must make his victim whole -- and it will
serve my purposes to focus on this principle even though there are others, mainly
subsidiary, that could be considered as well. The most natural interpretation of corrective
justice is that the negligence rule should govern liability, for negligence connotes
wrongful behavior. Conversely, strict liability would seem to be inconsistent with
corrective justice, for it results in liability independently of whether a person has acted
wrongly.37
        How moral notions ought to be taken into account. Under the assumption just
made about corrective justice, the negligence rule will be the optimal legal rule more
often than I found it to be best under conventional measures of social welfare. In
particular, where I suggested that the negligence rule was inferior to strict liability, due to
excessive activity levels under the negligence rule (see chapter 8), the negligence rule
might now be optimal because of the taste individuals have for it. Or individuals= taste for
         36
          In fact, society is able to harness the general moral rule to do social good by
making an act illegal. For then the rule is marked as likely to advance the social good.
For example, an individual need not understand why selling securities without having
capital of X is against the social interest; the fact that that is illegal conveys this to the
individual.
   37
      There are other interpretations of corrective justice that might be advanced, under which, although
negligence is usually the best rule, strict liability is said to be appropriate when activities impose unusual risks on
others. However, the qualitative nature of the arguments I will make would not be altered were I to consider such
an interpretation of corrective justice.




                                               Chapter 27 – Page 16
the negligence rule might imply that that rule is best where, under conventional social
welfare analysis, no liability would be desirable owing to the administrative costs of the
liability system or its small effect on incentives.
         Individuals= taste for corrective justice might also affect the conclusions about the
magnitude of damages, for corrective justice implies that damages should make the
victim whole, but this was not always the result found earlier. For example, I said that
damages received should usually be limited to monetary losses, and not compensate for
nonmonetary losses (essentially because receipt of more money by the victim is not as
beneficial as receipt of fine revenue by the state).38 In such situations, the factor of
corrective justice would lead to the desirability of raising damages paid to victims. There
were other cases that I investigated in which the influence of corrective justice on optimal
damages would be similar.39
         The degree to which the conclusions reached under conventional social welfare
maximization should be altered depends on the answer to the empirical question of the
strength of individuals= tastes for corrective justice. In making a conjecture about that
taste, the reader should bear in mind the point that in order to determine the importance
of it, a person must be able to separate the functional value of corrective justice in
reducing harm and in compensating victims from its other value. The mental experiment
that this requires is not easy. One would have to answer questions such as the following:
ASuppose that, under the negligence rule, society experiences the same number of
accidents as it would under a no-fault system and that compensation of victims is also the
same. How much would you be willing to pay each year to have the negligence rule
govern, even though it has no effect on outcomes?@ It is not obvious to me how most
people would answer such questions.
         Another problem in assessing the importance of corrective justice in the tort
context concerns insurance. One needs to know how a person=s taste for satisfaction of
corrective justice is influenced by the fact that judgments are usually paid by liability
insurers rather than by wrongdoers, and by the fact that victims may well be compensated
by their own first-party insurers, or that they would be in the absence of receipt of
damage payments.
         How moral notions are actually taken into account. What the analyst should not
do is ascribe importance to moral notions apart from their importance as tastes. This,
however, seems widely to be done. It is typical for commentators (and others in general)
to ascribe intrinsic significance to the negligence rule, or to whatever their preferred tort
rule is. Commentators= statements are not represented as reflecting solely the functional
values of tort rules and the tastes of the population for the rules. To be sure, the
functionality of rules is usually mentioned by commentators, but it is only one part of the
argument that they advance.
         Has social decisionmaking been harmed in a substantial way because of the view
of commentators? I think that the answer is yes. To illustrate, it seems to me possible
that the general scope of tort liability is too great because of commentators= orientation.

   38
        See section 6 of chapter 11.
   39
     For instance, I said that if administrative costs are high, it may be best not to estimate losses, and on certain
further assumptions not to include certain components of loss in damages; see sections 7 and 8 of chapter 10.




                                               Chapter 27 – Page 17
For instance, in substantial domains that I noted earlier, such as automobile accidents
and product harms to consumers, the extent of liability may well be too wide: First, tort
liability may provide little deterrence (in the automobile case, because people worry
about harm to themselves in the first place; in the product context, because reputational
concerns of firms may lead them to take precautions in the absence of liability, and
government could provide consumer information). Second, tort liability is very expensive
as a means of compensation compared to the insurance system. Third, the true taste for
tort liability may not be strong, and greatly compromised by the presence of insurance. In
the face of this, why do we not have a more restricted set of circumstances in which
liability is imposed? An answer is that the tort system that we observe is the product of
invocations of corrective justice by commentators, judges, and others of influence, rather
than an objective assessment of its importance as a taste, set off against conventional
social welfare considerations. Whether or not I am right about the conjecture that the
degree to which we use tort liability is excessive is not really important. My true point is
that I could be right: Because there is little real consideration given by commentators of
the true instrumental benefits of liability, and no real attempt to assess the taste for
corrective justice, errors in evaluation can be made.
         3.3 Contracts. The notion of morality that is most relevant in the context of
contract law is that of promise-keeping: that it is right to keep promises and wrong to
break them. The translation of this moral norm into contract law is that one is supposed to
honor a contract and not breach it, and if one does breach it, that one should suffer a
sanction. What this sanction should be, according to the promise-keeping norm, is not
entirely clear, and some subsidiary principle has to be used to determine it.
         How moral notions ought to be taken into account. The way that this moral notion
ought to be taken into consideration is that, whatever weight conventional analysis would
lead one to accord to keeping contractual promises due to the instrumental benefits
flowing from so doing, extra weight should be given to keeping such promises owing to
the taste for promise-keeping. Second, whatever level of damages for breach of contract
is best according to conventional analysis would be altered in the direction of the level of
damages for which there is a taste.
         What do these general observations imply? The answer depends on what the
understanding of breaking a contract is to individuals. Consider the example of a contract
that reads something like, “I will produce a machine for you.” One understanding of
breaking a contract, the standard one, is that if the machine is not delivered, then the
contract is breached. Under this understanding of breach, the promise-keeping norm says
that breach is wrong, and consequently should not come about. The implication of this
view is that whatever level of damages I said was desirable is too low, for I said that
breach of this type of contract is often desirable, and damages should be chosen so as to
allow an escape hatch that will lead to breach whenever the cost of performance exceeds
the value of performance; see chapters 13 and 15. This is why, in the paradigm case, I
said that expectation damages are desirable; they lead to breach whenever the cost of
performance exceeds its value to the promisor. Thus, the promise-keeping norm would
lead us to say that damages should be higher than expectation damages, so as to lead to
more frequent performance.
         The importance of this argument for raising damages above expectation damages
depends on the true taste individuals have for keeping promises, and remarks analogous



                                    Chapter 27 – Page 18
to those above about the importance of corrective justice apply here. Namely, it is not
clear that individuals have thought carefully about how important they believe promise-
keeping is, that their statements probably do not reflect a true parsing of the instrumental
from the intrinsic importance of promise-keeping. I should observe also that, when
individuals name liquidated damages for breach, such damages are often fairly low, and
very often equal expectation damages, suggesting that individuals do not strongly want to
induce promise-keeping, but rather to allow breach when the cost of performance would
be excessive.
         Finally, let me comment that this discussion has been premised on the standard
interpretation of breach, that not honoring the words of the contract is a breach.
However, it is possible that a deeper view of a contractual arrangement is held by some
individuals, under which the contract is interpreted in the way that I did in chapter 13.
Namely, the contract is regarded as an incomplete promise, and it reads as it does only
because of the inconvenience of writing a completely specified contractual promise.
Under this view, the breach of the incomplete contract, such as “I will produce a machine
for you,” is not a true breach. A true breach would be not honoring the completely
specified contract that would have been written had the parties included all relevant
contingencies. Under this completely specified contract, the obligation to produce the
machine would hold only when production cost is less than the value of performance;
otherwise there would be no obligation to produce it. Hence, the promise-keeping norm
would turn out to imply that one should obey contracts and perform only if the cost of
performance is below the value of performance, and thus would be consistent with the
economic analysis of contracts. But this view of contracts and promises is not the one that
is in fact held by very many individuals in my experience (even though I think it is the
view that ought to be held).
         How moral notions are actually taken into account. In fact, the way that moral
notions are taken into account in contract law has distinct aspects. First, the language of
commentators suggests that breaking the agreements that are written, such as that I will
produce a machine for you, is viewed as bad. 40 Thus, we see criticism of the idea that it
is permissible to break a contract as long as one pays damages. If, consistent with this
view and the seeming strength with which it is often expressed, damages for breach were
really high, or if specific performance were widely employed as a remedy, then contract
law would be very different from what it is; contracts would be performed much more
often, breach would be much less common than it is.
         This leads to the second point about moral notions and contract law. Namely,
when it comes to damages, the commentators seem usually to endorse the view that
damages should equal the expectation measure (or sometimes the reliance measure), not
that damages should be so high as to induce performance.41 Thus, there is tension
between the commentators’ view that damages should be moderate but that contractual
promises ought to be kept.


   40
     See, for example, Barnett 1986 and Fried 1981; and see the views about promise-keeping of such
philosophers as Kant [1785] 1997, 15,32,38, and Ross 1930, chapter 2.
   41
        For example, Fried 1981 endorses the expectation measure.



                                            Chapter 27 – Page 19
         In any case, because of the opinion that damages should be moderate, there does
not seem to be a general, socially disadvantageous effect on contract law flowing from
the application of morality to it. However, there are many particular instances of socially
undesirable aspects of contract law that are probably influenced by notions of morality,
but these we will not discuss here.42
         3.4 Public law enforcement and criminal law. The notion of morality that is
most important in regard to public law enforcement and crime is retributivist, that
wrongdoing merits punishment, and the punishment should be in proportion to the
gravity of the bad act. The proportion could be one to one, as under the biblical principle
of an eye for an eye, or different, typically higher. Of significance is that the level of
punishment depends on the degree of wrongfulness of the act and not on other factors,
notably, not on the likelihood of punishment or on the cost of imposing it.
         How moral notions ought to be taken into account. Whatever was the optimal
level of sanctions from the point of view of our previous analysis should be modified
somewhat to reflect the taste for retributive justice. This might mean that the sanction
should be lowered from what I suggested was optimal. This would be the case,
importantly, where a low likelihood of catching violators and imposing sanctions on them
leads to the desirability of sanctions substantially exceeding harm. Recall from chapters
20 and 21 that we concluded that it is desirable for sanctions to equal the harm multiplied
by the reciprocal of the probability of punishment (or something reflecting that in the
case of nonmonetary sanctions), so that, for example, if the chance of being caught is one
third, the sanction should equal three times the harm. This can easily lead to a level of
sanctions exceeding that given by the proportionality criterion of retributive justice. For
instance, the optimal sanction for tax cheating might be many times the understatement of
the tax due, and the optimal sanction for stealing a car might be a significant number of
years in jail. Taking account of the proportionality principle would reduce these
conventionally optimal sanctions.
         Note, however, that if sanctions should be smaller than the conventionally optimal
magnitude, due to our taste for retributively correct punishment, achieving more
deterrence would require investing more resources in enforcement to catch violators of
law. If we can only impose a sentence of one year on a car thief even though a three year
sentence would be more appropriate for purposes of preventing such theft, given the
present probability of apprehension, we had best increase the likelihood of apprehension
of car thieves even though that involves extra expense. This general implication of
retributive tastes is of special note because, as I emphasized in earlier chapters, the nature
of the conventionally optimal enforcement policy involves low likelihoods of catching
violators to save enforcement resources, and accompanying high penalties to maintain
deterrence. Retributivist tastes moderate the use of this strategy because these tastes
increase the effective cost of raising penalties above a fair level.
         An opposite possibility, that retributive tastes might lead to higher sanctions than
called for under the conventional social welfare calculus, arises in several circumstances.
   42
    One important example is the notion that damages should not be altered from their fair level for reasons
having to do with incentives. Thus, suppose that expectation damages are felt to be correct, but it turns out that
breach (such as improper quality of service of the promisor) would often go undetected. In such a situation, the
two parties might want to specify a multiple of expectation damages as liquidated damages in order to provide
proper incentives to perform. This, though, might be seen as unfair and not honored as the measure of damages.




                                              Chapter 27 – Page 20
One is where individuals are certain to be caught and the correct proportion of
punishment under retributivist principles exceeds one hundred percent. For instance,
suppose a firm knowingly pollutes a lake, causing $1,000,000 of harm. Here the
economically optimal fine is $1,000,000, but the retributively-best punishment is by
hypothesis higher, such as $2,000,000. A closely related reason why the retributive
punishment might exceed the economically appropriate one has to do not with the
proportionality factor, but rather with the assessment of the gravity of the act. Although
the harm caused by the pollution might be $1,000,000 and the proportionality factor
might be one, the retributively best punishment might be $2,000,000 because the
assessment of the gravity of the firm=s act might be high if the firm=s behavior had an
outrageous aspect, for instance, if its employee was drunk. Another reason that the
retributively appropriate punishment might exceed the economically optimal one is that
the costs of imposing punishment might be too high to make any punishment, or much
punishment, worthwhile, whereas retributivist principles are not influenced by the cost of
punishment.
         How much the conventionally optimal punishments should be modified depends
upon our taste for retributive justice, and it is hard to know what this is because of our
ignorance of the degree to which individuals separate their desire for appropriate
punishment from that for the consequences that punishment brings about, principally in
terms of deterrence and incapacitation.
         How moral notions are actually taken into account. It appears to me that our
notions of correct punishment have considerable effect on our punishment policy.
Certainly this is clear from the rhetoric surrounding punishment. Many punishments are
much lower than they ought to be according to conventional economic thinking. The
penalties for tax cheating are a good example; these are quite small, even though the
chance of being found out for that misbehavior is slight. Likewise for many criminal acts,
for automobile theft for example, sanctions may be inadequate given the likelihood of
capture. Because the probability of catching many types of violations is so low, the
needed sanctions for deterrence are often very high, come into conflict with our notions
of fair punishment, and these notions are given substantial weight.
         If sanctions are inappropriately constrained by retributivist thinking -- more than
is merited by our true tastes for retributivist principles -- then society suffers from a
number of disadvantages. First, deterrence and incapacitation are too low, relative to
what they ought to be. Second, expenditures on enforcement are greater than needed,
because we are unwilling to raise sanctions in many areas, which would allow us to lower
enforcement expenditures. Consider the enforcement of parking violations. If we were
willing to double the magnitude of tickets for parking too long at a metered space from
their usual level of about $20 to about $40, we could halve enforcement effort, which is
substantial in our country, and use these freed resources in other areas, or save taxpayer
money, without altering deterrence. While mundane, this example illustrates one way in
which society is paying for its desire to employ proportionate sanctions.
         When the sanctions that are felt to be fair exceed those that make economic sense
(rather than fall below the economically optimal sanctions), society also suffers a cost.
Perhaps the best example is that of firms that cause harm and suffer large penalties, such
as punitive damages, making their financial burden exceed harm done. What this




                                    Chapter 27 – Page 21
produces is excessive precautions, high product prices, and withdrawal of firms from
socially valuable lines of business.
         These costs to society in terms of social welfare, conventionally measured, are the
price we pay for proportionality of punishment. I have suggested that the costs are
substantial, and that they are not warranted by the actual taste we have for
proportionality. To know whether the conjecture is correct, we would have to assess the
strength of that taste, something that, as with the other moral notions, has not been done
to my knowledge.
         3.5 Influence of law on moral beliefs and their effectiveness. I noted above
that, to some degree, the law can influence moral beliefs and that it can also alter their
effectiveness by leading individuals to act on their beliefs to impose social sanctions on
those who deviate from moral behavior. This has obvious implications for the design of
the law, for it constitutes an effect of a legal rule that must be reckoned in the calculus of
its design, along with other consequences. For example, in assessing the desirability of
passage of civil rights laws, one would take into account not only their direct effects on
behavior, such as changes in the hiring practices of businesses to avoid liability, but also
that the laws may serve to alter basic beliefs about race and individual rights, as well as
the willingness of individuals to admonish those who discriminate.43 However, one
suspects that in most instances, unlike in that of the civil rights laws, the influence of a
legal rule on moral beliefs is a minor, if nonexistent, factor.

4. The Nature of Normative Discourse about Law and Morality
What has been suggested above to be the proper approach to understanding the
relationship between law and morality, and especially how best to design the law, is quite
different from the approach to these issues that is commonly found, whether in the
classroom, scholarly journals, legal opinions, or other forums. Here I want to characterize
briefly salient aspects of the normative discourse about law and morality that we
encounter, contrast it with the welfare economic view, and attempt to explain why the
nature of actual normative discourse is what it is. This will help to reconcile the
differences that exist between the usual normative views and the welfare economic view,
and I hope will lead the reader in the direction of endorsement of the welfare economic
view.
        4.1 Characteristics of observed discourse. Normative discourse about law and
morality appears to have three general characteristics. The first is that independent weight
is given to moral factors. For example, when crime is discussed, the blameworthiness of
criminals and the proportionality of punishment are typically accorded independent
importance, or when the subject of torts is addressed, corrective justice and compensation
of victims are accorded significance of their own. The second characteristic is that the
moral factors typically are not adequately distinguished from the instrumental ones. For
instance, when a person says that punishment for car theft ought to be a five year

   43
     Of course, a necessary part of this calculus is evaluation of the social value of the changed moral beliefs
themselves. In essence, such evaluation involves taking into account the direct effect on utility of the moral
beliefs (consisting of the experience of virtue for doing right, here of not discriminating, or of guilt for doing,
wrong, and of associated feelings with respect to giving praise or admonishing others), and taking into account
the indirect effects due to behavioral changes induced by the moral beliefs.




                                               Chapter 27 – Page 22
sentence, it will be unclear to what extent this reflects the person’s view of just
punishment and to what extent it is based on his judgment about conventional economic
factors, notably, deterrence, incapacitation, and enforcement costs. The third
characteristic of observed normative discourse is that it is generally not neutral in its tone.
When individuals debate issues of legal policy, their interchanges frequently include
elements of moral suasion. I am certain that the reader has seen that when a person
advances a right as a reason for this or that legal policy, the person typically evinces
feelings of virtue on his own part -- in his tone of voice, in his rhetorical and expressive
style. Likewise, if a contrary view is advanced by another person, that person is subjected
to attack, and certain types of social sanctions are imposed that are not entirely dissimilar
to those experienced by individuals who have acted immorally in reality. In other words,
the person advancing a morally incorrect legal policy is subjected to a translated form of
the social sanction that he would suffer if he had actually acted immorally.
         4.2 Chief difference between observed normative discourse and the proper
normative view. Perhaps the principal difference between what we encounter in
observed normative discourse about law and morality and the views that I have been
expressing is that the psychological aspects of morality and the instrumental role of moral
notions are generally ignored in the observed discourse. In this discourse, there is usually
no acknowledgment made of the point that individuals have tastes for satisfaction of
notions of morality and that the notions may serve to promote social welfare.
         4.3 Explanation for the difference. It is not mysterious that there should be this
difference. Since we care about adherence to moral notions, at least if we are well-
socialized individuals, it is natural for us to import our feelings about them into the realm
of analytical discussion. Suppose that we believe that there should be no punishment
without fault and that punishment should be in proportion to the gravity of bad acts. Then
if one of us becomes a legal academic, or an editorialist for a newspaper, it might be
expected that we would carry our views into our professional writing concerning legal
policy. This simple observation also helps to explain the non-neutral character of
observed discourse about normative legal issues.
         By contrast, the view of morality that I have been advancing is not a natural one
for individuals to hold. For it requires us to place ourselves on the psychiatrist=s couch in
order to examine why we ascribe the importance that we do to moral notions. Because
this is a difficult exercise, it is not entirely surprising that it is so infrequently done. Yet it
is somewhat surprising that academics have paid so little attention to the view advanced
here, for it is in many respects a well-known view. Famous philosophers have developed
important elements of the view of morality presented here -- I refer especially to Hume
([1751] 1998), Smith ([1790] 1976), and Mill ([1861] 1998), and more recently to such
writers as Hare (1981).
         4.4 Conclusion. My conclusion is that welfare economics, as described in the
previous chapter and this one, provides an intellectually attractive and generally
satisfactory lens for understanding and analyzing morality and law, in part because
welfare economics allows one to pass behind the veil of morality into an inquiry about its
functions and origins. Although I realize that this view is in tension with the great weight
of authority, it is the only one that I can comfortably endorse, and I hope that the reader
appreciates its value, even if the reader does not come to accept it.




                                       Chapter 27 – Page 23
                                                    Chapter 28

                INCOME DISTRIBUTIONAL EQUITY AND THE LAW
Let me now turn to the topic of the distribution of income and the legal system. Here the
question to be addressed is how the effects of legal rules on the distribution of income
should influence the choice of legal rules. I will first review how the distribution of
income enters into the determination of social welfare, and also how the income tax and
transfer system can be utilized to achieve income distributional objectives. Then I will
discuss the influence of legal rules on the distribution of income and whether the choice
of legal rules should be influenced by their distributional effects. The main point will be
that income distributional objectives are best pursued through the use of the income tax
and transfer system, implying that legal rules should be selected on the basis of objectives
apart from the distributional.44

1. The Distribution of Income and Social Welfare
Most concerns about the overall distribution of income can be accommodated by, and are
embodied in, the measures of social welfare of conventional welfare economics, as was
mentioned in section 1 of chapter 26. In particular, there are three channels through
which the distribution of income may influence social welfare.
         First, the distribution of income may matter to social welfare because the poor
may value a dollar more than the rich -- the marginal utility of a dollar to a poor person is
likely to exceed the marginal utility of a dollar to a rich person. If so, social welfare will
tend to be increased by redistributing income from the rich to the poor.45
         Second, the distribution of income may matter to social welfare because the
distribution of income affects the distribution of utility, and under the welfare economic
approach social welfare may depend directly on how equally utility is distributed among
individuals. Thus, even if the rich and the poor obtain the same marginal utility from a
dollar, it may be desirable to redistribute from rich to poor because the rich enjoy greater
overall utility.46

   44
     The questions discussed in this chapter are ones that fall under the head of conventional welfare economics,
and do not involve issues of morality in the sense in which I have used this term in previous chapters.
Nevertheless, because the distribution of income is usually described using words such as “equity” and
“fairness,” it seems natural to treat the relation between law and income distribution in this part of the book.
   45
     For example, consider the classical utilitarian social welfare function, the sum of utilities. Under it,
redistributing a dollar from a rich individual with a low marginal utility of income to a poor individual with a
high marginal utility of income will raise social welfare, for the utility of the rich individual will fall by less than
the utility of the poor individual will rise, meaning that total utility will be greater.
   46
      Suppose that social welfare equals the sum of the square roots of utility (this is a social welfare function
under which more equal distributions of utility are desirable; see note 5 of chapter 26). Suppose also that the
utility of a person equals simply his level of wealth (so that the marginal utility of a dollar is 1, regardless of
whether a person is rich or poor). Now consider two individuals, one who has wealth of $100 and the other
wealth of $1,000, and suppose that $100 is transferred from the wealthy person to the poor person, so that the
former is left with $900 and the latter possesses $200. The $100 gain by the poor person raises his utility by 100,
which is exactly the loss in utility for the rich person, so the redistribution does not lead to any change in the sum
of utilities. Yet, because the redistribution makes the distribution of utilities more equal, it raises social welfare:


                                                 Chapter 28 – Page 1
         Third, the distribution of income may matter to social welfare because an
individual=s utility may depend on the distribution of income in the population at large,
owing to generalized feelings of altruism or of sympathy. Thus, even if the rich and the
poor obtain the same direct marginal utility from a dollar, and even if social welfare
equals the sum of utilities and thus does not depend in an intrinsic way on the distribution
of utility, it may still be true that social welfare may rise if the distribution of income is
more equal.47
         In what follows, it will not be important to refer to the particular source of
importance of the distribution of income to social welfare; I will simply assume that the
distribution of income enters into the determination of social welfare.

2. The Income Tax System, Income Distribution, and Social Welfare
        2.1 The income tax system. By the income tax and transfer system is meant the
combined effect of the various taxes (federal, state, and local) on income, together with
programs (such as Medicare, food stamps) that effect transfers of money to individuals
based upon their income. For brevity, I will speak of these taxes and transfers simply as
the income tax system.
        There are two chief purposes of the income tax system: to raise revenues for
purposes of the state, and to redistribute income.48 The second purpose may not seem
important to some readers, perhaps because few individuals receive outright transfers and
because there is relatively little frank discussion in public forums of the tax system as a
means of redistribution. However, a moment=s reflection makes one realize that the tax
system does in fact possess substantial redistributive effects -- the situation of many
individuals, especially of the poor and of the rich, is changed significantly by the
existence of the tax system and government activity, and it is certainly clear that the tax
system can be used to redistribute.



social welfare is originally %100 + %1,000 = 10 + 31.62 = 41.62, and rises after the redistribution to %200 + %900
= 14.14 + 30 = 44.14.
   47
      For example, suppose that the utility of each person equals the sum of two components: his own wealth
(which he spends on personal consumption), and the sum of the square roots of the utilities of all individuals
(that is, the measure of social welfare discussed in the previous note). Notice, therefore, that the direct marginal
utility of a dollar for a person is 1, regardless of his wealth, for the first component of utility is equal to his
wealth; but the utility of a person also depends on the distribution of utilities in the population through the second
component of his utility. Suppose too that social welfare is utilitarian, the sum of utilities, so that, as stated in
text, social welfare is insensitive in a direct sense to the distribution of utilities. Then, as stated in the text, social
welfare rises if wealth is more equally distributed because that tends to raise individuals= utilities, and thus the
sum of utilities, for the individuals= utilities (as opposed to social welfare) depend on the distribution of utilities
and thus on the distribution of wealth. For instance, suppose that, initially, one person has wealth of 0 and the

other 1,000. The utility of the first person is 0 + %1,000 = 31.62, and that of the second is 1,000 + %1000 =
1,031.62, so, considering these two people, social welfare is 1,063.24. If wealth is redistributed so each person

has 500, the utility of each is 500 + 2%500 = 500 + 2(22.36) = 544.72, so social welfare is 1,089.44, which is
higher.
   48
        When I say redistribute income, I mean to include wealth as well as income.




                                                 Chapter 28 – Page 2
         2.2 The income tax system and optimal redistribution. To see how the income
tax system can be employed to redistribute income, let us suppose for simplicity that
redistribution is its sole purpose (that is, let us abstract from the government’s need to
raise revenue) and consider the following problem: Design the income tax system to
maximize social welfare, assuming that the measure of social welfare is one that favors
equality of income; thus, if a fixed amount of income exists to be divided, the best way to
divide it would be equally.49
         To solve this problem, suppose first that the income that each individual earns is
fixed in quantity. Then, the total income of individuals is obviously fixed, implying that
the optimal income tax would be designed so as to give all individuals an equal income,
namely, the average income. If, for instance, the average income were $20,000, then any
person earning over $20,000 would pay in taxes the excess earned over $20,000, so that
he would be left with $20,000, and any person earning less than $20,000 would receive
enough to bring him up to $20,000. Thus, the income tax would be employed to achieve
the ideal distribution of income, and associated with it, the ideal level of social welfare.
         There are, however, two important reasons why the income tax system cannot
achieve the ideal level of social welfare. One concerns the administrative costs of
taxation. Suppose that transferring a dollar among individuals via the tax system involves
an administrative cost (because individuals have to fill out tax forms, incomes must be
verified to combat evasion, and so forth). Then it is clear that the social welfare-
maximizing income tax system will not result in an equal distribution of income, for that
would involve too great a loss due to administrative costs. In general, the optimal income
tax system will strike an implicit balance between the social benefits of redistribution and
the administrative costs of redistribution; therefore, the level of redistribution and social
welfare achieved will fall short of the ideal. This point may be helpfully described in
terms of the metaphor of a leaky bucket: When transferring income in buckets for the
purpose of redistribution, some income leaks from the buckets and is wasted, so it is not
desirable to carry as much in buckets as society otherwise would want. Another metaphor
is that the size of the pie to be divided among the population, that is, the sum of incomes,
shrinks when the pie is divided.
         The second reason why the income tax system cannot be employed to achieve the
ideal level of social welfare through redistribution concerns distortion of work incentives.
Although it was assumed in the previous paragraphs that the earnings of each individual
were fixed, this is unrealistic, and let us now assume that a person=s earnings depend on
how hard he works and on his ability. In this situation, the income tax may alter work
incentives and thus earnings. Notably, a person who has to pay a substantial percentage
of earnings in taxes, such as 50 percent, may well work less hard, and earn less, than if he
paid no income taxes; and a person who will receive a payment if his earnings fall below
some threshold might have diluted incentives to work relative to what they would be if he
would not receive this payment. Hence, the use of the income tax to redistribute may lead
to a reduction in work effort and earnings, and through this route, reduce the total amount
of income available to redistribute. Therefore, when one takes into account how the
income tax influences work incentives in solving for the optimal income tax, it turns out

   49
      One measure of social welfare under which this would be so is, as mentioned, the sum of the square roots of
utilities; see note 3 above.




                                              Chapter 28 – Page 3
that the level of redistribution and social welfare falls short of the ideal.50 In a rough
sense, the reason is similar to that due to administrative costs; the distortion of incentives
is in effect another source of leakage from the buckets used to redistribute.
         A comment about the work incentive factor should be made. Economists
sometimes emphasize the point that this problem can be viewed as due to inability of the
tax authorities to determine the inate ability to earn of individuals. The reason is that if a
person=s ability to earn could be observed, the tax could be based on this ability and not
on actual income earned. For instance, a person who has the ability to earn $100,000 a
year and who would earn this amount in an ideal world, and for whom in that world the
ideal tax would be, say, $50,000, would face an unconditional flat tax of $50,000, not a
tax based on income earned. Hence, he would not have a disincentive to earn, because he
would face the $50,000 tax based on his ability and could not escape the tax by working
less hard. In reality, however, government cannot observe innate ability and earning
capacity, and it must largely base taxes on earned income.51
         In summary, then, we can say that the optimal use of the income tax to
redistribute income does not lead to an ideal distribution of income because of two costs
associated with redistribution: administrative costs and the implicit costs of the dulling of
work incentives.

3. Effect of Legal Rules on the Distribution of Income
        3.1 In general. It is clear that legal rules generally affect the distribution of
income. If we trace out the consequences of any legal rule for each income class, we can
determine its effects. Consider, for example, a rule that makes owners of large
recreational boats liable for harms they negligently cause. This rule leaves the large
recreational boat owners less well off both because they will be led to spend on safety
equipment and to take precautions that they would not otherwise have taken, and because
they will have to pay for any negligently caused accidents that still result; and it will
benefit possible victims, including small boat owners and swimmers, because they will
suffer from accidents less often and, if involved in accidents, will sometimes be able to
   50
      This problem was first formally studied by Mirrlees 1971 and emphasized by Vickrey 1947; it has been
developed in a vast literature known as the “optimal income tax literature.” In this literature, the standard model
is as follows. Each individual has an unobservable-to-the-government ability to work a. His earnings y equal aw,
where w is work effort (thus, the higher his ability, the more he earns), where w is also unobservable. Work effort
involves an effort cost to him of c(w). He pays an income tax t(y), which could be negative (corresponding to
receipt of money). Thus, an individual will choose work effort w to maximize his net utility: y ! t(y) ! c(w) = aw
! t(aw)! c(w). Clearly, the individual=s choice of w will depend on the tax schedule t(y), and it will also
generally depend on his ability a. Denote this net utility of a person of ability a who chooses his work effort
given the tax schedule t by u(a,t), and denote the person=s choice of work effort by w(a,t). The problem of the
government is to choose the income tax schedule, that is the function t(y), so as to maximize social welfare,
subject to the constraint that taxes collected sum to zero (that is, what is collected equals what is given out).
Social welfare can be expressed as IW(u(a,t))f(a)da, where f(a) is the probability density of individuals of ability
a. The condition that taxes net to zero is It(aw(a,t))f(a)da = 0.
   51
    Society can and sometimes does base income taxes on certain observable indicators of earning capacity. For
example, the blind have a lower earning capacity than those with sight, so we do not tax them as heavily (and
perhaps there are other reasons why that makes sense as well). However, society does not make use of all
observable indicators of earnings capacity, such as educational attainment. Using that factor might be
undesirable; for instance, it would discourage educational attainment, and this has benefits to individuals apart
from how it raises earning power. In any event, I will abstract from such considerations in the text.




                                               Chapter 28 – Page 4
collect. Because the large recreational boat owners will tend to be a wealthy class, and
their potential victims will not, the rule will redistribute from rich to poor; a refined
understanding of this effect could be ascertained from data on who purchases large
recreational boats and from data on victims of accidents. In such a manner, the influence
of any legal rule on the income distribution can be determined.
        3.2 Comments. Several remarks about the assessment of the distributional effects
of legal rules are worth bearing in mind.
        Diffused effects. Although in the example concerning recreational boats, the
distributional effects of the legal rule might be fairly clear, because the injurers and the
victims might be expected to comprise reasonably distinct income groups, that is not
always so. Consider, for example, the effects of use of the negligence rule for accidents
involving cars and pedestrians. This rule of liability imposes costs on drivers and it
benefits pedestrians, but drivers constitute an extremely diverse group by income, and so
do pedestrians. Moreover, drivers and pedestrians are not even distinct groups -- most
drivers sometimes walk and most pedestrians sometimes drive. Thus, the distributional
effects of the legal rule concerning drivers and pedestrians might be quite diffuse.
        Attenuated effects in contractual contexts. Another general observation about
distributional effects is that if legal rules affect parties who are in a contractual
arrangement with each other, the effects may be muted or even eliminated by changes in
contract prices. Suppose that a legal rule that increases liability of manufacturers of a
product for harms to buyers raises their liability-related unit costs by $100, and benefits
buyers by this amount because they collect the $100 in expected liability payments. If the
price of the product did not rise, buyers would be better off and a redistribution would
have resulted. But, of course, prices will tend to rise, and in a competitive market they
would rise fully by $100, negating the redistributive effect. It is true that price changes do
not always offset the influence of legal rules on prices, but the point here is that there is a
significant difference in the distributional effects of legal rules in contractual contexts
from the effects in noncontractual settings.
        Interrelated nature of, and totality of, effects of different legal rules. Two further
comments should be made. First, the change brought about by a legal rule will often
depend on other legal rules. For example, the effect of holding drivers liable for
negligently caused accidents to pedestrians will depend on speed limits and other traffic
laws (the more rigorous they are, the less the influence of the negligence rule) and on
legal regulation of vehicle manufacturers (for instance, requiring side-view mirrors on
cars, or devices that make beeping sounds when trucks are put into reverse). Second, the
income distribution is determined by the totality of effects of different legal rules, many
of which work counter to one another. Thus, although car owners may suffer because an
antipollution statute requires expensive pollution control devices in cars and raises their
prices, car owners may benefit from reduced pollution, and also from other legal rules,
such as antitrust rules. In strict logic, the distribution of income is the resultant of the
whole legal system, not only of the legal rules that we might think of as variable because
they are in flux or are under consideration for modification, but of the whole background
of legal rules of property, contract law, criminal law, and so forth that we view as stable
and that order our society.

4. Should Income Distributional Effects of Legal Rules Influence Their Selection?



                                      Chapter 28 – Page 5
         4.1 The general answer is in the negative: Given the availability of the income
tax system for achieving distributional goals, legal rules should not be chosen on the
basis of their distributional effects. Because society possesses the income tax system
for attaining income distributional goals, legal rules do not need to be chosen with these
goals in mind. In particular, if there is an affirmative reason to effect further
redistribution from the rich to the poor, society can do this with an appropriate
adjustment to the income tax, rather than through adoption of this or that legal rule.
Moreover, if a legal rule happens to have an undesirable redistributive effect, harming the
poor and benefiting the rich, that can be counterbalanced by a suitable change in the
income tax system, helping the poor and harming the rich. Thus, there is no evident need
to take distributional considerations into account in selecting legal rules.
         Further, if distributional considerations were taken into account in choosing legal
rules, society would be led to compromise the social benefits that the rules generate, such
as lowering the total costs of accidents. Hence, it is not only that distributional effects of
the choice of legal rules do not need to be taken into account, it is also that social welfare
would be lowered by taking those effects into account in the selection of legal rules.
Indeed, it can be demonstrated that if distributional effects do influence the choice of a
legal rule, it would be possible to make all individuals better off by altering the choice of
rule to the otherwise optimal rule and by making an appropriate change in the income tax
system.52
         In view of the importance of this argument against choosing legal rules on the
basis of their distributional effects, it is worth considering various complicating factors in
the following sections.
         4.2 Speed of adjustment of the income tax system. Although undesirable
distributive aspects of legal rules can be offset by adjustments in the income tax system,
it might take time for the tax system to adjust, and in the period before adjustment, social
welfare would suffer. This speed of adjustment factor, then, could in principle lead one to
take distributive effects of legal rules into account. Yet it is not obvious why we should
expect the income tax system to be slow to adjust, and in fact, it seems to be under more
or less constant modification.
         4.3 Adjustment of the income tax system to specific legal rules. A closely
related consideration that is sometimes mentioned is that the tax system cannot
practically be adjusted to offset the undesired distributional effects of specific legal rules.

         52
            A simple version of the argument is illustrated as follows. Consider a world with two equally
numerous income classes, rich and poor; a conventionally optimal rule of tort liability that lowers expected
accident losses net of costs of precautions by $20 per person, which is as much as possible, and that
otherwise leaves incomes unaffected; and a second liability rule that lowers net accident losses by only $10
per person but that reduces the wealth of each rich person by $50 and raises the wealth of each poor person
by $50. Suppose that the second rule is selected because its distributional effects are preferred. Our claim is
that all individuals can be made better off if, instead, the optimal rule is chosen. In particular, suppose that,
in place of the second rule, the first is chosen and income taxes are raised by $50 on the rich and lowered
by $50 on the poor. Then each poor person is better off under the optimal rule than under the other rule, for
the reduction by $50 in income taxes compensates for the loss of the $50 benefit from the rule, and his
accident losses fall by $20 instead of only by $10. Likewise, each rich person is better off under the optimal
rule, for the increase by $50 in income taxes is offset by the $50 benefit from the optimal rule, and his
accident losses fall by $20 instead of only by $10. This argument is easily shown to hold generally where
incomes of individuals are fixed, rather than a function of work effort, but it carries over to the latter setting
as well; see section 4.6 below.


                                              Chapter 28 – Page 6
Hence, it is asserted, there is some reason for the distributional effects of the choice of a
legal rule to be taken into account in its selection. This line of thinking, however, is
insufficiently articulated to be well understood, and when one attempts to amplify it, one
is left wondering about its meaning. For example, an important reason why it would be
impractical to alter the tax system in response to each and every choice of legal rule is
that some administrative cost is involved in so doing; another reason is that different legal
rules often have counterbalancing effects, so that it may be desirable to wait for some
period to see their cumulated effect before adjusting the tax system. But both of these
reasons would also apply to a court or a legislature in designing legal rules. They would
face administrative costs in determining the distributional effects of legal rules, and they
would need to assess the cumulated effect of different rules, not just an isolated rule at a
moment in time.
         4.4 Administrative costs. Administrative cost considerations may bear on the
comparison of legal rules and the income tax system for the purpose of altering the
distribution of income. If it were the case that legal rules allowed income to be
redistributed more cheaply than the income tax system does, then the conclusion that
legal rules should not be chosen on the basis of their redistributive effects would not
necessarily hold. Conversely, if it were the case that legal rules involve greater
administrative costs in connection with redistribution than the income tax system, the
conclusion that legal rules should not be selected on the basis of distributional effects
would be reinforced.
         The question at issue, therefore, is how the administrative costs of legal rules and
of the income tax system compare, and several remarks can be made about this. First, the
administrative costs of the income tax system (as distinct from distortions in work effort
that it causes) are not negligible, probably more than 5 percent of dollars collected.53
Second, the administrative costs of redistribution through use of legal rules should be
divided into two components. One is the administrative cost of redistribution through
litigation and settlement, and, as discussed earlier in chapter 12, this is very high, on the
order of 100 percent. But the other way that legal rules redistribute is through effects on
behavior, for instance, by inducing injurers to take precautions. This would not usually
seem to involve such substantial administrative costs. The administrative costs of
redistribution through use of legal rules is thus some compound of high expense and low,
and depends on the rule in question.
         4.5 Multiplicity of legal rules. A factor that supports the general argument
against use of legal rules to redistribute income is the numerousness of legal rules, for
this complicates the task of assessing their distributive effects. If legal rules were chosen
individually, on the basis of their particular effects on income distribution, needless social
losses would result, especially because of failure to take into account the offsetting
effects of different rules.54 Because legal rules are affected by different legislative bodies

   53
     See Slemrod and Bakija 2000, 134-38, for estimates of the costs to government and to taxpayers of the tax
collection process.
   54
      For example, suppose that initially, the distribution of income is thought to be desirable and at time 1, there
is a choice between two rules A1 and B1, where A1 is superior on nondistributional grounds but would favor the
rich. Hence, the rule B1 might be chosen if distribution is taken into account, so that the rich do not become
richer. Suppose too that at time 2, there is a choice between between two rules, A2 and B2, where A2 is superior
on nondistributional grounds and favors the poor. At this time, we could imagine that B2 might be chosen, to


                                               Chapter 28 – Page 7
and are also shaped by courts, one does not have confidence that the choice of legal rules
to accomplish distributional objectives is, or would be, done in an integrated way that
reflects the summed influence of different rules.
        4.6 Distortion of work effort under the income tax and consequent less-than-
ideal income distribution. As explained above in section 2.2, the income tax distorts
work effort, and as a result, the distribution of income that results under the optimal
income tax system involves inequality; although an equal distribution of income may be
possible to achieve, it is generally not optimal because it would dilute work incentives
too much. This raises the question of whether legal rules should be selected in part so as
to bridge the gap between the distribution under the income tax and what is socially ideal.
Somewhat surprisingly, perhaps, the answer to the question is no; it remains true that
legal rules should not be selected on the basis of distributional effects.
        The kernel of the explanation is that if legal rules are chosen to redistribute, this
too will distort work effort. If, for instance, those who earn an extra $1,000 know that
they will pay $500 more due to legal rules (say they will pay more in tort damages if they
are held liable), then this will reduce their incentive to earn the $1,000 just as much as if
they had to pay $500 more in income taxes. Whether it is the income tax arm of
government or the judicial arm that takes the $500 is of no consequence to a person; it is
the fact that earning $1,000 more will result in $500 of that amount being taken that
reduces the person=s incentive to work. Using legal rules to redistribute income distorts
work incentives just as much as the income tax does. But using legal rules to redistribute
also tends to interfere with achievement of the beneficial purposes of the legal rules,
notably in channeling behavior. Hence, it is best to use legal rules to achieve the
beneficial purposes for which they are directly intended, and not to select them on the
basis of their distributional effects.
        I should add for clarity that this point has been formally established in a version
of the standard model of the income tax and distortion of work effort. In that model, the
following conclusion (an extension of the conclusion mentioned in section 4.1) holds:
Suppose that there is an income tax system in place and that a legal rule that is not
conventionally optimal has been selected. If that rule is replaced by the conventionally
optimal legal rule and the income tax system is suitably modified, all individuals will be
made better off. This conclusion is stronger than what was discussed in the previous
paragraphs of this section in that it states that all individuals can be made better off if
legal rules are not selected on the basis of distributional considerations.55

prevent the previously corrected income distribution from being again upset. Thus, we could imagine two
inferior choices of rule, favoring B1 and B2, even though the superior rules, A1 and A2, have opposite
distributional effects that would be exactly offsetting.
   55
     This result is first shown in Shavell 1981 and is amplified and discussed in Kaplow and Shavell 1994c; it
builds on a result in the optimal income tax literature shown in Hyllund and Zeckhauser 1979. The model used in
Shavell and in Kaplow and Shavell is that of the optimal tax literature, as described in note 7 above, but in which
there is included as well an activity controlled by a legal rule. Specifically, individuals choose a variable x called
care that reduces harm to others h(x) but that involves disutility d(x) to them. The legal rule imposes a liability
cost l(x) on them. Let l* be the “efficient” legal rule -- that which results in minimization of h(x) + d(x) summed
across the population. And let t be any income tax schedule. Now let lN be any alternative legal rule that is not
efficient -- such as one chosen because of its distributional characteristics. Then there exists a modified tax
schedule tN such that, under tN and the efficient legal rule l*, all individuals are better off than they are under t
and the inefficient rule lN. As we discuss in Kaplow and Shavell 1994, this conclusion does depend on a


                                                Chapter 28 – Page 8
         4.7 Political process that determines the income tax is not socially desirable.
One occasionally encounters the argument that the income tax is set by an imperfect
political process and that, as a consequence, the income tax schedule does not lead to
optimal redistribution. Therefore, the argument continues, legal rules should be chosen at
least in part on the basis of their distributive aspects, so as to correct for the problem with
the political process. This argument, however, overlooks the ability of those with political
power to neutralize attempts by those controlling legal rules to redistribute income. If
legal rules were used in an attempt to take more from the rich and give to the poor, one
presumes that those who control the income tax could offset this effect by reducing tax
rates on the rich to compensate them for the extra burden they suffer under the legal
system. Thus, in the end, those who would choose inefficient legal rules in order to
redistribute income would only cause a loss in social welfare and not accomplish
additional redistribution. If, however, one assumes that the political process is not only
imperfect in failing to achieve society=s redistributive goals, but also imperfect in failing
to offset attempts to redistribute through the choice of legal rules, the argument just stated
would not apply.
         4.8 Conclusion. The initial point made here that legal rules should not be selected
on the basis of their income distributional effects is somewhat qualified, and is in certain
respects reinforced, by consideration of a number of factors that bear on it. In particular,
we found that where the administrative costs of the income tax system exceed those of
legal rules as a means of transferring income, then legal rules might be selected on the
basis of their distributional effects; and that if the speed of adjustment of the tax system
were slow, the same might be said. The reader may judge for himself or herself the
relevance of these two points. We also found that the multiplicity of legal rules and the
need to coordinate responses to them argues against selecting rules on the basis of their
distributional effects; that the distortion of work effort under the income tax is also a
disadvantage of redistribution through legal rules, and so does not alter our initial
conclusion; and finally that asserted defects in the political process also do not alter our
basic conclusion that legal rules should not be selected on distributional grounds.




separability assumption about the disutility of work effort and of the functions determining accidents. That
assumption seems the natural one to consider as a benchmark for thinking. In any case, were the assumption
relaxed, although the optimal legal rule would not in general be the efficient one, there is no reason for the
optimal rule to be such that it would redistribute toward the poor. On the latter issues, see Sanchirico 2000 and
Kaplow and Shavell 2000.




                                               Chapter 28 – Page 9
                                     References
Austin, John. [1832] 1995. The Province of Jurisprudence Determined. Edited by Wilfrid
       E. Rumble. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Barnett, Randy E. 1986. A Consent Theory of Contract. Columbia Law Review 86:269-
       321.
Baron, Jonathan. 1993. Morality and Rational Choice. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
       Boston.
----- 1994. Nonconsequentialist Decisions (with Commentary and Reply). Behavioral and
        Brain Sciences 17:1-42.
Daly, Martin, and Margo Wilson. 1988. Homicide. New York: A. de Gruyter.
Darwin, Charles. [1874] 1998. The Descent of Man. Reprint of second edition. Amherst,
      N.Y.: Prometheus Books.
Frank, Robert H. 1988. Passions within Reason: The Strategic Role of the Emotions. New
       York: W.W. Norton.
Fried, Charles. 1981. Contract as Promise: A Theory of Contractual Obligation.
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press.
Hare, Richard M. 1981. Moral Thinking: Its Levels, Method, and Point. Oxford: Oxford
       University Press.
Hirshleifer, Jack. 1977. Economics from a Biological Viewpoint. Journal of Law and
       Economics 20:1-52.
Hume, David. [1751] 1998. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals. Edited by
      Tom L. Beauchamp. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Hutcheson, Francis. [1725-55] 1994. Philosophical Writings. Edited by R. S. Downie.
      London: Everyman Library.
Hyllund, Aanund, and Richard Zeckhauser. 1979. Distributional Objectives Should
      Affect Taxes but Not Program Choice or Design. Scandinavian Journal of
      Economics 81:264-84.
Kant, Immanuel. [1785] 1998. Groundwork of the Metaphysics of Morals. Translated and
       edited by Mary Gregor. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Kaplow, Louis, and Steven Shavell. 1994c. Why the Legal System Is Less Efficient Than
      the Income Tax in Redistributing Income. Journal of Legal Studies 23:667-81.
----- 1999. The Conflict between Notions of Fairness and the Pareto Principle. American
        Law and Economics Review 1:63-77.
----- 2000. Should Legal Rules Favor the Poor? Clarifying the Role of Legal Rules and
        the Income Tax in Redistributing Income. Journal of Legal Studies 29:821-35.


                                   References – Page 1
----- 2001a. Any Non-welfarist Method of Policy Assessment Violates the Pareto
        Principle. Journal of Political Economy 109:281-86.
----- 2001b. Moral Rules and the Moral Sentiments: Toward a Theory of an Optimal
        Moral System. Harvard John M. Olin Discussion Paper Series, no. 342.
        Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard Law School.
-----2002b. Fairness versus Welfare. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press. (Also
        published in Harvard Law Review 114:961-1388.)
Mill, John Stuart. [1861] 1998. Utilitarianism. Edited by Roger Crisp. Oxford: Oxford
        University Press.
Mirrlees, James A. 1971. An Exploration in the Theory of Optimum Income Taxation.
       Review of Economic Studies 38:175-208.
Posner, Eric A. 1996. Law, Economics, and Inefficient Norms. University of
       Pennsylvania Law Review 144:1697-1744.
Ross, W. D. 1930. The Right and the Good. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Sanchirico, Chris William. 2000. Taxes versus Legal Rules as Instruments for Equity: A
       More Equitable View. Journal of Legal Studies 29:797-820.
Savage, Leonard J. 1972. The Foundations of Statistics. Second edition. New York:
      Dover Publications.
Shavell, Steven. 1981. A Note on Efficiency vs. Distributional Equity in Legal
       Rulemaking: Should Distributional Equity Matter Given Optimal Income
       Taxation? American Economic Review: Papers and Proceedings 71:414-18.
-----. 2002. Law versus Morality as Regulators of Conduct. American Law and
         Economics Review 4:227-57.
Sidgwick, Henry. [1907] 1981. The Methods of Ethics. Reprint of seventh edition.
      Indianapolis: Hackett Pub. Co.
Slemrod, Joel, and Jon Bakija. 2000. Taxing Ourselves: A Citizen’s Guide to the Great
      Debate over Tax Reform. Second edition. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press.
Smith, Adam. [1790] 1976. The Theory of Moral Sentiments. Reprint of sixth edition.
       Edited by D. D. Raphael and A. L. Macfie. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
Trivers, Robert L. 1971. The Evolution of Reciprocal Altruism. Quarterly Review of
       Biology 46:35-57.
Vickrey, William S. 1947. Agenda for Progressive Taxation. New York: Ronald Press
       Company.
Waal, Frans de. 1982. Chimpanzee Politics: Power and Sex among Apes. New York:
       Harper and Row.


                                   References – Page 2
Wilson, Edward O. 1980. Sociobiology. Abridged edition. Cambridge, Mass.: Belknap
      Press.




                                  References – Page 3
