                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                      RELATIVE PRICES AND
                                      RELATIVE PROSPERITY

                                            Chang-Tai Hsieh
                                            Peter J. Klenow

                                          Working Paper 9701
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9701


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




We are grateful to Francesco Caselli, Bill Easterly, J. Bradford DeLong, Gene Grossman, Chad Jones, Sam
Kortum, Bob Lucas, Casey Mulligan, David Romer, Nancy Stokey, Alan Taylor, and Fabrizio Zilibotti for
helpful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Chang Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is given
to the source.
Relative Prices and Relative Prosperity
Chang-Tai Hsieh and Peter J. Klenow
NBER Working Paper No. 9701
May 2003
JEL No. O4, O1, E2
                                           ABSTRACT

       The positive correlation between PPP investment rates and PPP income levels across
countries is one of the most robust findings of the empirical growth literature. We show that this
relationship is almost entirely driven by differences in the price of investment relative to output
across countries. When measured at domestic prices rather than at international prices, investment
rates are little correlated with PPP incomes. We find that the high relative price of investment in
poor countries is solely due to the low price of consumption goods in poor countries. Investment
prices are no higher in poor countries than in rich countries. These facts suggest that the low PPP
investment rates in poor countries are not due to low savings rates or to high tax or tariff rates on
investment. Poor countries instead appear to be plagued by low efficiency in producing investment
goods and in producing exportables to trade for machinery and equipment.



Chang-Tai Hsieh                                       Peter J. Klenow
Woodrow Wilson School                                 Research Department
411 Robertson Hall                                    Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Princeton University                                  90 Hennepin Avenue
Princeton, NJ 08544                                   Minneapolis, MN 55480-0291
and NBER                                              and NBER
chsieh@princeton.edu                                  Pete@klenow.com
1. Introduction

          One of the strongest relationships established in the empirical growth literature is the

positive correlation between the investment rate in physical capital and the level of output per

worker. As illustrated by figure 1, a well-known stylized fact is that the PPP investment rate of

wealthy countries such as Norway and the U.S. is roughly 2 to 3 times higher than that of poor

countries such as Mali and Kenya. This positive correlation also holds when considering the

growth rate, rather than the level, of output per worker.1 Based on this evidence, empirical work

accounting for why some countries are rich and others are poor has assigned an important role to

differences in physical capital intensity.2

          Two broad sets of explanations have been proposed for the low PPP investment rates in

poor countries. The first set of explanations operates through savings rates (combined with

limited international capital mobility). Prime examples are theories in which poor countries have

low savings because of institutions and policies that result in high effective tax rates on capital

income (e.g., financial repression).3 Other authors have argued that poor countries are stuck in

low-savings traps because of subsistence consumption needs.4 Regardless of the underlying

mechanism, the notion that poor countries have low savings was central to the way development




1
 Levine and Renelt (1992) single out the investment rate as the lone robust correlate with growth in income per
person. Sala-i-Martin (1997) finds the investment rate to be significantly correlated with growth in 99.97% of the
32,509 cross-country regressions he ran with investment alongside other regressors.
2
    See Mankiw, Romer and Weil (1992), Klenow and Rodríguez-Clare (1997), and Hall and Jones (1999).
3
  See McKinnon (1973). Poor countries have also been hypothesized to have low savings rates because of high
dependency ratios (Higgins and Williamson, 1997), high discount rates (Carroll et al., 1994), and high explicit tax
rates on capital income (Easterly and Rebelo, 1993).
4
 The earliest papers were by Nelson (1956) and Solow (1956). More recent papers include Gersovitz (1983),
Matsuyama (1992), and Ben-David (1998).




                                                          1
economists in the 1950s and 1960s thought about the world, and was an important intellectual

foundation for the lending work of institutions like the World Bank.5

           A second set of explanations focuses on forces that directly affect investment. A number

of recent papers argue that poor countries have policies and institutions that drive up the cost of

capital. According to this view, poor countries have low PPP investment rates because they tax

capital goods, have barriers to capital goods imports, or grant monopoly rights to domestic

capital goods producers. Advocates of this view typically point to the stylized fact that the

relative price of capital is 2 to 3 times higher in a poor country than in a rich country.6

Investment distortions have also played a prominent role in historical accounts of countries that

have experienced dramatic reversals of fortune. For example, Diaz-Alejandro (1970) tells how

policies introduced by Peron in Argentina to redistribute income to the urban working class had

the effect of doubling the price of capital. Diaz-Alejandro argues this distortion was responsible

for Argentina’s slide from being one of the wealthiest countries in the world 60 years ago to

where it is today.7

           In this paper, we present a series of facts to shed light on the underlying causes of

differences in PPP investment rates across rich and poor countries. The first fact involves the

rate of investment at international prices versus at domestic prices. (“International prices” — or

“PPP prices” — are a quantity-weighted average of domestic prices across countries, and hence

5
  Lewis (1954, p. 155): “The central problem in the theory of development is to understand the process by which a
community which was previously saving and investing 4 or 5% of its national income or less, converts itself into an
economy where voluntary saving is running at about 12 to 15% of national income or more.” Rostow (1960) saw
savings as the necessary trigger for takeoff into development. Bhagwati (1966) advocated taxes to boost national
saving, and Chenery and Strout (1966) advocated foreign aid. Easterly (2001, chapter 2) discusses the influence of
this “financing gap” view of underdevelopment in the lending work of international financial institutions.
6
 See Jones (1994), Lee (1995), Chari, Kehoe, and McGrattan (1996), McGrattan and Schmitz (1999), Collins and
Williamson (2001), Eaton and Kortum (2001), and Restuccia and Urrutia (2001).
7
    See Taylor (1998a, 1998b) for more recent accounts of the Argentinian case.




                                                           2
do not vary across countries.) When evaluated at domestic prices, richer countries have only

modestly higher investment rates than poorer countries do. Figure 2 illustrates this for 114

countries in 1996. Whereas the correlation between the PPP investment rate and PPP income is

0.50, that between the domestic-price investment rate and PPP income is only 0.05.8 At

domestic prices, poor countries like Mali and Kenya do not invest much less than rich countries

such as the U.S. or Norway. This evidence undermines explanations involving discount rates,

subsistence consumption, low-savings traps, and the taxation of capital income. Instead, the

domestic relative price of investment — which accounts for the difference between investment

rates at domestic prices vs. at international prices — is much higher in poor countries.

        The second stylized fact is that the high relative price of investment in poor countries is

entirely driven by the denominator rather than the numerator. We find that investment goods are

no more expensive in poor countries than in rich countries, whereas consumption prices tend to

be lower in poor countries. This contradicts the hypothesis that investment goods are taxed more

heavily in poorer countries, or are subject to high tariffs or transportation costs that make them

expensive for poor countries. Put differently, if investment distortions are responsible for the

high relative price of capital goods in Mali, then a computer in Mali should cost 2 to 3 times

more than a computer in the U.S. Instead, computers in Mali cost roughly the same as in the

U.S., and what is responsible for the high relative price of capital in Mali is that nontradable

services are much cheaper in Mali than in the U.S.


8
  The drop is from 0.58 to 0.03 when we exclude the four countries with very high PPP investment rates
(Turkmenistan, Thailand, Korea and Singapore). When we exclude the two countries with very high investment
rates at domestic prices (Congo and Turkmenistan), the drop is from 0.56 to 0.16. When we weight countries by
their Penn World Table data quality grade, with A = 4 (19 countries, all in the OECD), B = 3 (14 countries), C = 2
(76 countries), and D = 1 (the five countries Belarus, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, and Yemen), the drop is
from 0.54 to 0.02.




                                                         3
        These facts point to important differences in the productivity of the investment goods

sector (and other tradable sectors) across countries. Poor countries appear to have low

investment rates in PPP terms primarily because their investment sectors have low productivity

compared to their consumption sectors. This interpretation is entirely consistent with investment

goods being internationally tradable (even perfectly so), but does require that not all

consumption be costlessly tradable. To the extent that investment goods are more easily traded

than consumption goods and services, this is a corollary to the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis

that poor countries have low productivity in tradables relative to nontradables.9

        Our results imply that the covariation of physical capital investment rates and income

arises from a deeper productivity puzzle. The challenge is not just to explain low overall

productivity in poor countries, but to explain low productivity in investment goods production

relative to consumption goods production (and, more generally, low productivity in tradables

relative to nontradables).

        The rest of this paper proceeds as follows. In section 2 we present a model in which a

country’s investment rate and income level are endogenous to its tax rate on capital income, its

tax rate on producing and importing investment goods, and its productivity in producing

investment and consumption goods, respectively. In section 3 we compare the predictions of the

model to Penn World Table benchmark data on investment rates at domestic and international

prices, investment prices, consumption prices, and PPP income levels. In section 4 we

summarize.




9
 See Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964), and also Bhagwati (1984). Summers and Heston (1991) document this
phenomenon, using services as a proxy for nontradables.




                                                     4
2. A Model with Endogenous Investment Rates and Income Levels

       We consider a simple model with two sectors and two tax rates: a nontradable

consumption sector, a tradable investment sector, a tax rate on importing and producing

investment goods, and a tax rate on capital income. We use the capital income tax rate as a

stand-in for many potential determinants of a country’s saving rate. Aside from having separate

consumption and investment sectors, it is a conventional neoclassical growth model. After

laying out the model, we will show how the two tax rates and productivity levels affect a

country’s price of investment, price of consumption, PPP investment rate, and PPP income per

worker. Our aim is to identify telltale markings these forces should leave in the data.

       In the model, each of L j workers in country j inelastically supplies one unit of labor

each period. The representative worker chooses current consumption to maximize

                                                                   ∞     C1 − 1/ σ
                                                                       t   j, t
                                                                   ∑ β
                                                                  t=0     1 − 1/ σ

subject to the constraints

                                                        K                 = (1 − δ) K                  +I             ,
                                                              j, t + 1                          j, t           j, t

               P           C          +P           I          =w             + [R           −τ                 (R             − δP           )]K          +T          , and
                C              j, t     I              j, t           j, t          j, t           K                j, t          I                j, t        j, t
                    j, t                    j, t                                                           j                          j, t

                                                                      r          + δ−δτ
                                                                          j, t                  K
                                                                                                       j
(1)                                                    R          =                                        P              .
                                                           j, t                  1− τ                       I
                                                                                                                j, t
                                                                                        K
                                                                                            j

Here C is real consumption, β is the discount factor, σ is the intertemporal elasticity of

substitution, K is the real stock of physical capital, I is real investment, δ is the depreciation

rate on physical capital, w is the wage, R is the rental price of capital, τK is the tax rate on



                                                                                   5
(after-depreciation) capital income, PI is the domestic price of investment goods, T are transfers

from the government, PC is the domestic price of consumption goods, and r is the real interest

rate net of depreciation and taxes. The CRRA utility function and geometric depreciation are

standard assumptions. The transfers are rebated tax collections (the model has no government

purchases or production), which each worker takes as given. The flow budget constraint says

disposable income not spent on consumption is devoted to investment goods.

        We assume that consumption goods cannot be traded internationally, whereas investment

goods are fully tradable. Empirically, some consumption is in fact tradable (e.g., clothing and

cars) and not all investment is tradable (e.g., some construction services).10 In the empirical

section that follows we contrast the most nontradable forms of consumption with the most

tradable components of investment. Specifically, we compare services consumption with

investment in machinery and equipment. For expositional simplicity we model the polar case of

purely nontradable consumption and fully tradable investment.

        We assume that there is a pre-tax world price of investment that each country takes as

beyond its control. The price of investment goods in country j is pinned down by the world

price plus the country-specific tax and tariff rate τI that applies to producing and importing (but

not exporting) investment goods. Suppressing time subscripts here and below, we have:

(2)                                         P = (1 + τ ) P world
                                             I        I   I
                                               j             j




10
  In the first section of the appendix, we modify the model to allow for tradable consumption goods that can be
exchanged for investment goods.




                                                         6
In each country j , firms rent capital and hire labor in competitive spot markets. Firms sell their

output in competitive markets in order to maximize static profits. For firms producing

consumption and investment goods, respectively, current profits are

(3)                                    P C −w L −R K                                     and
                                        C j  j C  j C
                                          j                  j                       j


(4)                             P I − τ P world I − w L − R K .
                                 I j   I I       j   j I   j I
                                   j          j                                  j             j

The production technologies in the two sectors are

(5)                                       C = A K α L1 − α and
                                           j   C C C
                                                     j           j       j


(6)                                           I = A K α L1 − α .
                                               j   I I I
                                                         j           j       j

AC and AI are exogenous productivity indices. α ∈ (0,1) is the elasticity of output with respect

to physical capital, and (1 − α) that with respect to labor. We assume these elasticities are the

same across countries and across sectors. Gollin (2002) finds that payments to physical capital

range from 20% to 35% of GDP across countries, but that the variation is not correlated with

country income. In the U.S., readily available data indicates that factor shares are very similar

across the investment and consumption sectors.11

        Using first order conditions from (3) through (6), one can show that



11
  Nonetheless, in the second section of the appendix we show that our central results carry through when we allow
factor shares to differ between the two sectors. Our estimates of sectoral factor shares in the U.S. define Labor’s
Share = Compensation / (Value Added – Indirect Business Taxes – Proprietor’s Income). Using U.S. Bureau of
Economic Analysis data available at www.bea.gov, we calculated the average labor share over 1987-2000 to be 78%
in the consumption sector and 79% in the investment sector. In this calculation we excluded housing from
consumption because only capital inputs are incorporated in the service flow from housing. The capital-intensity of
housing pulls down the overall labor share in U.S. GDP to 67%.




                                                             7
(7)                                 R = αP world A ( K / L )α − 1 and
                                     j    I       I   j   j
                                                            j

                                              P                     A
                                               C                     I
                                                   j                     j
(8)                                                    =                         .
                                              P            A (1 + τ )
                                               I            C      I
                                                   j            j            j

Equation (7) equates the rental price of capital to the marginal product of capital. Marginal

products in the two sectors are equated to the common rental price. This implies a common

capital-labor ratio in the two sectors equal to the economywide K / L. Expression (8) says the

domestic price of consumption relative to investment is inversely related to relative TFP (Total

Factor Productivity) in the two sectors, and decreasing in the tax rate on producing and importing

investment goods. The relative price does not depend on the wage or real interest rate because

both sectors face the same factor prices and use factors with the same intensity. The relative

price also does not depend on the world price of investment, because the world price of

investment anchors both domestic price levels.

         The discount rate (β), intertemporal elasticity (σ), and depreciation rate (δ) are the

same in all countries. Sectoral TFPs grow at the constant rate g A across sectors and across

countries.12 What we allow to vary across countries are the tax rate on capital income (τ K j ), the

tax rate on producing and importing investment goods (τ I j ), TFP in the investment sector ( AI j ),

and TFP in the consumption sector ( AC j ). TFPs ascend parallel paths, but can differ across

countries and across sectors at a point in time.


12
  In the third section of the appendix, we show that the results are virtually identical if we allow sectoral TFPs to
grow at different rates. See Gordon (1990), Greenwood et al. (1997) and Mulligan (2002) for U.S. evidence that the
relative price of investment trends downward, suggesting faster TFP growth in the investment sector.




                                                            8
       Variation in (τ K j , τ I j , AI j , and AC j ) generates cross-country variation in steady state

levels of the investment rate at domestic prices, the domestic price of investment, and the

domestic price of consumption. Differing country parameter values also yield differing levels of

PPP income per worker at a point in time along steady state paths. No opportunities for

international goods arbitrage exist by (2), plus the assumption that consumption is nontradable.

Because capital income is taxed based on where the capital is located, there is also no incentive

for international capital flows. After-tax, after-depreciation real interest rates are the same in all

countries, and equal

(9)                                      r = (1 + g )1/ σ / β − 1.
                                           j

Here (1 + g ) = (1 + g A )1/(1−α ) . Expression (9) follows from the consumption Euler equation and

the steady state assumption. As no capital flows internationally, saving and investment rates (at

domestic prices) are equal within countries, and countries own their domestic capital stocks.

       Before expressing steady state values, it is useful to formally define the following:



                            Domestic Price GDP = Y = P C + P I
                                                  j   C j   I j
                                                                 j            j


                              PPP GDP = Y PPP = P PPPC + P PPP I
                                          j      C    j   I      j


                                                                             P I
                                                                              I j
                                                                                  j
                           Domestic Price Investment Rate = i =
                                                                     j        Y
                                                                                      j


                                                            P PPP I
                                                             I      j
                              PPP Investment Rate = i PPP =           .
                                                             Y PPP
                                                      j
                                                                         j




                                                     9
       To determine each country’s steady state path, we proceed as follows. We substitute (2)

and (9) into (1) to pin down a country’s rental price of capital. We substitute the rental price into

(7) to solve for a country’s capital-labor ratio, which is growing along with AI j on the country’s

steady state path. We use the capital accumulation equation to infer the steady state investment-

labor ratio from the capital-labor ratio. We substitute both ratios into (6) and divide by L j to

obtain the share of labor (and capital) devoted to investment goods production:

                                                       ( g + δ)α(1 − τ                  )
                                                                               K
                                                                                    j
(10)                    L /L =                                                                           .
                         I
                                                    )[(1 + g )1/ σ / β − 1 + δ(1 − τ
                            j
                             j     (1 + τ                                                           )]
                                            I                                               K
                                                j                                               j

It is then straightforward to show that the steady state investment rate at domestic prices is

                                                    (1 + τ           )L / L
                                                             I         I    j
                                                                 j         j
(11)                                   i =                                      .
                                        j           1+ τ       L /L
                                                             I I    j
                                                                 j     j

Note that a country’s investment rate at domestic prices does not depend on its sectoral TFPs.

TFP levels do not affect the investment rate at domestic prices because the quantities and prices

of investment and consumption respond in precisely offsetting ways. Our functional forms are,

of course, important for this result. But these functional forms are standard in the growth and

business cycle literatures, and for good reasons. The constant intertemporal elasticity of

substitution is needed for the existence of steady state investment rates and real interest rates.

And Cobb-Douglas production technologies are consistent with the stability of factor shares over

time and across countries.

       Given that all the parameter values lie between 0 and 1, (10) and (11) imply that the

investment rate at domestic prices is strictly decreasing in both tax rates. To see why intuitively,

we combine (1), (2), (7), and (9) to arrive at

                                                             10
                                  r +δ−δτ
                                                K
                                                                         ) = α A ( K / L )α − 1.
                                                    j
(12)                                                    (1 + τ
                                     1− τ                        I
                                                                     j
                                                                                I
                                                                                j
                                                                                    j   j
                                            K
                                                j

A higher capital income tax rate raises the left hand side and the (steady state) rental price of

capital, so the right hand side and the (steady state) marginal product of capital must be higher.

For a given level of TFP in the investment sector, a higher marginal product of capital requires a

lower capital-labor ratio and therefore a lower PPP investment rate. The tax rate on capital

income does not affect relative prices by (8), so the investment rate is lower at domestic prices as

well as at international prices.

           The negative effect of the investment tax on the investment rate follows similar logic. A

higher tax rate on investment raises the rental price of capital, necessitating a higher marginal

product of capital and a lower PPP investment rate. The negative effect on the investment rate at

domestic prices is less transparent. A higher investment tax raises the relative price of

investment goods in (8), a force for a higher investment rate at domestic prices. But the adverse

effect on the quantity of investment is larger, leaving the domestic-price investment rate lower.

From (10), (11) and α < 1 , the capital-labor ratio must fall proportionately more than the tax-

induced increase in the price of investment. As the real capital-labor ratio is proportional to a

country’s real investment rate (controlling for TFPs), the real investment rate must fall more than

the price of investment rises, yielding a lower investment rate at domestic prices.13

           The investment rate at international prices is




13
     For plausible parameter values we find this negative effect to be small. We illustrate this in figure 3 below.




                                                                         11
                                             P PPP A L / L
                                              I     I I    j
                                                        j   j
(13)                  i PPP =                                                   .
                       j
                                P PPP A L / L + P PPP A (1 − L / L )
                                 I     I I   j   C     C      I   j
                                        j   j                   j        j

From (10) and (13), the PPP investment rate is invariant to equiproportionate changes in sectoral

TFPs. Low TFP in the investment sector relative to TFP in the consumption sector, however,

does depress a country’s PPP investment rate. It makes investment expensive just like high taxes

on capital income or investment do. Because PPP prices of investment and consumption do not

vary across countries, there is no offsetting relative price effect as operates on the investment rate

at domestic prices. For the same reason, a higher investment tax rate lowers the PPP investment

rate more than it lowers the domestic-price investment rate. In contrast, a higher capital income

tax rate does not affect the relative price of investment and therefore has the same (negative)

effect on investment rates at domestic and international prices.

       Along steady state paths, PPP output per worker in country j is

                                                                                1
                                          α
                                                          A A                1− α
                               i PPP  1 − α               I C            
                  Y PPP /L =     j            
                                                              j     j
                                                                                   .
                    j     j  g+δ                         PPP
                                    
                                                 A (1 − i      ) + A i PPP 
                                                 I j     j          C j
                                                                       j    

Equivalently,

                                                          α            1
(14)                       Y PPP / L =  K PPP / Y PPP 1 − α TFP 1 − α
                             j      j  j         j          j 

Expression (14) is ready-made for development accounting. In this two-sector model, however,

there is no clean demarcation of parameters into those affecting capital intensity versus those

affecting aggregate TFP. Take the tax rate on investment goods. According to (10), a higher tax

rate on investment goods lowers the share of labor devoted to investment goods production, and


                                                   12
hence the PPP investment rate (13) and PPP capital intensity. Unless PCPPP and PIPPP AI happen

to be equal in the country, this higher tax rate also affects aggregate TFP. It does so by

reallocating labor away from producing investment goods toward producing consumption goods.

An easier way to see this is to re-express economy-wide TFP as

                                                L j − LI                L
                                                                           I
                                       PPP              j      PPP          j
(15)                           TFP = P     A               + P     A          .
                                  j   C     C        L          I     I   L
                                              j       j               j    j
                                                          

From this expression it is clear that reallocating labor away from investment goods production

lowers aggregate TFP if PCPPP AC < PIPPP AI , and raises aggregate TFP if PCPPP AC > PIPPP AI . The

use of PPP prices is crucial here. At domestic prices, the marginal product of labor is equated

across sectors. At international prices this need not be so.

           One can similarly show that sectoral TFPs affect both aggregate TFP and capital

intensity. Consider a drop in AI , holding AC fixed. This lowers aggregate TFP and the PPP

investment rate. The lower PPP investment rate means lower PPP capital intensity. TFP in the

investment sector matters more than the share of labor devoted to investment would suggest, as it

affects capital intensity throughout the economy. That is, the effect of TFP in the investment

sector is amplified through its effect on capital accumulation.14 As we shall see, poor countries

appear to have not only lower AC and AI than rich countries do (as one would expect), but

especially lower AI . Their low sectoral TFPs contribute to their low aggregate TFP, and their

low AI / AC ratios contribute to their low capital intensity in PPP terms.



14
     Schmitz (2001) emphasizes this effect in a model with inefficient government production of investment goods.




                                                          13
         Table 1 summarizes the model’s qualitative predictions. The table shows that no two

exogenous variables have the same qualitative effect on all of the endogenous variables. Figure

3 illustrates the quantitative predictions of the model.15 The figure demonstrates that the forcing

variables have first order effects on observables. With data on the endogenous variables, we can

try to infer variation in the underlying causal variables. In the next section we do just that.


3. Cross-Country Facts About Investment Rates and Income Levels

         The U.N. International Comparison Program (ICP) collects data on the prices of between

500 and 1500 individual goods and services in selected countries and years. The countries for

which the ICP has price data in a given year are “benchmark” countries for the Penn World

Table (PWT). The PWT uses the benchmark price data to convert each country’s expenditures at

domestic prices into expenditures at a common set of international prices. For non-benchmark

country-years, prices and therefore PPP values are inferred from fitted values of price regressions

run on benchmark data. Because price differences across countries are at the crux of our

investigation, we concentrate on the benchmark country-years for which actual price data was

collected. Benchmark data currently exists for 1970 (16 countries), 1975 (34 countries), 1980

(61 countries), 1985 (64 countries), 1990 (24 countries), and 1996 (115 countries). We focus on

1980, 1985, and 1996, the years with broad cross-sections of countries.16



15
  For figure 3 we set PCPPP = 1, PIPPP = 1, capital’s share α = 1/ 3, the depreciation rate δ = 0.07, the annual growth
of income per worker g = 0.02, the intertemporal elasticity σ = 1, and the discount factor β = 0.97.
16
  We obtained the benchmark data from the PWT website http://pwt.econ.upenn.edu. See Summers and Heston
(1991) and Heston, Summers and Aten (2002) for a fuller description of PPP methodology. We made two minor
changes to the 1996 benchmark sample. First, we excluded Mongolia because its prices and quantities are zero for
machinery and equipment. Second, for Antigua & Barbuda, St. Kitts & Nevis, and St. Lucia, we imputed missing
employment as 0.5*(adult equivalents). For the other benchmark countries, 0.5 is the average ratio of employment
to “adult equivalents” (which the PWT defines as population over 15 plus one half of the population 15 and under).




                                                          14
        We examine simple univariate regressions of observables on country log PPP income per

worker. We do not consider other regressors because we are interested simply in how the

dependent variables covary with income. Our first dependent variable is the PPP fixed

investment rate. Fixed investment excludes inventory investment and includes both public and

private investment. We exclude inventory investment because some inventories are for

consumer goods. The PWT does not contain separate data on public and private investment

rates.17 Table 2 provides results of regressing the PPP fixed investment rate on PPP income per

worker. In each of the three cross-sections (1980, 1985, and 1996), an additional log point of

income is associated with about a five percentage point higher PPP investment rate. Across the

114 benchmark countries in 1996, the mean fixed investment rate is 17.5% and PPP income per

worker varies by 4.4 log points. The estimated comovement of the PPP fixed investment rate

with PPP income is therefore significant relative to the mean investment rate.

        Table 2 also presents results for machinery and equipment investment. Machinery and

equipment are arguably the most tradable components of fixed investment (in contrast to

construction). Moreover, DeLong and Summers (1991) presented evidence that the investment

rate in machinery and equipment was most strongly related to growth and development. Using

the PPP investment rate in machinery and equipment, the coefficients on country income remain

highly significant. Although the coefficients are less than half as big as for fixed investment, so

is the mean investment rate in machinery and equipment at 8.0%.

        We next examine the investment rate at domestic prices. Table 2 documents that, in all

three years, coefficients on PPP income per worker fall by two-thirds or more when the fixed

17
  Pritchett (2000) argues that public investment should be distinguished from private investment, where possible,
because public investment effort is less likely to create economically viable capital.




                                                        15
investment rates are evaluated at domestic prices rather than at international prices. Eaton and

Kortum (2001) and Restuccia and Urrutia (2001) also note this low correlation between

domestic-price investment rates and PPP incomes across countries.18

         The results in the right half of Table 2 contrast sharply with those of Levine and Renelt

(1992) and Sala-i-Martin (1997), who identified the investment rate as an indomitable correlate

of income. When evaluated at domestic prices, the fixed investment rate is rendered

insignificant for the broadest set of countries (the 1996 sample). The most tradable portion of

investment (machinery and equipment) is uncorrelated with PPP incomes in all years. Note that

no conditioning variables are included in these regressions. The distinction between domestic

prices and international prices is evidently crucial to the connection between investment rates

and income levels. We now investigate price differences across the benchmark countries.

         Many studies have noted the high relative price of investment in poor countries, and used

it to help explain differences in country incomes. Examples include Jones (1994), Lee (1995),

Chari et al. (1996), McGrattan and Schmitz (1999), Jovanovic and Rob (1999), and Eaton and

Kortum (2001). A common theme in these papers is that the price of investment in poor

countries is high relative to the price of investment prevailing in rich countries. This is thought

to stem from high tariff rates on imports of investment goods and/or high tax rates on domestic

production of investment goods. As the model in the previous section suggests, this hypothesis

can be tested by comparing prices of investment goods in rich and poor countries after

appropriate conversion into a common currency.


18
  Parente and Prescott (2000, p. 39) find a similar pattern for savings rates. In the PWT benchmark data, however,
domestic-price savings rates are more highly correlated with PPP incomes than are domestic-price investment rates:
0.43 vs. 0.05 in 1996, 0.55 vs. 0.17 in 1985, and 0.53 vs. 0.23 in 1980. Rather than focus on savings rates, we focus
on investment rates at domestic prices as the mechanism by which savings rates should affect PPP investment rates.




                                                         16
        Table 3 presents regressions of investment prices on PPP GDP per worker. We obtained

these prices by converting PWT benchmark prices in national currency units into U.S. dollar

prices. We did this in two different ways: using official exchange rates from the PWT (whose

source is the IMF), and using black market exchange rates from the World Currency Yearbook.19

Although the official exchange rate may accurately reflect the market exchange rate in many

country-years, black market premia are well-documented in some country-years. Our logic for

presenting results using official exchange rates as well as black market exchange rates is as

follows. First, countries may allow preferential access to the official exchange rate for trade (as

opposed to purely capital account transactions). Second, countries may allow preferential access

to the official exchange rate for imports of equipment and machinery (as opposed to consumer

goods). Finally and most important, to the extent that a good is imported at a devalued exchange

rate relative to the official one, this should show up as a high dollar price when domestic prices

are converted at the official exchange rate. Using official exchange rates is, therefore, most

favorable to the conventional view that investment goods are expensive in poor countries.

        As documented in Table 3, neither the price of fixed investment nor the price of

machinery and equipment are negatively and significantly related to PPP income per worker.

This is true when prices are converted at official exchange rates as well as at black market

exchange rates. In several cases investment goods actually appear more expensive in richer

countries. Figure 4 illustrates the case of 1996 prices of machinery and equipment, converted

into dollars at official exchange rates. As the figure reveals, the price of machinery and



19
  For 1996 we use black market exchange rates collected by the IMF, since the World Currency Yearbook ceased
publication after 1995. We thank Carmen Reinhart and Kenneth Rogoff for providing this data. See Reinhart and
Rogoff (2002) for documentation.




                                                      17
equipment does vary across countries, especially outside the richest countries. But machinery

and equipment prices look no higher in poor countries overall than in rich countries.20

           PWT prices are supposed to include all taxes, tariffs, and transportation costs. The

results in Table 3 are therefore a blow to the “investment barriers” explanation for the low PPP

investment rates in poor countries. This explanation required a significant negative relationship

between the investment price and income across countries. The lack of any significant negative

relationship at official exchange rates suggests such barriers are not large. Another contributor

might be lower distribution costs in poorer countries. Using input-output data, Burstein, Neves

and Rebelo (2000) estimated that distribution costs accounted for 16% of the price of fixed

investment in the U.S. in 1992. The positive relationship between income and investment prices

at black market exchange rates could also reflect that some imports of equipment and machinery

occur at official exchange rates (rather than at black market exchange rates) in poorer countries.

           If the high relative price of investment in poor countries does not stem from a high price

of investment, it must reflect a low price of consumption. Figure 5 shows consumption prices

across countries in 1996. Table 4 provides elasticities with respect to country income. A

doubling of country income goes along with 20-50% higher consumption prices. This confirms

that the force behind high PPP investment rates in rich countries is high consumption prices.

           Table 4 also provides separate elasticities for “nontradable” and “tradable” consumption.

We classify consumption as Heston et al. (1995) do: services are nontradables (housing, medical

care, purchased transportation, communications, recreation, education, and personal services),

and goods are tradables (food, beverages, tobacco, clothing, footwear, fuel, house furnishings,

vehicles, and personal care items). The elasticities for nontradable consumption prices with

20
     The results are not sensitive to omitting outliers such as Macedonia (MKD), Syria (SYR), and Gabon (GAB).



                                                         18
respect to PPP income per worker in Table 4 are around 40-70%. Figure 6 plots nontradable

consumption prices in 1996, converted at official exchange rates. The elasticities for tradable

consumption prices are markedly lower, ranging from 14% to 37%.21

           The higher price elasticities for nontradables than for tradables fit the predictions of the

Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis: nontradables are relatively cheap in poor countries. But why

would tradable consumer goods be significantly cheaper in poor countries (albeit less so than

nontradables)? Just as for machinery and equipment, this could reflect local distribution costs.

Higher land prices and labor costs may feed into higher distribution costs in rich countries.

Implicit in this explanation is that TFP in retail and wholesale trade is not commensurately

higher along with wages and land prices in richer countries. Burstein et al. (2000) estimate that

distribution costs represent about 40% of the average retail price of consumer goods in the U.S.,

and about 60% in Argentina. Interestingly, this range is roughly what would be needed to

explain Table 4 if the elasticity for tradables was a weighted average of that for nontradables and

a zero elasticity for truly tradable consumption goods. That is, the tradable price elasticities are

about 40-60% of the nontradable price elasticities in Table 4.

           A useful way to summarize our findings is in terms of the following decomposition of a

country’s PPP investment rate into three terms:22

                                                     PIPPP I j
                                                PIPPP I j + PC j C j          i PPP
                                                                                j
(16)                             i PPP
                                   j     ≡ ij                                                 .
                                                        ij                  PIPPP I j
                                                                       PIPPP I j + PC j C j


21
  Our measure of nontradable consumption includes only private services. We obtained very similar price
elasticities when we added government services to private services.
22
     We thank David Romer for this suggestion.




                                                                 19
The first term is the investment rate at domestic prices; this would be a country’s PPP investment

rate if international prices equaled its domestic prices (i.e., if PIPPP = PI and PCPPP = PC ). The

second term in (16) captures the effect on a country’s PPP investment rate of a different

international than domestic price of investment ( PIPPP ≠ PI rather than PIPPP = PI ) conditional on

PCPPP = PC . The third term captures the effect of a different international than domestic price of

consumption ( PCPPP ≠ PC rather than PCPPP = PC ) conditional on PIPPP ≠ PI . The three terms are

one way of describing how a country’s PPP investment rate is affected by, respectively, its

domestic-price investment rate, its price of investment relative to the PPP price of investment,

and its price of consumption relative to the PPP price of consumption.

        Of course, the order in which one accounts for domestic prices deviating from PPP prices

can be reversed, yielding the alternative decomposition

                                                  PI j I j
                                            PI j I j + PCPPPC j         i PPP
                                                                          j
(17)                         i PPP
                               j     ≡ ij                                               .
                                                    ij                  PI j I j
                                                                  PI j I j + PCPPPC j

Here the middle term describes the effect on a country’s PPP investment rate of a different

international than domestic price of consumption ( PCPPP ≠ PC ) conditional on PIPPP = PI . The

third term describes the effect on a country’s PPP investment rate of a different international than

domestic price of investment ( PIPPP ≠ PI ) conditional on PCPPP ≠ PC . Empirically, these two

orderings produce similar decompositions. In what follows we simply average the two ways of

calculating investment price effects and consumption price effects.

        We take logs in (16) and (17) and regress each term on log PPP GDP per worker. The

elasticity for the PPP investment rate additively decomposes into three component elasticities.


                                                             20
We present the results in Table 5. The elasticity of the PPP investment rate with respect to PPP

GDP per worker is around 0.3 in both 1980 and 1996, and around 0.5 in 1985. The next row

indicates that at most one-third of the PPP investment rate elasticity can be attributed to richer

countries having higher investment rates at domestic prices.23 The subsequent row shows that

investment price differences contribute little in 1980, contribute modestly in 1985, and contribute

negatively in 1996. The final row shows that, in each year, the major reason why rich countries

have higher PPP investment rates is their low consumption prices.

         We now ask what tax rates and productivity levels would enable the model to literally

mimic the data. For each country, we calculate the tax rate on capital income τ K j , the tax rate

investment goods τ I j , the level of TFP in the investment sector AI j , and the level of TFP in the

consumption sector AC j so that the model exactly matches the country’s price of investment

goods, price of consumption relative to investment, investment rate at domestic prices, and PPP

income per worker. We do this for the benchmark countries in each of 1980, 1985 and 1996,

respectively. We retain a healthy skepticism about this exercise because of inevitable

measurement error in the data and specification error in the model.

         As we did for figure 3, for this exercise we set capital’s share α = 1/3, the depreciation

rate δ = 0.07, the annual growth of income per worker g = 0.02, the intertemporal elasticity

σ = 1, and the discount factor β = 0.97. Conditional on these parameter values, there are four

equations in four unknowns, so the model is just-identified. The model is recursive, so we

proceed sequentially: First, we use data on investment prices in dollars to calculate the tax rate

23
  The investment rate elasticities in Table 5 differ from the coefficients in Table 2 because the dependent variables
in the latter are investment rate levels rather than log levels.




                                                         21
on investment goods implied by (2). We set the world price equal to the U.S. price of investment

under the assumption that the U.S. tax rate on investment goods is approximately zero. Second,

we use data on the price of consumption relative to investment to infer TFP in the investment

sector relative to TFP in the consumer sector implied by (8). Third, we use data on the

investment rate at domestic prices to solve for the tax rate on capital income implied by (10) and

(11). Fourth, we use data on PPP income per worker to calculate the level of TFP in the

investment sector from (10), (13), and (15).24

            The implications of this exercise for tax rates and productivity levels in 1996 are as

follows. The median investment tax rate is -21% (an investment subsidy), and the interquartile

range (25th to 75th percentiles) goes from a 37% subsidy to a 12% tax. The U.S., recall, was

assumed to have an investment tax rate of zero. The median tax rate on capital income is 41%,

with an interquartile range of 19% to 60%. For a number of countries (e.g., Japan and

Singapore), explaining their high investment rates at domestic prices requires negative tax rates

on capital income. We do not take this implication too seriously because the model abstracts

from other possible sources of differing investment rates at domestic prices. Median TFP in

investment goods production is 24% of the U.S. level, with an interquartile range of 11% to 61%.

Median implied TFP in the consumption sector is 60% of the U.S. level, with an interquartile

range of 42% to 77%. Note that consumption TFPs do not differ as much as investment TFPs

do. As we describe next, this suggests that differences in relative TFP explain some of the

differences in PPP investment rates, capital intensity, and income.


24
     This actually identifies PIPPP AI j / PCPPP rather than AI j . The objects we report (elasticities with respect to PPP
GDP per worker) are unaffected by this distinction because PPP prices do not vary across countries. We take logs
and regress on log GDP per worker, so the distinction affects the constant but not the elasticities of interest.




                                                               22
        Table 6 presents elasticities of productivity levels with respect to PPP output per worker

in 1980, 1985, and 1996. The first two rows show that richer countries have higher productivity

in producing both investment and consumption goods — hardly surprising. More striking is that

richer countries appear particularly proficient at making investment goods. The third row says

countries with 1% higher PPP income tend to have 0.25 to 0.50% higher TFP in the investment

sector relative to the consumption sector. In our model, this triggers a lower price of investment

goods relative to consumption goods. Because investment is tradable, its price is pinned down in

the world market (conditional on the tariff). Rich countries’ productivity advantage in

investment therefore shows up as a higher price of consumption in rich countries. This is what

we estimated in Table 4. Viewed through the lens of the model, poor countries have low PPP

investment rates because they have especially low productivity in their investment sectors.

        The remaining rows of Table 6 present development accounting. We use (15) to

calculate the level of aggregate TFP implied by sectoral TFP levels. We set LI / L to the U.S.

level for all countries to isolate the effects of TFP differences, as opposed to differences in tax

rates. We use (13) to find the PPP investment rates implied by sectoral TFPs, again assuming all

countries share the U.S. LI / L. We use (14) to obtain implications for PPP output per worker.

Finally, we regress the predicted contributions on actual PPP output per worker. The results in

Table 6 show that sectoral productivities appear to explain 75% or more of observed differences

in income through their impact on aggregate TFP.25 More to the heart of our investigation,

relative sectoral productivities appear to explain 11-23% of observed income differences through


25
  Given that we are omitting human capital from this accounting, our results are in line with Klenow and
Rodríguez-Clare (1997) and Hall and Jones (1999). These studies estimate that TFP and human capital together
explain 75-85% of income differences, with physical capital responsible for the remaining 15-25%.




                                                      23
their impact on physical capital intensity. The two contributions sum to 92-99%, leaving little

room for tax rates on capital income and investment to explain why countries are rich vs. poor.

        To recap, poor countries do not exhibit particularly low investment rates at domestic

prices. Nor do they exhibit high investment goods prices. Instead they exhibit low consumption

prices. When consumption is valued at common PPP prices, the investment rates in poor

countries are lower than in rich countries. Poor countries do not appear to suffer from low-

savings traps brought on by high discount rates or subsistence consumption needs. If they did,

we would expect to see much lower domestic-price investment rates in poor countries. Nor do

they appear to heavily tax the returns to capital. If they did we would, again, expect to see low

domestic-price investment rates in poor countries. Finally, poor countries do not appear to

impose high taxes and tariffs on producing and importing investment goods. If they did we

would expect to see high investment good prices in poor countries. Poor countries do not appear

to lack investment effort, but rather investment efficiency.


Could our findings reflect measurement error in the ICP price data?

        In our model, poor countries cannot export consumer goods, their comparative advantage

in production. Our model therefore ignores a way poor countries might circumvent their low

efficiency in producing investment goods, namely exporting tradable consumer goods (e.g., food

or clothing) and importing machinery and equipment.26 This would substitute a larger tradable

consumption goods sector for an inefficient machinery and equipment sector. Empirically, most

developing countries do import a significant fraction of the equipment they purchase. Eaton and



26
  Also, some migrants from poorer to richer countries work in nontradable consumption sectors and send
remittances to their country of origin — effectively exporting nontradables to richer countries.




                                                       24
Kortum (2001) report that the median share of equipment imports relative to domestic equipment

investment was 70% across 14 non-OECD countries in 1985.

       In the appendix, we extend our model to accommodate a tradable consumption sector.

Our results survive so long as poor countries have low productivity in producing tradable

consumer goods tantamount to their low productivity in producing investment goods. Of course,

they must have some comparative advantage in consumer tradables to explain why they are net

importers of investment goods. We note that the finding in Table 4 — that poor countries have

high prices of consumer tradables relative to nontradables — is consistent with their having low

productivity in consumer tradables relative to nontradables.


Could our findings reflect measurement error in the ICP price data?

       Classical measurement error across countries would generate precisely the opposite

patterns as those in the data. Countries with overstated prices would tend to have understated

incomes. Because consumption is about three times investment, countries with overstated prices

of consumption relative to investment would tend to have understated incomes. And countries

with overstated PPP investment rates would tend to have understated PPP incomes. Some form

of non-classical measurement error would seem necessary to explain away our findings.

       The U.N. Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO) provides an independent source of

data on food prices in many countries, which we can compare to the food prices in the PWT

benchmark data.27 In 1994, the year with FAO data for the most countries, the prices of all 190

crops rise with country income. For 48 of the 49 crops with data for at least 50 countries, the

elasticity is statistically significant (the exception being wheat). Pooling all 190 crops and




                                                 25
allowing for crop dummies, we estimate an elasticity with respect to country income per worker

of .37 (standard error .01). This does not merely reflect agricultural price supports in OECD

countries; the elasticity is .32 (.01) across countries outside the OECD. The elasticities would be

even higher using black market exchange rates. FAO data on food prices clearly support the

conclusion we reach from the PWT data: food prices are decidedly higher in richer countries.

        One could argue that crops are relatively homogeneous, whereas other goods and services

can differ substantially in quality across countries. This raises the issue: How closely does the

ICP come to pricing comparable quality items in different benchmark countries? This is the

stated goal of the ICP, so there is some hope that comparable quality items are priced even if the

average quality of items sold is higher in richer countries. For example, the ICP compares the

prices of particular car models across countries (in 1975, Ford Escort 1100s, BMW 1602s,

Chevy Camaros, etc.). And it compares houses of the same size, vintage (year built), and

facilities (electricity, water, bath, central heating).

        The ICP’s goal notwithstanding, it may inadvertently price higher quality items in richer

countries. Properly adjusted for quality differences, the price of investment goods might fall

(and the price of consumption no longer rise) with country income. Trade barriers to importing

equipment could be higher in poor countries than ICP prices suggest. Eaton and Kortum (2001)

take this view. If they are right, then ICP data understate differences in PPP income per worker

across countries. According to Table 4, an unmeasured quality elasticity of 0.25 or more would

be needed to keep quality-adjusted consumption prices from rising with PPP income. With an




27
  The data can be downloaded from http://apps.fao.org/page/collections?subset=agriculture. The FAO data
provides prices in local currency. We convert to dollar prices using IMF official exchange rates.




                                                      26
elasticity of unmeasured quality of 0.25 with respect to measured PPP income, true purchasing

power would vary by a factor of 40 rather than 32 across the richest and poorest economies.28

         Might unmeasured quality differences be larger for consumption (e.g., education and

health care) than for investment? If so, then measurement error would contribute both to the

high measured price of consumption and to the high measured PPP investment rates in rich

countries. Adding in the unmeasured PPP consumption in rich countries would lower their PPP

investment rates. The correlation between PPP investment rates and PPP incomes would

partially reflect measurement error rather than reality. This would undercut a Balassa-

Samuelson interpretation of the data, to be sure, but would also undercut tax and tariff

explanations of the investment-income correlation. It would mean differences in PPP income are

larger and differences in PPP capital intensity smaller than the PWT data suggest. If true, we

have even more variation in income and TFP to explain and understand.

         Pritchett (2000) argues for a form of measurement error going the other way. He

maintains that public investment is often high and inefficient in poor countries, so that effective

investment rates covary more strongly with PPP incomes than do measured PPP investment

rates. We view his story as very much in the spirit of ours, namely that poor countries suffer

more from a lack of investment efficiency than a lack of investment effort.29




28
  Hummels and Klenow (2002) estimate an elasticity of export quality with respect to PPP income of about 0.11
across 121 countries in 1995. If this elasticity is representative of country expenditures, then quality does not vary
enough with income to explain our findings (even if no quality differences are controlled for by the ICP).
29
  A related hypothesis is that the quality of investment projects undertaken is lower in poor countries, say because
of financial underdevelopment. Imrohoroglu and Kumar (2003) and Erosa and Hidalgo Cabrillana (2003) advance
this story as a contributor to the low TFP in poor countries.




                                                          27
4. Conclusion

       The higher investment rate in rich countries than in poor countries is arguably the most

consistent finding in the empirical growth and development literature. We find that richer

countries have a significantly higher investment rate in PPP terms, but not in domestic price

terms. This pinpoints the low price of investment relative to consumption in rich countries as the

main force behind their high PPP investment rates. We find no lower investment prices but

notably higher consumption prices in rich economies.

       Subject to caveats about possible measurement error in the PWT data, we conclude that

low PPP investment rates in poor countries are not due to low savings rates or high tax rates on

capital or investment. We instead trace the low investment rates in poor countries to their low

TFP in producing investment goods relative to consumption. Consumption is cheap in poor

countries, making investment expensive and lowering PPP investment rates.

       To the extent consumption is less tradable than investment, our findings are consistent

with the Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis. This hypothesis holds that productivity in nontradables

(e.g., haircuts, taxicabs, retail trade) rises less with country income than does productivity in

tradables. The Balassa-Samuelson hypothesis begs the question of why this should be so. We

offer two brief comments: First and foremost, tradables might have inherently greater capacity

for productivity variation than services do, say because the latter are labor-intensive and hard to

mechanize. This explanation is often given for why tradables productivity grows faster than

services productivity over time. Second, by increasing the scale of the market, tradability may

raise the return to innovations. This could lead to faster innovation for tradables. A faster pace

of innovation, in turn, could produce greater differences in productivity. This is a common

feature of models with gradual technology diffusion, such as Howitt (2000).



                                                 28
                                           Figure 1: Investment Rates at International Prices
                             55
                                                                                             THA

                             50                                                                                    KOR
                                                                                   TKM

                             45                                                                                             SGP
1996 % PPP Investment Rate




                             40
                                                                                                                               HKG
                                                                                                                    JPN
                             35                                                                                       ISR


                             30                                                                                          AUT
                                                                                                     SVK                    NOR
                                                        COG                                                CZE
                                                                                                            PRT        CHE
                             25                              NPL
                                                                                    ECU                   SVNGRCNZL  GER
                                                                                                                ESP AUS              LUX
                                                                            JAM              JOR      CHL            CAN
                                                                                                                       NLD
                                                                                    PER GRD PAN                       FRA BEL
                                                                                                                    ISL
                                                                                 IDN        TUR   BWA     ARG      FIN     USA
                                                                                                BLZ MEX
                                                                                                      KNA                IRL
                             20                                             ALB
                                                                                     BLR                HUN
                                                                                                      ATG
                                                                                                    BRA
                                                                                                                 GBR   DNKITA
                                                                          ZWE   PHL     SWZ                BHR    SWE
                                                                                         HRV
                                                                                         RUS POL
                                                                                         MAR
                                                                                         EST          TUN         QAT
                             15                      ZMB   VNM              LKA
                                                                       BGDPAK         SYR LCA IRN
                                                                                       LTU DMA              MUS
                                                      TJK            AZE        MKD
                                                                                                   URY
                                                MLI                                LVA ROM LBN VEN
                                                                                                                    BMU
                                                                                                                     OMN
                                     TZA                   SEN          KGZ UKR        VCT
                             10                   BEN KEN        MDA ARM
                                                                        BOL         KAZ    FJI
                                                                                                              BHS
                                                NGA             CMR     UZB                    GAB TTO            BRB
                                               MDG
                                               MWI                    GIN
                                                                    CIV
                                                                                          EGY
                             5                             YEM               GEO
                                                                                   BGR
                                                          SLE
                             0
                              1/64            1/32         1/16            1/8             1/4               1/2               1           2

                                                                1996 PPP GDP per worker (U.S. = 1)
                                                          Figure 2: Investment Rates at Domestic Prices
                                            60                         COG                          TKM
1996 % Investment Rate at Domestic Prices




                                            50


                                                                                                                 THA
                                            40                                                                            KNA
                                                                                                                   JOR   SVK          KOR
                                                                                                                                            SGP
                                                                                                                            CZE
                                                                                              JAM          SYR            ATG                HKG
                                                                                                     IDN    GRD
                                            30                                               ALB
                                                                                                         SWZ
                                                                                                                 BLZ               JPN
                                                                     TJK    VNM                           EST
                                                                                      AZE               VCTDMA BWA HUN
                                                                                                             TUR       TUN
                                                                                             LKA PHL ECUROMLCA
                                                                                                          RUSPAN       CHL PRT
                                                                                                                                        AUT
                                                              MLI             NPL MDA    KGZ UKR        LTU
                                                                                                      BLR       GAB
                                                                                                                  IRN       MUS
                                                                                                                      MEX SVN
                                                                                                                           BHR        ISR NOR
                                                                                           ZWE       PER HRVLBN                  NZL
                                                                                                                                  QAT              LUX
                                                                                         UZB
                                                                                        BGD                                           GER
                                            20                        KEN             ARM PAK    MKD      MAR POL BRA ARG    GRC ESP AUSCHE
                                                                                                                                        NLD
                                                                     ZMB    SEN        GIN         LVA
                                                                                                                                  BRB  CAN
                                                                                                                                       OMN
                                                                                                                                     ISL  IRL
                                                                                                                                            USA
                                                                                                                                            BEL
                                                                  BEN                                KAZ                                DNK
                                                                                                                                       FRA ITA
                                                                            YEM                                   VEN               FIN
                                                                                                                                  GBR
                                                    TZA                          CMR CIV BOL                                      SWE
                                                              NGA                                          EGY        TTO     BHS BMU
                                                             MWI
                                                             MDG                                                     URY
                                                                                              GEO           FJI
                                            10
                                                                                                      BGR
                                                                            SLE

                                            0
                                             1/64          1/32             1/16            1/8              1/4                1/2          1           2

                                                                                  1996 PPP GDP per worker (U.S. = 1)
                                                       Figure 3
40%

                                                               3.0
30%
            I/Y at Domestic and International Prices
                                                               2.0            PPP Y/L
20%


                                                               1.0
10%
                                                                          Absolute and Relative Price of I

0%                                                             0.0
      0%      20%        40%          60%      80%     100%          0%          20%         40%          60%     80%   100%
                Tax Rate on Capital Income                                           Tax Rate on Capital Income

40%

                                                               3.0
30%
                                 Nominal I/Y
                                                               2.0
20%                                                                        PPP Y/L


                               PPP I/Y                         1.0
10%                                                                       Absolute and Relative Price of I


0%                                                             0.0
      0%      20%        40%          60%      80%     100%          0%         20%          40%          60%     80%   100%
                    Tax Rate on Investment                                             Tax Rate on Investment


40%

                                                               3.0
30%                                                                                PPP Y/L
           I/Y at Domestic and International Prices

                                                               2.0
20%


                                                               1.0
10%
                                                                               Absolute and Relative Price of I

0%                                                             0.0
  1.00           1.25          1.50          1.75       2.00      1.00             1.25            1.50         1.75    2.00
                        TFP (both I and C)                                                TFP (both I and C)

40%

                                                               3.0
                           PPP I/Y
30%
                                                                                             PPP Y/L
                                                               2.0
20%                 I/Y at Domestic Prices

                                                                                        Absolute Price of I
10%                                                            1.0


                                                                                        Relative Price of I
 0%                                                            0.0
   1.00          1.25          1.50          1.75       2.00      1.00             1.25            1.50         1.75    2.00
               TFP in I (holding TFP in C fixed)                                 TFP in I (holding TFP in C fixed)
                                          Figure 4: 1996 Price of Machinery and Equipment
                            8

                                                                                    MKD
                                                                                           SYR

                           4

                                                                                                       GAB
Relative to the U.S. = 1




                                               NGA

                           2                             COG
                                                            YEM

                                                                      CIV                        EGY
                                                                            UZB                                         FIN
                                                                                                                         BMUCHE
                                                                                                                            DNK
                                                                                                 JOR      ATG          JPN
                                                                                                                      SWE GER
                                                   BEN     SEN                                 LBN
                                                                                             HRV                GRC   QAT AUS
                                                                                                                           FRAIRLNOR
                                                                               UKR                              PRT         AUT        LUX
                                                                  MDA  GIN                   RUS
                                                                                             EST            HUN
                                                                                                              SVN   NZL
                                                                                                                     GBR ISLNLDITA
                                                                         BOL ALB       PER
                                                                                       ECU
                                                                                      BGR
                                                                                      LVA
                                                                                                THA
                                                                                          LTU FJI   VEN
                                                                                                    IRN SVK CZE     ESP OMNBEL
                           1        TZA              ZMB
                                                     KEN VNM          AZE               BLR
                                                                                       KAZ
                                                                                                TUR
                                                                                                PAN
                                                                                                       U
                                                                                                     BWA
                                                                                                   POL   RY
                                                                                                       BRACHL
                                                                                                        MEX
                                                                                                              ARG
                                                                                                                           CAN
                                                                                                                          ISR
                                                                                                                                USA
                                             MWI
                                             MDG                 CMR                       ROM            KNA
                                                                                              LCA              BHR
                                                                               GEO
                                                                              JAM             DMA
                                                                                               GRD
                                                                                             MAR          TUN MUSBHS BRB        SGP
                                                      TJK SLE           KGZ                             TTO          KOR         HKG
                                               MLI                    ARM           IDN VCT
                                                                                   PHL      SWZ BLZ
                                                                              LKA
                                                             NPL
                           1/2                                             ZWE
                                                                            PAK
                                                                       BGD



                                                                                     TKM
                           1/4
                                 1/64       1/32           1/16              1/8                 1/4          1/2               1            2
                                                                  1996 PPP GDP per worker (U.S. = 1)
                                              Figure 5: 1996 Price of Consumption
                            4

                                                                             MKD
                            2
                                                                                                                     CHE
                                                                                                                JPN
                                                                                                               SWEBMU
                                                                                                                 FIN DNKNOR
                                                                                                                    FRA
                                                                                                                   GER
                                                                                                                     AUT
                                                                                                                  ISLNLDBEL     LUX
                                         NGA                                       SYR                                   SGP
Relative to the U.S. = 1




                                                                                                                       IRL
                            1                                                                                 GBRISR
                                                                                                             NZL
                                                                                                             ESP   AUS ITA
                                                                                                                         USA
                                                                                                         GRC
                                                                                                                   CAN    HKG
                                                                                                  ATG PRT KOR
                                                     YEM                                               SVN BHS
                                                                                                BRA ARG
                                                                                                URY     BHR
                                                                        JAM            LCA
                                                                                        LBN
                                                                                      HRV
                                                                                        DMA        KNA
                                                                                                  CHL
                                                                                 PERVCTFJI
                                                                                        GRDBLZ
                                                                                             VENTTO
                           1/2                                                   ECU     THA
                                                                                         PAN
                                                                                          JOR    MEX           QAT
                                                  COG                                    TURPOL
                                               ZMB                                    EST           HUN
                                 TZA                               BOL                 RUS GAB       CZE           OMN
                                        MDG BEN                                LVA           IRN
                                                     SEN                            LTU          SVK
                                                               CIV           PHL
                                                                        ALB IDN       MAR
                                                                                              BWA              BRB
                                         MLI
                                        MWI                CMR        PAK
                           1/4                                          LKA      KAZROMEGY
                                                KEN               BGD GEO
                                                                AZE             BGR               TUN MUS
                                                                ARMUZB   UKR      BLRSWZ
                                                     VNM             ZWE
                                                                   KGZ
                                                    SLE     MDA GIN
                                                       NPL
                                                TJK
                           1/8
                                                                               TKM


                      1/16
                          1/64         1/32          1/16             1/8               1/4            1/2               1            2
                                                          1996 PPP GDP per worker (U.S. = 1)
                                       Figure 6: 1996 Price of Nontradable Consumption
                            4


                            2                                                                                          CHE
                                                                                                                    BMU
                                                                             MKD         LBN                     SWE   AUT NOR
                                                                                                               ESPJPNGER
                                                                                                                   FINFRA  BEL   LUX
                                                                                                                       DNK
                                                                                                                       NLD SGP
                            1                                                                                  NZL ISL USA
                                                                                                                         IRL
                                                                                                            GRC GBR  AUS
                                                                                                                     ISR  ITA
                                                                                   SYR                                OMN HKG
                                                                                                                      CAN
Relative to the U.S. = 1




                                                      YEM                                               ARG
                                                                                                          BHR
                                                                                                  BRA      PRT  KOR
                                                                                           JOR      CHL SVN  BHS QAT
                           1/2                                                                 VEN
                                                                                                  URY
                                                                                 PER
                                                                                 ECU                ATG
                                                                                                   MEX
                                                                         JAM              THA
                                                                                          PAN
                                                                                         FJI       TTO
                                                                             PHL        LCA
                                                                                       HRV      BWA
                                           NGA                      BOL       IDN                    KNA
                           1/4             MLI
                                                   COG
                                                                CIV                      GRD
                                                                                    VCTDMATUR
                                                                                              BLZ
                                                                                             GAB
                                                                                             POL
                                                                                                      HUN
                                                                                                       CZE
                                 TZA                                                   EST     IRN
                                          MDG BENZMB
                                                            CMR       ZWE              RUS
                                                                                        EGY        SVK
                                                                                                    TUN
                                          MWI    KEN                            BGR
                                                                                LVA LTUMAR
                                                     SEN               PAK
                           1/8                                    GIN                 SWZ                  MUS   BRB
                                                                                     ROM
                                                      VNM                LKA
                                                        NPL        BGD UKR
                                                                    UZB ALB       BLR
                                                                                 KAZ
                      1/16                                   MDA
                                                                    KGZ GEO

                                                        SLE        AZE
                      1/32                                                      TKM
                                                  TJK              ARM

                      1/64
                          1/64           1/32            1/16            1/8             1/4             1/2              1            2
                                                              1996 PPP GDP per worker (U.S. = 1)
                                       Table 1
               Comparative Steady States in the Model



   Endogenous →                    i          i PPP       PI       PI /PC    Y/L

     Exogenous ↓



            τK                     −           −                             −

             τI                    −           −          +            +     −

    ZAI     and ACZ                                                          +

   ZAI (AC fixed) Z                            +                       −     +



Note: Blank entries denote independence between the variables.

i = the investment rate at domestic prices.

iPPP = the investment rate at international prices.

PI = the domestic price of investment. PC = the domestic price of consumption.

Y/L = PPP GDP per worker.     τK   = the tax rate on capital income.

τ I = the tax rate on producing and importing investment goods.
AI = investment sector productivity. AC = consumption sector productivity.
                                                           Table 2
                     PPP Investment Rates vs. Investment Rates at Domestic Prices

                                 Independent Variable = log PPP GDP per worker


                                               PPP Investment Rates                  Investment Rates at Domestic Prices
   Dependent Variable
                                      1980             1985             1996            1980           1985            1996

            Fixed                      4.64            5.74             4.62            1.51            1.59           0.58
          Investment                  (0.75)          (0.46)           (0.74)          (0.71)          (0.54)         (0.73)

                                    R2 = .32         R2 = .60         R2 = .26        R2 = .06       R2 = .10        R2 = .01


         Machinery                     1.23            1.89             2.40            0.26            0.45          -0.43 x
       and Equipment                  (0.35)          (0.20)           (0.44)          (0.28)          (0.25)         (0.59)

                                    R2 = .14         R2 = .50         R2 = .21        R2 = .01       R2 = .03        R2 = .00


 # of benchmark countries               61              64              114              61              64             114


Notes: Each entry is a coefficient from a single regression. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Bold coefficients are
significant at the 5% level. Fixed Investment includes equipment and structures, and excludes inventory investment.
Machinery and Equipment includes both electrical machinery and nonelectrical machinery.
                                                       Table 3
                                         The Price of Investment Goods

                             Independent Variable = log PPP GDP per worker


                                      At Official Exchange Rates                    At Black Market Exchange Rates
 Dependent Variable
                                   1980             1985             1996            1980            1985              1996

        Fixed                      .024            -.038x            .183             .190            .096              .245
      Investment                  (.049)           (.048)           (.045)           (.053)          (.050)            (.047)

                                 R2 = .00         R2 = .01         R2 = .07        R2 = .14        R2 = .03        R2 = .19


      Machinery                    .014            -.058x            .052             .180           .076               .113
    and Equipment                 (.041)           (.035)           (.033)           (.058)         (.048)             (.035)

                                 R2 = .00         R2 = .03         R2 = .02        R2 = .14        R2 = .02        R2=0.08


# of benchmark countries            61               64              114               61             64                114


        Note: Prices are in dollars (converted from national currencies at official or black market exchange rates.)
                                                        Table 4
                                          The Price of Consumption


                                     At Official Exchange Rates                  At Black Market Exchange Rates
 Dependent Variable
        ↓                        1980            1985             1996            1980            1985           1996

         All                      .221            .286            .445            .380            .415           .507
     Consumption                 (.053)          (.049)          (.048)          (.049)          (.038)         (.052)

                               R2 = .25        R2 = .41        R2 = .43         R2 = .43        R2 = .52       R2 = .45


     Nontradable                  .377            .415            .660            .542             .540          .721
     Consumption                 (.064)          (.050)          (.059)          (.062)           (.050)        (.065)

                               R2 = .38        R2 = .51        R2 = .48         R2 = .49        R2 = .53        R2=.52


       Tradable                   .141            .223            .310            .307            .357           .372
     Consumption                 (.047)          (.049)          (.040)          (.045)          (.034)         (.041)

                               R2 = .15        R2 = .33        R2 = .35         R2 = .37        R2 = .41        R2=.42


# of benchmark countries           61              64             114              61              64             114


    Notes: The independent variable is always log PPP GDP per worker. Nontradables are services, tradables are goods.
                                        Table 5
                    Decomposing PPP Investment Rates

                Independent Variable = PPP GDP per worker



        Dependent Variable                       1980             1985             1996


         PPP investment rate                     .296             .514             .325
                                                (.045)           (.056)           (.043)
                                               _______          _______          _______

 investment rate at domestic prices               .085            .088             .067
                                                 (.031)          (.036)           (.033)

        investment price term                     .006            .107            -.205x
                                                 (.036)          (.046)           (.073)

       consumption price term                     .204            .319             .463
                                                 (.035)          (.040)           (.074)


      # of benchmark countries                     61               64              114



Notes: All variables are in log terms. Each entry is a coefficient from a single regression.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. Bold coefficients are significant at the 5% level.
Investment refers to fixed investment. See equations (16) through (17) and surrounding
text for description of the investment price and consumption price terms. As implied by
(16) and (17), the first row decomposes into the other three rows. This Table uses prices
converted into dollars at official exchange rates.
                                       Table 6
             Productivity Levels and Income Differences

            (Entries are elasticities with respect to PPP Y/L)



                                 1980                1985                1996


           AI                    .778                .824                .965
                                (.034)              (.037)              (.036)

          AC                     .529                .452                .465
                                (.017)              (.020)              (.017)

        AI /AC                   .249                .372                .500
                                (.045)              (.051)              (.049)


   Contribution                  .849                .761                .768
   through TFP                  (.021)              (.023)              (.021)


   Contribution                  .106                .158                .226
   through K/Y                  (.019)              (.022)              (.022)


     # of countries               61                  64                 114


Notes: All variables are in logs. AI = productivity in the investment sector. AC =
productivity in the consumption sector. See equation (15) for the definition of
aggregate TFP. See equation (14) for the contributions of TFP and K/Y. Here TFP and
K/Y incorporate country-specific AI and AC only; each country is assumed to have the
same tax rates (and hence the same LI /L) as the U.S.. Where prices are used for the
calculations in this Table, they are in dollars converted at official exchange rates.
                                                Appendix


1: Tradable consumption goods

        Here we modify the model to allow for two types of consumption goods: tradable and
non-tradable. With this modification, countries that have a comparative advantage in producing
tradable consumption goods can export these goods in exchange for machinery and equipment.
Specifically, country j will export tradable consumption goods and import investment goods if


                                        ACT j         PIworld
(1.1)                                            >             ≡ p.
                                         AI j         PCTworld


A country will export investment goods in exchange for tradable consumer goods if the
inequality goes the other way. ACT j is the exogenous index of productivity in the tradable

consumption goods sector and p is the world price of investment goods relative to the world
price of tradable consumer goods. We will assume that countries are small enough such that
they are completely specialized either in tradable consumption or in investment goods (although
all countries will produce non-tradable consumption goods).


        We begin by showing the key endogenous variables for countries with a comparative
advantage in investment goods. From the firm’s first order conditions, one can show that the
relative price of nontradable consumption is


                                       PCN j               AI j
(1.2)                                           =
                                        PI j         ACN j (1 + τ I j )


Equation (1.2) is exactly the same as (8). Next, we determine the share of factor inputs that are
devoted to domestic investment. In this model, equation (10) pins down the share of labor used
to produce investment goods channeled towards domestic investment, rather than the share of
labor devoted to the investment goods sector:




                                                      A1
                                                                                   ( g + δ )α (1 − τ K j )
(1.3)                  LDI j L j ≡ ( LI j / L j )( I Dj / I j ) =
                                                                    (1 + τ I j )[(1 + g )1 / σ β − 1 + δ (1 − τ K j )]



Here I Dj denotes the flow of real investment and LDIj the labor used to produce I Dj . The

investment rate at domestic prices is given by equation (11), with LI j L j replaced by LDIj L j :



                                                                (1 + τ I j ) LDI j L j
(1.4)                                                    ij =                            .
                                                                 1 + τ I j LDI j L j


In turn, the PPP investment rate is given by


                                                                    PIPPP AI j LDI j L j
(1.5)    i   PPP
                   =                                                                                                        .
             j
                       ((PI
                              PPP
                                                    )
                                    PCTPPP ) / p − 1 AI j LDI j L j + PCTPPP pAI j LI j L j + PCN
                                                                                                PPP
                                                                                                    ACN j (1 − LI j L j )


The total share of labor employed in the investment goods sector is

(1.6)                                                                          (
                                               LI j L j = LDI j L j + γ j 1 − LDI j L j ,      )
                        PCT j CT j
where γ j ≡                                  is the consumption share of tradables. Comparing (1.5) and (1.6)
               PCT j CT j + PCN j CN j

with (13), one can see that p and γ j now potentially affect the PPP investment rate (although not

the investment rate at domestic prices). However, since p is constant across countries, γ j is the

only additional variable that can contribute to cross-country differences in PPP investment rates.


        In the benchmark data, γ j tends to be lower in richer countries: nontradable services are

a higher fraction of consumption in richer countries. A lower share of tradables in consumption
should boost the PPP investment rate to the extent PCTPPP pAI j > PCN
                                                                    PPP
                                                                        ACN j . In section 4 we argued

that AI j / ACN j tends to rise with PPP income, suggesting this inequality will generally prevail for

richer countries. Thus, across rich countries with a comparative advantage in investment goods,
γ j should contribute to a higher PPP investment rate in richer countries.


                                                                        A2
        Now we turn to countries with a comparative advantage in producing tradable
consumption goods. The relative price of non-tradable consumption goods is

                                                       PCN j                    ACT j
(1.7)                                                            =
                                                        PI j           ACN j (1 + τ I j ) p


Equation (1.7) indicates that an alternative explanation for the low price of non-tradable
consumption goods in poor countries is that they are relatively inefficient in producing tradable
consumer goods. Equation (10) pins down the share of labor devoted to production of exports of
tradable consumer goods


                                                                                        ( g + δ )α (1 − τ K j )
(1.8)                 X
                     LCT   L j ≡ ( LCT j / L j )(CTXj / CT j ) =                                                             .
                         j
                                                                        (1 + τ I j )[(1 + g )1 / σ β − 1 + δ (1 − τ K j )]


                                                               X
Here, CTXj denotes the exports of tradable consumer goods and LCT j
                                                                    the labor used to produce

these exports. The investment rate at domestic prices is


                                                               (1 + τ I j ) LCT
                                                                             X
                                                                                  Lj
(1.9)                                                  ij =                     j
                                                                                           .
                                                                 1 + τ I j LCT
                                                                            X
                                                                               j
                                                                                 Lj


The PPP investment rate is given by



(1.10) i   PPP
                 =
                                                             (P  I
                                                                     PPP
                                                                            )       X
                                                                           p ACT j LCT j
                                                                                         Lj
           j
                     ((PI
                            PPP
                                  PPPP
                                  CT             )
                                         ) / p − 1 ACT j LX
                                                          CT j        L j + PCTPPP ACT j LCT j L j + PCN
                                                                                                       PPP
                                                                                                           ACN j (1 − LCT j L j )


Again, the only additional variable that can potentially explain the correlation of PPP investment
rates with PPP incomes is the share of tradables in consumption, γ j .


        As noted, γ j tends to be higher in poorer countries. A higher share of tradables in

consumption should lower the PPP investment rate to the extent PCTPPP ACT j > PCN
                                                                                PPP
                                                                                    ACN j . In section



                                                                           A3
4 we reported evidence suggesting that ACT j / ACN j rises with PPP income, suggesting the

inequality will tend to go the wrong way for poorer countries. Therefore, across poorer countries
with a comparative advantage in tradable consumer goods, γ j should contribute to a lower PPP

investment rate in richer countries, the opposite of the pattern in the data.


           Putting the two cases together, we see that tradable consumer goods would contribute a
U-shape to PPP investment rates across poorer vs. richer economies. Generalizing the model in
this way would not help explain the uniform tendency of higher PPP investment rates along with
higher PPP incomes.


2: Differing Sectoral Factor Shares


           Although capital shares appear roughly equal across U.S. consumption and investment
sectors, here we sketch the implications of a higher capital share in the investment sector. In
place of (5) and (6) we consider


(2.1)                                                          C j = AC j K CαCj L1C−jαC


(2.2)                                                           I j = AI j K IαjI L1I−j α I


This alters the fundamental equations as follows. In place of (10) and (13) we have


        LI j                                                    ( g + δ )α C (1 − τ K j )(1 − α I )
(2.3)          =                                                                                                                            .
        Lj          (1 + τ I j )[(1 + g )1/ σ / β − 1 + δ (1 − τ K j )](1 − α C ) + ( g + δ )(1 − τ K j )[(1 − α I )α C − (1 − α C )α I ]

and
                                                                      PIPPP AI j LI j / L j
(2.4)          i   PPP
                   j     =                                                                                                   α I −α C
                                                                                                                                        .
                                                                                   (1 + g ) / β − 1 + δ (1 − τ K j ) 
                                                                                              1/σ                             1−α I
                             PIPPP AI j LI j / L j + PCPPP AC j (1 − LI j / L j )                                      
                                                                                           (1 − τ K j )α I AI j       




                                                                           A4
        The price of investment still satisfies (2), so the implied tax rate on investment is
unaffected by α I ≠ α C . The expression for the investment rate at domestic prices remains (11),

but it is affected by α I ≠ α C through LI j / L j . As shown by (11) and (2.3), however, τ I and τ K

remain the only variables capable of generating country differences in domestic-price investment
rates. Given that the domestic-price investment rate does not relate significantly to PPP income
across countries, the capital income tax rate cannot relate significantly to country income. In
sum, our conclusion that sectoral productivities (rather than tax rates) explain most of the
variation in PPP investment rates holds even if we allow α I ≠ α C .


3: Differing Sectoral Productivity Growth Rates

        Here we relax the assumption that TFP grows at the same rate in the two sectors, and
suppose instead that TFP grows at a constant rate gC in the nontradable consumer goods sector
and gI in the investment goods sector. There are two consequences of this modification. First,
from (8), one can see that the relative price of investment goods falls at a constant rate gI-gC in
all countries. If gI >gC, this fits the stylized fact that the relative price of capital has steadily
fallen in the postwar era. However, at any point in time, cross-country differences in the relative
price of capital are still given by the cross-sectional distribution of AI j /[ AC j (1 + τ I j )] . Second,

the steady state share of labor in the capital goods sector is now given by


                                                       ( g I + δ )α (1 − τ K j )
(3.1)                         LI j L j =                                                        .
                                           (1 + τ I j )[(1 + g )1 / σ β − 1 + δ (1 − τ K j )]


Here (1 + g ) ≡ (1 + gC )1−σ (1 + g I )α (1−α ) −σ and (1 + g I ) ≡ (1 + g I )1 (1−α ) . The domestic-price and
international-price investment rates are still given by (11) and (13), except that the share of labor
in the investment goods sector is now given by (3.1). Therefore, allowing for different rates of
TFP growth in the two sectors affects the levels of investment rates. But as long as TFP growth
rates do not differ across countries, our predictions about the forces underlying the correlation of
PPP output per worker with the investment rates remain unchanged.




                                                            A5
                                       References


Balassa, Bela (1964), “The Purchasing-Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of
       Political Economy 72 (December), 584-596.

Ben-David, Dan (1998), “Convergence Clubs and Subsistence Economies,” Journal of
      Development Economics 55 (February), 153-169.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1966), The Economics of Underdeveloped Countries, McGraw-Hill,
     New York.

Bhagwati, Jagdish N. (1984), “Why Are Services Cheaper in the Poor Countries?” Economic
     Journal 94 (June), 279-286.

Burstein, Ariel T., Joao C. Neves, and Sergio Rebelo (2000), “Distribution Costs and Real
       Exchange Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based-Stabilizations,” NBER Working
       Paper 7862 (August).

Carroll, Christopher D., Byung-Kun Rhee, and Chang-Yong Rhee (1994), “Are There Cultural
        Effects on Savings? Some Cross-Sectional Evidence,” Quarterly Journal of Economics
        109 (August), 685-699.

Chari, V.V., Patrick J. Kehoe, and Ellen R. McGrattan (1996), “The Poverty of Nations: A
       Quantitative Exploration,” NBER Working Paper 5414 (January).

Chenery, Hollis B. and Alan M. Strout (1966), “Foreign Assistance and Economic
      Development,” American Economic Review 56 (September), 679-733.

Collins, William and Jeffrey Williamson (2001), “Capital Goods Prices and Investment,”
       Journal of Economic History 61 (March), 59-94.

DeLong, J. Bradford and Lawrence H. Summers, (1991) “Equipment Investment and Economic
     Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (May), 445-502.

Diaz-Alejandro, Carlos (1970), Essays in the Economic History of the Argentine Republic,
      Yale University Press, New Haven, CT.

Easterly, William and Sergio Rebelo (1993), “Fiscal Policy and Economic Growth: An Empirical
       Investigation,” Journal of Monetary Economics 32 (December), 417-458.

Easterly, William (2001), The Elusive Quest for Growth: Economists’ Adventures and
       Misadventures in the Tropics, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

Eaton, Jonathan and Samuel Kortum (2001), “Trade in Capital Goods,” European Economic
       Review 45 (June), 1195-1235.

                                              29
Erosa, Andrés and Ana Hidalgo Cabrillana (2003), “On Capital Market Imperfections as an
       Origin of Low TFP and Economic Rents,” unpublished paper, University of Toronto.

Gersovitz, Mark (1983), “Savings and Nutrition at Low Incomes,” Journal of Political
      Economy 91 (October), 841-855.

Gollin, Douglas (2002), “Getting Income Shares Right,” Journal of Political Economy 110
        (April), 458-474.

Gordon, Robert J. (1990), The Measurement of Durable Goods Prices, University of Chicago
      Press, Chicago, IL.

Greenwood, Jeremy, Zvi Hercowitz, and Per Krusell (1997), “Long-Run Implications of
      Investment-Specific Technological Change,” American Economic Review 87 (June),
      342-362.

Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114 (February), 83-
       116.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers, Bettina Aten, and Daniel A. Nuxoll (1995), “New Kinds of
       Comparisons of the Prices of Tradables and Nontradables,” CICUP Paper 95-3,
       University of Pennsylvania.

Heston, Alan, Robert Summers and Bettina Aten (2002), Penn World Table Version 6.1, Center
       for International Comparisons at the University of Pennsylvania (CICUP), December.

Higgins, Matthew and Jeffrey G. Williamson (1997), “Age Structure Dynamics in Asia and
       Dependence on Foreign Capital,” Population and Development Review 23 (June), 261-
       293.

Howitt, Peter (2000), “Endogenous Growth and Cross-Country Income Differences,” American
       Economic Review 90 (September), 829-846.

Hummels, David and Peter J. Klenow (2002), “The Variety and Quality of a Nation’s Exports,”
     unpublished paper, Purdue University, December.

Imrohoroglu, Ayse and Krishna Kumar (2003), “Entry Costs, Intermediation, and Endogenous
      TFP Differences,” unpublished paper, USC Marshall School of Business.

Jones, Charles I. (1994), “Economic Growth and the Relative Price of Capital,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics 34 (December), 359-382.

Jovanovic, Boyan and Rafael Rob (1999), “Solow vs. Solow,” unpublished paper, New York
      University.

                                              30
Klenow, Peter J. and Andrés Rodríguez-Clare (1997), “The Neoclassical Revival in Growth
      Economics: Has It Gone Too Far?” 1997 NBER Macroeconomics Annual, B. Bernanke
      and J. Rotemberg eds., MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 73-103.

Lee, Jong-Wha (1995), “Capital Goods Imports and Long-Run Growth,” Journal of
       Development Economics 48 (September), 91-110.

Levine, Ross and David Renelt (1992), “A Sensitivity Analysis of Cross-Country Growth
       Regressions,” American Economic Review 82 (September), 942-963.

Lewis, W. Arthur (1954), “Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor,”
       Manchester School of Economic and Social Studies 22 (May), 139-191.

Matsuyama, Kiminori (1992), “Agricultural Productivity, Comparative Advantage, and
      Economic Growth,” Journal of Economic Theory 58 (December), 317-334.

McGrattan, Ellen R. and James A. Schmitz, Jr. (1999), “Explaining Cross-Country Income
      Differences,” chapter 10 in the Handbook of Macroeconomics, Volume la, John B.
      Taylor and Michael Woodford, eds., North-Holland, New York, 669-737.

McKinnon, Ronald (1973), Money and Capital in Economic Development, Brookings
     Institution, Washington DC.

Mulligan, Casey B. (2002), “Capital, Interest, and Aggregate Intertemporal Substitution,” NBER
       Working Paper 9373 (December).

Nelson, Richard R. (1956), “A Theory of the Low-Level Equilibrium Trap in Underdeveloped
       Economies,” American Economic Review 46 (December), 894-908.

Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (2000), Barriers to Riches, MIT Press, Cambridge,
       Massachusetts.

Pritchett, Lant (2000), “The Tyranny of Concepts: CUDIE (Cumulated, Depreciated, Investment
        Effort) Is Not Capital,” Journal of Economic Growth 5 (December), 361-384.

Reinhart, Carmen and Kenneth Rogoff (2002), “The Modern History of Exchange Rate
      Arrangements: A Reinterpretation,” NBER Working Paper 8963 (May).

Restuccia, Diego and Carlos Urrutia (2001), “Relative Prices and Investment Rates,” Journal of
       Monetary Economics 47 (February), 93-121.

Rostow, W.W. (1960), Stages of Economic Growth: A Non-Communist Manifesto,
      Cambridge University Press.




                                              31
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (1997), “I Just Ran Four Million Regressions,” NBER Working Paper
       6252 (November).

Samuelson, Paul A. (1964), “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” The Review of Economics
      and Statistics 46 (May), 145-154.

Schmitz, Jr. James A. (2001), “Government Production of Investment Goods and Aggregate
      Labor Productivity,” Journal of Monetary Economics 47 (February), 163-187.

Solow, Robert M. (1956), “A Contribution to the Theory of Economic Growth,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 70 (February), 65-94.

Summers, Robert and Alan Heston (1991), “The Penn World Table (Mark 5): An Expanded Set
     of International Comparisons,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106 (May), 327-368.

Taylor, Alan M. (1998a), “Argentina and the World Capital market: Saving, Investment, and
       International Capital Mobility in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Development
       Economics 57 (October), 147-84.

Taylor, Alan M. (1998b), “On the Costs of Inward-Looking Development: Price Distortions,
       Growth, and Divergence in Latin America,” Journal of Economic History 58 (March),
       1-28.

World Currency Yearbook (various years), Currency Data and Intelligence Inc.




                                             32
