NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

BANK INTEGRATION AND
STATE BUSINESS CYCLES
Donald P. Morgan
Bertrand Rime
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 9704
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9704
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003

The views expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the position of the Swiss National
Bank, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, or the Federal Reserve System. We thank Jean Tirole for his
comments and Paul Edelstein and Shana Wang for their research assistance. The views expressed herein are
those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Philip E. Strahan, Donald P. Morgan, and Bertrand Rime. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including ©notice, is given to the source.

Bank Integration and State Business Cycles
Donald P. Morgan, Bertrand Rime, and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 9704
May 2003
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
We investigate how the better integration of U.S. banks across states has affected economic
volatility within states. In theory, the link between bank integration and volatility is ambiguous;
integration tends to dampen the impact of bank capital shocks on state activity, but it amplifies the
impact of firm collateral shocks. Empirically, the net effect has been stabilizing as year-to-year
fluctuations in employment growth within states fall as that state's banks become better integrated
(via holding companies) with banks in other states. The magnitudes are large, and the effects are
most pronounced in states with relatively undiversified economies. Consistent with our model, we
find the link between economic growth and bank capital within a state weakens with integration,
whereas the link between growth and housing prices (a possible proxy for firm capital) tends to
increase.

Donald Morgan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
don.morgan@ny.frb.org
Philip Strahan
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

Bertrand Rime
Swiss National Bank
Börsenstr. 15, Postfach
8022 Zürich
rime@snb.ch

2
I. Introduction
The United States once had essentially 50 little banking systems, one per state.
States themselves limited geographic expansion with laws blocking entry by banks
headquartered in other states. Once states began opening their borders to out-of-state
banks in the late 1970s, our many systems began rapidly converging toward a more
national banking system dominated by very large holding companies operating banks in
many states (Map). U.S. banks are not just getting bigger as they consolidate; they are
also getting wider. This other dimension of bank consolidation—geographic
integration—has been largely neglected by researchers, hence our paper.
Under the segregated regime, the fate of a state and its banks were closely tied; as
went the states, so went the banks. Farm price deflation in the early 1980s bankrupted
many farmers and many farm banks. Falling oil prices in the mid-80s wiped out a lot of
Texans and a lot Texas banks. While the price drops probably precipitated these crises,
our maintained premise is that the associated loss of collateral by firms and the loss of
capital at banks prolonged and deepened crises, and that integration--allowing banks to
enter and exit states--should alter the feedback between real and financial shocks.
As a starting point for thinking about those effects, we work through an extended
version of the banking model in Holmstrom and Tirole (HT,1997). Bankers in that model
both prevent moral hazard—by monitoring firms—and they commit moral hazard—by
neglecting to monitor. Because of these hazards or frictions, equilibrium investment in
an economy depends on the level of firm collateral and bank capital; these seemingly
backward-looking variables give firms and bankers a stake in future investment
outcomes, and that keeps them honest. Negative shocks to either firm collateral or bank

2

3
capital cause investment to contract. We add a second (physical) state to the HT model,
then investigate how interstate banking alters the impact of these shocks. Both are still
contractionary, but the magnitudes change: bank capital shocks in state A have a smaller
impact with interstate banking, but the impact of collateral shocks gets bigger. The
derivatives are complicated functions of the frictions in the model, but the logic is
straightforward: a holding company that operating in two states can import capital to state
A if lending opportunities there are still good, but a collateral shock in state A will lead
the holding company to export capital and lending away from that state. In essence,
interstate banking immunizes states against bank capital shocks, but exposes them to
collateral shocks.
Rather than trying to identify these effects separately (the econometric equivalent
of laser surgery), we first investigate whether the net impact of integration has made state
economies more or less stable.1 Table 1 suggests the answer. As states’ banking systems
integrated, the state-specific variation in employment, variation that can be not be
attributed either to aggregate business cycles or to differences in average growth across
states, fell. Volatility in each state declines by more than one-half, from 2.4% in the late
1970s to 1.1% in the middle 1990s.2 Personal income growth displayed a similar trend;
we include these figures in Panel B to show that there was no trend decline toward lower

1

Banks and firms share risk to some extent, so they end up inheriting each other’s problems. The precise
division of those risks (and the bad outcome) would depend in a complicate way on ex ante contracts and
ex post bargaining power. Nor do we consider the welfare benefits of integration, but presumably welfare
rises as volatility falls.
2
These figures are the root mean squared error from a regression of state employment growth on a time
effect (to remove aggregate cycles) and a state effect (to remove state differences in mean growth). See
Table 1 for details.

3

4
state-specific volatility during the 1960s and 1970s, prior to deregulation-induced bank
integration.3
Our more detailed results suggest that the (negative) correlation between state
volatility and bank integration is more than coincidence. Using a panel of state-year data
on employment growth over 1976-1994, we link fluctuations in employment growth
around the state-year average to banking integration and find that it fell significantly as
banks became increasingly integrated (via holding companies) with out-of-state banks.
Our panel lets us control for trends in volatility across all states (due to macro changes),
so we can isolate how state-specific changes in integration are linked with state-specific
changes in volatility. Integration may be partly endogenous, so as a precaution, we use
instruments for integration. Controlling for the composition of employment in each state,
and the degree of concentration, strengthens the result. The stabilizing benefits of bank
integration are most pronounced in the state with the least diversified economies—farm
or energy states, for example.
The net stabilizing we find suggests that the insurance or diversification against
bank capital shocks associated with integration more than offset any amplified effect on
collateral. In fact, we show that the link between bank capital growth and employment
growth within states falls substantially as banks in that state tighten ties to banks in other
states. That is certainly consistent with our conclusion that integration over the last
quarter century has helped stabilize state economic activity by helping banks diversify
against shocks to their own capital.

3

Personal income growth is a somewhat less reliable measure of economic activity that occurs within a
state than employment growth because it attributes income generated from returns on capital earned
anywhere to individuals living within the state. For this reason, we will focus the remainder of our
empirical analysis on state employment growth.

4

5
Although our focus here is on volatility in state economies, integration has
important implications for bank stability and risk as well; operating across many states
should have obvious diversification benefits, although how that plays out in terms of
banks’ risk taking is less obvious (Demsetz and Strahan, 1997).
II. Interstate Banking
Capital and banking market integration have been considered in a variety of
contexts. The international literature on capital market integration (across nations)
focuses mostly on the risk-sharing benefits of integration; cross-country diversification of
asset portfolios tends to smooth aggregate consumption within nations. We doubt that
banking integration in the U.S. has important risk-sharing effects for savers since they
could always diversify via the stock market. In fact, Asdrubali et al. (1996) find that U.S.
capital markets play a more vital role in income and consumption smoothing across states
than do credit markets. The international literature does find, however, that increased
capital market integration may actually amplify the own-country effect of productivity
shocks as capital is able to flee a country afflicted with a productivity slump. Our model
of interstate banking has some of that flavor.
Williamson (1989) compares the unit banking system in the U.S. to the more
integrated system in Canada. Using an equilibrium costly monitoring model, he argues
that the cross-province banking there should have stabilized the Canadian banking system
relative to the U.S. unit banking system. His model also implies, somewhat counterintuitively, that integration amplifies the impact of aggregate real shocks. Integrated

5

6
banking systems are less volatile, in other words, but the economy as a whole becomes
more volatile.4
Our paper, by contrast, investigates how banking integration affects state
volatility (rather than bank or aggregate volatility). Our model introduces a second
physical state to the (unit) banking model in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997) to illustrate
how interstate banking can alter the impact of various shocks and thus affect the
amplitude of the business cycle. As it turns out, interstate banking is not necessarily
stabilizing because some types of shocks get dampened, but other types get amplified.
II.1 The Holmstrom and Tirole Model
The HT model comprises three players: firms, financial intermediaries, and
investors. All are risk neutral. Firms have access to identical project technologies, but
they differ in their initial capital endowments: A0 . Financial intermediaries (“banks”)
and investors can both lend to firms, but only the banks have monitoring know-how; the
uninformed investors must rely on monitoring by the banks. Investors have access to an
alternative investment opportunity.
Technology. Firms choose between a good project and either of two bad projects.
The “good” project succeeds with probability p H ; both “bad” projects succeed with
probability p L . A key parameter in the model is the good and bad projects’ relative
likelihood of success: ∆ p = p H − p L > 0 . All of the projects return R per-unit
invested if they are successful and 0 if not. R is public. The two bad projects also

4

The counterintuitive result that integration amplifies the effect of real shocks seems to stem from the
type of shock considered (a mean preserving increase in the projected technology risk) and on a hard-toexplain effect of bank diversification on the elasticity of credit demanded by firms. His evidence from the
pre-War period is mixed.

6

7
produce differing amounts of private benefits (to the firm): type b bad projects produce a
small private benefit (b); type B bad projects produce a larger private benefit (B > b ).

Moral Hazard and Monitoring. Moral hazard arises because of the private
benefits from bad investments; firms may choose bad projects over good projects (with
higher expected returns) because the former produce private (i.e., unshared) benefits.
Monitoring by a bank can prevent type B investment, but not type b investment. The
idea here is that monitoring is an effective deterrent against obvious fraud and abuse
(e.g., simply absconding with the borrowed funds), but smaller abuses, (shirking, etc.)
must be remedied through incentive schemes. Monitoring costs are proportional to the
amount invested; if investment is I, monitoring costs = cI. Monitoring is itself a private
activity, in that savers cannot determine if bankers have actually monitored a given firm.
Private monitoring creates a second moral hazard; unless it is worthwhile, bankers will
only pretend to monitor. Banks must invest enough of their own capital in the project to
ensure that they will monitor adequately.5

Contracts. Firms will always choose a mix of liabilities, borrowing from both the
bank and investors. If the project succeeds, the firm, bank monitor, and uninformed
investors receive Rf, Rm and Ru. These shares are determined endogenously by the
opportunity costs of the three parties. We prefer the intermediation interpretation of
financing structure offered by HT: investors deposit their money with the bank, and
banks fund the firms they monitor with those deposits and the bank’s own capital. The

5

Project risk is not completely diversifiable so banks need a stake in the project (or else they would shirk
on monitoring).

7

8
bank’s ability to attract deposits depends on its own capital (which is needed to assure
uninformed investors that it will monitor firms adequately).6

Equilibrium and Comparative Statics. Given the rates of return required by investors
( γ ) and banks ( β ), a firm with initial assets A0 chooses investment (I), its own capital
contribution (A), and its mix of liabilities to maximize its expected profits:
max U ( A0 ) = pH RI − pH Rm − pH Ru + γ ( A0 − A)

RI ≥ Rf + Rm + Ru

(1)

Rf ≥ bI / ∆p

(2)

Rm ≥ cI / ∆p

(3)

subject to:

The main budget constraint (1) limits the sum of returns to the three parties to the
total return on the investment.7 Eq. (2) is an incentive constraint on the firm; the gain in
expected payments to the firm from choosing the good project cannot be less than the
private benefit from choosing the first bad project. Eq. (3) is an incentive constraint on
the intermediary; the expected gain in return to the bank from forcing the firm to choose
the good project must exceed the cost of monitoring, else the bank will not monitor. At
the optimum, all constraints will bind so Eq. (1)-(3) define the maximum income the
project owner can pledge to uninformed investors: pH ( R − (b + c ) / ∆p ) , i.e. the

maximum payment per unit of investment that can be promised to uninformed investors
without violating incentives.

6

Under the certification interpretation, uninformed investors invest directly in the firm, but only after the
monitor has taken a large enough financial interest in the firm that the investor can be assured that the firm
will behave diligently.

8

9
All firms choose the same optimal policy per unit of own capital, so an economywide equilibrium is easily found by aggegating across firms. Let Kf be the aggregate
amount of firm capital, Km the aggregate amount of informed capital, and Ku the
aggregate supply of uninformed capital. The first two are fixed, while the third is
determined so that the demand for uninformed capital (the sum of the pledgeable
expected returns of individual firms, discounted by γ ) equals the supply of uninformed
capital. Let γ (Ku ) be the inverse supply function, and let K = Kf + Km + Ku is the total
amount of capital invested. The equilibrium rate of return on uninformed capital is
determined by
(1a)

γ ( Ku ) = pH K (R − (b + c) / ∆p ) / Ku .

The equilibrium rates of return in informed capital markets is determined by
(3)

β = p H c ⋅ K /( Km ⋅ ∆p ) ,
Holmstrom and Tirole show how shocks to each player’s capital affect the

equilibrium returns to investors ( γ ) and banks ( β ) and the rate of investment by firms. A
decrease in informed capital (a capital “crunch”) decreases γ and increases β . A fall in
firms’ capital (a collateral “squeeze”) decreases γ and decreases β .
The model can also be used to examine how the two types of shock affect the
availability of external finance and firms’ investment spending. First, there is a direct
contractionary effect due to the fact that the capital crunch and the collateral squeeze lead
to a reduction in the amount of capital that can be invested in the firm by the bank and by
the entrepreneur, respectively. Second, there is an indirect contractionary effect due to the

7

The other budget constraints (i,ii,iii and iv HT p. 680) are omitted here for brevity.

9

10
fact that the collateral squeeze and the capital crunch reduce the pledgeable income that
can be promised to uninformed debtholders without destroying incentives. The decrease
in the pledgeable income affects negatively firms' ability to attract uninformed capital
(see equation 1a).
II.2 Interstate Banking in the HT Model
We extend the HT model to interstate banking by simply adding another physical
state. The only subtlety is in the treatment of capital mobility across states under the two
banking regimes (unit and interstate) that we want to compare. For simplicity, we make
the extreme assumption that informed capital is completely immobile across states under
unit banking. In other words, unit banking is equivalent to the single state world HT
considered. At the opposite extreme, we assume that informed capital is completely
mobile across states under interstate banking. These extreme assumptions are not
necessary for our results below, however; we obtain qualitatively similar results so long
as informed capital is relatively less mobile under unit banking. Note that we also
assume that the return on uninformed capital is exogenous and equal across states for
both unit banking and interstate banking. This is consistent with the fact that uninformed
investors have access to a nation-wide securities market regardless of the banking regime.
On this securities market, there is a quasi-unlimited supply of investment opportunities,
with a rate of return independent of state-specific shocks.
The appendix contains details on the extended model, the equilibrium, and the
comparative statics. In short, the own-state effect of a bank capital shock is diminished
under interstate banking because bank capital can flow from other states that did not
experience a shock. The own-state impact of a firm collateral shock is amplified under
interstate banking because banks in the affected state are free to shift their lending across

10

11
the border to firms with better collateral. Thus, the net effect of integration on volatility
is ambiguous. The following propositions compare the impact of the two shocks under
unit banking and interstate banking.
Proposition 1: with interstate banking, the negative impact of a bank capital
crunch in state 1 on the amount of uninformed and informed capital invested in that state
is smaller than with unit banking. The intuition for this result is that with interstate
banking, the increase in β caused by the bank capital crunch will attract bank capital
from state 2. This will mitigate the impact of the bank capital crunch on the availability
of external finance in two ways. First, the bank capital inflow leads to a lower decrease in
the amount lent by banks to firms in state 1. Second, because the amount lent by banks to
firms in state 1 decreases less, we also have a smaller reduction in the pledgeable income
that can be promised to uninformed investors by firms in state 1 without breaking
incentives. As a result, we have a smaller reduction in the amount of uninformed capital
that firms in state 1 can attract. With unit banking, these mitigating effects do not take
place, since bank capital cannot move across states.
Proposition 2: with interstate banking, the negative impact of a collateral squeeze
in state 1 on the amount of uninformed and informed capital invested in that state is
larger than with unit banking. The intuition for this result is that with interstate banking,
the decrease in β following the collateral squeeze will induce bank capital to move to
state 2. Here again, two effects must be distinguished. First, the bank capital flight leads
to a decrease in the amount lent by banks to firms in state 1. Second, because of this
reduction of the amount lent by banks to state 1 firms, we also have a decrease in the
pledgeable income that can be promised to uninformed investors. As a result, there is a

11

12
reduction of the amount of uninformed capital that state 1 firms can attract. With unit
banking, these amplifying effects do not take place, since bank capital cannot move
across states.
In sum, cross-state banking amplifies the effects of local shocks to entrepreneurial
wealth because bank capital chases the highest return. Capital flows in when collateral is
high and out when it is low. Integration dampens the impact of bank capital supply. This
source of instability becomes less important because entrepreneurs are less dependent on
local sources of funding in an integrated market since bank capital can be imported from
other states.
III. Empirical Strategy and Data

Identifying exogenous components of the two kinds of financial shocks just
discussed seems like a difficult task. Even with the requisite data, the high correlation
between bank capital and borrower collateral would require strong and perhaps
implausible identifying assumptions. Instead, we first ask a more tractable (but still
useful) question: how has banking integration across states affected overall volatility
within states? Do state-specific business fluctuations get bigger or smaller as banks in
the state become increasingly integrated with banks in other states? We know from the
model that if bank capital shocks are more a source of volatility than collateral shocks,
the net effect of integration should be stabilizing. Integration, in other words, should
reduce volatility. We then offer tentative evidence suggesting that the effects of the two
kinds of financial shocks change in ways consistent with our model, with the caveat that
we have no good instruments to identify the exogenous components of these shocks.
Endogenous Integration?

12

13
Reverse causality of two sorts concerns us. First, increased cross-state banking
may indicate merely that states’ economies are becoming more integrated; banks may
simply follow their customers across state lines. If so, and if “real” integration (as
opposed to bank integration) affects business volatility, our results may confuse the
effects of real vs. bank integration. Reverse causality could arise also via banking
“hangovers” (from too much farming, or too much oil), as the associated distress and
volatility may attract bargain-hunting banks from other states. (In fact, we find evidence
of this idea below.) To guard against these or other potential endogeneity problems, we
instrument for integration using an indicator equal to one after a state entered an interstate
banking agreement, and the number of years elapsed since the agreement.
A Brief History of Interstate Banking
Restrictions on interstate banking in the U.S. date back to the infamous Douglas
Amendment to the 1956 Bank Holding Company (BHC) Act. With that amendment,
banks or holding companies headquartered in one state were prohibited from acquiring
banks in another state unless such acquisitions were permitted by the second state’s
government. No states allowed such transactions in 1956, so the amendment effectively
barred interstate banking. Change began in 1978, when Maine passed a law allowing
entry by out-of-state BHCs if, in return, banks from Maine were allowed to enter those
states (entry meaning the ability to buy incumbent banks). No states reciprocated,
however, so the integration process remained effectively stalled until 1982, when Alaska,
Massachusetts, and New York passed laws similar to Maine’s.8 State deregulation was

8

As part of the Garn-St Germain Act, federal legislators amended in 1982 the Bank Holding Company Act
to allow failed banks and thrifts to be acquired by any bank holding company, regardless of state laws (see,
e.g., Kane (1996) and Kroszner and Strahan, 1999).

13

14
nearly complete by 1992, by which time all states but Hawaii had passed similar laws.9
The process was completed in 1994 with the passage of the Interstate Banking and
Branching Efficiency Act of 1994 (IBBEA) that mandated complete interstate banking as
of 1997 and gave states the option to permit interstate branching.10
This roughly 15-year history provides an excellent opportunity to test how the
resulting integration has affected volatility. Luckily for us, the states did not deregulate
all at once, and the subsequent integration across states proceeded at different rates (Chart
1). The staggered deregulatory events provide us with both cross-sectional and time
series variation with which to identify the effects of integration; also, the deregulatory
events themselves provide a good instrument for integration.11
Measuring Integration and Volatility
Our measure of bank integration equals the share of total bank assets in a state
that are owned by bank holding companies that also hold banking assets in other states
(or other countries). To illustrate, if a state had one stand-alone bank and one affiliated
bank of equal size, integration in that state would equal ½.
We associate volatility with the year-to-year deviations (from average) in
measures of business activity. Starting with the annual growth rate of series x for state i
in year t, we first subtract off the mean growth rate in x for state i over time.
“Demeaning” by the state average removes long-run growth differences across states.
We then subtract off the mean growth rate of series x across states in year t. Demeaning
9

State-level deregulation of restrictions on branching also occurred widely during the second half of the
1970s and during all of the 1980s.
10
IBBEA permitted states to opt out of interstate branching, but only Texas and Montana chose to do so.
Other states, however, protected their banks by forcing entrants to buy their way into the market.

14

15
by the national average each year helps control for aggregate business fluctuations. We
are left with the state-specific shock to our measure of business activity. Our volatility
measures will be the square of the resulting deviations, the log of the squared deviations,
or the absolute value of these deviations.
Our sample starts in 1976, a few years before interstate deregulation began. We
end the sample in 1994, the year that the Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching
Efficiency Act became law. Riegle-Neal allowed bank holding companies to acquire
banks in any state after September 29, 1995 and permitted mergers between banks in
different states as of June 1, 1997, which effectively allowed nationwide branch
networks. The law also gave states the right to adopt an earlier starting date for interstate
bank mergers, however, and about half of the states did so (Spong, 2000). In response,
banks such as NationsBank consolidated operations from several other states into its
primary North Carolina bank (NationBank NC N.A.), leading to an increase of this
bank’s (and hence North Carolina’s) assets from $31 billion in 1994 to $79 billion in
1995. Because of this cross state consolidation, we lose the ability to measure bank
assets meaningfully at the state level after 1994.
Our two measures of business activity are the annual growth rates of total state
employment and small-firm employment, where we define a small firm as one with fewer
than 20 employees.12 Numbers on total employment are available from 1976-94 from the
Census Bureau. Small-firm employment comes from the Bureau’s County Business

11

While we focus here on interstate banking, Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) report that state-level growth
accelerated following branching deregulation; Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) show that branching
deregulation led to improved efficiency in banking.
12
The employment data from the County Business Patterns are stratified by establishment size rather than
firm size. Thus, there may be some misclassifications in cases of large firms operating many small-scale
plants.

15

16
Patterns series, starting in 1977 (1978 after converting to growth rates).13 In principle,
the more bank-dependent firms in the latter category may be more affected by banking
integration. To isolate the volatility that is specific to these small firms, we remove the
state-specific shock to employment that is common to both small and large firms before
constructing our measure of volatility. We do this by regressing small-firm employment
growth on the state effect (removes the long-run state mean growth rate), the time effect
(removes the current aggregate business cycle) and the growth rate in employment at
large firms (those with more than 250 employees). We use the residuals from this
regression to construct our measures of small-firm volatility.14
Table 2 reports summary statistics for the integration and volatility measures.
The average share of integrated bank assets over the full sample of state-years was 0.34,
rising from under 0.1 in the 1970s to about 0.6 by the mid-1990s. Overall employment
grew 2.3 percent per year on average over the sample of state-years. The squared
deviation of employment growth from its mean averaged 0.03 percent, and, perhaps more
interpretable, the absolute deviation of employment growth averaged 1.3 percent. Smallfirm employment growth was slightly more volatile than overall employment growth,
averaging 0.04 percent for squared deviations and 1.4 percent for absolute deviations.
We also control for the share of employment in a given state/year in each of eight broad
industrial categories (one-digit SIC), along with the sum of squared shares in these
13

The small firm and total employment data are not directly comparable as the former excludes selfemployed individuals, employees of private households, railroad employees, agricultural production
employees, and most government employees. We drop Delaware and South Dakota as these two states’
banking sectors are dominated by credit card banks due to their liberal usury laws. See Jayaratne and
Strahan, 1999 for details.
14
The justification for this procedure is a pragmatic one. We are comfortable that firms with fewer than 20
employees ought to be viewed as “small”, and that firms with more than 250 are “large.” In between lies a
difficult-to-categorize group of firms. We therefore leave these firms out in trying to isolate the shock to
employment growth at small firms.

16

17
groups as a measure of the diversification across industries in a given state/year. (We call
the diversification index the “labor share HHI”.) The summary statistics for these
variables are also reported in Table 2.
IV. Results

IV.1 State Business Volatility Declines with Bank Integration
In view of the ambiguous theoretical relationship between integration and
volatility, we choose to report a variety of relationships. We have two growth measures
(total employment and small-firm employment) and three ways to define volatility. Also,
for each dependent variable, we report both a fixed effects regression (OLS) and an
instrumental variable (IV) estimate. IV seems advisable because the pace of integration
may itself depend on volatility as noted earlier. We use two instruments in the first stage:
an indicator variable equal to zero before a state entered an interstate banking agreement
with other states and one after; and a continuous variable equal to zero before interstate
banking, and equal to the log of the number of years that have elapsed since a state
entered an interstate banking arrangement with other states.15
As noted, employment volatility will obviously depend on labor force
composition, so we also control for the share of employment in each one-digit SIC sector
(manufacturing, services, etc.) and employment concentration (the sum of the squared
shares). In all specifications we control for the year and state, so the resulting fixed effect
estimates reveal how increased integration within a state in a given year is related to
volatility within the same state and year.16

15

In the first stage models, both instruments have very strong explanatory power. These regressions are
available on request.
16
But other important changes occurred during the 1980s, such as rapid adoption of sophisticated financial
models and increased use of securitization, not just for residential mortgages but also for consumer loans,

17

18
Tables 3 and 4 report the estimated coefficients for the twelve specifications. For
overall employment growth, all of the estimates are negative, and five of the six are
statistically significant at the five percent level (Table 3). Integration has had, on net, a
stabilizing influence on state business volatility. In addition, the IV coefficient estimates
are much larger than the corresponding OLS estimates in all three cases, implying that
the stabilizing influence of integration is larger (if less precisely estimated) when we use
deregulation variables to parcel out the endogenous variation in integration.17 In fact, the
portion of integration that is orthogonal to deregulation is strongly positively related to
employment volatility (not reported), perhaps because out-of-state banking companies
opportunistically enter new states when banks in those states are facing difficulties
associated with an economic downturn. (Remember: banks enter new states by buying
their way in.)18
We do not find evidence in these regressions that diversification across industries,
measured by the labor share HHI index, reduces volatility, as one might expect. There is
very little time-series variation in this index, however, making it difficult to measure its
coefficient in the fixed effects models. If we drop the state fixed effects and estimate the

commercial real estate loans and even commercial and industrial loans (Mishkin and Strahan, 1999). These
new technologies seem to have increased the efficient scale in banking and may be responsible, in part, for
greater integration. For an exhaustive review of the causes and consequences of financial consolidation in
the U.S., see Berger, Demsetz and Strahan (1999).
17
One might object that interstate banking deregulation itself may be determined, in part, by the volatility
of a state’s business cycle. For example, perhaps political pressure for opening a state’s banking system to
out-of-state competition intensifies during economic downturns (when volatility is high). To rule out the
possibility that endogenous deregulation drives our IV results, we have also estimated the model after
dropping the 3 years just prior to deregulation as well as the year of deregulation itself. In these
specifications, the coefficient increases in magnitude (i.e. becomes more negative), and its statistical
significance increases across all three measures of volatility.
18
We have also estimated this model with a full set of interactions between the year effects and the statelevel industry employment share variables in order to allow the impact of the aggregate shock to depend on
a state’s industry mix. These results give very similar results for the effect of integration on volatility (i.e.
negative and statistically significant).

18

19
model with random effects instead, the labor share HHI does enter the regression with a
positive and statistically significant coefficient (not reported).
We also find declines in employment growth volatility at small firms, where we
expect the influence of banking, and hence banking integration, to be most important
(Table 4). Here, we find a statistically significant effect of banking integration on
volatility in five of our six specifications. Moreover, the declines in volatility are larger
for the small firms than for overall employment in all of the IV specifications.
The IV estimates for both overall and small-firm employment imply a substantial
stabilizing benefit from integrating bank assets across states. The share of integrated
bank assets rose from around 10 percent in 1976 to around 60 percent in 1994; the
reduced form model (not reported) suggests that about one-half of this increase can be
attributed to interstate deregulation, or an increase in integration of 25 percent. Based on
the coefficient from the IV model, this 25 percent increase in integrated bank assets
reduced the absolute deviation of overall state employment growth by 0.9 percent (Table
3, column 6). This decline is very large relative to the mean (1.3 percent) and standard
deviation (1.2 percent) over the whole sample. For small-firm employment, the IV
estimate suggests that the 25 percent increase in integrated bank assets led to a drop in
volatility of 1 percent (Table 4, column 6).
Table 5 reports two slightly more complex models in which we test whether
banking integration reduces volatility more in states relatively reliant on one or a few
sectors. A well-diversified state will tend to have well-diversified (unit) banks too, thus
reducing the potential stabilizing effect of integration. In contrast, in a state that relies
heavily on one or two sectors, banks constrained to operating only there will also rely on

19

20
those one or two sectors. Integrating these banks ought to have greater benefits, and the
results suggest that it has.
We provide two tests of this idea. First, we interact the labor-share HHI with our
integration variable (Panel A); second, we estimate the basic model separately for large
states (states with above-median income in 1975) and small states (Panel B). Both
approaches support the idea that banking integration stabilizes small and specialized
economies more than large and well-diversified economies. First, we estimate a negative
and significant coefficient on the interaction of HHI with integration, meaning that the
effect of banking integration is more negative in states with more specialized economies
(Panel A).19 Second, we estimate a negative effect of banking integration for small states
using all three measures of volatility, and the coefficient is statistically significant in two
of the three specifications. In contrast, the measured effect of banking integration on
volatility is never significant.
IV.2 How Integration Changes the Correlation between Bank Capital, Collateral and
Business Activity
We have not directly tested our model of integration due to the difficult task of
identifying exogenous and independent shocks to bank capital and to entrepreneurs’
collateral.20 In this section, however, we offer tests of how the correlation between
proxies for these shocks changes with integration, without attempting to find the
exogenous portion of each shock. We estimate how local employment growth and
19

Note, however, that the interaction term between the labor share HHI and banking integration loses
statistical significance when we drop Wyoming, the state with the most specialized economy in the U.S.
20
Peek and Rosengren (2000) used the downturn in Japan to identify an exogenous decline in bank capital.
They show that when Japanese banks faced financial difficulties in the 1990s, they reduced their lending in
California, leading to a decline in credit availability there. This finding is consistent with our model,

20

21
lending growth correlate with local bank capital growth (a proxy for bank capital shocks)
and with growth in local housing prices (a proxy for collateral shocks), and how these
correlations change in response to banking integration. To be precise, we regress state
employment growth and aggregate growth of total bank loans and business loans on 1)
the growth in aggregate capital held at all banks in the state, and 2) the growth in Freddie
Mac’s index of housing prices in the state 3) our measure of banking integration, and 4)
interactions between integration and the two local “shocks”. We also include state and
year fixed effects. According to our interstate version of the HT model, the correlation
between bank capital growth and economic activity (employment growth and loan
growth) ought to decline with integration, implying a negative coefficient on the
interaction term. The correlation between housing prices and activity ought to increase
with integration, implying a positive interaction term.21
The results support these implications (Table 6). As states integrate, local bank
capital becomes much less correlated with all four measures of local economic activity.22
For example, prior to banking integration, a one standard deviation decline in bank
capital growth (a decline of 8.5 percent) was associated with a reduction in employment
growth of 1.2 percent (Panel A, column 1). Based on the mean level of banking
integration in 1994 (0.6), the end of our sample, the model suggests that a one standard

although it emphasizes the downside of integration. While integration insulates an economy from shocks
to its own banks, it simultaneously exposes an economy to banking shocks from the outside.
21
Other researchers have investigated how holding company affiliation, a concept related to our measure
of banking integration, affects bank lending properties; Houston and James (1997) find that lending by
affiliated banks is less sensitive to the bank’s own cash flow, suggesting the holding company operates as
an internal capital market. Ashcraft (2001) finds that lending by affiliated banks is less sensitive to changes
in monetary policy (i.e., changes in the federal funds rate) than is lending by unaffiliated banks.
22
We have also estimated these regressions using IV, where an instrument for integration is constructed
from an indicator variable equal to one after state-level interstate banking reform and a continuous variable
equal to the log of the number of years elapsed since reform. These results are similar to those reported in
Table 6.

21

22
deviation decline in bank capital growth would be associated with a decline in
employment of just 0.3 percent. We find similar effects of banking integration on
employment growth at small firms; bank capital matters a lot prior to integration but
much less after, although both the direct effect of capital, as well as the interaction term,
are larger in magnitude for small-firm employment growth.
Table 6 also shows that the link between bank capital and loan growth declined
sharply after banking integration. Prior to integration, a standard deviation increase in
bank capital was associated with an increase in business lending of 5.7 percent and an
increase in total lending of 5.5 percent. With integration that prevailed in 1994, the same
increase in local bank capital was associated with just a 3.1 percent increase in business
lending and a 4.2 percent increase in total loans.
The correlation between housing prices (collateral) and local economic
conditions, again consistent with our model, strengthens following integration. For
example, a standard deviation decrease in housing prices (0.078) would be associated
with a decline in employment of 0.4 percent (0.4 percent for small firms) before
integration, but a decline of 0.7 percent (0.9 percent for small firms) after integration.
The same decline in housing prices would be associated with a drop in business lending
of 1.1 percent (1.0 percent for total lending) before integration, but a decline of 4.1
percent (2.8 percent for total lending) after integration. These changes are all statistically
significant at the 5 percent level or better.
IV.3. Bank Integration vs. Real Integration?
The negative correlation between bank integration and state business volatility is
probably not an artifact of increased real integration—increased trade that is—among the

22

23
states. It is not obvious that trade among states even stabilizes production within states,
as trade may reflect specialized production and specialization is the opposite of
diversification. Even if we suppose that trade has stabilizing effect, the change in bank
integration and trade integration are not correlated during our sample period (Chart 2).
The only qualifier necessary here relates to our proxy for “real” or trade integration: outof-state shipments for each state expressed as a percentage of total shipments. These data
are collected as part of the Commodity Flow Surveys conducted by the Department of
Transportation and the Department of Commerce. While these are the best, most
frequently available data, they are not perfect. The 1977 survey covered only
manufacturers, while the 1993 included wholesale trade firms as well. Wholesalers tend
to ship shorter distances (Hillberry and Hummel, 2002), so their inclusion in the 1993
tends to lower look lower relative to 1977. As long as that survey bias is not correlated
with the change in bank integration over the 1977 to 1993, our point in Chart 2 goes
through: the negative correlation we have found between bank integration and business
volatility does not reflect trade integration in disguise.
V. Conclusions

The U.S. used to have 50 little banking systems, one in every state. Now, some
15 years after states opened their borders to other states’ banks, we have a much more
integrated banking system, with holding companies operating banks across many states.
As a theoretical matter, the impact of cross-state banking on business volatility is
ambiguous because integration immunizes borrowers from shocks to their own banks but
exposes them to shocks to their own wealth. We find that the fragmented business of U.S
banking before the mid-1980s was, in all likelihood, a source of state business volatility.

23

24
On net, integration was stabilizing; employment growth fluctuations in a state diminished
as its banks commingled with other states’ banks. State business cycles have become
smaller, in other words, but more alike. As the French say: the more things change, the
more they stay the same.
Our findings here also bear on developments in Europe, where banks are just
starting to integrate across nations.23 Applied there, our findings imply that further bank
integration abroad should lead to smaller, but more correlated, national business cycles.
More generally, our results may inform thinking about worldwide financial integration,
since “globalization” is just a scaled-up version of the national integration studied here.
Better bank integration may also be a factor behind the decline in aggregate U.S.
economic volatility over the past twenty years noted by McConnell and Perez-Quiros
(2000) and Blanchard and Simon (2001).24 The possible mechanisms that have been
proposed to explain this stabilization trend are 1) better inventory management (Kahn,
McConnell and Perez-Quiros, 2002), 2) reduced volatility of sales with non-convexities
in the production process (Ramey and Vine, 2001), 3) better monetary policy (Blanchard
and Simon, 2001), and 5), better luck (Stock and Watson, 2001). Our results suggest
adding better finance to the list. In fact, access to finance is a crucial piece of the
inventory-management hypothesis. According to this view, firms began smoothing
production better in the post-1984 period by building up inventories during period of low

23

Garcia Blandon (2001) finds that foreign bank entry in Europe is impeded by various non-regulatory
barriers, such as cultural distance between consumers, while export levels and the presence of
multinationals are positively correlated with foreign bank penetration.
24
McConnell and Quiros (2002) mark the break in volatility at 1984. Blanchard and Simon argue that
volatility has trended down since the 1950s, with the 1970s being an aberration to that trend.

24

25
sales growth, and vice versa during period of high sales growth.25 These counter-cyclical
movements in inventories are only possible if firms can finance inventory investment
when cash flow (sales) is low. In other words, counter-cyclical inventory investment is
only possible if external finance is available and affordable during downturns. Exploring
the link between improved bank finance and aggregate decline in aggregate volatility
would make an interesting paper.

25

In fact, the correlation between sales growth and inventory investment went from positive to negative
after 1984 (Kahn, et al, 2002).

25

26
References

Ashcraft, Adam, “New Evidence on the Lending Channel,” Federal Reserve Bank Staff
Study 136, September 2001.
Bernanke, B., and M. Gertler, “Banking and Macroeconomic Equilibrium,” in New
Approaches to Monetary Economics, W. Barnett and K. Singleton, eds. (New
York and Melbourne: Cambridge University Press, 1987).
Berger, Allen N., Rebecca S. Demsetz, and Philip E. Strahan (1999), “The Consolidation of the
Financial Services Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for the Future,”
Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 135-194.
Blanchard, Olivier and John Simon, 2001, “The Long and Large Decline in U.S. Output
Volatility,” Brooking Papers on Economic Activity no. 1, 135-74

Clark, T., and E. Wincoop, “Borders and Business Cycles,” Forthcoming in Journal of
International Economics, 2000.
Demsetz, Rebecca S. and Philip E. Strahan (1997), “Size, Diversification and Risk at US Bank
Holding Companies,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 29, 300-13.

Feldstein, Martin, 1997, EMU and International Conflict, Foreign Affairs, 76, 60-73.
Garcia Blandon, Josep, Cross-border Banking in Europe: An Empirical
Investigation, Working paper No 509, October 2000, Universitat Pompeu
Fabra. 2000.
Hillberry, Russell, and D. Hummels, 2002, “Intra-national Home Bias: Some
Explanations,” NBER Working Paper 9022
Holmstrom, B., and J. Tirole, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds, and the Real
Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII (1997), 663-691.
Houston, Joel, Christopher James, and David Marcus, 1997, “Capital Market Frictions
and the Role of Internal Capital Markets in Banking,” Journal of Financial
Economics 46, 135-164.
Jayaratne, Jith and Donald P. Morgan, 1999, “Capital Market Frictions and Deposit
Constraints on Banks,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan (1996), “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank
Branch Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, 639-670.
_____ (1998), “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution, and Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from
Commercial Banking, The Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. XL1 (1), 239-273.

26

27
Kahn, James A., Margaret McConnell and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2002, “On the Causes of the
Increased Stability of the U.S. Economy,” Federal Reserve Bank of New York, Economic
Policy Review, May 2002.
Kane, Edward (1996), “De Jure Interstate Banking: Why Only Now?,” Journal of Money, Creidt,
and Banking, Vol. 28, May, 141-161.
Kroszner, Randall S. and Philip E. Strahan (1999), “What Drives Deregulation: Economics and
Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,” Quarterly Journal of
Economics, Vol. 114, No. 4, 1437-67.
McConnell, Margaret and Gabriel Perez-Quiros, 2000, “Output Fluctuations in the United States:
What has Changed since the Early 1980s?” American Economic Review 90(5), 1464-76.

McPherson, S., and C. Waller, “Do Local Banks Matter for the Local Economy? In
Search of a Regional Credit Channel,” Forthcoming in International
Macroeconomics, G. Mess and E. Wincoop, eds., (Cambridge University Press,
1999).
Peek, Joseph and Eric Rosengren (2000), “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese Bank
Crisis on the United States,” American Economic Review (March), 30-45.
Ramey, Valerie A., and Daniel J. Vine, 2001, “Tracking Sources of the Decline in GDP
Volatility: An Analysis of the Automobile Industry,” mimeo, December 28, 2001.
Spong, Kenneth (2000). Banking Regulation: Its Purposes, Implementation, and Effects. Federal
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City: MO.
Stock, James and Mark W. Watson, 2002, “Has the Business Cycle Changed and Why?” mimeo,
August 2002.

Stockman, A., and L. Tesar, “Tastes and Technology in a Two-Country Model of the
Business Cycle: Explaining International Comovements,” American Economic
Review, LXXXV (1995), 168-185.
U.S. Department of Transportation, Bureau of Transportation Statistics, 1993
Census of Transportation, Communications, and Utilities, Commodity Flow
Survey, Washington, D.C.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census, 1977 Census of Transportation:
1977 Commodity Transportation Survey Summary, Washington D.C.
Williamson, S., “Bank Failures, Financial Restrictions, and Aggregate Fluctuations:
Canada and the United States, 1870-1913,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
Quarterly Review, XIII (1989), 20-40.
Williamson, S., “Restrictions on Financial Intermediaries and Implications for Aggregate
Fluctuations: Canada and the United States 1870-1913,” in NBER
Macroeconomics Annual: 1989, O. Blanchard and S. Fischer, eds. (Cambridge,
Mass. And London: MIT Press, 1989).

27

Appendix: Comparative statics in the HT Model with unit and interstate
banking
Equilibrium with unit banking

With unit banking and assuming γ exogenous, equilibrium on the uninformed
capital market in state 1 obtains when
pH ( Kf1 + Km1 + Ku1u )(R − (b + c) / ∆p ) = γ ⋅ Ku1u .

(1a)

Solving this equation, we obtain the equilibrium quantity of uninformed capital
attracted by firms in state 1
Ku1u =

(2a)

p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )( Kf1 + Km1 )
.
p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ

Equilibrium in state 2 can be defined in a similar way.
Equilibrium with interstate banking

Interstate banking changes the equilibrium in the following way. Assuming
capital can move freely across states, the shares π 1 and (1- π 1 ) of aggregate informed
capital Km1+Km2 invested in each state adjust endogenously to equalize the return on
informed capital across states. When the share of informed capital invested in each state
is endogenous, equilibrium in the uninformed capital market under interstate banking is
defined by
(3a)

p H (Kf1 + π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) + Ku1i )(R − (b + c ) / ∆p ) = γ ⋅ Ku1i

(4a)

p H (Kf 2 + (1 − π 1 )( Km1 + Km2 ) + Ku2i )(R − (b + c ) / ∆p ) = γ ⋅ Ku 2i .

The equilibrium rate of return on the bank capital market is:

28

β = p H ⋅ c ⋅ K1 / (∆p ⋅ π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) ) = p H ⋅ c ⋅ K 2 / (∆p(1 − π 1 )( Km1 + Km2 ) ) .

(5a)

With K1 = Kf1 + π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) + Ku1i and K 2 = Kf 2 + (1 − π 1 )( Km1 + Km2 ) + Ku2i
Solving the system of equations defined by (3a)-(5a), we obtain the equilibrium
quantities attracted by firms in each state and the share of informed capital invested in
each state:
(6a)

Ku1i =

p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )( Kf1 + Kf 2 + Km1 + Km2 ) Kf1
( p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ )( Kf1 + Kf 2 )

(7a)

Ku2i =

p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )( Kf1 + Kf 2 + Km1 + Km2 ) Kf 2
( p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ )( Kf1 + Kf 2 )

(8a)

π1 =

Kf1
Kf1 + Kf 2

Comparative statics

To get the intuition for proposition 1 and 2, we compare the equilibrium condition for
unit banking (1a) and for interstate banking in state 1 (3a), after substitution of π 1 by its
reduced-form solution in (8a). The equilibrium conditions for the two regimes are plotted
in figure 1.
Let’s first consider the bank capital crunch. With unit banking, the reduction in the
pledgeable income is proportional to the reduction of Km1 . With interstate banking, by
contrast, the reduction in the pledgeable income is less than proportional to the reduction
of Km1 , since π 1 is smaller than unity. Graphically, this implies a smaller reduction of
the intercept of the curve representing the pledgeable income. Because the pledgeable
income decreases less with interstate banking following a bank capital crunch, we also
have a smaller reduction in the amount of uninformed capital that can be attracted by
firms.

29

A similar mechanism is at work for the collateral squeeze. With unit banking, the
reduction in pledgeable income is proportional to the reduction of Kf1 . With interstate
banking, by contrast, the reduction in pledgeable income is more than proportional to the
reduction of Kf1 , because the share of informed capital π 1 invested in state 1 – which
depends on the amount of capital available in the two states – also decreases following a
decrease of Kf1 . Graphically, this implies a larger reduction of the intercept of the curve
representing the pledgeable income. Because the pledgeable income decreases more with
interstate banking following a collateral squeeze, we also have a larger reduction in the
amount of uninformed capital that can be attracted by firms.
Capital crunch: proof of proposition 1

For the unit banking case, the derivative of Ku1 with respect to Km1 is
Impact on the availability of uninformed capital
For the unit banking case, the derivative of Ku1 with respect to Km1 is
∂Ku1u
p H ( − b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )
=
∂Km1 p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ
∂Ku1u ∂Km1 is positive. The numerator is positive because the positiveness of the
payment promised to uninformed investors, Rm = K ( R − (b + c) / ∆p ) > 0 , implies
p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p ) > 0 . The denominator is also positive, because the return on
uninformed capital γ has to be larger than the pledgeable expected income
pH ( R − (b + c ) / ∆p ) to have an interior solution for Ku1 (see HT, p. 682). For the
interstate banking case, the derivative of Ku1 with respect to Km1 is
∂Ku1i
pH ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )
=
∂Km1 2( p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ )
under the above mentioned symmetry conditions.

30

∂Ku1u ∂Km1 is twice as large as ∂Ku1i ∂Km1 .■
Impact on the availability of informed capital
For the unit banking case, the derivative of Km1 with respect to itself is equal to unity.
For the interstate banking case, the quantity of informed capital attracted by firms in state
1 is equal to π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) with π 1 =

Kf1
. The derivative of this quantity with
Kf1 + Kf 2

respect to Km1 is
∂π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) 1
=
2
∂Km1

under the above mentioned symmetry conditions.
∂π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) / ∂Km1 is smaller than unity. ■

Collateral squeeze: proof of proposition 2

Impact on the availability of uninformed capital
For the unit banking case, the derivative of Ku1 with respect to Kf 1 is
∂Ku1u
p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )
=
.
∂Kf1
p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ
∂Ku1u ∂Kf 1 is positive.
For the interstate banking case, the derivative of Ku1 with respect to Kf 1 is equal to
∂Ku1i p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p )( 2 Kf1 + Km1 )
=
∂Kf1 2 Kf1 ( p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ )

31

under the symmetry conditions Kf 1 = Kf 2 and Km1 = Km2 at initial values. ∂Ku1i ∂Kf 1
is positive.
The difference between the two derivatives is
∂Ku2i ∂Ku2u
p H ( −b − c + R ⋅ ∆p ) Km1
=
−
∂Kf1 ∂Kf1 2 Kf1 ( p H (b + c − R ⋅ ∆p ) + ∆p ⋅ γ )
∂Ku 2i ∂Kf 1 − ∂Ku 2u ∂Kf 1 is positive. ■
Impact on the availability of uninformed capital
For the unit banking case, the derivative of Km1 with respect to Kf1 is equal to zero,
since Km1 is independent of Kf1 .
For the interstate banking case, the quantity of informed capital attracted by firms in state
1 is equal to π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) with π 1 =

Kf1
. The derivative of this quantity with
Kf1 + Kf 2

respect to Kf1 is
∂π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) Km1
=
∂Kf1
2 Kf1

under the above mentioned symmetry conditions.
∂π 1 ( Km1 + Km2 ) / ∂Km1 is larger than zero. ■

32

Table 1
State-Specific Business Volatility Has Fallen as Integration Has Increased
We decompose employment growth and personal income growth, for which we have a longer time series,
in state j in year t as follows:

Yj,t=aj+bt+ej,t
Where aj is the state-specific average growth rate over the period; bt is the aggregate shock to growth at
time t; ej,t is the time t shock to growth that is specific to circumstances in state j. We estimate these
regressions separately over 5 non-overlapping periods (i.e. the state fixed effect is allowed to be different
over each of the 5 periods).
Panel A: Employment Growth

Period
1977-1981
1982-1985
1986-1989
1990-1993
1994-1997

Pre-Interstate Banking
Transition
Transition
Transition
Post-Interstate Banking

Root MSE Of
State-Specific
Shock to
Employment
Growth (ej,t)
2.4%
2.2%
1.9%
1.6%
1.1%

Average Bank
Integration
14%
26%
46%
53%
59%

Root MSE Of
State-Specific
Shock to Personal
Income Growth
(ej,t)
3.5%
2.0%
3.9%
3.0%
2.0%
1.9%
1.3%
1.5%
1.0%

Average Bank
Integration
Low*
Low
Low
14%
26%
46%
53%
59%
High*

Panel B: Personal Income Growth

Period

1962-1966
Pre-Interstate Banking
1967-1971
Pre-Interstate Banking
1972-1976
Pre-Interstate Banking
1977-1981
Pre-Interstate Banking
1982-1985
Transition
1986-1989
Transition
1990-1993
Transition
1994-1997
Post-Interstate Banking
1998-2000
Post-Interstate Banking
*Integration equals the share of banking assets in a state owned by a multi-state bank holding company.

We do not have the data to construct this integration measure before 1976 or after 1994. (The figure for the
1994-1997 period is the average for 1994.) Note that interstate integration continued after 1994 due to
cross-state consolidation such as the merger of Bank of America (a west coast bank holding company) and
NationsBank (an southeast bank holding company) in 1998. We cannot construct our measure of
integration after 1994 because bank holding companies began to consolidate their holding of bank assets
across state lines in 1995. We believe that the integration figure would be higher than 59% during the last
years in this table, however.

33

Table 2
Bank Integration, Business Volatility and State Labor Share: Summary Statistics
Statistics calculated using state-year observations. Integration is the share of bank assets in each state held
by banks with offices out of the state. Growth is the annual growth in employment or small firm
employment, where a firm is defined as small if it has fewer than 20 employees. Volatility is based on the
deviation in the annual growth of total employment or small firm employment (firms with fewer than 20
employees) from state and national means. To construct this deviation for small firms, we also control for
employment growth at large firms (firms with more than 250 employees).
Standard
N
Mean
Deviation
931
0.34
0.28
A. Integration
B. Employment
Employment Growth
Squared Deviation from Expected Growth
Log of Squared Deviation from Expected Growth
Absolute Value of Deviation from Expected Growth

931
931
931
931

0.023
0.0003
-9.66
0.013

0.023
0.0007
2.40
0.012

C. Small-Firm Employment (< 20 Employees)
Employment Growth
Squared Deviation from Expected Growth
Log of Squared Deviation from Expected Growth
Absolute Value of Deviation from Expected Growth

823
823
823
823

0.023
0.0004
-9.58
0.014

0.026
0.0008
2.46
0.013

D. Labor Shares
Mining
Construction
Manufacturing
Transportation
Trade
Finance
Services
Government
Labor Share HHI (Sum of Squared Shares)

870
870
870
870
870
870
870
870
870

0.013
0.048
0.194
0.055
0.229
0.054
0.221
0.188
0.203

0.018
0.014
0.112
0.012
0.038
0.013
0.060
0.048
0.058

34

Table 3
Volatility of State Employment Growth Falls as Bank Integration Increases
Regressions are based on a panel of state-year observations. Integration is the share of bank assets in each
state held by banks with offices out of the state. Growth is the annual growth in employment. Volatility is
based on the deviation in the annual growth of total employment from state and national means.
Coefficients estimated with state-year observations over 1976-94 (standard errors in parenthesis). All
models include state and year fixed effects.
Fixed Effects Regressions
IV Regressions

Dependent
Variable:

Integration

Labor Shares:
Mining

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.0006**
(0.0002)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-1.44**
(0.65)

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.013**
(0.003)

0.002
(0.004)
0.012**
(0.003)
-0.008**
(0.004)
-0.012
(0.010)
-0.009
(0.005)
-0.015
(0.010)
0.001
(0.004)

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.002**
(0.0005)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-1.90
(1.84)

30.7*
0.13*
0.010*
32.8*
(17.1)
(0.08)
(0.005)
(18.9)
Construction
22.8*
0.19**
0.018**
24.6*
(12.7)
(0.06)
(0.004)
(14.5)
Manufacturing
-23.8*
-0.16**
-0.002
-22.3
(13.4)
(0.06)
(0.004)
(14.6)
13.0
-0.13
-0.003
15.6
Transportation
(38.7)
(0.18)
(0.011)
(39.9)
Trade
-19.9
-0.13
0.008
-15.3
(20.6)
(0.10)
(0.008)
(27.0)
Finance
-35.8
-0.26
-0.019*
-36.9
(36.1)
(0.17)
(0.010)
(36.4)
Services
-16.6
-0.06
0.010*
-14.1
(17.0)
(0.08)
(0.005)
(19.6)
Government
------------------Omitted Category----------------------Labor Share
-0.002
27.8
0.08
-0.002
27.7
HHI
(0.005)
(18.7)
(0.09)
(0.005)
(18.7)
N
870
870
870
870
870
R2
0.1093
0.0874
0.1339
0.1179
0.0831
*significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level

35

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.036**
(0.009)

0.24**
(0.09)
0.28**
(0.07)
-0.09
(0.07)
0.01
(0.20)
0.11
(0.13)
-0.32*
(0.18)
0.07
(0.10)
0.08
(0.09)
870
0.1328

Table 4
Small Firm Employment Growth Volatility Declines As Bank Integration Increases
Regressions are based on a panel of state-year observations. Integration is the share of bank assets in each
state held by banks with offices out of the state. Growth is the annual growth in employment at small
establishments, defined as establishments with fewer than 20 employees. Volatility is based on the
deviation in the annual growth of total employment from state and national means; in addition, we control
for growth at large establishments (defined as those with more than 250 employees). Coefficients
estimated with state-year observations over 1976-94 (standard errors in parenthesis). All models include
state and year fixed effects.
Fixed Effects Regressions
IV Regressions

Dependent
Variable:

Integration

Labor Shares:
Mining

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.0003
(0.0002)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-1.55**
(0.71)

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.009**
(0.004)

-0.018**
(0.006)
0.025**
(0.005)
-0.016**
(0.005)
-0.033**
(0.008)
-0.014
(0.013)
-0.014
(0.013)
-0.002
(0.006)

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.003**
(0.0007)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-4.66**
(2.19)

29.3
-0.12
-0.008
43.5*
(20.8)
(0.10)
(0.008)
(23.1)
42.8**
0.33**
0.034**
55.4**
Construction
(17.2)
(0.09)
(0.006)
(19.3)
Manufacturing
-7.1
-0.20**
-0.007
4.7
(16.4)
(0.08)
(0.006)
(18.3)
Transportation
28.3
-0.25
-0.016
52.0
(45.1)
(0.22)
(0.016)
(48.3)
Trade
-3.5
-0.14
0.012
32.2
(24.9)
(0.12)
(0.011)
(34.6)
Finance
39.9
-0.09
-0.023
28.2
(41.7)
(0.10)
(0.014)
(43.0)
Services
-11.4
-0.08
0.011
7.4
(21.1)
(0.10)
(0.008)
(25.9)
Government
------------------Omitted Category----------------------Labor Share
0.002
25.7
0.07
0.001
22.9
HHI
(0.008)
(25.5)
(0.13)
(0.008)
(25.9)
N
778
778
778
778
778
R2
0.1765
0.1012
0.1731
0.1903
0.1008
*significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level

36

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.040**
(0.011)

0.02
(0.12)
0.45**
(0.10)
-0.08
(0.09)
-0.01
(0.25)
0.21
(0.18)
-0.20
(0.22)
0.11
(0.13)
0.04
(0.13)
778
0.1802

Table 5, Panel A
Employment Growth Volatility Falls with Banking Integration,
Particularly in States with Highly Concentrated Economies
Regressions are based on a panel of state-year observations. Integration is the share of bank assets in each
state held by banks with offices out of the state. Growth is the annual growth in employment. Volatility is
based on the deviation in the annual growth of total employment from state and national means.
Coefficients estimated with state-year observations over 1976-94 (standard errors in parenthesis). All
models include state and year fixed effects.
Fixed Effects Regressions
IV Regressions

Dependent
Variable:

Integration
Integration *
Labor Share
HHI
Labor Shares:
Mining

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
0.0012
(0.0005)
-0.008**
(0.002)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
0.87
(1.99)
-11.24
(9.13)

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
0.016*
(0.009)
-0.137**
(0.043)

-0.001
(0.005)
0.010**
(0.003)
-0.010**
(0.004)
-0.013
(0.010)
-0.013**
(0.005)
-0.014
(0.009)
-0.006
(0.005)

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.0004
(0.0009)
-0.009**
(0.004)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
3.20
(1.84)
-25.01*
(14.78)

27.8
0.10
0.010*
31.8*
(17.2)
(0.08)
(0.005)
(18.8)
Construction
21.3*
0.17**
0.017**
22.2
(12.7)
(0.06)
(0.004)
(14.6)
Manufacturing
-26.2*
-0.19**
-0.003
-24.2*
(13.6)
(0.06)
(0.004)
(14.6)
Transportation
11.3
-0.15
-0.005
9.0
(38.7)
(0.18)
(0.010)
(40.1)
Trade
-25.1
-0.20*
0.005
-23.9
(21.0)
(0.10)
(0.007)
(27.5)
Finance
-34.2
-0.24
-0.019**
-37.3
(36.1)
(0.17)
(0.010)
(36.4)
Services
-25.6
-0.17*
0.007
-21.7
(18.5)
(0.09)
(0.005)
(20.1)
Government
------------------Omitted Category----------------------Labor Share
0.001
30.9
0.12
-0.002
27.2
HHI
(0.005)
(18.9)
(0.09)
(0.005)
(18.7)
N
870
870
870
870
870
R2
0.1231
0.0891
0.1448
0.1263
0.0862
*significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level

37

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
0.003
(0.016)
-0.192**
(0.070)

0.23**
(0.09)
0.26**
(0.07)
-0.10
(0.07)
-0.05
(0.19)
0.04
(0.13)
-0.32*
(0.17)
0.01
(0.09)
0.08
(0.09)
870
0.1424

Table 5, Panel B
Employment Growth Volatility Falls with Banking Integration,
Particularly in Small States
Regressions are based on a panel of state-year observations. Integration is the share of bank assets in each
state held by banks with offices out of the state. Growth is the annual growth in employment. Volatility is
based on the deviation in the annual growth of total employment from state and national means.
Coefficients estimated with state-year observations over 1976-94 (standard errors in parenthesis). All
models include state and year fixed effects and are estimated with IV.
Small States
Large States
(1975 Income < Median)
(1975 Income >= Median)

Dependent
Variable:

Integration

Labor Shares:
Mining

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.0021**
(0.0007)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-1.95
(2.00)

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.032**
(0.011)

0.007
(0.006)
0.017**
(0.005)
-0.013**
(0.006)
-0.026
(0.017)
-0.012
(0.010)
-0.027*
(0.016)
0.005
(0.007)

Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.0009
(0.0007)

Log of
Squared
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
2.39
(4.21)

19.83
0.191*
0.018*
18.93
(19.59)
(0.107)
(0.010)
(60.56)
10.56
0.228**
-0.005
10.85
Construction
(15.38)
(0.084)
(0.005)
(32.02)
Manufacturing
-51.33**
-0.295**
0.006
-17.10
(17.36)
(0.095)
(0.007)
(46.56)
Transportation
-102.08**
-0.662**
0.039**
288.33**
(48.55)
(0.265)
(0.012)
(77.87)
Trade
-63.73**
-0.302*
0.027*
13.26
(28.63)
(0.156)
(0.014)
(88.16)
Finance
-52.50
-0.474*
0.042**
112.85
(45.02)
(0.246)
(0.011)
(70.77)
Services
-27.99
-0.019
-0.005
-101.56
(19.50)
(0.107)
(0.012)
(75.14)
Government
------------------Omitted Category----------------------Labor Share
0.001
24.01
0.126
0.015
158.02**
HHI
(0.007)
(20.47)
(0.111)
(0.010)
(60.781)
N
432
432
432
438
438
R2
0.1134
0.1579
0.1812
0.1995
0.0795
*significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level

38

Absolute
Value of
Deviation
from
Expected
Growth
-0.009
(0.016)

0.296
(0.233)
-0.054
(0.123)
0.030
(0.180)
1.270**
(0.300)
0.415
(0.339)
0.888**
(0.272)
-0.334
(0.290)
0.555**
(0.233)
438
0.2071

Table 6
How Integration affects the Correlation between Employment, Loan Growth and Changes in Bank
Capital and Housing Prices
Reported are fixed effects regression coefficients and standards errors (in parenthesis) estimated for panel
of 48 states and D.C. The dependent variable and associated estimation periods are indicated at the top of
each column. Bank capital growth is the annual growth rate of total capital held by all banks headquartered
in each state. Growth in housing prices is the ratio of Freddic Mac’s index of housing prices in the
state/year (fourth quarter) to that housing price index in the preceding year. Integration is the share of bank
assets in each state held by banks with offices out of the state. All regressions include state and year fixed
effects (not reported).
Panel A: Employment Growth
Dependent variables:

Bank Capital Growth

Employment
growth

Small-firm
employment growth

Bank Capital Growth x
Integration

0.136**
(0.014)
0.047**
(0.011)
0.101**
(0.002)
-0.167**
(0.021)

0.177**
(0.015)
0.046**
(0.012)
0.126**
(0.035)
-0.213**
(0.026)

Growth in Housing Prices x
Integration

0.079**
(0.026)

0.107**
(0.029)

R2
N

0.601
882

0.665
823

Growth in Housing Price
Integration

Panel B: Loan Growth
Dependent variables:

Bank Capital Growth

Growth in Business Loans
(C&I+Commercial Real
Estate)

Total Loan Growth

Bank Capital Growth x
Integration

0.672**
(0.076)
0.142**
(0.061)
-0.094
(0.181)
-0.521**
(0.116)

0.649**
(0.070)
0.127**
(0.056)
-0.141
(0.166)
-0.252**
(0.106)

Growth in Housing Prices x
Integration

0.647**
(0.143)

0.390**
(0.131)

R2
N

0.508
882

0.482
882

Growth in Housing Prices
Integration

*significant at 10% level. ** significant at 5% level

39

40

Chart 1: Cross-State Banking Waves
% o f o ut-o f-state b ank as sets (median fo r year)
.7
.6

integration

.5
.4
.3
.2
.1
0
1975 1977 1979 1981 1983 1985 1987 1989 1991 1993 1995 1997
year

Interstate banking agreements occurred in waves between 1982 and 1993. States
were grouped by the year that they entered into an agreement. Plotted for each wave
is the median share of out-of-state banking assets for states in each wave.
ο: 1982-1984 wave
∆: 1985-1987 wave
: 1988-1990 wave
_: 1991-1993 wave

41

Chart 2:
The change in bank integration in each state between 1977 and 1993 is not correlated
with the change in out-of-state shipments. Note: “Ex-state shipping” = out-of-state
shipments/total shipments. Source: Department of Commerce (1977) and Department of
Transportation (1993) .

change in bank integration ratio: 1993 - 1977

0.9
.9

.6

.3

0
-.05
0.0
-.4

-.3

-.2

-.1

-0.4

change in ex-state shipping ratio: 1993 - 1977
change in ex-state shipping ratio: 1993 - 1977

42

0

0.0
9

