NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

FOREIGN BANK ENTRY AND
BUSINESS VOLATILITY:
EVIDENCE FROM U.S. STATES
AND OTHER COUNTRIES
Donald P. Morgan
Philip E. Strahan
Working Paper 9710
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9710
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003

The opinions expressed in this paper represent the authors’ views and do not necessarily reflect the official
position of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York or the Federal Reserve Board. We thank our discussant,
Norman Loayza, for very helpful comments.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Donald P. Morgan and Philip E. Strahan. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©notice, is
given to the source.

Foreign Bank Entry and Business Volatility: Evidence from U.S. States and Other Countries
Donald P. Morgan and Philip E. Strahan
NBER Working Paper No. 9710
May 2003
JEL No. G2
ABSTRACT
Theory suggests that bank integration (financial integration generally) can magnify or dampen the
business cycles, depending on the importance of shocks to firm collateral versus shocks to the
banking sector. In this paper, we show empirically that bank integration across U.S. states over the
late 1970s and 1980 dampened economic volatility within states. Internationally, however, we find
that foreign bank integration, which advanced widely during the 1990s, has been either unrelated
to volatility of firm investment spending or positively related to that volatility. The results suggest
the possibility that business spending may become more volatile as countries open their banking
sectors to foreign entry.
Donald Morgan
Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of New York
33 Liberty Street
New York, NY 10045
don.morgan@ny.frb.org
Philip Strahan
Carroll School of Management
Boston College
140 Commonwealth Avenue
Chestnut Hill, MA 02467
and NBER
philip.strahan@bc.edu

I. Introduction
"Foreign banker" once had a nasty ring to it, like "carpetbagger" or "loan shark."1
In the harshest terms, foreign banks were seen as parasites out to drain financial capital
from their hosts. In nationalization campaigns, banks were often the first targets,
especially when foreign owned. Even after a decade of privatization, governments still
own a surprisingly large share of banks assets (La Port et al. 2000). Bank privatization
has been held up, in part, by fear of foreign bankers who, in many cases, were the only,
or most likely, buyers.
In the U.S., banks from other states were viewed as "foreign," and until the mid1970s, most states strictly forbid entry by banks from other states. Indeed, even banks
from other cities within a state were often blocked from opening branches in other cities
in the state. Loosely speaking, the hometown bank was local, and banks from anywhere
else were foreign.
Times have changed. In the U.S., barriers to entry by out-of-state banks were
gradually lowered across the states, and the biggest U.S. banks now operate more or less
nationally, with banks or branches in many states. Nations around the world have also
lowered barriers to foreign bank ownership, and foreign banks have entered aggressively.
Foreign bank ownership in Latin America has increased dramatically in the second half
of the 1990s with aggressive acquisitions by Spanish banks in particular. In Chile, the
foreign bank share of Chilean bank assets in increased from less than 20 percent in 1994
to more than 50 percent in 1999 (Clarke et al. 2001).

1

"Carpetbaggers" was a pejorative term for northerners who flocked to the south after the
Civil War in search of opportunity, financial or otherwise.
1

Generally speaking, the first-order effects of relaxed bank entry restrictions have
been favorable. Relaxed branching restrictions within states in the U.S. have been
associated with increased credit availability, enhanced bank efficiency, and faster
economic growth within states (Jayaratne and Strahan, 1996 and 1998). Internationally,
the benefits of foreign entry seem to depend on the level of development of the host
country, but at least for developing nations, foreign entrants tend to be more efficient than
incumbent banks, and the stiffer competition seems to improve overall bank efficiency
(Classens et al. 2000). Geert et al. (2001) find that broader financial liberalizations—
opening equity markets to foreign investors—is associated with faster economic growth.
Interest lately has turned to the second-order, or stability, effects of foreign bank
entry, especially in developing nations where recent crises have raised general concern
about financial sector stability, and specific concern about bank stability. In contrast to
the first order effects -- where one might expect mostly benefits from entry -- the stability
implications of increased entry are less obvious. Vague concerns of several sorts have
surfaced. Maybe fickle foreign banks "cut and run" at the first hint of trouble, whereas
local banks with long-term ties (or no place to run) may remain stalwart. Foreign
bankers may also expedite capital flight during crises. During the Asian crises,
depositors did shift funds from finance companies and small banks toward large banks,
especially foreign ones. What if foreign banks "cherry pick" the best borrowers, leaving
the local banks with the "lemons" and a risky overall portfolio? Evidence thus far
suggests these concerns are unfounded. Goldberg, Dages, and Kinney (2000) found that
lending by foreign banks in Argentina and Mexico during the 1994-95 crises grew faster
than did lending by domestic banks, contrary to the cut and run hypothesis. Looking

2

across a wider sample of countries, Levine (1999) finds that the foreign share of bank
assets is negatively correlated with the probability of crises.
Our paper investigates whether foreign bank entry is associated with more or less
economic volatility, as measured by year-to-year fluctuations in real GDP and
investment. Financial crises are the higher profile event, but business cycle fluctuations
are much higher frequency and may be an important underlying determinant of financial
instability. Moreover, our empirical strategy employs panel data, allowing us to absorb
unobserved heterogeneity across countries with fixed effects. We approach the topic
with mix of theory and evidence from both the U.S. states and countries. At the theory
level, we use the macro-banking model in Holmstrom and Tirole (1997). Morgan,
Strahan, and Rime (2002) use an extended (two-state) version of that model to think
about the implications of interstate banking within the U.S. on business volatility within
states. The main result is that integration (entry by out-of-state banks) is a two-edged
sword for economic volatility; integration tends to dampen the effect of bank capital
shocks on firm investment in a state, but it amplifies the impact of firm collateral shocks.
The net effect of integration on business volatility is therefore ambiguous. The empirical
effect, however, has been stabilizing in the United States. MSR find that volatility within
states falls substantially as integration with out-of-state banks increases.
Given the useful parallels between bank integration in the U.S. in the late 1970s
and 1980s, we first review the theory behind MSR. We then review and extend their
empirical findings for the U.S. states, showing that banking integration across states
reduced volatility by weakening the link between the health of local banks and the
economy. As we describe in Section III, the history of U.S. banking deregulation sets up

3

an almost ideal empirical laboratory for testing how banking integration affects the
economy because we can separate out the exogenous changes in bank ownership using
regulatory instruments. Section IV applies a similar set of tests to a panel of about 100
countries during the 1990s, but in the cross-country context regulatory changes are not
sufficiently common to allow us to identify the exogenous component of banking
integration. Instead, we address the endogeneity problem by constructing instruments
reflecting characteristics of groups of countries in the same region, with a common
language, or with a similar legal system. The resulting IV estimates allow us to avoid the
problem that foreign bank entry may reflect, rather than drive, changes in economic
performance. In contrast to the results for U.S. states, however, we find no evidence that
foreign entry has been stabilizing. If anything, the evidence points tentatively in the other
direction.
In our final set of tests, we show that the link between changes in the value of a
country’s traded equity – a proxy for the value of potential collateral – and its economy
becomes stronger with banking integration. Foreign bank entry makes economies more
unstable, perhaps, by amplifying the effects of wealth changes; this amplification does
not appear to be outweighed by more stable banking. This result contrasts with the U.S.
experience where dampening of bank capital shocks made integration stabilizing, and
suggests that the specific environment in which banking integration occurs may
determine its effects.

4

II. Foreign Banking and Economic Volatility
How are foreign banking and economic volatility related in theory?
Ambiguously, we think, at least if the insights from the interstate banking model in
Morgan, Strahan, and Rime (MSR 2002) apply internationally. MSR extend Holmstrom
and Tiroles’ (HT 1997) macro-banking model by adding another (physical) state, then
investigating how the impact of various shocks differs under unit banking regime, where
bank entry is forbidden, and interstate banking, where bank capital can flow freely
between states. The impact of bank capital shocks (on firm investment) is diminished
under interstate banking, but the impact of firm capital shocks is amplified. The net
effect, in theory, is ambiguous. We think the insights from that model help in the
international context so we review the basic HT model and the MSR extension below. At
the end of the section, we discuss the applicability of the model to the topic of
international bank integration.
The marginal effects arising from integration both have to do with how the
supply of uninformed capital responds to changes in the supply of informed (i.e. bank)
capital. The intuition is pretty simple. A banking firm operating in two states (One and
Two) can import capital from state One to state Two if another of its banks in Two has
good lending opportunities but no capital. The infusion of informed bank capital also
draws extra uninformed capital. That capital shifting immunizes firms in state Two from
bank capital shocks to some extent. Firms are more exposed to collateral shocks,
however. An interstate banking firm will shift lending to state One if firms in state Two
suffer collateral damage. The loss of informed bank capital also causes capital flight by
uninformed lenders, more so than in a unit banking arrangement. Hence, collateral
shocks get amplified.

5

The HT model
The HT model is an elegant synthesis of various strands of the macro and
intermediation literature. Banks, or intermediaries generally, matter because their
monitoring of firms’ activities reduces moral hazard--shirking, perquisite consumption-by firm owners. Knowing that intermediaries are monitoring the firms also increases
access to capital from uninformed savers. Bankers are prone to moral hazard as well;
they will shirk monitoring unless they have sufficient stake in the firm's outcome to
justify the monitoring costs. In the end, the level of firm investment spending on projects
with given fundamentals depends on the level of bank and firm capital. Negative shocks
to either kind of capital are contractionary, naturally, but the contractions are amplified
through their effects on the supply of uninformed capital. The reduction in capital that
can be invested in the firm by the bank and by the entrepreneur reduce the maximum
amount of future income that the firm can pledge to uninformed investors (without
distorting the firms’ incentives). The decrease in the pledgeable income reduces the
supply of uninformed capital available to the firm.
Interstate Banking
MSR extend the HT model by adding another (physical) state. With interstate
banking, we assumed that bank capital is completely mobile across states. With unit
banking, bank capital was completely immobile across states. Foreign entry, in other
words, was completely prohibited. Even if we relax this restriction, the results remained
similar as long as informed capital is relatively less mobile under unit banking. The
return on uninformed capital is exogenous and equal across states in either regime. That
made sense in the U.S., where savers had access to a national securities market even

6

under unit banking. That assumption is more arguable in the international context but we
stick with it for now. The key results from that extended model are stated and discussed
below.
Proposition 1: The negative impact of a bank capital crunch in state ‘A’ on the
amount of uninformed and informed capital invested in state ‘A’ is smaller with interstate
banking than with unit banking. A capital crunch in ‘A’, for instance, will attract bank
capital from state ‘B’, so firm investment in ‘A’ falls less than it would under unit
banking. Because firm investment falls less, the maximum income they can pledge to
informed investors falls by less (than under unit banking); hence there is a smaller
reduction in the amount of uninformed capital that firms in state ‘A’ can attract.
Proposition 2: The negative impact of a collateral squeeze on the amount of
uninformed and informed capital invested is larger under interstate banking than under
unit banking. With interstate banking, for example, the decreased return on bank capital
following a collateral squeeze causes bank capital to migrate from state ‘A’ (where the
initial downturn occurred) to state ‘B’ (which is integrated with ‘A’). The bank capital
flight from ‘A’ reduces investment by firms in ‘A’, which in turn reduces the maximum
pledgeable income firms can credibly promise to uninformed investors so the supply of
uninformed capital to firms in state ‘A’ falls. These amplifying effects are absent under
unit banking because bank capital is immobile across states under that regime.
In sum, cross-state banking amplifies the effects of local shocks to entrepreneurial
wealth because bank capital chases the highest return. Capital flows in when collateral is
high and out when it is low. Integration dampens the impact of variation in bank capital
supply. This source of instability becomes less important because entrepreneurs are less

7

dependent on local sources of funding in an integrated market since bank capital can be
imported from other states.
Applying HT Internationally
We think the intuition from the interstate banking model in MSR (2002) is helpful
in thinking about how international banking should affect volatility within nations. In
fact, the model may fit better internationally. The distinction between informed and
uninformed capital seems more germane with the distances involved in international
lending than with interstate lending in the U.S. The flights of uninformed capital in the
model may describe international capital flows in the 1980s and 1990s better than
interstate capital flow in the U.S. in the 1970s.
Eichengreen and Bordos' (2002) historical study of financial globalization has
"anecdata" consistent with the role of informed capital (bank capital) in allowing
leverage using uninformed capital. "That overseas investors appreciated … (this)
monitoring is evident in the willingness of Scottish savers to make deposit with British
branches of Australian banks, and in the willingness of British investors ….to place
deposits with Argentine banks (p. 9).” They also note the strict appetite for more
monitorable, collateralizable claims by foreign investors. Railways were a favorite, for
example, because investors (or their monitors) could easily verify how much track had
been laid, and once laid, the track was staked down.
III. Bank Integration and Business Volatility in U.S. States
The U.S. once had essentially 50 little banking systems, one per state. Twentyfive years after states began permitting entry by out-of-state banks, the U.S. banking
system is much more national. Entry by out-of-state banks is not exactly the same as

8

foreign bank entry, but they are not completely different either. The parallels are close
enough to revisit what MSR found in their U.S. study before turning to the international
data. To maintain the parallels, the U.S. regressions reported in this section are specified
as closely as possible to those estimated with international data. For the U.S., we still
find negative correlation between "out-of-state" bank share and within state business
volatility. Consistent with that result, and the model, we find as well that as bank
integration increases, the (positive) link between bank capital growth and business gets
weaker. For the U.S., we conclude that bank integration, and the resulting immunization
from bank capital shocks, has had a stabilizing effect on state business volatility.
A Brief History of Interstate Banking in the U.S.
The Bank Holding Company (BHC) Act of 1956 essentially gave states the right
to block entry by out-of-state banks or bank holding companies. States also had the right
to allow entry, but none did until Maine passed a law in 1978 inviting entry or
acquisitions by BHCs from other states so long as Maine banks were welcomed into the
other states. No states reciprocated until 1982, when Alaska, Massachusetts, and New
York passed similar laws.2 Other states followed suit, and by 1992, all but one state
(Hawaii) allowed reciprocal entry.3 This state level deregulation was codified at the
national level in 1994, with the Reigle-Neal Act. That act made interstate banking

2

As part of the Garn-St Germain Act, federal legislators amended in 1982 the Bank Holding Company Act
to allow failed banks and thrifts to be acquired by any bank holding company, regardless of state laws (see,
e.g., Kane (1996) and Kroszner and Strahan, 1999).
3
State-level deregulation of restrictions on branching also occurred widely during the second half of the
1970s and during all of the 1980s.

9

mandatory (i.e., states could no longer block entry), and made interstate banking optional
(according to state wishes).4
Because states did not deregulate all at once, and because the resulting entry
proceeded at different rates, integration happened in "waves" across states (Chart 1). The
differences across states and across time provide the cross-sectional and temporal
variation that we need to identify the effects of integration within states. The
deregulatory events make useful instruments to identify the exogenous component of
integration (since actual entry may be endogenous with respect to volatility).5
U.S. Data and Empirical Strategy
Our bank integration measure equals the share of total bank assets in a state that
are owned by out-of-state BHCs (i.e., BHCs that also own bank assets in other states or
countries). To take a simple example, if a state had one stand-alone bank and one
affiliated bank of equal size, bank integration for that state would equal ½. We compute
our integration variables using the Reports of Income and Condition (“Call Report”) filed
by U.S. banks. Our sample starts in 1976 and ends in 1994. 6
We measure business volatility using the year-to-year deviations in state i
employment growth around the expected growth for state i (over the 1976-94 period) in
year t. To estimate expected growth, we first regress employment growth on a set of time
fixed effects, a set of state fixed effects, an indicator equal to 1 after interstate
4

The Reigle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act permitted states to opt out of interstate
branching, but only Texas and Montana chose to do so. Other states, however, protected their banks by
forcing entrants to buy their way into the market.
5
While we focus here on interstate banking, Jayaratne and Strahan (1996) report that state-level growth
accelerated following branching deregulation; Jayaratne and Strahan (1998) show that branching
deregulation led to improved efficiency in banking.

10

deregulation, and our measure of state-level banking concentration (defined below).7 The
residual from this first-stage regression is our measure of the deviation from expected
growth for each state and year. We take the square or absolute value of this deviation as
our volatility measure.
The mean of our integration measure over all state-years was 0.34, rising from
under 0.1 in 1976 to about 0.6 by 1994 (Table 1). Employment grew 2.3 percent per year
on average over the sample of state-years. The squared deviation of employment growth
from its mean averaged 0.03 percent. The absolute value of deviations in employment
growth averaged 1.3 percent.
Other controls and Instruments
Though not an element of the model, we also use banking sector concentration in
our regressions. Bank level studies for the U.S. find bank risk taking tends to increase as
concentration (and the associated rents, or bank charter value) falls.8 Safer banks may
translate into safer, i.e., less volatile economies (albeit slower growing ones--Jayaratne
and Strahan 1996). Bank concentration will also likely affect the political game
determining the barriers to out-of-state (or foreign) banking. The rents and inefficiencies
associated with concentration will attract new entrants, but of course, the rents provide
incumbents with the incentives and funds to defend barriers.9 For the U.S., Kroszner and

6

The Riegle-Neal Interstate Banking and Branching Efficiency Act, passed that year, makes our
integration measure incalculable by allowing banks to consolidate their operations within a single bank.
Thus, we lose the ability to keep track of bank assets by state and year after 1994.
7
Business investment would be preferable (in terms of the model), but state-level investment data are not
available for the U.S. states (although we will have such data with the international data). Our
employment series is the best proxy for overall state economic activity, however.
8
On the relationship between charter value and risk, see Keeley (1990), Demsetz, Saidenberg and Strahan
(1996), Hellman, Murdock and Stiglitz, (2000), and Bergstresser (2001).
9
This may explain why interstate deregulation began in a reciprocal manner: State A would open its
borders to State B only if State B reciprocated.

11

Strahan (1999) found that states with more concentrated banking sectors were faster to
lower barriers to in-state banks that simply wanted to branch into other cities. Since
concentration may matter directly for volatility, and indirectly (through its effect on
deregulation), we use it both as an instrument and as a control (in some cases).
Concentration is measured by the share of assets held by the largest three banks (Table
1).
The rate of integration could depend, in part, on volatility. For example, banks
may be more likely to enter a state after a sharp downturns (when volatility is high) to
buy up bank assets cheaply. To exclude this endogenous element of integration, we use
two instruments based on regulatory changes: 1) an indicator variable for whether or not
a state had passed an interstate banking agreement with other states and 2) a continuous
variable equal to zero before interstate banking, and equal to the log of the number of
years that have elapsed since a state entered an interstate banking arrangement with other
states. Our third (potential) instrument is banking concentration in each state, although
we use that variable selectively (see Table notes).10 All the specifications include year
dummy variables and state dummies.
Results
All of coefficients on integration are negative and statistically significant (Table
2). The IV coefficient estimates are much larger than the OLS estimates, implying that
the stabilizing influence of integration is larger (if less precisely estimated) when we
parcel out the endogenous component of integration.11 The magnitudes are economically

10

In the first stage models, both regulatory instruments have very strong explanatory power. These
regressions are available on request.
11
One might object that interstate banking deregulation itself may be determined, in part, by the volatility
of a state’s business cycle. For example, perhaps political pressure for opening a state’s banking system to

12

important. For example, between 1976 and 1994, the average share of a state’s assets
held by multi-state bank holding companies rose by about 0.5. According to our
regression coefficients in the OLS model, the 0.5 increase in integration across states was
associated with 0.4 percentage point decline in business volatility (Table 2, Column 5).
The exogenous component of the increase in integration – that is, the increase stemming
from deregulation – was about 0.25 over the sample.12 Even with this smaller measure,
we would still conclude that integration led to a 0.5 percentage point decline in volatility,
a large drop relative to the unconditional mean for business volatility of 1.3 percent.
Our model suggests that the stabilizing effect of integration arise because of better
diversification against bank capital shocks. If capital falls in state ‘A’, affiliated banks in
state ‘B’ will be happy to supply more to take advantage of good investment
opportunities. Thus, we should observe weaker link between bank capital growth and
business growth within a state as integration increases, and we do (Table 3). Bank capital
and state employment growth are positively correlated, but the correlation weakens as
integration increases. If we take the case of the level of integration at the beginning of our
sample (0.1), the coefficients suggest that a one standard deviation increase in bank
capital growth (0.084) would be associated with an increase in employment growth of 1.3
percent. In contrast, using the mean level of integration at the end of our sample (0.6), a

out-of-state competition intensifies during economic downturns (when volatility is high). To rule out the
possibility that endogenous deregulation drives our IV results, we have also estimated the model after
dropping the 3 years just prior to deregulation as well as the year of deregulation itself. In these
specifications, the coefficient increases in magnitude (i.e. becomes more negative), and its statistical
significance increases across all three measures of volatility.
12
We report a Hausman specification test in Table 2 comparing the OLS and IV models. This test fails to
reject that hypothesis that the two models differ, although with the large number of fixed effects the test has
low power.

13

standard deviation increase in capital would be associated with an increase in
employment of just 0.4 percent.13
Thinking Globally
Our analysis of U.S. data suggests quite strongly that bank integration across
states has had a stabilizing influence on economic activity within states. The regulatory
history of state-level deregulation over a relatively long period offered an almost ideal
way to explore integration’s effects on business cycles because we could sort out
integration stemming from endogenous forces – such as banks’ appetite to enter new
states when the incumbent banks are weak – from integration stemming from policy
changes. We also have accurate and consistent measures of both state-level economic
activity and banking integration over a long span of time. This long, balanced panel lets
us absorb all sorts of confounding variables by including year and state fixed effects.
Even without these fixed effects, of course, confounding omitted variables are much less
of a problem when comparing New York and New Mexico than it would be in comparing
Chile and China. Cross-country studies also suffer from measurement problems for
observable variables, particularly the measure of integration (described below).
But how general are the state-level results? Do the good experiences of U.S.
states translate naturally into good experiences when emerging economies open their
markets to foreign banks? Clearly the environments differ substantially. For example,
the U.S. has a well-developed financial market with a legal system that makes contract
writing and enforcement relatively easy. In emerging economies, explicit contracting is
13

Peek and Rosengren (2000) find that when Japanese banks faced financial difficulties in the 1990s, they
reduced their lending in California, leading to a decline in credit availability there. This finding is
consistent with our results, although it emphasizes the downside of integration. While integration insulates

14

more difficult. Collateral shocks therefore may matter more outside the U.S. where
weaker contract enforcement makes lenders insist on higher collateral requirements or,
more generally, greater levels of entrepreneurial equity holding per dollar lent
(Eichengreen and Bordo, 2002).
The country experience with foreign bank entry also offers some data advantages
over the state-level experience. First, we can measure both GDP growth and investment
growth at the country level, rather than having to rely on employment growth. We also
have better ability to sort out the effects of different shocks. As the MSR model shows,
the effects of banking integration depend on the relative importance of different kinds of
financial shocks. In the U.S. states, we showed that the impact of changes local bank
capital declined as states integrated with the rest of the country, but we could not control
for shocks to collateral because measures of these shocks are not available at the state
level. This omission is potentially serious because the model predicts that integration
will amplify, rather than dampen, the effects of collateral shocks. Luckily, when looking
across countries there is at least the possibility of sorting out these two kinds of shocks
because we can observe changes in the market value of all traded equity in the stock
market (a proxy for changes in the value of collateral or entrepreneurial wealth), and, at
the same time, we can measure change in the health (capital) of the country’s banking
system.
IV. International Evidence
We now consider how banking integration affects business cycles using countries
rather than states. We use similar empirical specification, although we do exploit data

an economy from shocks to its own banks, it simultaneously exposes an economy to banking shocks from
the outside.

15

advantages where they exist. The challenges with international data involve 1) greater
cross-country heterogeneity, 2) measuring integration accurately, and 3) potential
endogeneity between business volatility and foreign bank entry.
Cross-country Heterogeneity
Our panel data allow us to eliminate much of the cross-country heterogeneity with
country-level fixed effects. That is a distinct advantage of our approach over recent
papers relating predetermined measure of financial structure and regulation to subsequent
economic growth and stability ( Demirguc-Kunt et al. 2002, Levine 1999, Claessens et al.
2001). We were able to construct a wide, though unbalanced, panel for nearly 100
countries, although the time period that we can look at, from 1990 to1997, is quite short
(see Table 4). Many foreign countries began opening their markets to foreign banks
during this period, however, so we do have enough time series variation within countries
to include a country fixed effects.
Measuring Banking Integration and Volatility
We measure integration by the share of bank assets in a country held by banks
with at least 50% foreign-bank ownership. The series was constructed by Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (2000) using the IBCA Bankscope database. In contrast to
our state measure of integration, foreign-bank ownership share does not fully capture the
integration process because it does not include the effects of a country’s banks reaching
out into new markets. Our measure of state-level integration did incorporate all
ownership ties between banks. This was possible with U.S. data because all banks during
our sample operated within a single state, and, for each bank we could observe the
identity of the banking company controlling it. Thus, we were able to compute the share

16

of banks in a state controlled by a bank holding company with assets outside the state. In
contrast, the best measure of foreign integration -- foreign ownership of a country’s banks
-- does not incorporate integration in which banks headquartered in one country own
substantial bank assets outside that country. So, for example, a country like Spain, with it
largest banks holding significant assets in Latin America, does not appear to be well
integrated with the rest of the world. Despite this limitation, foreign ownership is the
best measure we have, and it probably represents the bulk of integration for smaller, and
less developed countries that do not have banks large enough to expand internationally.14
Table 5 reports the foreign share data by year and region. The data suggest large
increases in banking integration in Asia, Eastern Europe, and the non-industrialized
portion of the Western Hemisphere (Table 5). In contrast, Africa and Middle Eastern
countries experienced little trend in integration during the 1990s.
We measure country volatility on a yearly basis the same as for the U.S. states,
except that we consider both overall volatility in real GDP growth and the volatility in
growth of real investment spending. For each series, we first construct a measure of
unexpected growth by regressing GDP growth (investment growth) on a set of time fixed
effects, a set of country fixed effects, our measure of banking integration, and the other
control variables (described below). As before, volatility equals the square or absolute
value of the residuals from this first-stage growth regression for each country and year.
Note that by controlling for banking integration in the first-stage regression, we implicitly
allow the growth rate to increase (or decrease) as a country opens itself up to foreign

14

To partially account for this measurement issue, we have also estimated our models without the
Industrial Countries listed in Table 4. We find similar results to those reported in Table 7 below.

17

bank entry. Thus, there is no chance that we will confuse an accelerated growth rates
following banking integration with an increase in GDP volatility.15
Table 6 reports the summary statistics for our integration and volatility measures
across countries and time. For banking integration, the average share of bank assets
controlled by foreign banks equals 0.192. Real GDP growth averages 2.85% per year,
with an average squared deviation from the conditional mean growth of 0.43% and an
average absolute deviation of 4.39%. These measures of average volatility are about
three-and-a-half times as large as volatility of the U.S. states. Real investment has both a
higher mean growth rate and greater volatility than overall GDP growth. Average
investment grew by 7.68% per year, with volatility of 4.77% (squared deviations) and
16.07% (absolute deviations).
As in the state-level regressions, we include banking concentration both as an
instrument and as a regressor in our model, although we vary the specifications because
of the potential endogeneity of concentration. As noted above, an advantage of the
country-level analysis over the state-level analysis is that we now can control for real
integration (as opposed to financial integration), equal to the trade share of each country,
(imports+exports)/GDP. Because the country-level data introduces more heterogeneity,
we control for the effects of exchange rate volatility by adding the absolute value of the
change in the real exchange rate for a given country relative to the dollar. Following

15

The models in Aghion et al. (1999) and Caballero Krishnamurthy (2001) suggest that the more severe
credit constraints in emerging market countries may slow growth and increase volatility. Their models
suggests that foreign bank entry might reduce volatility via an “efficiency channel” whereby the increased
competition resulting from foreign bank entry relaxes those constraints, causing growth to accelerate and
volatility to decline. Our assumption of perfect competition even without foreign entry essentially rules
out a reduction in volatility via increased efficiency (Norman Loayza gets credit for this point).

18

Levine (forthcoming), we also add a measure of the level of financial development in a
country and year (the ratio of total liquid liabilities to GDP).16
As in the state-level approach, all regressions include both fixed country effects
and fixed year effects. The country effects are especially important in the cross-country
models because they eliminate many of the unobservable differences in economic
conditions, institutions, regulations, taxation, law, corruption, culture, and other factors
that may simultaneously affect volatility and foreign entry.
Potential Endogeneity: Constructing Instruments for Integration
It is perhaps even harder to argue that foreign bank entry is exogenous to
economic conditions in a country than it is in the state-level context, so instrumenting
becomes even more important than before. Our set of instrumental variables exploits
linguistic, institutional, and geographic differences across countries. The idea is simple:
a Spanish bank will be more likely to enter countries where Spanish is the primary
language; an American bank will be more likely to enter countries in the Western
Hemisphere; a British bank will be more likely to enter countries with similar legal and
regulatory institutions. Therefore, if American banks are well positioned to enter new
markets abroad because, for example, they are well capitalized, then English-speaking
countries experience more (exogenous) entry than, say, French-speaking countries.
Accordingly, we first grouped countries along three dimensions: primary
language (English, French, German, Arabic, Spanish/Portuguese, and other), legal origin
(English, French, German, Scandinavian, and Socialist), and region (Table 4). For each
country, we then compute the average of a series of characteristics related to the

16

Denizer at al. (2002) find that GDP volatility and financial development are negatively related.

19

likelihood that foreign banks enter a country in the group. To make sure that these group
means are exogenous, we exclude the characteristics of the country itself. The group
characteristics include the following: the ratio of bank assets to GDP (a measure of
financial depth), the average bank capital-asset ratio (a measure of bank financial
strength), and the average share of foreign ownership (a measure of how much entry has
already occurred within the group). In addition, we include the size of the country’s
banking system relative to total banking assets held by all countries in the group.
The results from the first-stage regressions of foreign bank share on these group
characteristics indicates that we are able to build a good instrument that will allow us to
estimate the effects of integration in an IV model, even controlling for country and time
effects. For example, the p-value testing the joint significance of the set of instruments
excluded from the model in the first stage regressions is less than 0.01. The regional
averages turn out to be more powerful predictors of entry than either language or law.
Countries in region where banks are well-capitalized on average experience significantly
more foreign entry than countries in regions where banks are poorly capitalized on
average. Entry is also higher in countries located in regions with large banking systems
(relative to GDP), and in countries whose banking system is small relative relative to the
entire region.
Results
Table 7 contains the results for volatility of real GDP growth, and Table 8
contains the results based on volatility of real investment growth. Panel A includes all
countries; Panel B includes only the non-industrial countries in the Western Hemisphere.

20

In each Panel we report eight specifications, four using the squared deviations of growth
to measure volatility and four using the absolute deviations of growth. These four
specifications include the fixed-effects OLS, and three IV models, one which includes the
full set of instruments, one that deletes banking concentration from the instrument set as a
possibly endogenous variable, and one that includes concentration as a right-hand-side
variable in the model.
In contrast to the U.S. experience, these results are consistent with a zero or
positive link between foreign banking (i.e. banking integration) and economic volatility.
We do not estimate a single negative coefficient on the foreign bank share variable that is
significant at the 10% level or better in any of 32 specifications. In contrast, we find a
positive and significant coefficient on foreign banking in 15 of 32 specifications. This
positive effect is most evident in Panel B of Table 8, where we include only the nonindustrial Western Hemisphere countries, and where we look at volatility of investment.
In all eight of these specifications, the results suggest that greater banking integration is
associated with more, not less, volatility.
Tables 7 and 8 report the Hausman specification test that compares coefficients of
consistent (but not necessarily efficient) IV models with the more efficient (but not
necessarily consistent) OLS model. The test never rejects the consistency of the OLS
models. Although the magnitude of the effects of integration do change with the
estimation technique, we never observe a change of sign in the coefficient on banking
integration in comparing OLS with IV. If we look only at these eight OLS specifications,
the coefficient on banking integration is positive in six of eight specifications, with
statistical significance at the 10 percent level for five of these cases.

21

Why are country results so different from the U.S. results? Our model suggests
that integration heightens the impact of firm collateral shocks on spending. Perhaps
foreign banks respond more elastically to collateral shocks than domestic banks because
they are better able to reinvest funds outside the country. To investigate, we regress the
real growth of GDP and investment on proxies for shocks to entrepreneurial collateral
(the return on the stock market in the country during the preceding year) and shocks to
the banking system (the growth rate of bank capital in the country). We then interact
these two capital variables with the foreign bank share.
The results (Table 9, columns 1 and 4) confirm that the two capital variables are
positively correlated with GDP and investment spending growth, as one would expect.
More interesting is the positive coefficient on the collateral-foreign bank share
interaction, that positive sign suggests that the impact of firm capital shocks is indeed
amplified by the presence of foreign banks. The amplification is much more pronounced
in the investment regressions than the overall GDP growth regressions, which seems
sensible since lower collateral value has a direct impact of firms’ ability to borrow.
V. Conclusions
The theory behind this paper suggests that bank integration is a two-edge sword in
terms of business cycle variability. Integration can magnify the impact of firm collateral
shocks because integrated banks have the opportunity to shift their capital elsewhere
during downturns. Shocks to the banking system itself, however, become less important
in an integrated world because the integrated banks can import banking resources from
abroad to fund good, local projects.

22

Our data suggest that the cutting edge of the sword depends on where one looks.
Bank integration across U.S. states over the late 1970s and 1980 appears to have
dampened economic volatility within states. That dampening suggests that the benefit of
integration in the U.S. has been to diminish the impact of bank capital shocks, and
indeed, we find that employment growth and bank capital growth became less correlated
with shocks to the local banking sector with integration. Internationally, we find that
foreign bank integration is either unrelated to volatility of firm investment spending, or
positively related. That suggests that the amplifying effect of integration on firm capital
shocks dominate and, in fact, we find that GDP growth and investment growth became
more sensitive to changes in stock market wealth, whereas as the effect of shocks to the
banking sector did not change significantly.
Even though our model admits conflicting effects from integration, and even
though our ancillary regressions (where we interact integration with bank capital or firm
collateral) are consistent with those conflicting effects, we are less confident about our
international results. The international data are noisier, for one, and we have less of it
(eight years versus eighteen for the U.S.). Another concern is that our window on the
world--the 1990 to 1997 period—is partly obscured by sweeping transitions and episodic
financial crises, especially in emerging economies, that may confound the effects of
integration, or may even motivate it. Fixed effects and instruments help with those
problems to some degree, but not completely.
With those qualifiers, policymakers and central bankers should be aware of the
possibility that business spending may become more volatile as they open their banking
sectors to foreign entry. The first-order (growth and efficiency) effects of foreign bank

23

entry are almost certainly positive, but the second-order (volatility) effects are less
clear.17

17

The first- and second-order effects may be related, as well. Foreign bank entry implies
increased competition for domestic banks, and hence, more efficient credit markets. from
foreign bank entry may reduce
24

References
Aghion, Phillipe, Abhijitt Banerjee, and Thomas Picketty, 1999 , “ Dualism and
Macroeconomic Volatility,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, v, 114,
1359-1397.
Ashcraft, Adam, “New Evidence on the Lending Channel, 2001, ” Federal Reserve Bank
Staff Study 136, September.
Bekaert, Geert, Campbell R. Harvey, and Christian Lundblad, 2001 “Does Financial
Liberalization Spur Growth?” NBER Working Paper No. w9510
Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt, and Ross Levine, 2000, “A New Database on the
Structure and Development of the Financial Sector,” World Bank Review.
Berger, Allen N., Rebecca S. Demsetz, and Philip E. Strahan, 1999, “The Consolidation
of the Financial Services Industry: Causes, Consequences, and Implications for
the Future,” Journal of Banking and Finance, Vol. 23, No. 3-4, 135-194.
Bergstresser, Daniel, 2001, “Market Concentration and Loan Portfolios in Commercial
Banks,” mimeo, February 2001.
Caballero Ricardo and Arvind Krishnamurthy 2001, “International and Domestic
Collateral Constraints in a Model of Emerging Market Crises,” Journal of Monetary
Economics, 48, 513-548.
Cevdet A. Denizer, Murat F. Iyigun, and Ann Owen, 2002, “Finance and Macroeconomic
Volatility", Contributions to Macroeconomics: Vol. 2: No. 1, Article 7.
Claessens, Stijn, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Harry Huizinga, 2001, “How does Foreign
Entry Affect Domestic Banking Markets?” Journal of Banking and Finance 25,
891-911.
Clark, T., and E. Wincoop, “Borders and Business Cycles, 2000, Journal of
International Economics, forthcoming.
Clarke, George, Cull, Robert, Soledad Martinez Peria, Maria, and Sanchez, Susana M.
2001, "Foreign Bank Entry: Experience, Implications for Developing Countries,
and Agenda for Further Research," mimeo, World Bank.
Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Ross Levin, 2002, Financial Structure and Economic Growth:
A Cross Country Comparison of Banks, Markets, and Development, MIT Press,
Cambridge, MA.
Demsetz, Rebecca S. and Philip E. Strahan, 1997, “Size, Diversification and Risk at US
Bank Holding Companies,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, Vol. 29, 30013.

25

Demsetz, Rebecca S., Marc R. Saidenberg and Philip E. Strahan, 1996, “Banks with
Something to Lose: The Disciplinary Role of Franchise Value,” Economic Policy
Review (October), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Eichengreen, Barry and Bordo, Michael D, 2002, "Crises Now and Then: What Lessons
from the Last Era of Financial Globalization?" NBER Working Paper 8716.
Goldberg, Linda, Gerard Dages and Daniel Kinney, 2000, “Foreign and Domestic Bank
Participation in Emerging Markets: Lessons from Mexico and Argentina,”
Economic Policy Review 6(3), Federal Reserve Bank of New York.
Hellman, Thomas, Kevin Murdock and Joseph Stiglitz, 2000, “Liberalization, Moral
Hazard in Banking, and Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements
Enough?” American Economic Review 90(1), 147-65.
Holmstrom, Bengt and Jean Tirole, 1997, “Financial Intermediation, Loanable Funds,
and the Real Sector,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXII, 663-691.
Houston, Joel, Christopher James, and David Marcus, 1997, “Capital Market Frictions
and the Role of Internal Capital Markets in Banking,” Journal of Financial
Economics 46, 135-164.
Jayaratne, Jith and Donald P. Morgan, 1999, “Capital Market Frictions and Deposit
Constraints on Banks,” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1996, “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from
Bank Branch Deregulation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 111, 639-670.
Jayaratne, Jith and Philip E. Strahan, 1998, “Entry Restrictions, Industry Evolution, and
Dynamic Efficiency: Evidence from Commercial Banking, The Journal of Law
and Economics, Vol. XL1 (1), 239-273.
Keeley, Michael C, 1990, "Deposit Insurance, Risk, and Market Power in Banking,"
American Economic Review 80, no. 5: 1183-1200.
Kroszner, Randall S. and Philip E. Strahan, 1999, “What Drives Deregulation:
Economics and Politics of the Relaxation of Bank Branching Restrictions,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 114, No. 4, 1437-67.
Laporta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2001, “Government
Ownership of Banks,” Journal of Finance.
Levine, Ross, 1999, “Law, Finance and Economic Growth,” Journal of Financial
Intermediation.
Levine, Ross (forthcoming), “More on Finance and Growth: More Finance, More
Growth?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review.

26

Levine Ross, Norman Loayza, and Thorsten Beck, 2000, “Financial intermediation and
growth: Causality and Causes,” Journal Of Monetary Economics 46(1), 31-77.
McPherson, S., and C. Waller, “Do Local Banks Matter for the Local Economy? In
Search of a Regional Credit Channel,” Forthcoming in International
Macroeconomics, G. Mess and E. Wincoop, eds., (Cambridge University Press,
1999).
Morgan, Donald P., Bertand Rime and Philip E. Strahan, 2001, “Bank Integration and
State Business Cycles,” Federal Reserve Bank of New Staff Study # 129.
Peek, Joseph and Eric Rosengren, 2000, “Collateral Damage: Effects of the Japanese
Bank Crisis on the United States,” American Economic Review (March), 30-45.
Spong, Kenneth, 2000, Banking Regulation: Its Purposes, Implementation, and Effects.
Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Kansas City: MO.

27

Table 1
Summary Statistics for U.S. State-Level Panel Data
1976-1994

N
931

Mean
0.34

Standard
Deviation
0.28

Employment Growth

931

0.023

0.023

Squared Deviation of Employment Growth from
Expected Employment Growth

931

0.0003

0.0006

Absolute Deviation of Employment Growth from
Expected Employment Growth

931

0.013

0.012

Share of State Bank Assets held by Three Largest
Banks (Banking Concentration)

931

0.376

0.210

Share of State Bank Assets owned by Multi-State
Bank Holding Companies (Banking Integration)

28

Table 2
Panel Regression relating volatility of U.S. State-Level Employment Growth
To Banking Integration
1976-1994
Dependent Variables:
Squared Deviation of Growth from
Absolute Deviation of Growth from
Expected Growth
Expected Growth
-0.0003*
(0.0002)

-0.0013*
(0.0004)

-0.0011*
(0.0004)

-0.0011*
(0.0004)

-0.008*
(0.0003)

-0.022*
(0.007)

-0.021*
(0.007)

-0.021*
(0.007)

Banking
Concentration

-

-

-

-0.0004
(0.0004)

-

-

-

-0.003
(0.007)

Within R2
Total
Observations
Number of
States
Hausman χ2
Test
Estimation
Technique

0.05
931

0.01
931

0.01
931

0.01
931

0.07
931

0.03
931

0.04
931

0.04
931

49

49

49

49

49

49

49

49

-

8.14

2.05

-

-

5.08

0.33

-

OLS

IV

IV*

IV

OLS

IV

IV*

IV

Banking
Integration

All regressions contain both year and state fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a state’s bank assets that are owned by multi-state bank holding
companies.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables are an indicator equal to 1 after a state allows out-of-state bank
holding companies to purchase their banks, the log of the number of years that have elapsed since this
regulatory change, and the market share of the largest three banks in the state (banking concentration). In
the IV* model, we drop concentration from the list of instruments.
The sample includes DC but not South Dakota or Delaware. The latter two states are dropped because their
banking systems are dominated by national credit card banks.
The Hausman Test compares the model with the one preceding it. So, for example, the test in column 3
compares the coefficients in column 3 with the coefficients in column 2.

29

Table 3
How US State Employment Growth Responds Local Bank Capital Shocks
1976-1994
Dependent Variable
Employment Growth
0.0578*
0.1718*
(0.0066)
(0.0141)

Growth in State Bank Capital

Banking Integration

-

-0.0001
(0.0101)

Growth in State Bank Capital * Banking Integration

-

-0.2127*
(0.0236)

0.5001
931
49
OLS

0.5435
931
49
IV

Within R2
Number of Observations
Number of States
Estimation Technique

All regressions contain both year and state fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a state’s bank assets that are owned by multi-state bank holding
companies.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables are an indicator equal to 1 after a state allows out-of-state bank
holding companies to purchase their banks, and the log of the number of years that have elapsed since this
regulatory change.
The sample includes DC but not South Dakota or Delaware. We drop the latter two states because their
banking systems are dominated by credit-card banks that serve the whole country.

30

Africa
Algeria
Benin
Botswana
Cameroon
Congo
Ivory Coast
Kenya
Lesotho
Madagascar
Mali
Mauritius
Morocco
Namibia
Nigeria
Rwanda
Senegal
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Swaziland
Tanzania
Tunisia
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe

Asia
Bangladesh
Hong Kong
India
Indonesia
Malaysia
Nepal
Pakistan
Papua New Guinea
Philippines
Taiwan
Singapore
China (Taiwan)
Thailand
Vietnam

Table 4
List of Countries by Region
Eastern
Industrial
Europe
Countries
Belarus
Bulgaria
Croatia
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Estonia
Hungary
Kazakhstan
Latvia
Lithuania
Poland
Romania
Russia
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
Turkey
Ukraine

31

Australia
Austria
Belgium
Canada
Denmark
France
Germany
Greece
Ireland
Italy
Japan
Luxembourg
Netherlands
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
USA

Middle
East
Bahrain
Egypt
Israel
Kuwait
Lebanon
Saudi Arabia
UAE

Western
Hemisphere
Argentina
Bahamas
Bolivia
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Costa Rica
Dom. Republic
Ecuador
El Salvador
Guatemala
Guyana
Honduras
Mexico
Neth. Antilles
Nicaragua
Panama
Paraguay
Peru
Uruguay
Venezuela

Table 5
Trends in Median Foreign-Bank Market Share, by Region
1990-1997

1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997

Africa

Asia

Eastern
Europe

Industrial
Countries

Middle
East

Western
Hemisphere

18.2%
11.8%
23.1%
28.2%
23.6%
29.0%
22.3%
20.7%

12.4%
13.4%
15.0%
15.6%
18.4%
21.2%
24.1%
32.9%

3.6%
9.1%
2.8%
4.4%
6.9%
8.8%
10.4%
9.8%

3.2%
4.9%
4.1%
3.7%
3.8%
3.6%
3.6%
2.9%

5.5%
4.8%
4.9%
5.5%
5.6%
6.2%
6.3%
9.1%

11.7%
14.5%
21.7%
19.9%
17.9%
20.0%
21.1%
23.0%

Medians are based on the percentage of each country’s banking assets held by banks controlled by a foreign
company, where control means that the foreign company owns at least 50% of the bank’s equity.

32

Table 6
Summary Statistics for Cross-Country Panel Data
1990-1997

N
498

Mean
0.192

Standard
Deviation
0.222

Real GDP Growth

498

0.0285

0.0634

Real Growth in Investment

516

0.0768

0.1877

Squared Deviation of GDP Growth from Expected
GDP Growth

498

0.0043

0.0141

Absolute Deviation of GDP Growth from Expected
GDP Growth

498

0.0439

0.0494

Squared Deviation of Growth in Investment from its
Expected Value

516

0.0477

0.0972

Absolute Deviation of Investment from its Expected
Value

516

0.1607

0.1480

Share of a Country’s Bank Assets Controlled by
Largest Three Bank (Banking Concentration)

498

0.639

0.216

Total Liquid Liabilities divided by GDP
(Financial Development)
Absolute value of percent change in Real Exchange
Rate (Terms of Trade Shock)
Imports+Exports divided by GDP
(Real Integration)

498

0.525

0.344

498

0.070

0.081

498

0.388

0.267

Share of a Country’s Bank Assets Controlled by a
Foreign Bank (Banking Integration)

Expected growth rates are computed as the predicted value from a regression of GDP growth (capital
growth) on a time effect and a country effect.

33

Table 7
Panel Regressions Relating Volatility of Country Real-GDP Growth
To Banking Integration
1990-1997
Panel A: All Countries
Dependent Variables
Squared Deviation of Growth from
Absolute Deviation of Growth
Expected Growth
from Expected Growth
0.0083
0.0413
0.0381
0.0388
0.0477* 0.2633* 0.2031* 0.2038*
Banking
(0.0077)
(0.0289)
(0.0323)
(0.0343)
(0.0271)
(0.1063) (0.1154) (0.1229)
Integration
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0002
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
Real
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0001)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
Integration
0.017
0.017
0.017
0.018
0.061
0.066
0.065
0.070*
Financial
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.039)
(0.042)
(0.040)
(0.041)
Development
0.024*
0.024*
0.024*
0.024*
0.103*
0.100*
0.101*
0.098*
Terms of
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.007)
(0.024)
(0.026)
(0.025)
(0.025)
Trade Shock
0.0012
0.0212
Banking
(0.0073)
(0.0262)
Concentration
0.0747
0.0326
0.0404
0.0388
0.0964
0.0200
0.0222
0.0237
Within R2
498
498
498
498
498
498
498
498
Number of
Observations
87
87
87
87
87
87
87
87
Number of
Countries
1.40
0.05
4.39
1.00
Hausman χ2
Test
Estimation
OLS
IV
IV*
IV
OLS
IV
IV*
IV
Technique
All regressions contain both year and country fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are owned by foreign banks, where the
foreign bank must own at least 50% of the local bank. Real integration equals the ratio of total imports plus
exports to GDP. Banking concentration equals the market share of the country’s three largest banks.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables include the following: banking concentration, the average ratio
of bank assets to GDP in countries in the same group (“group” defined below), the average bank capitalasset ratio for all countries in the same group, the average share of foreign ownership for all countries in the
same group, and the size of the countries banking system relative to the group. For each of these
instruments, we construct group averages, where countries are grouped along three dimensions: primary
language (English, French, German, Arabic, Spanish/Portuguese, and other), legal origin (English, French,
German, Scandinavian, and Socialist), and region (defined in Table 4). Also, note that for each of the
averages we do not include the value for the country itself, only the other countries within the group are
used. In the IV* model, we drop concentration from the list of instruments.
The Hausman Test compares the model with the one preceding it. So, for example, the test in column 3
compares the coefficients in column 3 with the coefficients in column 2. The models in columns 3 and 4 (7
and 8) are not nested, so the test is not available.

34

Table 7
Panel Regressions Relating Volatility of Country Real-GDP Growth
To Banking Integration
1990-1997
Panel B: Western Hemisphere, non-industrial countries only
Dependent Variables
Squared Deviation of Growth from
Absolute Deviation of Growth
Expected Growth
from Expected Growth
-0.0213 -0.0279 -0.0286 -0.0253 -0.0013 -0.0226
-0.0195
-0.0309
Banking
(0.0232)
(0.0235)
(0.0235)
(0.0241)
(0.0699)
(0.0706)
(0.0706)
(0.0727)
Integration
0.0007* 0.0007* 0.0007
0.0006
0.0008
0.0008
0.0008
0.0010
Real
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
(0.0012)
(0.0012)
(0.0012)
(0.0013)
Integration
-0.027
-0.031
-0.032
-0.039
-0.0053 -0.0181
-0.0162
-0.0016
Financial
Development (0.036) (0.036) (0.036) (0.038) (0.1093) (0.1096) (0.1096) (0.1145)
0.018
0.017
0.017
0.020
0.106
0.104
0.104
0.097
Terms of
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.029)
(0.030)
(0.088)
(0.088)
(0.088)
(0.089)
Trade Shock
-0.0111
0.0266
Banking
(0.0169)
(0.0509)
Concentration
0.1428
0.1420
0.1419
0.1472
0.0999
0.0989
0.0992
0.1011
Within R2
112
112
112
112
112
112
112
112
Number of
Observations
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
18
Number of
Countries
3.78
0.37
4.27
1.73
Hausman χ2
Test
Estimation
OLS
IV
IV*
IV
OLS
IV
IV*
IV
Technique
All regressions contain both year and country fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are owned by foreign banks, where the
foreign bank must own at least 50% of the local bank. Real integration equals the ratio of total imports plus
exports to GDP. Banking concentration equals the market share of the country’s three largest banks.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables include the following: banking concentration, the average ratio
of bank assets to GDP in countries in the same language group, the average bank capital-asset ratio for all
countries in the same language group, the average share of foreign ownership for all countries in the same
language group, and the size of the countries banking system relative to the group. We do not construct
instruments grouped along either regional or legal origin lines because all countries in these regressions are
in the same region, and almost all of the countries in this region have a legal system originating from the
French system. In the IV* model, we drop concentration from the list of instruments.
The Hausman Test compares the model with the one preceding it. So, for example, the test in column 3
compares the coefficients in column 3 with the coefficients in column 2. The models in columns 3 and 4 (7
and 8) are not nested, so the test is not available.

35

Table 8
Panel Regressions Relating Volatility of Country Real Growth in Investment
To Banking Integration
1990-1997
Panel A: All Countries
Dependent Variables
Squared Deviation of Growth from Absolute Deviation of Growth from
Expected Growth
Expected Growth
0.1795*
0.2428
0.1802
0.1560
0.2548*
0.4812*
0.3039
0.2809
Banking
(0.0505)
(0.1807)
(0.2074)
(0.2178)
(0.0805)
(0.2909)
(0.3310)
(0.3462)
Integration
0.0004
0.0003
0.0004
0.0005
0.0006
0.0004
0.0005
0.0007
Real
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0008)
(0.0010)
(0.0012)
(0.0009)
(0.0013)
Integration
0.028
0.031
0.028
0.032
0.076
0.085
0.078
0.090
Financial
(0.071)
(0.071)
(0.072)
(0.072)
(0.113)
(0.115)
(0.114)
(0.114)
Development
0.1488* 0.1483* 0.1488* 0.1448* 0.2380* 0.2360* 0.2376* 0.2270*
Terms of
(0.0446)
(0.0448) (0.0447) (0.0450) (0.0712) (0.0720) (0.0713) (0.0717)
Trade Shock
0.0328
0.0843
Banking
(0.0475)
(0.0756)
Concentration
0.1086
0.1053
0.1086
0.1097
0.1242
0.1075
0.1234
0.1278
Within R2
Number of
Observations
Number of
Countries
Hausman χ2
Test
Estimation
Technique

516

516

516

516

516

516

516

516

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

92

-

0.13

0.38

-

-

0.66

1.26

-

OLS

IV

IV*

IV

OLS

IV

IV*

IV

All regressions contain both year and country fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are owned by foreign banks, where the
foreign bank must own at least 50% of the local bank. Real integration equals the ratio of total imports plus
exports to GDP. Banking concentration equals the market share of the country’s three largest banks.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables include the following: banking concentration, the average ratio
of bank assets to GDP in countries in the same group (“group” defined below), the average bank capitalasset ratio for all countries in the same group, the average share of foreign ownership for all countries in the
same group, and the size of the countries banking system relative to the group. For each of these
instruments, we construct group averages, where countries are grouped along three dimensions: primary
language (English, French, German, Arabic, Spanish/Portuguese, and other), legal origin (English, French,
German, Scandinavian, and Socialist), and region (defined in Table 4). Also, note that for each of the
averages we do not include the value for the country itself, only the other countries within the group are
used. In the IV* model, we drop concentration from the list of instruments.
The Hausman Test compares the model with the one preceding it. So, for example, the test in column 3
compares the coefficients in column 3 with the coefficients in column 2. The models in columns 3 and 4 (7
and 8) are not nested, so the test is not available.

36

Table 8
Panel Regressions Relating Volatility of Country Real Growth in Investment
To Banking Integration
1990-1997
Panel B: Western Hemisphere, non-industrial countries only
Dependent Variables
Squared Deviation of Growth from Absolute Deviation of Growth from
Expected Growth
Expected Growth
0.2820*
0.2841*
0.2827*
0.2670*
0.4398*
0.4364* 0.4389* 0.4107*
Banking
(0.0869)
(0.0877)
(0.0878)
(0.0901)
(0.1674)
(0.1691)
(0.1692) (0.1738)
Integration
0.0012
0.0013
0.0013
0.0016
0.0034
0.0034
0.0034
0.0041
Real
(0.0016)
(0.0016)
(0.0016)
(0.0016)
(0.0030)
(0.0030)
(0.0030)
(0.0031)
Integration
0.118
0.119
0.118
0.148
0.0010
-0.0010
0.0005
0.0504
Financial
(0.136)
(0.136)
(0.136)
(0.142)
(0.2620)
(0.2624)
(0.2625)
(0.2739)
Development
0.374*
0.374*
0.374*
0.361*
0.6055* 0.6051* 0.6054* 0.5842*
Terms of
(0.109)
(0.109)
(0.109)
(0.111)
(0.2107)
(0.2108) (0.2108) (0.2136)
Trade Shock
0.0489
0.0828
Banking
(0.0631)
(0.1217)
Concentration
0.3130
0.3129
0.3130
0.3179
0.2817
0.2817
0.2200
0.2856
Within R2
Number of
Observations
Number of
Countries
Hausman χ2
Test
Estimation
Technique

112

112

112

112

112

112

112

112

18

18

18

18

18

18

18

18

-

0.03

0.13

-

-

0.02

0.15

-

OLS

IV

IV*

IV

OLS

IV

IV*

IV

All regressions contain both year and country fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are owned by foreign banks, where the
foreign bank must own at least 50% of the local bank. Real integration equals the ratio of total imports plus
exports to GDP. Banking concentration equals the market share of the country’s three largest banks.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables include the following: banking concentration, the average ratio
of bank assets to GDP in countries in the same language group, the average bank capital-asset ratio for all
countries in the same language group, the average share of foreign ownership for all countries in the same
language group, and the size of the countries banking system relative to the group. We do not construct
instruments grouped along either regional or legal origin lines because all countries in these regressions are
in the same region, and almost all of the countries in this region have a legal system originating from the
French system. In the IV* model, we drop concentration from the list of instruments.
The Hausman Test compares the model with the one preceding it. So, for example, the test in column 3
compares the coefficients in column 3 with the coefficients in column 2. The models in columns 3 and 4 (7
and 8) are not nested, so the test is not available.

37

Table 9
How Real GDP Growth and Real Capital Formation Growth Respond to Banking
and Collateral Shocks
1990-1997
Dependent Variables
Real GDP
Real Growth in
Growth
Investment
Growth in Real Bank
Capital
Real Return on
Stock Market
Banking
Integration
Growth in Bank
Capital*Banking
Integration
Return on Stock
Market*Banking
Integration
Within R2
Number of
Observations
Number of Countries
Estimation
Technique

0.0301*
(0.0167)

0.0254
(0.0216)

0.0363
(0.0257)

0.0698
(0.0519)

0.0460
(0.0804)

0.0592
(0.0962)

0.0242*
(0.0118)

0.0124
(0.0146)

-0.0112
(0.0201)

0.1565*
(0.0366)

0.0440
(0.0542)

-0.0607
(0.0754)

-

-0.1272
(0.1845)

0.0130
(0.2479)

-

0.0857
(0.6865)

-1.6607*
(0.9281)

-

0.06607
(0.1036)

-0.0372
(0.1066)

-

0.2342
(0.3853)

-0.0157
(0.3995)

-

0.1712*
(0.0895)

0.3290*
(0.1262)

-

0.9394*
(0.3331)

1.4923*
(0.4730)

0.1513
188

0.2330
175

0.2472
181

0.4125
189

0.4544
176

0.4739
182

30

30

30

31

31

31

OLS

IV

IV*

OLS

IV

IV*

All regressions contain both year and country fixed effects. A ‘*’ denotes statistical significance at the 10
percent level.
Banking integration equals the share of a country’s bank assets that are owned by foreign banks, where the
foreign bank must own at least 50% of the local bank.
In the IV models, the instrumental variables include the following: banking concentration, the average ratio
of bank assets to GDP in countries in the same group (“group” defined below), the average bank capitalasset ratio for all countries in the same group, the average share of foreign ownership for all countries in the
same group, and the size of the countries banking system relative to the group. For each of these
instruments, we construct group averages, where countries are grouped along three dimensions: primary
language (English, French, German, Arabic, Spanish/Portuguese, and other), legal origin (English, French,
German, Scandinavian, and Socialist), and region (defined in Table 4). Also, note that for each of the
averages we do not include the value for the country itself, only the other countries within the group are
used. In the IV* model, we drop concentration from the list of instruments.

38

