                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           A STRUCTURAL EMPIRICAL MODEL OF
                         FIRM GROWTH, LEARNING, AND SURVIVAL

                                            Jaap H. Abbring
                                          Jeffrey R. Campbell

                                          Working Paper 9712
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9712


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




We gratefully acknowledge the research support of the National Science Foundation through grant #013748
to the NBER. Jaap Abbring’s research is supported by a fellowship of the Royal Netherlands Academy of
Arts and Sciences and was in parts carried out at The University of Chicago, University College London and
the Institute for Fiscal Studies. We would also like to thank Gadi Barlevy and seminar participants at
University College London for comments, and the IZA in Bonn for facilitating a joint visit in December 2001.
Ronni Pavan and Raghu Suryanarayanan provided superlative research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Jaap H. Abbring and Jeffrey R. Campbell. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.
A Structural Empirical Model of Firm Growth, Learning, and Survival
Jaap H. Abbring and Jeffrey R. Campbell
NBER Working Paper No. 9712
May 2003
JEL No. C34, C35, C41, D83, L11
                                        ABSTRACT

We present a structural model of firm growth, learning, and survival and consider its identification
and estimation. In the model, entrepreneurs have private and possibly error-ridden observations of
persistent and transitory shocks to profit. We demonstrate that the model's parameters can be
recovered from public observations of sales and survival, and we estimate them using monthly data
from new bars in Texas. We find that entrepreneurs observe profit's persistent component without
error. In this sense, their information is substantially superior to the public's.



Jaap H. Abbring                                 Jeffrey R. Campbell
Department of Economics                         Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Free University                                 230 South LaSalle Street
De Boelelaan 1105                               Chicago, IL 60604
1081 HV Amsterdam                               and NBER
The Netherlands                                 jcampbell@frbchi.org
jabbring@econ.vu.nl
1 Introduction
We present in this paper a structural model of rm growth, learning, and survival; and we
consider its identi cation and estimation using a panel of Texas bars' monthly sales histories.
As in panel data commonly available from company directories or tax returns, these histories
record each rm's sales from its birth until the end of the sampling period or its exit. In
the model a rm's sales is a linear and increasing function of its pro t, but transitory shocks
make it an imperfect indicator of pro t's persistent component. Entrepreneurs observe some
of these shocks, so their forecasts of future pro t are necessarily superior to those of the
public. Maximum likelihood estimation of the model's parameters measures the extent of
entrepreneurs' Bayesian learning while accounting for their private information. We nd that
the entrepreneurs in our sample observe pro t's persistent component without error. In this
sense, their information is substantially superior to the public's.
    Our analysis begins with an extension of Jovanovic's (1982) model of rm selection. The
logarithm of each rm's pro t is the sum of three components, one that displays persistence
and two others that are transitory. Unlike in Jovanovic's original model, the persistent
component possibly changes through time. After the entrepreneur observes her pro t, she
must decide either to remain open or to close the rm and avoid future xed costs. An
entrepreneur only observes her pro t and one of its transitory components, and she bases her
continuation decision on her posterior belief regarding the persistent component. We follow
Jovanovic and assume that the components unobserved by the entrepreneur have normal
distributions. Hence, the entrepreneur's posterior beliefs are also normal with a history-
dependent mean and an age-dependent variance. The rm exits when the posterior's mean
falls below an age-speci c threshold. The data available to the econometrician are these
continuation decisions' outcomes and the history of the rm's sales. The econometrician
cannot predict the rm's future as well as the entrepreneur, because he observes neither of
pro t's transitory components.
    The characterization of entrepreneurs' private information using only their discrete con-
tinuation decisions and public sales data is not straightforward, because the information
relevant for their continuation decisions is both hidden from the econometrician and persis-
tent. The hidden state variable distinguishes our analysis from estimation procedures that use

observations of a continuous forward-looking choice to infer a relevant state variable's value,
as in Olley and Pakes (1996). Our work also di ers from structural dynamic discrete choice
estimation that incorporates Rust's (1987) conditional-independence assumption, because
the hidden state variable displays persistence even after conditioning on the entrepreneur's

                                              1
observed choice.
    Although continuation decisions do not reveal the relevant state variable, the model's
parameters can be recovered from rm histories such as those we observe. We show that
di erences between all rms' average sales and the average sales of those rms that subse-
quently survive reveals the distribution of the entrepreneurs' observations as well as the rules
they use for their exit decisions. Heuristically, if these samples are very similar we conclude
that most observed variation across rms re ects shocks that the entrepreneur perceives to
be irrelevant for the rm's future. This step only requires that the entrepreneur bases her
decisions on her private information. It does not require the entrepreneur to form rational ex-
pectations or to make optimal decisions. The identi ed distributions and exit rules uniquely
determine the parameters relevant for the entrepreneur's signal extraction problem.
    Our data contain monthly records of the rst year in the lives of 305 new rms that
operated a single bar in Texas. To calculate maximum likelihood estimates using this data,
we augment the Kalman lter to account for sample selection. The resulting estimates
measure the variances of the shocks that contaminate the entrepreneur's and econometrician's
observations of pro t's persistent component. We nd that the entrepreneur observes this
component without error.
    Pakes and Ericson (1998) precede us in the empirical detection of Bayesian learning by
entrepreneurs. One observable implication of Bayesian learning about a xed parameter
is that a rm's initial size is useful for forecasting its size throughout its life. Pakes and
Ericson formally develop this idea and nonparametrically test for such Bayesian learning by
estimating the relevance of initial size in a rm size regression. With private entrepreneurial
information a rm's initial size may improve the public's forecast even without entrepreneurial
learning. We apply a test similar in spirit to Pakes and Ericson's to our sample of Texas bars
and nd that initial size does indeed improve forecasts of rm sizes. However, the estimates
of our structural model's parameters indicate that entrepreneurs' private information can
account for this nding without reference to entrepreneurial learning.
    Our estimates indicate that entrepreneurs face no signal extraction problem. However, a
policy maker with access to only public information should use Bayesian updating to learn
about a particular rm's pro t. Because our estimates directly characterize the informational
di erences between such a policy maker and an entrepreneur, they can serve as an important
input into the evaluation of information-constrained policy interventions such as the taxation
of entrepreneurship. We defer the analysis of such policies to future research.
    The remainder of the paper proceeds as follows. The next section describes the data and
some of its salient characteristics. Section 3 presents the structural model, and Sections 4 and
                                               2
5 consider its identi cation and estimation. Section 6 presents and discusses our maximum
likelihood estimates, and the nal section o ers some concluding remarks.

2 Histories of Firm Growth and Survival
Readily available data sources| such as public tax records, business directories, or economic
census records| allow the construction of data documenting the growth and survival of a
cohort of entering rms. Gort and Klepper (1982), Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1989),
Bahk and Gort (1992), Jovanovic and MacDonald (1994), Holmes and Schmitz (1994), and
Pakes and Ericson (1998) have all examined such data sets and characterized their implica-
tions for various aspects of rm and industry growth. Our analysis uses a similar data set
constructed from a panel of Texas alcohol tax returns. The state of Texas collects a 14% tax
on the sale of alcohol for on-premise consumption, and the Texas Alcoholic Beverage Control
Board (TABC) makes these returns publicly available. Returns are led monthly, and a rm
must le a separate return for each of its establishments. Information included with each
return includes the identity and street address of the establishment's parent rm, its trade
name, its own street address, the date its alcohol license was issued, the date it was returned
if the establishment no longer operates, and its tax payment for that month.

2.1 Sample Construction
Our observations begin in December, 1993 and end in March, 2001. To account for in a-
tion over the sample period and persistent di erences in input prices across locations, we
divided all sales observations in our sample by the geometric average of tax returns from
the establishment's county led in the same month. We used alcohol tax identi cation num-
bers and the establishments' street addresses to group these observations into establishment
histories. Our linking process accounts for the fact that a single establishment may have
multiple owners over its lifetime.1 A tax return must be led for each establishment in every
month, even if the establishment sold no alcohol for that month. Therefore, our data contain
several reports of zero sales. The data also contain tax returns with a very low tax payment.2
   1 Inour sample, there are numerous instances of an establishment being transferred from an individual to a
corporate entity with the same address. These appear to be simply legal reorganizations with few immediate
economic implications.
   2 Some of these re ect operation during only part of the rst or last month of the establishments' operation.

When the given dates of license issuance and return indicate that this is the case, we divide the tax payment


                                                      3
These apparently re ect unobserved shutdown of the establishment for part of the month or
a very small scale of operation. When constructing establishment histories, we equate any
tax payment of less than $750 with zero. We consider an establishment to be born in the
  rst month that it pays more than $750 in tax, and we date its exit in the rst month that it
fails to pay that amount. If an establishment's tax payment temporarily falls below $750, we
consider that establishment to have temporarily shut down. We exclude such establishments
from our data set altogether.
    Alcohol sales is of primary importance for bars, but restaurants substantially pro t from
both alcohol and food sales. So that our sample is as homogeneous as possible in this regard,
we focus only on those establishments that present themselves to the public as bars. To
be included in our sample, a rm's trade name must include the word \bar" or one of 10
other words indicative of a drinking place, and it must not include the word \restaurant" or
one of 20 words indicating the presence of substantial food service.3 Given the limitations
of the data, this minimizes the risk of falsely including restaurants at the expense of falsely
excluding bars.
    There are also substantial di erences between multiple establishment rms and their
counterparts that only operate one location. The manager of an incumbent rm's new
establishment can use that rm's history and experience to plan its operations and judge its
prospects. An entrepreneur starting a single establishment rm has no such information to
rely upon. Accordingly, we exclude any establishment founded by a rm with two or more
establishments in Texas from our data set. There are 305 single-establishment rms in our
data set that were born in the ve years beginning in 1994 and ending in 1999. These single
establishment rms comprise our sample.
by the fraction of the month the establishment operated. Even after this correction, there remain several tax
returns with very small but positive tax payments. The smallest positive tax payment in our data is under
$1.
    3 The words that qualify a rm for inclusion in the data set are \bar", \cantina", \cocktail", \drink",

\lounge", \pub", \saloon", \tap", and \tavern." In addition to \restaurant" the words that exclude a
 rm from our analysis are \bistro", \brasserie", \cafe", \club", \diner", \dining", \food", \grill", \grille",
\hotel", `oyster", \restaurante", \shrimp", \steak", \steakhouse", \sushi", and \trattoria". When selecting
this sample, we consider only the trade name listed on the rm's rst tax return that reports a tax payment
greater than $750.




                                                      4
2.2 Summary Statistics
Table 1 reports summary statistics from our sample of rms. For each age we consider, one
to thirteen months old, it reports the number of rms that survived to that age; the mean,
standard deviation, skewness, and kurtosis of the logarithm of sales among these survivors;
and the fraction of them that did not operate in the following month (the exit rate). Selection
during these rms' rst year was extensive. Over the course of the year, 20% of the rms
exited. The exit rates vary greatly over the course of the rst year. Exit rates near the end
of the rm's rst year are relatively high, and no rms in our sample exited following their
sixth and thirteenth months.
    The lack of exits following the thirteenth month is particularly notable because it con-
tinues into the (unreported) fourteenth month. One possible explanation for this sudden
and persistent decrease in exit is that the renewal of an annual lease on a commercial lo-
cation is a watershed event that induces many unpro table businesses to exit after twelve
months. In this case, rms that survived their rst year were relatively t and unlikely to
have immediately exited.
    Unsurprisingly, survivors' average size increases quickly with age. Initial average sales of
all bars is slightly greater than the average sales of all license holders. After one year, the
survivors' average size is approximately 27% greater than this overall average. The standard
deviation of rms' initial sales is 0:87, and this cross-sectional standard deviation changes
little over the rst year. The skewness of sales is very close to zero except in the eighth and
tenth months, while the kurtosis varies between a high value of 3:53 in the rst month and
a low value of 3:08 in the fth month. To better understand the statistical signi cance of
these estimates, we have tabulated 95% bootstrap con dence intervals for all of the statistics
in Table 1. These (unreported) con dence intervals reveal that the skewness and kurtosis
coeÆcients are estimated much less precisely than the means and standard deviations. The
average width of a con dence interval for a mean is 0:20, while the analogous average for
the standard deviations' con dence intervals is 0:16. In contrast, the average widths of the
skewness and kurtosis coeÆcients' con dence intervals are 0:62 and 1:20.4
     To assess the role of selection in the evolution of these summary statistics, it is helpful to
inspect the analogous statistics from those rms that survived the entire sample period. Table
2 reports these statistics for the 244 rms that operated for thirteen or more months. There
are no striking di erences between the selected sample's second and higher moments and
  4 The  bootstrap con dence intervals were constructed from 10; 000 random samples of 305 rms drawn
with replacement from our data set.


                                                 5
those of the complete sample. However, the means of the selected sample are considerably
higher than their analogues from the complete sample. The average log sales in the rst month
of a rm that survives its rst year is eleven percentage points higher than the unconditional
average, 0:17 versus 0:06. Thus, selection and the growth of surviving rms each account for
approximately one half of the complete sample's mean growth.

2.3 Firm Growth
As in many other panels of rm histories, entrepreneurs' exit decisions clearly contribute
to the evolution of our sample. To better understand the importance of entrepreneurial
learning for this selection and other forward-looking decisions, Pakes and Ericson (1998)
advocate examining the persistence of surviving rms' sales. In particular, they derive robust
predictions from two models of learning. In the model of passive learning, entrepreneurs
apply Bayesian updating to learn about a time-invariant and rm-speci c parameter, as in
Jovanovic (1982). This model implies that a rm's initial sales will be useful for forecasting
its sales throughout its life. In the active learning model, rms invest to improve their
products and processes. Because the outcome of this investment is stochastic and very
successful rms optimally choose to invest little and allow their knowledge to depreciate, a
  rm's initial sales becomes progressively less relevant for forecasting its future as it ages.
Pakes and Ericson test these models' contrasting predictions using panels of Wisconsin retail
and manufacturing rms. They nd that initial sales improves forecasts of retailers' future
sales, but manufacturers' future sales appear to be Markovian. From this, they conclude that
an approach to rm dynamics based on Bayesian learning is promising for retail rms.
    We have assessed the properties of our sample of bars by conducting a similar empirical
investigation. For each month of the life cycle that we consider, we have nonparametrically
characterized the regression of the logarithm of a rm's sales on the logarithms of its sales in
the previous and rst months. For this we estimated density-weighted average derivatives of
the regression functions using Powell, Stock, and Stoker's (1989) nonparametric instrumental-
variables estimator.5 These estimates rely on no distributional assumptions beyond standard
regularity conditions, so they are appropriate for investigating the importance of a rm's
initial sales on its evolution when the structural parameters relevant for the survival decision
are unknown.
   5 To implement this estimation, we follow Powell, Stock, and Stoker's (1998) recommendation and use the
bias-reducing kernel discussed by Bierens (1987). Before estimation, we scaled both explanatory variables by
their standard deviations. We used a tenth-order kernel with a bandwidth of 2.


                                                     6
    Table 3 reports these estimates as well as standard errors based on their Gaussian asymp-
totic distributions. All of the derivative estimates are positive and statistically signi cant at
the 5% level. The derivatives with respect to the previous month's sales are surprisingly sim-
ilar across months. They are nearly all between 0:80 and 0:95. The derivatives with respect
to the rm's sales in its rst month are smaller but not negligible. Furthermore, there is no
apparent tendency for the rm's initial sales to become less relevant for forecasting as the
  rm ages. When the dependent variable is the rm's sales in the third month, the derivative
with respect to the rst month's sales equals 0.154. This is nearly identical to the analogous
coeÆcient when the dependent variable is the thirteenth month's sales, 0.168. The analogous
coeÆcients in the other months vary from a low estimate of 0:021 to a high of 0:190. Overall,
the estimates indicate that no low-order Markov process can t surviving rms' observed
sales well. Expanding the set of regressors to include the past three months' sales attenuates
the estimated e ect of the rst month's sales, but does not alter this conclusion.
    Pakes and Ericson (1998) emphasize that the observable di erences between the two mod-
els they consider only apply to very old rms if sales depend on transitory shocks observed
by only the entrepreneur. Thus, any conclusion about the importance of Bayesian learn-
ing based on the application of their methodology to our sample of new rms is necessarily
suspect. The structural analysis we will pursue next overcomes this diÆculty by using en-
trepreneurs' observed continuation decisions to measure the variation in sales due to those
transitory shocks that the entrepreneur observes.

3 A Structural Model of Firm Growth and Survival
In this section, we present a structural model of rm growth and survival in a monopolistically
competitive industry. We assume that potential entrants are ex ante identical and that rms
only compete anonymously ex post. That is, the behavior of any single rm only possibly
depends on the behavior of other rms through some aggregate statistics. There is no direct
strategic interaction between any two rms. We rst discuss this assumption's content and
empirical plausibility. We then detail the rm's stochastic environment and optimization
problem. Finally, we consider the entrepreneur's procedure for optimally assessing her rm's
future and deciding upon its survival.




                                               7
3.1 Imperfect Competition and Firm Dynamics
Bars produce heterogeneous goods and compete with each other in local markets. This
compels us to consider imperfect competition as the most likely market structure for our
sample of rms. The theory of competition among a large number of producers o ers us two
distinct approaches to consider, monopolistic and oligopolistic competition.
    In models of monopolistic competition such as Dixit and Stiglitz's (1977), Hart's (1985),
and Wolinsky's (1986), producers compete anonymously, and strategic interaction is absent.
These models inherit the simplicity of perfect competition. The actions of any single pro-
ducer are irrelevant for any competitor's pro ts. This irrelevance immediately implies that
idiosyncratic shocks to demand and cost have no e ect on competitors' pro ts or optimal
actions. Therefore, the empirical analysis of a monopolistic competition model can proceed
by considering each producer's choice problem in isolation from those of her rivals after
conditioning on the appropriate aggregate variables.
    In contrast, models of oligopolistic competition, such as Prescott and Visscher's (1977)
and Salop's (1979), emphasize strategic interaction. A producer's actions impact the pro ts
of her neighbors in geographic or product space, so shocks that directly in uence only one
producer's pro ts can a ect her competitors indirectly. The presence of these indirect e ects
complicates these models' empirical analysis.6
    Campbell and Hopenhayn (2002) suggest a simple procedure for distinguishing between
these two approaches to imperfect competition based on cross-market comparisons of the pro-
ducer size distribution. A robust prediction of anonymous monopolistic competition is that
the producer size distribution is invariant to market size if factor prices, demographics, and
technology are held constant.7 This prediction follows directly from the the failure of entry
to erode monopolistic competitors' market power. In contrast, models of oligopolistic com-
petition generally predict that producers in large and competitive markets recover their xed
costs by selling more at a lower markup than their counterparts in small and less competitive
markets. Thus, a comparison of average producer size across large and small markets can
   6 The observation that consumers view similar goods available at di erent geographic locations as imperfect
substitutes does not immediately imply that competition is oligopolistically competitive. Campbell and
Lapham (2001) illustrate this with a model of monopolistic competition and cross-border shopping. Although
competition is anonymous in that model, goods produced in the same location are better substitutes than
are goods produced in di erent locations.
   7 Campbell (2002) demonstrates that this familiar feature of symmetric monopolistic competition models

with free entry and a single technology is robust to introducing product placement and technology choice
decisions of arbitrary complexity.


                                                      8
determine which of these two approaches to competition among large numbers of producers
is more empirically promising. We have implemented Campbell and Hopenhayn's procedure
for our bars' parent four-digit industry, Drinking Places, using exactly the same sample of
markets, control variables, measures of market size, and measures of establishment size that
they do. Unlike in the majority of industries that Campbell and Hopenhayn consider, we fail
to nd a statistically signi cant e ect of market size on average establishment size in Drinking
Places. In most of the speci cations we have considered, the estimated coeÆcient on market
size is negative and statistically insigni cant. This cross-market comparison of establishment
sizes does not refute the assumption that bars are monopolistic competitors. The remainder
of our analysis rests accordingly on the assumption of monopolistic competition.

3.2 The Stochastic Environment
Consider the life of a single rm, which begins production at time t = 1. The rm is
a monopolistic competitor that produces a single good at a single location. Idiosyncratic
shocks cause the demand curve for the rm's product to vary over time. In period t, it
is Qt = eXt+Wt Pt ", where " > 1 is the absolute value of the rm's demand elasticity and
Pt is its price. The composite random variable Xt + Wt shifts the demand curve's location
through time, and we explain the properties of its two components below. Throughout, we
adopt conventional notation and reserve capital letters for random variables and small letters
for their realizations.
    An aÆne cost function, #  Qt + t , describes the rm's technology, with both # and t
strictly greater than zero. In our application to Texas' bars, time variation in the xed cost
t may re ect the fact noted in Section 2 that leases on bars typically have xed terms. It is
straightforward
           
                  to show that the entrepreneur's pro t-maximizing price choice is constant,
Pt = " 1 #. The resulting sales and pro ts are
         "

                               1 "
                        "
      e St   = Pt Qt = " 1             eXt+Wt #1   "                                       (1)
and
                                                 "
                                 1
     (Pt #) Qt t = " 1 " 1 eXt+Wt #1 " t ; "
                                                                                         (2)
We choose the unit of account to set # = (" 1)=", so that log sales are simply St = Xt + Wt
and the rm's pro t equals " 1eSt t .

                                                         9
    The random variables Wt and Xt represent the transitory and persistent components of
the rm's pro t. The transitory component is independent through time and continuously
distributed with density fWt in period t. We assume that this random variable has mean
zero, but currently we leave its distribution otherwise unspeci ed. The persistent component
follows a Gaussian linear state-space model with parameters that (potentially) depend on
the rm's age. That is
      At = t + t At 1 + Zt             with Zt  N (0; t2)                              (3)
and
      Xt = At + Ut              with Ut  N (0; t2):                                      (4)
In (3), 1  0 and t > 0 for all t > 1, so that At and Xt are positively autocorrelated. The
disturbance processes fZtg and fUt g are independent over time and mutually independent
of each other. The intercept t re ects systematic rm growth as the rm ages, such as that
arising from passive learning about the production process.
    For concreteness, we have assumed that variation in the rm's pro t re ects only demand
shocks and that the rm's marginal cost is constant. We could alternatively have assumed
that demand is constant and marginal cost is stochastic, or that both are stochastic. If we
only have data on sales and survival, all of these models are observationally equivalent. In
this paper, we restrict attention to the analysis of such data and we do not address the
separate identi cation of idiosyncratic demand and cost shocks. If we also observed rms'
price choices, the assumption of a constant percentage markup would allow us to identify
separate shocks to demand and marginal cost.

3.3 Bayesian learning and selection
We assume that the entrepreneur observes Wt and Xt separately at the beginning of period t,
but she observes neither At nor Ut . At the end of each period, the entrepreneur must decide
whether or not to close the rm and exit. Exit is an irreversible decision, and its payo
equals zero. The entrepreneur is risk-neutral and discounts the rm's future pro ts with the
constant factor Æ < 1.
    The normality of Zt and Ut imply that the entrepreneur can use the Kalman lter to
calculate an optimal inference of At given the information at hand, (X1; : : : ; Xt)  Xt.
Denote this optimal forecast and its mean squared error with
                                             2 
      ^           
      At  E [At jXt ] and t  E At At :    ^

                                             10
The Kalman lter calculates A^t and t recursively using
      A^t = t + t A^t 1 + t (Xt t t A^t 1 );                                              (5)
and
      t = t2t;                                                                              (6)
where
                2  +  2
      t  2 t t 1 2 t 2 :                                                                     (7)
            t t 1 + t + t
The initialization of (7) uses 0 = 0. The coeÆcient t is the Kalman gain, and it mea-
sures the informativeness of the entrepreneurs' observation of Xt . The rm's sales re ects
both Xt and Wt , so the entrepreneur's inference of At is necessarily superior to that of an
econometrician using only the current and past realizations of St.
    Although the entire history of Xt is in principle relevant for the entrepreneur's exit deci-
sion, A^t and the rm's age are suÆcient for characterizing
                                                                the distribution of future pro ts
given the information in Xt . De ne vt A^t; St to be the value of a rm of age t to an
entrepreneur who estimates At to be A^t and observes current sales to be St . The Bellman
equation that this value function satis es is
                 
      vt A^t ; St = " 1 eSt t + Æ maxf0; E t [vt+1 (A^t+1 ; St+1 )]g:                         (8)
The entrepreneur calculates the expectation E t in (8) using the joint distribution of A^t+1 and
St+1 conditional on the available information at time t, for which (t; A^t ) is suÆcient.
    The owner's optimal exit policy is simple. The expectation in the right-hand side of (8)
is a function of (t; A^t ) and it is continuous and increasing in A^t . Therefore, there exists a
threshold value t such that the owner chooses to exit if and only if A^t  t . De ne Nt to be
an indicator variable that equals one if the rm has survived through that date and equals
zero otherwise. Given the exit rule, this is generated recursively by
             (
      Nt =
                 1 if Nt 1 = 1 and A^t 1 > t 1 :                                               (9)
                 0 otherwise
    This speci cation of our model assumes that the market is in a stationary equilibrium,
as in Hopenhayn (1992), so that aggregate disturbances change neither the rm's demand
nor its cost structure. This assumption is undesirable if aggregate shocks are important for
the industry under consideration. However, it is straightforward to generalize the model to
allow the evolution of the sales process and the chosen exit policy to depend on aggregate
statistics such as the number of producers per customer.
                                               11
4 Identi cation
Suppose an econometrician observes a set of rms from our model for T periods. On each
date, the econometrician records both St and Nt . For completeness, we de ne St = 0 if
Nt = 0. At the end of period T , the econometrician also records NT +1 . That is, the rms'
survival at the end of the sample period is known. In this section, we investigate which of
the parameters of our structural model can be recovered from the joint distribution of these
observations.
    In our model, the exit thresholds ( 1; : : : ; T )  T represent the entrepreneur's optimal
exit decisions. Unlike Rust's (1987) nested xed-point algorithm, our approach to identi -
cation and estimation does not rely on an explicit solution to the entrepreneur's dynamic
programming problem. Rather, we treat these thresholds as parameters to be estimated
jointly with parameters that determine the evolution of St; T , T , T2 and T2 , and the un-
known densities (fW1 ; : : : ; fWT ). The statistical problem we face is to identify and estimate
the true values of these parameters and functions using the realizations of (ST ; NT +1) from
a large cross-section of rms. We do not identify or estimate the parameters that in uence
the observable data only through the choice of T . These are Æ, ", and T .
    We begin by placing our model into a less restrictive encompassing model in which neither
the latent variable At nor the entrepreneur's Bayesian learning play an explicit role in the
evolution of Xt, St , and Nt. Rust (1994) refers to such a model that directly characterizes
dynamic decisions without reference to the parameters of technology or preferences as a
reduced-form model, and we adopt this terminology here. We rst show that the parameters

of the reduced-form model are identi ed. Then, we prove that these parameters can be
used to recover all of our structural model's parameters except 1, 1 , 12, 12, 2 , and 2.
The identi cation of these remaining parameters requires one additional restriction. This
sequential approach to identi cation broadens the applicability of our results beyond the
speci c structural model we consider.

4.1 A Reduced-Form Model of Survival and Growth
Our structural model can be viewed as a special case of a less restrictive model of rm
growth and survival in which (3) and (4) are replaced by a sequence of age-speci c regression
functions,
                     
      Xt =   t   X t 1 + Vt                                                                 (10)

                                               12
for t = 1; : : : ; T . The expectational error Vt is normally distributed with mean zero and
variance !t2(Xt 1 ) conditional on Xt 1. t and !t are arbitrary (measurable) functions of
X t 1 . The rm has no history at t = 1, so 1 and !1 are simply constant parameters.
The entrepreneur's exit rule also makes no reference to At or Bayesian learning. Instead,
the entrepreneur
          
                      closes the rm if and only if Xt falls below a history-dependent threshold,
t X t 1 . Again, t is an arbitrary (measurable) function of Xt 1 and 1 is simply a constant
parameter. The recursive rule determining Nt in this case is
             (                                           
                  1   if Nt 1 = 1 and Xt 1 > t 1 X t 2
        Nt =                                               :                                (11)
                  0 otherwise
   The model given by (10), (11), and
      St = Nt (Xt + Wt )                                                                       (12)
encompasses the structural model. For given values of the structural model's parameters,
there are unique choices of t , !t2 and t that yield the same distribution of (ST ; NT +1; XT ).
In particular, equations (3) and (4) imply that t(Xt 1 ) = t + t A^t 1 , so that we can build
the regression functions t recursively using (5), (6), and (7). The regression error Vt is
simply Xt t(Xt 1 ) = t(At 1 A^t 1 ) + Zt + Ut , so that !t2 = 2t t 1 + t2 + t2. Finally,
the exit threshold that is consistent with the structural model's exit rule is
                           t 1
                            X
      t X t 1 =   t    t
                                   +  t Xt 1 :                                               (13)
                          t
     Because its parameters display general history dependence, the reduced form model's
identi cation demonstrates that structural models of rm growth and survival other than
our own also have empirical content. In particular, the heteroskedasticity of the errors in
the state-evolution equation (10) allows the volatility of rms' pro ts to depend on the
resolution of a pro t-relevant event, such as acquiring a stable clientele. Such modi cations
to our relatively simple structural model may be relevant for considering other aspects of the
life cycle in other industries, and we defer their exploration to future research.

4.2 Identi cation of the Reduced Form Model
Identi cation of the reduced form model requires deconvolution of the observed sales process
fStg into the two components observed by the entrepreneur, fXt g and fWt g. To achieve
identi cation, we use sample selection to partially solve the deconvolution problem. Because
                                                13
the entrepreneur's continuation decisions only depend on fXt g, we can disentangle fXt g
and fWtg by comparing the unconditional distribution of St with its distribution
                                                                               2
                                                                                    conditional
                                                                                         
on Nt+1 = 1. Our solution is partial in the sense that we identify t Xt 1 , !t Xt 1 , and
t X t 1 only for those values of X t 1 that imply Nt = 1. The following proposition formally
states this result.8
Proposition 1. (Identi ability of the reduced-form model) The joint distribution of
             
 ST ; NT +1 uniquely determines the density fWt and the functions t , !t2 , and t for all X t 1
such that Nt = 1 for t = 1; : : : ; T .


Proof.      The proof proceeds recursively. It is helpful to de ne S~t and N~ t+1 to be the ran-
dom vectors (St ; : : : ; ST ) and (Nt+1 ; : : : ; NT +1). Denote their joint density with Xt 1 by
fS~t;N~ t+1 ;X t 1 (). We begin with the assumption that the econometrician knows this joint
density for a particular age t. For t = 1, fS~1;N~ 2 ;X0 () is simply the joint density of the econo-   
metrician's data. We rst show that t , !t2, t and fWt can be recovered from fS~t;N~ t+1 jX t 1 .
We then demonstrate that these parameters in turn identify fS~t+1;N~ t+2;Xt () if t < T , allowing
the recursion to continue.                                                                          
      We begin with the identi cation of t Xt 1 , !t Xt 1 and t Xt 1 for some value
of Xt 1 such that Nt = 1. This requires only the knowledge of the expected value of St
conditional on this history, the conditional probability of survival, and the expected value of
St given this history and survival to period t + 1. These are
                                t 1 ] = t(Xt 1 );
                         E [St jX                                                                       (14)
                                                                             
                                                      
                                t 1 ] = 1  t (Xt 1) t (Xt 1) ;     
                      E [Nt+1 jX                                                                        (15)
                                                         !t (X t 1 )
                                                                                                     
                    t 1; Nt+1 = 1] = t(Xt 1 ) + !t (Xt 1)             ( 
                                                                             X    1 )       ( 
                                                                                              X   1 )
          E [St jX
                                                                         t     t          t     t
                                                                                                        (16)
                                                                                 !t (X t 1 )
                                                                                 
                                                     t (Xt 1 ) t (X t 1 )
                                         = 1 
                                                             ! (X )
                                                                   t    t   1
where () and () and the c.d.f. and p.d.f. of a standard normal random variable. Because
the joint distribution of (St ; Nt+1 ) conditional on the given history
                                                                 
                                                                         is assumed
                                                                                
                                                                                    to be known,
                                                                          
these three equations immediately yield t Xt 1 , !t Xt 1 and t Xt 1 . To obtain fWt ,
   8 Because  we have not even assumed continuity of fW1 ; : : : ; fWT , 2 ; : : : ; T , !2 ; : : : ; !T and 2 ; : : : ; T ,
these functions can only possibly be identi ed up to almost-everywhere equivalence. We will not explicitly
qualify our results this way.




                                                             14
note that the probability density of St conditional on the given history can be written as
                                                             !
                  
                      Z 1
                                 1          x         t 1
                                                      X
      fSt sjX t 1 =                             t
                                                               fWt (s x) dx:                (17)
                          1 !t (X t 1 )      !t (X t 1 )
All components of (17) except fWt are known, so applying a standard deconvolution argument
establishes that fWt is identi ed.9
    We will now show that fS~t+1;N~ t+2;Xt () is identi ed. The independence of Wt from W
                                                                                           ~ t+1
                                                                                                
and XT implies that the joint distribution of Wt and Xt conditional upon Xt 1 ; S~t+1; N~ t+1
displays independence. Therefore, the probability density of St conditional on these variables
is
                               Z 1                                
             
      fSt sjXt 1 ; St+1 ; Nt+1 =
                    ~     ~                         
                                           fXt xjXt 1 ; St+1 ; Nt+1 fWt (s x) dx:
                                                           ~    ~                           (18)
                                           1
As in (17), Xt 1 is assumed to imply that Nt = 1. The left-hand side of (18) and fWt
are known, so deconvolution yields fXt jXt 1; S~t+1 ; N~ t+1 . For any value of Xt such that
                  
X t  Xt ; X t 1 implies that Nt+1 = 1, we can immediately recover the joint distribution of
interest by multiplying this conditional distribution by the known joint distribution of the
conditioning variables. Thus, the recursion may continue.
     Equation (16) directly parallels Heckman's (1979) decomposition of the regression func-
tion of a selected sample into the unconditional regression function and the expectation of
the error conditional upon selection. As in his model, the choice probability in (15) imme-
diately identi es the inverse of Mill's ratio in (16), but without imposing further parametric
restrictions on t(Xt 1 ) and !t(Xt 1 ), the resulting equation does not uniquely determine the
model's parameters. However, because we observe the unselected sample, the identi cation
of t (Xt 1) is immediate using (14). With this additional information, the identi cation of
!t (X t 1 ) is straightforward.
     Our analysis is also related to Blundell and Preston's (1998) identi cation of a consumer's
permanent income process using the covariance of his current income (a noisy proxy) with
his consumption (a forward-looking choice). To see this, rewrite equation (16) using (14) and
(15) as
        E [St Nt+1 jXt 1 ] E [St jXt 1]E [Nt jXt 1] = !t(Xt 1 )  1 1 E [Nt jXt 1 ]
This equation immediately yields !(Xt) from the observed covariance of St with Nt . As
the covariance approaches zero for a given survival probability, so does the inferred value
  9 See   Feller (1971) for an introduction to deconvolution.

                                                      15
of !(X t). Thus, if current size is very helpful at forecasting survival in a linear probability
model, we infer that much of the observed variance of St re ects persistent shocks. Otherwise,
we infer that transitory shocks without dynamic implications for the entrepreneur dominate
variation in St.10

4.3 Identi cation of the Structural Model
Proposition 1 shows that identi cation of XT 's distribution and the rm's exit policy relies on
only on the assumption that fXtg follows some (possibly non-linear, higher-order, and het-
eroskedastic) auto-regression with normal disturbances and that the entrepreneur uses some
history-dependent threshold-based exit rule. We now turn to the implications of Proposition
1 for our particular structural model. If we assume that entrepreneurial learning is absent
from our framework, then the identi cation of the structural model's remaining parameters
is immediate. The following proposition asserts that the addition of entrepreneurial learning
imposes no fundamental obstacle to identi cation.
Proposition 2.       Given the functions        t,   !t , t   for   t = 1; : : : ; T , the following parame-
ters of the structural model are uniquely determined:                1 ; 3 ; : : : ; T ; 32 ; : : : ; T2 ; 3 ; : : : ; T ;
22 ; : : : ; T2 ; and 2 ; : : : ; T . Furthermore, these functions        uniquely determine the values of

2 + 2 1 , 12 + 12 , 1 2 , 22 1 + 22 , and ( 1 1 ) =12 .
     Proposition 2 can be easily proven using the choices of t , !t, and t that are consistent
with the structural model. The proof is available from the authors upon request. The intu-
ition behind this result is straightforward: if entrepreneurial learning is unimportant, then
     t 1 ) will depend only on Xt 1 and t (Xt 1 ) will be a constant. With entrepreneurial
  t (X
learning, both of these functions depend in general on the entire history Xt 1. Therefore, it
is possible to use these functions' history dependence to infer the presence and magnitude of
entrepreneurial learning. Because the lag structure plays a crucial role here, Proposition 2
does not deliver full identi cation of the structural model. In particular, there may be multi-
ple ways of decomposing X1 into the persistent component unobserved by the entrepreneur,
A1 , and the noise that masks it, U1 . However, this lack of identi cation can be addressed
with a single additional restriction. In all of our empirical speci cations, we will impose the
  10 Thisargument depends critically on the assumption that Vt has a normal distribution. Because this
assumption arises repeatedly in theoretical treatments of entrepreneurial learning, such as that of Jovanovic
(1982), we view our structural model as a natural benchmark. The identi cation of a variant of the reduced
form model without the assumption of normality is a subject of our current research.


                                                      16
assumption that 2 = 3 = : : : = T , which is more than suÆcient to guarantee identi cation
of all the structural model's parameters.11

4.4 Discussion
Before proceeding to the estimation of our model, we wish to consider brie y our identi ca-
tion result from the perspective of the extensive literature on the identi cation of discrete
choice models. A key aspect of our analysis is that entrepreneurs base their decisions on
information that is unavailable to the econometrician. This is embodied in our model by the
assumption that the econometrician only observes a noisy signal, St , of the relevant state
variable, Xt . As such, our discrete-choice problem involves an error that is independent of
the latent variable that determines the entrepreneur's choice. Therefore, we cannot directly
apply non-parametric identi cation results for static binary-choice models involving an error
that is independent of the observed covariates, such as some of Manski's (1988) results. The
discrepancy between private and public information in our model furthermore implies a vio-
lation of Rust's (1987) conditional-independence assumption. Taber (2000) and Magnac and
Thesmar (2002) have studied the identi ability of dynamic discrete-choice models without
this assumption. Our identi cation result di ers from theirs, because we observe no state
variable.

5 Maximum Likelihood Estimation
The proof of Proposition 1 is constructive, so it immediately suggests a semi-parametric esti-
mator for our model built on the empirical analogues of (14), (15), and (16). Forming these
moment conditions requires repeated deconvolution applied to the joint density of (ST ; NT +1).
Rather than pursuing this semi-parametric approach, we consider instead parametric max-
imum likelihood estimation. To this end, we assume that Wt is normally distributed with
mean zero and variance t2 . Maximum likelihood estimation poses no conceptual problems,
but computation of the likelihood is nontrivial because the model involves repeated selection
on the basis of a persistent latent state variable.
  11 The  structural model also implies several cross-equation restrictions that allow one to test the hypotheses
that (i) the persistence in Xt re ects the evolution of a single latent factor and (ii) entrepreneur's exit decisions
are based on a rational assessment of this latent factor. We will explore these cross-equation restrictions in
future work.



                                                         17
    In the following, we suppose that the structural model's parameters are themselves known
functions of a vector of \primitive" parameters, $. Our method of calculating the likelihood
function follows the non-Gaussian state-space model approach of Kitagawa (1987), which
utilizes the likelihood's prediction-error decomposition
                                               +1
                                               TY                           
      fYT +1 Y T +1 ; $ = fY1 (Y1 ; $)                  fYt Yt jY t 1 ; $ ;                   (19)
                                                   t=2
where Yt  (St ; Nt) unless t = T +1, in which case it equals NT +1. In (19), we have explicitly
included the vector of primitive parameters to be estimated as an argument.
    Consider the rst term in (19), the density of Y1 . Because N1 = 1 always, this is simply
                                                                    !
                                 1           S 
        fY1 ((S1 ; 1); $) = p 2 2  p 1 2 1 2 ;                                                (20)
                             !1 + 1           !1 + 1
where !t2 = 2t t 1 + t2 + t2 is the variance de ned in the analysis of the reduced form model.
     Our recursive procedure for computing the likelihood's remaining terms is based on ini-
tializing and updating the density of Abt given Yt. The distribution of Ab1 given S1 is nor-
mal with mean 1 + 1 !12 (S1 1) = (!12 + 12) and variance 21!12 12= (!12 + 12 ). Therefore,
fAb1 (ba1 jY1 ; $) is known.
     To recursively calculate the likelihood function's
                                                      
                                                          remaining terms, suppose that for a given
t  2, the conditional density fAbt 1 a^t 1 jYt 1 ; $ is known. We consider three separate cases.
If the rm exits production following period t 1, then Nt = 0 and the relevant term in the
likelihood function is the probability of exit conditional on the observed history.
                              Z     t   1
                                                                       
      fYt (0; 0)jYt 1; $ =                 fAbt    1    a^t 1 jYt 1 ; $ da^t 1               (21)
                                   1
Following exit, the evolution of St is trivial and the remaining terms in the prediction error
decomposition identically equal one. In the second case, the rm continues production fol-
lowing period t 1, but t = T + 1 so the data do not contain the realized value of St . In this
case of right censoring, the nal term in the prediction error decomposition is
                           Z 1
                                                          
      fYT +1 1jYT ; $ =          fAbT a^T jYT ; $ da^T                                       (22)
                             T

   In the nal case, the rm produces in period t < T + 1, so Nt = 1. For this case, the
term of interest in the likelihood function can be written as
                         Z 1                                   !
                      
 fYt (St ; 1)jYt 1; $ =
                                    1     
                                             St    t    a
                                                         t t 1
                                                          b
                                                                 f      ^
                                                                        a     j t 1; $ da^t 1 (23)
                                                                                Y
                               p                p                         t 1
                                 !t2 + t2         !t2 + t2
                                                                   b
                                                                   At 1
                           t 1


                                                               18
Equation (23) follows from Bayes' rule and the de nition of Abt 1 .
   This nal case is the only   
                                   one in which we wish to continue the recursion. To do so, we
must calculate fAbt bat jYt; $ , which is
                         R1                                                         
                              f     (^
                                      a t ; St ja^ t 1 ; $ ) f     ^
                                                                   a t 1 jYt 1 ; $   da^t 1
     fAbt a^t jYt; $ = t 1 At ;St
                                 b                             b
                                                              At 1
                                                                                            : (24)
                                                 fYt Yt jYt 1 ; $
                            
The distribution of Abt ; St conditional on Abt 1 is bivariate normal, so both terms in the
integrand of (24) are known. Therefore, the recursion can continue.
    Iterating on (23) and (24) until the individual either exits or is right censored produces the
likelihood function at any given choice of $. In practice, evaluating the likelihood function
requires approximating the integrals in (21), (22), (23), and (24). We do so using a Gaussian
quadrature procedure.

6 Empirical Results
We now turn to maximum likelihood estimation of our model's parameters using the TABC
panel. We begin with a relatively simple model based on Hopenhayn's (1992) industry dy-
namics model. In this model, the entrepreneur faces no signal extraction problem because
t2 = 0 and Wt has an age-invariant normal distribution with variance 2 . Furthermore, the
evolution of At does not directly depend on the rm's age because t, t , and t2 equal the
constants , , and 2 for t  2: If the xed production cost does not vary with age, then the
optimal exit policy in such a stationary environment is itself stationary. We impose this by
constraining t for all t to equal the constant . We refer to this below as the model's station-
ary speci cation. After considering these estimates, we turn to a nonstationary speci cation
in which t and t are both allowed to be arbitrary functions of t. Finally, we further gen-
eralize the nonstationary speci cation by introducing entrepreneurial learning. To do so, we
assume that t2 equals a possibly nonzero constant, 2, for all t. This section then concludes
with a brief summary of our results.

6.1 Stationary Speci cation
Table 4 reports the maximum likelihood estimates of our model's stationary speci cation
using the sample of 305 new bars described in Section 2. Below each estimate is its asymptotic
standard error, which we calculated using the outer product estimate of the information

                                                19
matrix. First, consider the estimates of 1, 1 , and , which jointly determine the distribution
of rms' initial sizes. The estimate of 1, 0:109, is somewhat higher than the unconditional
mean of rms' initial size reported in Table 1, 0:06. However, the standard error attached to
this estimate is relatively large, 0:055. The estimates of 1 and 1, 0:766 and 0:294, together
imply that the standard deviation of S1 equals 0:82, which di ers little from the estimated
standard deviation of 0:87. At these parameter estimates, the transitory shock W1 accounts
for approximately 13% of the variance of S1 . The remainder is attributable to the persistent
shock X1 . The estimate of equals 1:23, implying that the probability of a rm exiting
after just one month of operation is 0:04. This is substantially higher than the exit rate we
observe in the TABC sample.
    Perhaps the most striking feature of Table 4 is the estimated value of , which is exactly
one. That is, the persistent component of pro tability in the model follows a random walk.
This is estimated with great precision | its standard error equals 0.006. With this estimate
of  the intercept  becomes the drift in the random walk of At . This estimate is negative,
  0:017 and signi cantly di erent from zero. The innovation to this random walk has a
standard deviation of , which we estimate to equal 0:187. Together, the estimated negative
drift and substantial innovation variance imply that the expected growth rate of the persistent
component's level, E [eAt 1] is slightly above zero. Given the estimates of  and , we
can calculate the variance of the change in St , 2 + 2 2 . The associated standard deviation
equals 0:46. Variation in Wt accounts for just over 80% of this variance.
    To help gauge how well the estimated model ts the data, Table 5 reports the population
values of the summary statistics we considered above in Section 2.12 As we noted above, the
exit rate for new rms in the model is much higher than its empirical analogue. Similarly,
the model's exit rates for rms nine to twelve months old are lower than those we estimate.
Overall, the model with a stationary exit threshold ts the observed exit rates poorly. As in
the data, selection drives growth in the average size of survivors, and it has little impact on
the standard deviation of their sizes. As expected, selection increases the cohort's skewness
as it ages. The cohort's kurtosis initially falls with selection and then gradually increases.
Recall from Section 2 that these latter two moments are very imprecisely estimated, so
the di erences between the model's predictions of skewness and kurtosis and their sample
counterparts does not indicate a poor t between the model and the data.
 12 We   calculated these summary statistics using 100000 simulated rm histories from the estimated model.




                                                    20
6.2 Nonstationary Speci cation
The discrepancy between the very low frequency of exit among brand-new entrants and the
relatively high rate predicted by the estimated stationary speci cation suggests that the
model's t could be improved by allowing either the evolution of At or the exit policy to
depend on t. The nonstationary speci cation allows for both of these sources of age depen-
dence. Table 6 contains the maximum likelihood estimates of its parameters, and Table 7
presents the estimated speci cation's summary statistics. The estimates of those parameters
that are common to the two speci cations, 1 , 1 , , , and , are very close to the analogous
estimates in Table 4. In particular, the estimate of , 0:992, is statistically indistinguishable
from one. Next, consider the estimates of the age-speci c intercepts, 2; : : : ; 12. These are
measured relatively imprecisely, but the tendency for them to be negative is clear: only three
of the eleven estimates are positive. Overall, these estimates reveal no substantial tendency
for a rm's growth to accelerate or decelerate as it ages.
    The nal parameters to report are those describing the entrepreneurs' exit policy, 12.
Unlike with the estimated intercepts, these are clearly not constant. The estimate of the
initial exit threshold is 1:94. This is estimated imprecisely, as the relatively little exit
following the rst month leads us to expect. Nevertheless, it is substantially below the
estimated exit threshold from the stationary speci cation. The implied probability that a
  rm exits following its rst month, 0:008, is much closer to that we observe. As the rm
ages, the estimated exit thresholds tend to rise. Although this increase is not uniform over
time, its e ects are clear. The estimate of 2 is 1:53, while that for 12 is 0:97. These
are both relatively precisely estimated. The only remaining exit threshold that we estimate
imprecisely is 6 . This is unsurprising, given the fact that no rm in our sample exits
immediately following its sixth month of operation. Overall, allowing t to vary with the
  rm's age signi cantly improves the model's t with the data.13 A comparison of the model's
summary statistics with those of the data reinforces this impression. As in the data, the exit
rate from the model is initially low and then gradually rises through the cohort's rst year.
Similarly, the growth of surviving rms' average size matches that from the data reasonably
well.
  13 To formally gauge this improvement, we have calculated a likelihood ratio statistic of the hypothesis
that that the values of t are unconstrained and t = for all t relative to the alternative hypothesis
embodied in the nonstationary speci cation. The likelihood ratio test statistic equals 236:09, which exceeds
all conventional critical values for a 2 random variable with 11 degrees of freedom.




                                                    21
6.3 Maximum Likelihood Estimation of 2
We now turn to the estimation of 2, which determines the speed and extent of entrepreneurial
learning. Figure 1 summarizes our results. For values of 2 between zero and 0:07, it plots the
value of the likelihood function after enveloping out the nonstationary speci cation's other
parameters. The result is clear: the likelihood function attains its maximum at 2 = 0. That
is, our maximum likelihood estimates imply that entrepreneurs observe the persistent com-
ponent of pro t without error. We have conducted the same exercise for several alternative
speci cations of our model, and they have all yielded this result. Thus, we nd no evidence
that entrepreneurial learning contributes to the dynamics of the rms in this sample.

6.4 Summary of Results
Four results summarize our estimates. First, pro t's persistent component follows a random
walk. Thus, a version of Gibrat's law characterizes our young and small rms. Second, the
variance of rms' growth rates is dominated by transitory shocks. In both speci cations, these
account for approximately 80% of the observed variance. Third entrepreneurs' exit thresholds
increase as the rm ages. Because we observe no rms exiting after their thirteenth and
fourteenth months, we believe that the annual timing of lease renewals plays a large role in
the increasing exit thresholds we estimate. Finally, entrepreneurs' observe pro t's persistent
component without error. That is, entrepreneurial learning appears to be irrelevant for the
 rms in our sample.

7 Conclusion
Our model of rm growth and survival with private entrepreneurial information has empirical
content. In particular, the extent of entrepreneurial learning is econometrically identi ed,
even though entrepreneurs' observations are hidden from the econometrician. Our maximum
likelihood estimates indicate that entrepreneurs' observe pro t's persistent component with-
out error, so the theoretical identi cation result has empirical relevance for our sample of
new bars in Texas.
    The model we develop in this paper is structural| its unknown parameters either are
primitive to the entrepreneur's decision problem or represent the entrepreneur's solution to
it. Because we estimate the entrepreneur's decision rule directly, our procedure avoids the
repeated solution of the decision maker's dynamic programming problem inherent to Rust's

                                              22
(1987) nested xed point algorithm. An additional advantage of estimating entrepreneurs'
exit policies directly is that the procedure thereby accounts for the entrepreneur's superior
understanding of her pro t maximization problem. The nonstationarity of the estimated
exit thresholds illustrates this. Time-varying xed costs associated with annual lease renewal
can manifest themselves in the estimated exit thresholds even if the econometrician fails to
appreciate their importance before estimation.
    One obvious omission from this paper's model is the in uence of observable covariates
on either the stochastic process for rm size or the entrepreneur's exit thresholds. Incorpo-
rating observable covariates is a straightforward extension of our analysis, but it may be of
considerable relevance for the model's further application. A structural model of the growth
and survival of new establishments owned by incumbent rms should incorporate observ-
able characteristics of the parent rms as covariates. Examples of such characteristics in
the TABC data set are rm size, geographic location, and use of a franchised identity. The
e ects of these variables on establishment growth and survival are of independent relevance
for theories of contracts and rm formation. We plan to pursue these applications in future
research.




                                             23
References
Bahk, B. and M. Gort (1993), \Decomposing learning by doing in new plants", Journal of
   Political Economy, 101, 561{583.


Bierens, H.J. (1987), \Kernel estimators of regression functions", in T.F. Bewley, editor,
   Advances in Econometrics. Fifth World Congress, volume I, Cambridge University Press,

   Cambridge.
Blundell, R. and I. Preston (1998), \Consumption inequality and income uncertainty", Quar-
   terly Journal of Economics, 113, 603{640.


Campbell, J.R. (2002), \A robust prediction of monopolistic competition", Mimeo, Federal
   Reserve Bank of Chicago and NBER.
Campbell, J.R. and H.A. Hopenhayn (2002), \Market size matters", Working Paper 9113,
   National Bureau of Economic Research.
Campbell, J.R. and B. Lapham (2001), \Real exchange rate uctuations and the dynamics of
   retail trade industries on the U.S.-Canada border", Working Paper 8558, National Bureau
   of Economic Research.
Davis, S.J. and J. Haltiwanger (1992), \Gross job creation, and employment reallocation",
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107, 820{863.


Dixit, A.K. and J.E. Stiglitz (1977), \Monopolistic competition and optimum product diver-
   sity", American Economic Review, 67, 297{308.
Dunne, T., M.J. Roberts, and L. Samuelson (1989), \Plant turnover and gross employment
     ows in the U.S. manufacturing sector", Journal of Labor Economics, 7, 48{71.
Ericson, R. and A. Pakes (1995), \Markov-perfect industry dynamics: A framework for
   empirical work", Review of Economic Studies, 62, 53{82.
Feller, W. (1971), An Introduction to Probability Theory and Its Applications, volume II,
   Wiley, New York, 2nd edition.
Fishman, A. and R. Rob (2000), \Consumer inertia, rm growth and industry dynamics",
   Technical report, University of Haifa and University of Pennsylvania.
Gort, M. and S. Klepper (1982), \Time paths in the di usion of product innovations",
   Economic Journal, 92, 630{653.


Hart, O. (1985), \Monopolistic competition in the spirit of Chamberlin: A general model",
   Review of Economic Studies, 52, 529{546.



                                           24
Heckman, J.J. (1979), \Sample selection bias as a speci cation error", Econometrica, 47,
  153{161.
Holmes, T.J. and J.A. Schmitz Jr. (1995), \On the turnover of business rms and business
  managers", Journal of Political Economy, 103, 1005{1038.
Hopenhayn, H.A. (1992), \Entry, exit, and rm dynamics in long run equilibrium", Econo-
  metrica, 60, 1127{1150.

Jovanovic, B. (1982), \Selection and the evolution of industry", Econometrica, 50, 649{670.
Jovanovic, B. and G.M. MacDonald (1994), \The life cycle of a competitive industry", Jour-
  nal of Political Economy, 102, 322{347.

Kitagawa, G. (1987), \Non-Gaussian state-space modeling of nonstationary time series",
  Journal of the American Statistical Association, 82, 1032{1041.

Magnac, T. and D. Thesmar (2002), \Identifying dynamic discrete choice processes", Econo-
  metrica, 70, 801{816.

Manski, C.F. (1988), \Identi cation of binary response models", Journal of the American
  Statistical Association, 83, 729{738.

Olley, G.S. and A. Pakes (1996), \The dynamics of productivity in the telecommunications
  equipment industry", Econometrica, 64, 1263{1298.
Pakes, A. and R. Ericson (1998), \Empirical implications of alternative models of rm dy-
  namics", Journal of Economic Theory, 79, 1{45.
Powell, J.L, J.H. Stock, and T.M. Stoker (1989), \Semiparametric estimation of index coef-
    cients", Econometrica, 57, 1403{1430.
Prescott, E.C. and M. Visscher (1977), \Sequential location among rms with foresight",
  Bell Journal of Economics, 8, 378{393.

Rust, J. (1987), \Optimal replacement of GMC bus engines: An empirical model of Harold
  Zurcher", Econometrica, 55, 999{1033.
Salop, S.C. (1979), \Monopolistic competition with outside goods", Bell Journal of Eco-
  nomics, 10, 141{156.

Taber, C. (2000), \Semiparametric identi cation and heterogeneity in discrete choice dy-
  namic programming models", Journal of Econometrics, 96, 201{229.
Wolinsky, A. (1986), \True monopolistic competition as a result of imperfect information",
  Quarterly Journal of Economics, 101, 493{512.




                                            25
 Table 1: Summary Statistics from the First 13 Months in the Lives of New Texas Bars(i)

     Age(ii) Firms Mean Standard Deviation Skewness Kurtosis Exit Rate(iii)
     1        305 0.06         0.87         -0.003   3.53       0.003
     2        304 0.08         0.89         -0.066   3.39       0.016
     3        299 0.10         0.86          0.085   3.17       0.007
     4        297 0.11         0.85          0.114   3.24       0.020
     5        291 0.12         0.85          0.071   3.08       0.017
     6        286 0.11         0.87          0.034   3.28       0.000
     7        286 0.11         0.89          0.058   3.33       0.028
     8        278 0.17         0.84          0.199   3.34       0.004
     9        277 0.17         0.86          0.101   3.49       0.032
     10       268 0.20         0.86          0.218   3.35       0.019
     11       263 0.20         0.89         -0.006   3.23       0.042
     12       252 0.23         0.89          0.037   3.23       0.032
     13       244 0.27         0.87          0.052   3.30       0.000

Notes: (i) See the text for details regarding the sample's construction. (ii) Age is measured
in months and equals one for a rm ling its rst tax return. (iii) The exit rate is de ned as
the number of rms operating in month t that do not operate in month t + 1 divided by the
number of rms operating in month t.




                                             26
  Table 2: Summary Statistics from the First 13 Months in the Lives of Surviving Bars(i)

                Age(ii)   Mean Standard Deviation Skewness Kurtosis
                1         0.17        0.85          0.089   3.38
                2         0.21        0.86         -0.033   3.53
                3         0.20        0.86          0.083   3.13
                4         0.23        0.85          0.079   3.25
                5         0.24        0.83          0.006   3.16
                6         0.21        0.87         -0.065   3.51
                7         0.24        0.84          0.166   3.35
                8         0.24        0.83          0.204   3.40
                9         0.25        0.84          0.205   3.41
                10        0.26        0.85          0.194   3.11
                11        0.24        0.88          0.074   3.24
                12        0.25        0.89          0.015   3.30
                13        0.27        0.87          0.052   3.30

Notes: (i) The reported statistics are for the sample of rms that operated for at least 13
months. See the text for further details regarding its construction. (ii) Age is measured in
months and equals one for a rm ling its rst tax return.




                                            27
       Table 3: Regression Estimates of Sales on Previous and First Months' Sales(i)

                                      Logarithm of Sales in
                          Age(ii) Previous Month First Month
                          3            0.809          0.154
                                      (0.010)        (0.010)
                          4            0.778          0.190
                                      (0.008)        (0.008)
                          5            0.942          0.021
                                      (0.008)        (0.008)
                          6            0.859          0.088
                                      (0.008)        (0.008)
                          7            0.880          0.086
                                      (0.010)        (0.009)
                          8            0.851          0.132
                                      (0.009)        (0.008)
                          9            0.905          0.073
                                      (0.005)        (0.005)
                          10           0.916          0.058
                                      (0.006)        (0.006)
                          11           0.894          0.062
                                      (0.006)        (0.006)
                          12           0.830          0.122
                                      (0.009)        (0.007)
                          13           0.822          0.168
                                      (0.008)        (0.007)

Notes: (i) For the third to thirteenth months, this table reports Powell, Stock, and Stoker's
(1989) instrumental variable density-weighted average derivative estimates for single-index
regression models of log sales on the logarithms of sales in the previous and rst months.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses below each estimate. For each month, the es-
timation was conducted using the sample of rms that survived to that month. (ii) Age is
measured in months and equals one for a rm ling its rst tax return.

                                             28
           Table 4: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: Stationary Speci cation(i)

    Parameter(ii)          1       1                    
    Estimate              0.109 0.766 1.000 -0.017 0.187 -1.230 0.294
    Standard Error (iii) (0.055) (0.037) (0.006) (0.005) (0.004) (0.007) (0.002)

Notes: (i) This speci cation assumes that entrepreneurs face no signal extraction problem
(2 = 0), that the parameters determining the evolution of Xt and Wt after the rm's birth
do not depend on the rm's age, and that the entrepreneur's exit threshold also does not
vary with age. (ii) The parameters  and  refer to t and t for t  2. All other parameters
without a time subscript are assumed to be invariant to the rm's age. (iii) The standard
errors are calculated using an estimate of the information matrix based on the outer product
of the scores. See the text for further details.




                                             29
             Table 5: Summary Statistics from the Stationary Speci cation(i)

   Age(ii) Firms(iii)   Mean Standard Deviation Skewness Kurtosis Exit Rate(iv)
   1        100.0       0.11        0.82          0.00    3.00       0.041
   2         95.9       0.16        0.78          0.22    2.84       0.014
   3         94.6       0.17        0.79          0.25    2.87       0.012
   4         93.4       0.17        0.80          0.28    2.88       0.012
   5         92.3       0.18        0.81          0.30    2.89       0.013
   6         91.1       0.18        0.82          0.33    2.91       0.013
   7         89.9       0.18        0.83          0.34    2.91       0.013
   8         88.8       0.19        0.84          0.36    2.93       0.013
   9         87.6       0.19        0.85          0.37    2.93       0.013
   10        86.4       0.20        0.86          0.39    2.94       0.013
   11        85.3       0.20        0.87          0.40    2.95       0.014
   12        84.1       0.20        0.88          0.42    3.00       0.014

Notes: (i) The reported statistics are calculated from a synthetic sample of 100; 000 rm
histories drawn from the estimated stationary speci cation. (ii) Age is measured in months
and equals one for a new rm. (iii) The number of rms is measured in thousands. (iv) The
exit rate is de ned as the number of rms operating in month t that do not operate in month
t + 1 divided by the number of rms operating in month t.




                                           30
         Table 6: Maximum Likelihood Estimates: Nonstationary Speci cation(i)

                  Parameter(ii)           1             
                  Estimate              0.832 0.190 0.992 0.278
                  Standard Error (iii) (0.040) (0.004) (0.005) (0.003)

         Parameter              1      2      3      4      5      6
         Estimate              0.063 0.026 -0.014 -0.001 -0.024 -0.030
         Standard Error (iii) (0.067) (0.048) (0.045) (0.047) (0.048) (0.041)

         Parameter              7      8      9      10     11     12
         Estimate              0.004 0.017 -0.008 -0.013 -0.029 -0.017
         Standard Error (iii) (0.041) (0.043) (0.051) (0.054) (0.046) (0.035)

            Parameter                1     2      3      4      5      6
            Estimate              -1.94 -1.53 -1.44 -1.19 -1.27 -1.55
            Standard Error (iii) (0.17) (0.03) (0.04) (0.03) (0.03) (0.31)

            Parameter                7     8      9      10     11     12
            Estimate              -1.32 -1.45 -1.16 -1.10 -0.92 -0.97
            Standard Error (iii) (0.03) (0.04) (0.03) (0.04) (0.02) (0.02)

Notes: (i) This speci cation assumes that entrepreneurs face no signal extraction problem
(2 = 0) and that the evolution of Xt and Wt depends directly on age only because t may be
a nontrivial function of t. (ii) The parameter  refers to t for t  2. The other parameters
without a time subscript are assumed to be invariant to the rm's age. (iii) The standard
errors are calculated using an estimate of the information matrix based on the outer product
of the scores. See the text for further details.


                                             31
           Table 7: Summary Statistics from the Nonstationary Speci cation(i)

   Age(ii) Firms(iii)   Mean Standard Deviation Skewness Kurtosis Exit Rate(iv)
   1        100.0       0.07        0.88          0.00    3.00       0.007
   2         99.2       0.11        0.87          0.09    2.87       0.021
   3         97.1       0.13        0.85          0.19    2.85       0.014
   4         95.7       0.16        0.85          0.24    2.85       0.035
   5         92.4       0.19        0.83          0.32    2.87       0.010
   6         91.5       0.17        0.83          0.34    2.90       0.001
   7         91.4       0.17        0.85          0.31    2.89       0.013
   8         90.3       0.21        0.85          0.34    2.91       0.003
   9         90.0       0.20        0.86          0.32    2.90       0.027
   10        87.6       0.23        0.85          0.38    2.93       0.022
   11        85.7       0.24        0.84          0.41    2.95       0.051
   12        81.3       0.29        0.82          0.47    3.05       0.017

Notes: (i) The reported statistics are calculated from a synthetic sample of 100; 000 rm
histories drawn from the estimated nonstationary speci cation. (ii) Age is measured in
months and equals one for a new rm. (iii) The number of rms is measured in thousands.
(iv) The exit rate is de ned as the number of rms operating in month t that do not operate
in month t + 1 divided by the number of rms operating in month t.




                                           32
                                     Figure 1: Maximum Likelihood Estimation of 2


                            −2100
Log Likelihood Function Value




                            −2200


                            −2300


                            −2400


                            −2500


                            −2600


                            −2700


                            −2800


                            −2900
                                 0   0.01      0.02     0.03       0.04    0.05      0.06   0.07
                                                               2
                                                               η




                                                          33
