                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                    IS-LM AND MONETARISM

                                           Michael D. Bordo
                                           Anna J. Schwartz

                                         Working Paper 9713
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9713


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




This paper was presented at the 2003 HOPE Conference on “The IS/LM Model: Its Rise, Fall, and Strange
Persistence” at Duke University, April 25-27. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Michael D. Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.
IS-LM and Monetarism
Michael D. Bordo and Anna J. Schwartz
NBER Working Paper No. 9713
May 2003
JEL No. B22, B31, B41, E12, N12
                                             ABSTRACT

This paper discusses monetarist objections to the IS-LM model. We explore the views of two
principal spokesmen for monetarism: Milton Friedman and the team of Karl Brunner and Allan
Meltzer. Friedman did not explicitly state the reasons he generally chose not to use the IS-LM
model in rejecting Keynesian views on the demand function for money, the role of autonomous
expenditures in cyclical fluctuations, the potency of fiscal policy as against monetary policy, etc.
He presented statistical findings, historical evidence, and econometric results to support his
alternative analysis of macroeconomics, but his critics were unconvinced. In 1970, in an effort to
use his critics’ common language, he set up a model with explicit terms for IS-LM to encompass
both the quantity theory and the income-expenditure theory. Friedman attributed the failure of this
effort to the fact that he was a Marshallian, his opponents Walrasians.

        Brunner and Meltzer’s objections to IS-LM were explicit. They found it too spare, so they
elaborated it by adding a credit market, disaggregating the asset market by specifying three assets:
base money, government debt, and real capital. They set up a model with financial institutions and
utilized it to study the effects of a variety of policies.

In brief, summarizing the views of both Friedman and Brunner and Meltzer, monetarists dislike the
IS-LM framework because it limits monetary influence too narrowly, essentially to the interest
elasticity of money demand, and defines investment in an excessively narrow fashion, and even that
is not explicit.



Michael D. Bordo                                         Anna J. Schwartz
Dept. of Economics                                       National Bureau of Economic Research
Rutgers University                                       365 Fifth Avene, 5th Floor
New Jersey Hall                                          New York, NY 10016-4309
New Brunswick, NJ 08901-1284                             aschwartz@gc.cuny.edu
and NBER
bordo@economics.rutgers.edu
                                        IS-LM and MONETARISM


1. Introduction

        Monetarism is the name that the late Professor Karl Brunner of the University of

Rochester gave in 1968 to propositions about the relation between money and other economic

variables – such as income, prices, interest rates – propositions that Keynesian economists of that

date and earlier denied. Specifically, monetarists regarded the relation between money balances

and nominal income as a strong one and Keynesians regarded it as a weak one. Even the view of

inflation as a monetary phenomenon, a core monetarist proposition, to many Keynesians before

1970 was unacceptable.1 There is no canon, however, that one can consult to establish the

orthodox monetarist position. Proponents of monetarism all accept the quantity theory of money

as the explanation of inflation and deflation, although they differ on the importance of selected

building blocks of the approach.2

        Although there is no canon of monetarist views, two principal spokesmen for monetarism

can be named. They are Milton Friedman on the one hand and, on the other, the team of Karl

Brunner and Allan Meltzer, even if their individual versions are not invariably identical. It is

their views that we shall explore in later sections of our paper.

        Our task is to study elements of the IS-LM model that the spokesmen for monetarism we

have singled out rejected. First developed by John Hicks in 1937, the IS-LM model was an

attempt to portray the central ideas of Keynes’s General Theory. The model was widely adopted

in teaching macroeconomics in the decades that followed. Section 2 describes equilibrium in the

1
  See Bronfenbrenner and Holzman (1963) for a non-monetarist survey of inflation theory. Johnson (1971) refers to
inflation as “the issue Keynesian theory was least well designed to deal with” (p.7).
2
  According to Mayer (1978) there are 12 characteristic monetarist propositions, but he suggests that readers may
choose to add or delete items from his list. Purvis (1980) lists eight as most basic, but adds “one can believe some




                                                                                                              1
investment and savings market and in the money market as defined by the IS-LM model, and the

evolution of the model since the 1960s.

        Section 3 presents Friedman’s alternative analysis of macroeconomics in the years

between 1956 and 1970. He contrasted it with the Keynesian version, describing the basic

differences between the two. If IS-LM is the distillation of The General Theory, it suited

Friedman better to confront the source rather than the distillation. His objections to the IS-LM

model, however, are implicit since he never directly stated what they were. The General Theory

simply did not express his own conception of how the macroeconomy functioned. His

description of the features of the economy that he regarded as crucial was expressed in a

language that was not consistent with the language most economists used to explain an explicit

model like IS-LM. So there was no engagement with the IS-LM model when Friedman

presented his views. This observation must be qualified in one respect. In an essay responding

to the charge that the omission of an interest rate variable in his study of velocity (1959) implied

that money was divorced from the real sector, Friedman (1966) introduced Hicks’s IS-LM

analysis. It is not necessary for our purpose to report his use of different versions of the analysis

to defend the view that, inclusion of the interest rate in the demand for money equation is neither

a necessary nor a sufficient condition for the divorce of money from the real sector.

          While Friedman did not explicitly state the reasons that he generally chose not to use the

IS-LM model to discuss his rejection of Keynesianism, we can summarize one or another aspect

of the views that he challenged in his publications. It is interesting, nevertheless, that he lectured

on IS-LM in the graduate course in macroeconomics that he taught for the first time in 1967,

evidently to acquaint his students with the language that he customarily spurned in his analytic


without believing others” (p. 98). Laidler (1981) discusses four key characteristics of monetarism. Hoover (1988,
p.10) identifies two criteria as defining monetarists.


                                                                                                              2
work. In 1970, however (published 1974), in an effort to facilitate communication with his

critics, Friedman phrased his arguments in terms of IS-LM. The effort proved unsuccessful.

Friedman later (2001) concluded, “It was really a waste, I think, trying to reconcile the

Keynesian thinking with the monetarist thinking.” Friedman did not say outright why expressing

his views with the IS-LM formulation did not achieve the reconciliation that he sought. His

shorthand explanation was that he was a Marshallian, and his opponents were Walrasians. It is

possible, however, to note some concrete differences that we shall detail.

        In section 4 we turn to the explicit objections to the IS-LM model that Brunner and

Meltzer posed at different stages in their treatment of the subject. We discuss an early version

and a later version of their dissatisfaction with the model. They sought to amend the model,

unlike Friedman, who in the main disregarded it.

        In section 5 we conclude by discussing the evolution of the IS-LM model in the decades

since it came into common use in the heyday of the monetarist-Keynesian debate. It has

survived and prospered as a pedagogical device for undergraduate economics at the intermediate

level. The monetarist debate is moribund but the main tenets of monetarism have been

incorporated in the New Keynesian Synthesis model that has succeeded IS-LM as the apparatus

used for technical and policy discussions.



2. IS-LM from Hicks to Friedman

        Hicks (1937) synthesized in a simple general equilibrium model the central argument of

the General Theory and compared it to the position of the classical economists. The model had

two markets: the market for goods and the money market.3 In the goods market, investment is


3
 Hicks (1937) assumes rigid money wages. Also income is derived from a two sector model consisting of
consumption and investment goods which in turn are functions of employment in the two sectors.


                                                                                                        3
assumed to be a negative function of the interest rate -- Keynes’s marginal efficiency of capital

schedule -- savings a positive function of income -- derived from Keynes’s marginal propensity

to consume -- and of the interest rate.4 The equality of investment and savings clears the market.

The solution of these three equations produces the IS curve, a negative relationship in interest

rates, nominal income space. A rise in the interest rate reduces investment and via the multiplier

also income.

           In the money market, Hicks distinguishes the Keynesian demand for money or liquidity

preference function -- a negative function of the interest rate -- from the classical Cambridge

cash balance equation where money is solely a positive function of income. In a more general

Keynesian model, money demand depends on both income -- the transaction demand -- and the

interest rate -- the speculative demand. Money supply is assumed to be fixed by the central

bank. From the equality of money demand and supply, the LM curve is derived as a positive

function in interest rates, nominal income space. A rise in income increases money demand,

which requires a rise in the interest rate to restore equilibrium.

           Hicks then uses his apparatus to delineate the salient differences between the Keynesian

and classical positions. In his analysis, he maintains the assumption of wage rigidity in both

models so that the key difference between the two models is the money demand function used,

and hence the shape of the LM curve. In the pure Keynesian case LM is horizontal -- interest

elastic (absolute liquidity preference). In the pure classical case it is vertical -- interest inelastic.

Whether monetary policy can stimulate the economy then depends on whether IS intersects LM

in the Keynesian (flat) zone of LM to the left of the diagram or the classical (steep) zone to the

right.



4
    In a more general model, Hicks also includes income in the investment function.


                                                                                                    4
       Many components of the Hicksian apparatus were developed by his contemporaries

(Meade, Harrod, Champernowne, Reddaway) but Hicks is remembered because he embedded it

in a simple compelling diagram (Darity and Young (1995), De Vroey (2000)). Although we

always think of Hicks when discussing IS-LM, his model is not the direct antecedent of the

popular textbook model commonly used since the 1950s. Hick’s assumption of wage rigidity in

both Keynesian and classical models made it difficult to interpret the classical case (De Vroey

2000). Indeed, the model adopted by the textbooks, that Friedman used in his debate with his

critics in the early 1970s, was developed by Modigliani (1944). That model of the labor market

explicitly distinguished between the Keynesian and classical cases. In the classical case, labor

demand and supply are both functions of the real wage and prices and wages are perfectly

flexible, so that full employment and the full employment level of output are determined. In the

Keynesian model the assumption of a rigid money wage leads to a perfectly elastic supply curve

for labor and movements in labor demand lead to movements in employment and output.

       For Modigliani the key difference between Keynes and the classics was wage rigidity,

which leads to a less than full employment equilibrium. He viewed absolute liquidity preference

as a curiosity and not the true hallmark of the Keynesian model.

       The Hicks Modigliani model was then popularized by Hansen (1953). The simplest

textbook version of the 1950s assumed price rigidity and operated in interest rate, real income

space. Other popular textbooks of the era (e.g., Dernberg and MacDougal (1960), Ackley

(1961), followed the Hansen lead. A more sophisticated extension of the Modigliani model that

provided the framework used by Friedman in his 332 course at the University of Chicago in the

late 1960s and later appeared in his debate with the critics in the early 1970s, is developed in

Bailey (1962). In that framework, the classical model with fully flexible wages and prices was




                                                                                               5
elucidated in an IS-LM diagram where the IS and LM curves intersect the full employment level

of output shown as a vertical line and derived from Modigliani’s labor market equations. Various

Keynesian cases (wage rigidity, absolute liquidity preference, interest inelastic investment and

savings) then follow as special cases of the mere general model.



3. Friedman. Bypasses IS-LM Before 1970

       Instead of directing his criticisms to the shorthand version of the General Theory (1936),

represented by IS-LM, Friedman directly attacked the thinking on which the book was based.

For Friedman, the gist of Keynes was that money did not matter. Keynes believed that any

change in the supply of money in the main would be offset by a change in velocity. Thus he

regarded the quantity theory equation in its Cambridge cash-balance version, M = kPY, to be

valid as an identity but useless for policy or for predicting short-run fluctuations in income,

which Keynes treated as if there were no difference between nominal and real income.

        Each of the Keynesian ideas and Friedman’s alternative are presented in the works he

published at various dates before 1970, the year he first defined his approach in terms of the IS-

LM model. Friedman in turn became the target of criticism by defenders of Keynes. We also

review the disputes.

       A. The Liquidity Trap versus A Stable Demand Function for Money (“The Quantity

Theory of Money: A Restatement” (1956)). The essay presented the quantity theory as a theory

of the demand for money. To households money is one kind of asset, one way of holding

wealth. To firms, money is a capital good that combined with other sources of productive

services yields the products that firms sell. Friedman interprets the theory of the demand for

money as a special topic in the theory of capital.




                                                                                                  6
       The demand for money by households, like their demand for other consumption services,

is dependent on total human and nonhuman wealth (the budget restraint), the expected price of

and return on money and alternative forms of wealth, as well as intertemporal rates of

substitution, tastes and preferences of household wealth holders. Friedman distinguishes

between real and nominal magnitudes and casts the demand for money by households as a

demand for real balances -- a function of real variables independent of nominal money values.

       A firm’s demand to hold more or less money, like their demand for other productive

services, depends on the cost of the productive services money yields, the cost of substitute

productive services and the value of the product the productive service yields. Like the

household the firm’s demand for money is a demand for real balances, responsive to rates of

return on bonds, equities, and on other assets as well as the rate of change of the price level.

       From Friedman’s viewpoint, the Keynesian distinction between “active balances and

“idle balances” and “transaction balances” and “speculative balances” is irrelevant. Each unit of

money renders a variety of services that the household or firm equates at the margin.

       According to Friedman, three issues account for the difference of opinion between

someone who is and someone who is not a quantity theorist. The first issue is that a quantity

theorist accepts the empirical hypothesis that the demand for money is highly stable, more so

than the consumption function that Keynes offered as an alternative. The quantity theorist

assigns a key role to the demand for money in determining such variables as the level of nominal

income or of prices. Rejection of the quantity theory has been based on the assertion that the

demand for money is unstable and that it is not possible to specify a limited number of variables

on which it depends.




                                                                                                   7
       A second issue is that the quantity theorist regards the supply of money as affected by

factors other than those affecting the demand for money.

       A third issue is that Keynes asserts that under conditions of underemployment, when

interest rates are positive but low, a liquidity trap exists such that the demand for money

becomes infinitely elastic. Changes in the real supply of money then have no effect at all.

         Of all the commentators on Friedman’s restatement of the quantity theory Don Patinkin

(1969, 1970) offered the most critical appraisal. He did so not on grounds that its substance was

flawed, but for three incidental shortcomings. One, it was an improper representation of the

traditional quantity theory. Two, it was a misinterpretation of doctrinal history, of the shift from

the transaction approach to the income version, to the cash-balance version of the quantity theory

and the Keynesian income-expenditure approach. Finally, in Patinkin’s view, Friedman should

have acknowledged that his analysis was far closer in its conceptual framework to Keynes’s

liquidity preference theory than to that of the quantity theory. Friedman denies each of

Patinkin’s strictures, particularly the one that terms Friedman’s formulation of the demand for

money a riff on Keynes’s liquidity preference theory.

       B. Testing the Keynesian Multiplier versus the Velocity of Money (“The Relative

Stability of Monetary Velocity and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897-1958”

(with David J. Meiselman) (1963)). This study predicts consumption expenditures in the US for

the 6 decades since 1897, using annual data, and for a shorter period, using quarterly data. Two

equations represent the competing hypotheses, one with the stock of money as the independent

variable, the other with Keynes’s definition of investment, i.e., autonomous expenditures. Three

comparisons were reported, one in real terms, one in nominal terms (a price variable was added

to each of the equations), and a multiple regression with both autonomous expenditures and




                                                                                               8
stock of money as independent variables in the same equation. The relative accuracy of forecasts

of consumption predicted by the two competing hypotheses was the issue. The correlation

coefficient for the full period for the money equation was 0.98, and for the autonomous

expenditure equation, 0.76. Results for subperiods were similar. The multiple regressions with

both autonomous expenditures and money as independent variables in the same equation that

showed a partial correlation of consumption with autonomous expenditures were interpreted as

reflecting a correlation between money and autonomous expenditures. Friedman and Meiselman

conclude that the simple version of the income-expenditure theory is “almost completely useless

as a description of stable empirical relationships” (p. 187).

       Early on three articles appeared attacking the work: Ando and Modigliani (1965);

DePrano and Mayer (1965); Hester (1964). Ando and Modigliani dismiss the tests as

meaningless for either the prediction or control of income. Their reason is that the independent

variables are not shown to be exogenous to the system, and that the competing means of

stabilization are parts of the single Keynesian general equilibrium system. They maintain that

tests they perform substituting for actual money data a measure of money that is the maximum

that can be created given the supply of reserves excluding borrowed reserves confirm the

Keynesian position that the interaction of monetary and real forces determines income, and that

after eliminating trend the contribution of money supply to income fluctuation was at most

slightly over one-third. DePrano and Mayer find specification errors in the models, and conclude

that both autonomous expenditures and money are of roughly equal importance. Hester labels

Friedman and Meiselman’s finding false because their definition of income excludes tax-

financed government expenditure; their use of net rather than gross private domestic expenditure




                                                                                             9
biases the correlation coefficient for autonomous expenditure toward zero; and in the period

from 1930 to 1958, the autonomous expenditure theory outperformed the quantity theory.

       Friedman and Meiselman in answer to their critics note that focusing on overarching

theories and theoretical models is not the way to discriminate between empirically verifiable and

unverifiable hypotheses. They decry the absence of an unambiguous criterion of the most useful

empirical counterpart for autonomous expenditure as there is about the counterpart for money.

Because the critics omit some components of income for the income-expenditure calculations

their results are incorrect, according to Friedman and Meiselman.

       C. Keynesian Investment versus Money Stock in Business Cycle Fluctuations (“Money

and Business Cycles” (with Anna J. Schwartz)(1963)). This conference paper is divided into two

parts. The first part reports factual evidence on the behavior of money during NBER business

cycles from 1867 to 1961. We do not summarize that evidence at this juncture. It is reported

below in the comments of the critics on individual findings about the behavior of money.

       The first part ends with a statement concerning the Keynesian position, which regards the

rate of cyclical expansion or contraction as fairly rigidly determined by the rise or fall in

investment or autonomous expenditure, with this link far more crucial than any link with the

contemporary behavior of the money stock. The statement is followed by an assessment of the

relative roles of money and investment by correlating (1) the variability of annual changes in

money with the variability in annual changes in consumption, and (2) the variability of annual

changes in investment with the variability of annual changes in consumption. The synchronous

correlation coefficients are consistently higher, both for the period as a whole and for the period

since 1899 (when income figures require less interpolation) for money-consumption variability

than they are for investment-consumption variability. These results are the same as for the




                                                                                                10
Friedman-Meiselman study, though, derived by a different methodology, from first differences

of logarithms and moving standard deviations of the first differences. For a given stock of

money, these results suggest that there is no systematic relationship at all between autonomous

expenditures and consumption.

       The second part of the conference paper presents interpretations of the factual evidence.

The factual evidence shows that the stock of money displays a consistent cyclical behavior,

which is closely related to the cyclical behavior of the economy, but is not decisive about the

direction of influence. One relevant factor cited in the paper is that, despite substantial changes

in arrangements determining the quantity of money over the period, the changes have not altered

the relation between business changes and monetary changes. More convincing evidence that

money plays an important independent part cited next is the historical record of major economic

fluctuations, including deep depressions, substantial inflations, and a few long-continued

movements in one direction. These events justify two generalizations: (1) Disturbances in the

rate of growth of the money stock in every case are accompanied by changes in money income

and prices in the same direction and of appreciable magnitude, and there are no comparable

disturbances in the rate of growth of the money stock unaccompanied by changes in money

income and prices. (2) The changes in the stock of money can generally be attributed to specific

historical circumstances that are not attributable to contemporary changes in money income and

prices. The consistent relation between money and income must reflect an influence running

from money to business. The demonstration that the major changes in the stock of money have

been attributable to a variety of sources connected directly neither with contemporary nor earlier

business developments contradicts an explanation of the one-to-one relation between monetary

change and major economic change as a relation running from economic change to money.




                                                                                              11
Hence appreciable changes in the rate of growth of the money stock are a necessary and

sufficient condition for appreciable changes in the rate of growth of money income. This is true,

it is argued, both for long secular changes and for changes over business cycles. Secular changes

in money income produced by a changed secular rate of growth of the money stock are reflected

mainly in different price behavior rather than different rates of growth of output. Shorter period

changes in the rate of growth of the money stock can exert a considerable influence on the rate of

growth of output as well. This is the case for monetary fluctuations as the source of major

movements in economic fluctuations.

       The case for a monetary explanation of minor economic fluctuations is not nearly so

strong, the paper concedes. The view that monetary change is important does not preclude the

existence of other factors that affect the course of business or that account for the rhythmical

character of business fluctuations. What is needed to explain minor movements is a specification

of the distribution of the random disturbances impinging on the economy and a specification of

the systematic disturbances that can be introduced into it as well as the reaction mechanism of

the economy. That explanation is not yet at hand.

       The paper includes a theory that accounts for the observed tendency of cyclical

fluctuations in income to be wider in amplitude than cyclical fluctuations in money. The theory

yielded an independent statistical estimate of the ratio of the percentage change in income to the

associated percentage change in the stock of money of 1.84. The directly observed ratio was 2.0.

       The paper concludes with a sketch of the transmission mechanism that could explain how

monetary changes produce cyclical fluctuations in income. The mechanism emphasizes

adjustment of stocks to flows with money playing a key role as a component of the stock of

assets. Balance sheet adjustments are important. Money’s effects are transmitted through a




                                                                                              12
wider channel than the interest rate on financial assets. It includes prices of sources of services

of durable and semi-durable consumer and producers goods as well as the prices of the goods

that yield a flow of services

       Two discussants of the paper were critical. Hyman Minsky argued that the paper failed

to make a convincing case that monetary changes fully explain observed business cycles. He

would agree only with a proposition that there should be fuller integration of monetary

phenomena into the basically income-expenditure models. For Arthur Okun the estimate of the

money multiplier effect on national income of an increase in money was unbelievable, given the

much smaller estimated combined multiplier-accelerator effects on national income of fiscal

action comparable in size to the monetary increase. He faulted the paper for the larger estimate

of the leverage of money as the consequence of associating the demand for money with

permanent income that varies from year to year by an estimated one-third as much as aggregate

measured income; then assuming that demand for and supply of money are equilibrated by

changes in measured income, a change in the money supply must induce magnified income

changes. Okun also challenged the view of money as a luxury good with a long-run income

elasticity of the demand estimated as 1.8. (In a later study of trends by Friedman and Schwartz

(1982), this estimate of the long-run income elasticity of the demand for real money balances

was lowered to allow for growth of financial sophistication in the US before 1903.) With respect

to the transmission mechanism the paper described, Okun expressed surprise that it was similar

to the one he visualized.

       The third discussant, Clark Warburton, gave generally favorable comments.

       Complementing and amplifying the cyclical evidence was historical evidence that

Friedman and Schwartz provided in A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960.




                                                                                              13
Written within the framework of the quantity theory although without an explicit model, the

history documented a close relationship between money and nominal income and the price level.

It also documented the short-run relationship between changes in money and changes in real

income, revealed most dramatically in episodes of deep recessions, especially the Great

Depression of 1929-33. In addition, institutional evidence identified independent sources of

monetary changes such as wartime fiat money issues and gold discoveries. See Lucas 1994;

Miron 1994; Summers 1991.

       D. Keynesian Fiscal vs Friedman Monetary Policy (“Monetary vs Fiscal Policy: A

Dialogue, Milton Friedman/ Walter W. Heller” (1969)). Heller argued that the issue was not

which policy made a more significant contribution to economic stabilization, since Keynesian

economics assigned an important role to both. The issues were two-fold, whether only money

matters, disregarding interest rates and credit availability, and whether the Fed should have

discretion or be bound by a rule. On fiscal policy, the issues again were two-fold, how much

budget cuts or tax changes contributed to stabilization, and whether there should be rigid rules or

discretion to modify procedures for cutting or boosting taxes. Money was resurrected by the

Accord of 1951, but was threatened by Friedman’s money-supply peg. Heller addressed eight

questions for Friedman to answer before money was given dominance over fiscal policy. He

pleaded for joint efforts to develop a more complete model to ascertain why the economy

worked far better than it did before active fiscal monetary policy came into play. Heller then

argued for the potency and effectiveness of fiscal policy and for continued and expanded use of

discretionary policy.

       Friedman’s response to Heller was that money matters a great deal for nominal income

and prices in the long run and has an important effect on fluctuations in nominal and real income




                                                                                             14
in the short run. Money does not matter, however, over the long run for real magnitudes. The

real wealth of a society depends on its institutional structure, the abilities, initiatives, driving

force of its people, on investment potentialities, on technology. How many dollars the output

will be valued at is the issue for which money matters. Both fiscal and monetary policy have

been oversold because fine tuning of both has been oversold. Friedman contended that we have

the ability to avoid extreme fluctuations and to correct past mistakes, but we do not know enough

to fine tune to eliminate minor fluctuations. We know there is a close relation on average

between monetary changes and nominal income changes, but the relation is not precise enough

to predict from changes in money in one quarter what’s going to happen one or two quarters

later. That is the reason Friedman favored a rule.

        With respect to fiscal policy, according to Friedman, the state of the government budget

matters for many things, but by itself it has no significant effect on the course of nominal

income, on inflation or deflation, or on cyclical fluctuations. The influence of fiscal policy needs

to be separated from the influence of monetary policy since changes in both occur at the same

time. Friedman formulated two questions: What happens if monetary policy is held constant and

fiscal policy is changed? What happens if fiscal policy is held constant and monetary policy is

changed?

        He answered the questions by noting that fiscal policy can change without a change in

monetary policy. For example, a tax cut can be financed by government borrowing from the

market; in which case interest rates but not money supply will be affected. Alternatively, a tax

cut can be financed by printing money to cover the deficit. The essence of the claim for the

potency of fiscal policy, Friedman argued, is that it doesn’t matter how a tax cut is financed.




                                                                                                  15
       Fiscal policy could be potent if indirect effects were strong, but no statistical empirical

evidence supported Heller’s assertion that the 1964 tax cut by itself was expansionary. That

assertion ignores what monetary policy was doing at the same time. The same observation

applies to the assertion that the 1966 surtax was contractionary.

       According to Friedman, statistical evidence is available on the relative potency of fiscal

and monetary policy. He cited his study of monetary and fiscal magnitudes during three war

periods. It demonstrates that it was monetary, not fiscal, magnitudes that explain wartime price

behavior. In Friedman and Meiselman’s study, monetary effects on income outperformed

autonomous expenditure, the Keynesian driving variable, in their effects on income. The St.

Louis study by Andersen and Jordan (1968) confirmed that the response of economic activity

from 1952 to 1968 was larger, more predictable, and faster for money than for fiscal variables.

       Friedman challenged proponents of the importance of fiscal effects for inflation and the

price level to offer evidence to support their assertions.

         Heller replied that Keynesians use complete models of the economy rather than one-

equation systems to formulate more interesting questions than the simple one of whether fiscal or

monetary policy is paramount. His view was that one cannot test and measure the effects of

policy on the economy without a correctly specified model. The models show that fiscal policy

matters a great deal.

       In Friedman’s rebuttal, he denied the Keynesian position that tax increases or expenditure

decreases were equivalent and that they are an effective stabilization device. Since he regarded

the US federal government budget as excessive, he favored expenditure decreases, rather than

tax increases. Friedmam concluded by answering some of the eight questions about money that

Heller posed in his opening statement.




                                                                                              16
         In the foregoing studies the debate between Keynesians and monetarists was joined.

Although the discussion touched on different relationships embodied in the IS-LM model and the

roles of monetary and fiscal policy, they were not spelled out in terms of a general equilibrium

model. One reason that Friedman preferred single equations rather than testing general

equilibrium models was his long-standing position that he was a Marshallian. That meant

focusing on particular problems of economic analysis, using theory as “an engine for the

discovery of concrete truth.” In this approach, hypotheses need to be tested by the accuracy of

their predictions. Friedman explicitly rejected the alternative Walrasian paradigm of “general

equilibrium” that emphasizes the realism of its assumptions and is characterized by

“abstractness, generality, and mathematical elegance” (Hirsch and DeMarchi 1990; Hammond

1996).

         Friedman had tried to establish the validity of his work in monetary economics by

presenting statistical findings, historical evidence, and econometric results, but his efforts had

not succeeded. His opponents did not confront him with conflicting empirical evidence. Instead,

his critics, who were not exclusively Keynesians, charged that monetarists relied on a black box

instead of providing a credible explanation of how monetary policy was transmitted to the real

economy. They said that there was no underlying theoretical model of the economic structure

corresponding to Friedman’s empirical findings. A persistent complaint was that Friedman had

not demonstrated the exogeneity of money.5 In general, the critics found that identification

problems marred Friedman’s formulations. Moreover, statistical correlation was all that

accounted for the importance he claimed for money.




5
  Friedman’s argument that a variable could be exogenous in some contexts and endogenous in others, depending on
the issue, was not addressed by his opponents.


                                                                                                        17
        A critique by Tobin (1970) was particularly effective in buttressing opposition to

Friedman’s treatment of money. To dispute the use of timing patterns as a basis for the claim that

monetary actions preceded income changes, Tobin constructed models that produced simulated

patterns of money and income. The Keynesian model has money leading income although

money does not determine income. The monetary model has money lagging income in time, yet

money determines income.6

        Friedman was frustrated by the fact that he and his critics were talking past one another.

They were Walrasians, he was a Marshallian. That accounted for the communication failure.

The solution, Friedman thought, was to encompass both the quantity theory and the income-

expenditure theory in one model that included explicit terms for IS and LM. This was the

monetary framework that he presented in 1970.

        Robert Gordon invited four critics to assess Friedman’s attempt to communicate across

doctrinal differences. The critics did not appreciate that Friedman was trying to provide a

framework in order to discriminate between alternative hypotheses. In acknowledging that Y =

kA and Y = vM, he offered the Keynesian model as a particular case and the quantity theory

model as an alternative case of a more general model that he specified, but he was unsuccessful

in closing the model. In retrospect Friedman concluded that his attempt to reconcile the quantity

theory with the income-expenditure theory was a waste of time.7 Expressing monetarist analysis

in IS-LM terms did not clarify the issues dividing Marshallians and Walrasians.

        Jerome Stein organized a conference at Brown University in 1974 to try once more to

sort out the differences between Friedman and his critics. Purvis (1980), commenting on the


6
  Tobin’s critique essentially condemned Friedman’s work because it lacked an explicit model that specified cause
and effect relations before undertaking measurement and estimation. See Hammond 1996, p. 138.
7
  Purvis (1980) notes that despite dissatisfaction with IS-LM and some of the shortcomings of Keynesian
conventional wisdom, the alternative Friedman offered of “virtual constant full employment” had little appeal.


                                                                                                           18
subjects the conference considered, thought the major issue should have been whether

stabilization policies were desirable. Disagreement centers on alternative theories of the causes

of unemployment. IS-LM treats deficient aggregate demand as the primary cause. Recent

emphasis, however, is on aggregate supply. Differences in theories of aggregate supply and the

determinants of output are the issue the Brown conference neglected.

        The Brown attempt at reconciling monetarist and Keynesian views was futile. For the

critics monetarism lacked a broad theoretical foundation. For Friedman different theories were

appropriate for different problems. Carving up a broad issue into smaller parts that could be

studied empirically produced more precise results than a big structural model with hundreds of

equations. The division between the opposing sides seemed more acute when lined up as

Marshallians vs. Walrasians than as monetarists vs. Keynesians.



4. Brunner and Meltzer Elaborate the IS-LM Model

       The definitive statement by Karl Brunner and Allan Meltzer concerning the problems

they perceived with IS-LM is contained in the second of the four Raffaele Mattioli Foundation

lectures they gave in Milan at Bocconi University in August 1988 (published in 1993). (Earlier

versions of the model in the lecture appeared in Brunner (1971, 1974), Brunner and Meltzer

(1972, 1976.))

       The co-authors describe IS-LM with the addition of the Phillips curve as a model of

stock-flow interactions consisting of two equations, the equilibrium conditions for the asset and

output or income markets.

       IS: y = f(i, M/p)

       LM: M/p = g(i, y)




                                                                                            19
M is predetermined or given, p is either given or obtained from the Phillips curve. Other

variables may be added.

       The co-authors review early uses of IS-LM by Keynesian economists. Some treated

money as a substitute for bonds or financial assets only. Until the 1950s the monetary

mechanism was viewed as sensitive to the system’s interest elasticities, which contrasted with

more reliable, direct effects of fiscal policy. Interest rates were interpreted as borrowing costs

borrowers paid to finance investment projects, but studies reported that borrowing costs were

trivial. The upshot was that the interest elasticity of aggregate demand was negligible, and the

IS line relatively steep. Hence stabilization policy had to rely on fiscal policy, and the role of

monetary policy was to keep borrowing costs low.

      In the late 1950s, the concerns of IS-LM users shifted. Monetary policy effects were

concentrated on the housing market where borrowing costs were important, but politics limited

the use of monetary policy to keeping interest rates low.

      Other users of IS-LM recognized that money is a substitute for the whole spectrum of both

financial and real assets. One interpretation was that bonds and real capital have identical rates

of return, so financial markets have to keep the two returns identical. This assumes active

financial markets. However, relations between money, income, and prices exist with primitive

or non-existent financial markets. Further, the co-authors demur, portfolio adjustments are

delayed by transactions and information costs. Also risk distributions for all real and financial

assets are not always and everywhere identical. Accordingly, bonds and capital are not always

perfect substitutes.

      The co-authors believe that neither the interpretation of money as a substitute for bonds

only or as a substitute for a full range of assets includes analysis of main aspects of financial




                                                                                               20
markets and of portfolio allocations affecting the relation of money to income and prices. IS-LM

has no markets for credit or bank loan rationing. Shocks affecting the credit markets are treated

as shocks to the demand for money. The two sets of shocks have different consequences.

Income effects on loan demand and on the credit market in the IS-LM model must also be treated

as a shift in the demand for money. IS-LM analysis cannot accommodate intermediation and

disintermediation and their effect on transmission of monetary and real impulses. Deregulation

is outside the scope of IS-LM.

      For these reasons Brunner and Meltzer regard the analysis of monetary policy in the IS-

LM framework deficient. A single interest rate misrepresents the problem central banks confront

and may mislead them to believe that they control interest rates. It is not possible to understand

the effects of permanent and transitory shocks as well as real and nominal shocks on the relation

between rates for different maturities and on real and financial assets within the IS-LM

framework.

      Brunner and Meltzer proceed to elaborate the framework. They add a credit market, and

introduce three assets, base money, government debt, and real capital. They are less than perfect

substitutes in portfolios. Money differs from the other two assets because of its services in a

world of uncertainty. The public may hold the three assets or exchange securities for loans from

financial institutions. These institutions determine separate rates for each liability they offer in

response to market conditions. The co-authors specify the equilibrium conditions of the credit

market and money market, respectively. They set up a model with the government budget

constraint, an aggregate supply function, and an aggregate demand function which involves

solving for equilibrium in the goods and asset markets. Equilibrium in the money and credit

markets involve the banking system money supply and credit demand multipliers.




                                                                                               21
      The core of the Brunner and Meltzer model is its emphasis on disaggregated asset

markets. Dornbusch (1976) questions the value added of disaggregated asset markets and the

manner in which the model translates monetary and fiscal actions into changes in prices and

output. The transmission channels in the aggregate demand function involve interest rate and

wealth effects. Dornbusch discounts the authors’ claim that their model provides a more

pervasive adjustment mechanism than in Keynesian models. Finally, he questions the extent to

which the Brunner and Meltzer model qualifies as monetarist.

      Purvis (1980) finds the multiasset feature in Brunner and Meltzer’s work to be an

important departure from the IS-LM straight jacket but a “total red herring” as marking its

distinction from eclectic Keynesian analysis.



5. IS-LM and Monetarists Today

      IS-LM has survived all of its criticisms over the years and is alive and well in the

intermediate macro textbooks. The reason it is still used is the same reason that it won over its

competitors – over sixty years ago – it is simple, elegant and easy to manipulate for expository

purposes. However, as Colander (2003) points out, its use is no longer as the common language

for debates among monetary theorists over the issues of high theory as it was 30 years ago, but

rather as a classroom device to point out to undergraduates the economic impact of alternative

macroeconomic policies. It is also still the workhorse of open economy macroeconomics and the

IMF in its evaluation of member countries’ economic balance (Darity and Young 2003,

Boughton 2002). Finally it has now been endowed with the legitimacy of microfoundations

based on optimizing behavior by households and firms (McCallum and Nelson1999).




                                                                                              22
        Yet while IS-LM has survived, the monetarist Keynesian debate that so consumed the

profession 30 years ago is moribund. Today the synthesis that unites theorists and policymakers

is the New Keynesian model which like IS-LM, is a general equilibrium model with nominal

rigidities but also incorporating optimizing micro behavior, rational expectations, and policy

rules. Although this model is used to evaluate and conduct monetary policy, it does not actually

have money in it nor an explicit LM function.

        The model has three equations: an IS equation where the output gap (actual less potential

GDP) depends on the real interest rate (the nominal rate minus rationally expected inflation); a

Phillips curve, which relates the inflation rate to the output gap and to both past inflation and

rationally expected future inflation; a policy rule (commonly the Taylor rule), which relates the

short-term interest rate (in the U. S. the Federal Funds rate), the central bank’s policy instrument,

to the output gap and the difference between inflation and the central bank’s inflation target

(Meyer 2001).

        Although the model does not have an LM curve in it, one can be added on to identify the

amount of money (high-powered money) that the central bank will need to supply when it

follows the policy rule, given the shocks that hit the economy (McCallum 1999). However this

fourth equation is not essential for the model.

        Yet although money is now missing from the mainstream macro model, the lessons of

monetarism have not been ignored. Incorporated in the model are a number of Friedman’s main

tenets: that inflation is always and everywhere a monetary phenomenon and can be controlled by

monetary policy; that monetary policy in the short-run has important real effects because of the

presence of nominal rigidities or lags in the adjustment of expected to actual inflation; i.e., that in

the long run the Phillips curve is vertical, as expected inflation adjusts to its actual level; that




                                                                                                  23
there is a distinction between nominal and real interest rates embodied in the Fisher equation;

and that policy rules are important anchors to stable monetary policy.

       Moreover Brunner and Meltzer, working in the Walrasian tradition, incorporated a

number of these tenets into the general equilibrium models that they developed in the 1960s and

70s. Their work thus served as an important building block to the modern synthesis.

       In sum, Friedman’s main criticism of Keynes - - that money matters (in the long run for

inflation and in the short-run for output - - has survived and prospered and is at the heart of both

the synthesis model and the emphasis today on low inflation as the key policy goal of the world’s

leading central banks.




                                                                                              24
References

Ackley, Gardner. 1961. Macroeconomic Theory. New York: Macmillan.

Andersen, Leonall, and Jerry L. Jordan. 1968. “Monetary and Fiscal Actions: A Test of Their

       Relative Importance in Economic Stabilization.” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis

       Review 50:11-23.

Ando, Albert, and Franco Modigliani. 1965. “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity and

       the Investment Multiplier.” American Economic Review 55:693-728.

Bailey, Martin. 1962. National Income and the Price Level. New York: McGraw Hill.

Boughton, James. 2002. “ On the Origin of the Fleming – Mundell Model.” IMF Working Paper

       02/107. Washington D.C. International Monetary Fund.

Bronfenbrenner, Martin, and Franklin D. Holzman. 1963. “Survey of Inflation Theory.”

       American Economic Review 53: 593-661.

Brunner, Karl. 1968. “The Role of Money and Monetary Policy.” Federal Reserve Bank of St.

       Louis Review 50: 8-24.

Brunner, Karl. 1971. “A Survey of Selected Issues in Monetary Theory.” Schweizerische

       Zeitschrift fur Volkswirtschaft und Statistik 107: 1-147.

Brunner, Karl. 1973. “Credit Market, Interest Rate and Three Types of Inflation.” Kredit und

       Kapital.

Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer. 1972. “Money, Debt, and Economic Activity.” Journal of

       Political Economy 80: 951-977.

Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer. 1976. “An Aggregative Theory for a Closed Economy” in

       Jerome Stein (ed.) Monetarism. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 69-103.




                                                                                           25
Brunner, Karl, and Allan H. Meltzer. 1993. Money and the Economy Issues in Monetary

       Analysis. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Colander, David. 2003. “ The Strong Persistence of the ISLM Model.” Paper prepared for the

       HOPE conference on “ The ISLM Model: Its Rise, Fall and Strong Persistence.” Duke

       University. April 25-27, 2003.

Darity Jr., William, and Warren Young. 1995. “IS-LM: An Inquest.” History of Political

       Economy 27: 1-41.

Darity, William, and Warren Young. 2003. “ IS-LM-BP: an Inquest.” Paper prepared for the

       HOPE conference on “ The ISLM Model: Its Rise, Fall and Strong Persistence.” Duke

       University. April 25-27, 2003.

DePrano, Michael, and Thomas Mayer. 1965. “Tests of Relative Importance of Autonomous

       Expenditures and Money.” American Economic Review 55: 729-752.

Dernberg, Thomas, and Duncan MacDougal. 1960. Macroeconomics. New York: McGraw Hill.

De Vroey, Michael (2000), “IS-LM a la Hicks versus IS-LM a la Modigliani.” History of

       Political Economy, 32:2.

Dornbusch, Rudiger. 1976. “Comments on Brunner and Meltzer.” In Jerome Stein (ed.),

       Monetarism. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 104-126.

Friedman, Milton. 1956. “The Quantity Theory of Money: A Restatement.” In M. Friedman (ed.)

       Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 3-21.

Friedman, Milton. 1959. “The Demand for Money: Some Theoretical and Empirical Results.”

       Journal of Political Economy 67: 327-351.

Friedman, Milton. 1966. “Interest Rates and the Demand for Money.” Journal of Law and

       Economics 9: 71-85.




                                                                                         26
Friedman, Milton. 1974. “A Theoretical Framework for Monetary Analysis.” In R. J. Gordon

       (ed.) Milton Friedman’s Monetary Analysis. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1-62.

Friedman, Milton. 2001. Interviewed by John B. Taylor. Macroeconomic Dynamics 5: 101-131.

Friedman, Milton, and Walter W. Heller. 1969. Monetary vs. Fiscal Policy: A Dialogue. New

       York: W.W. Norton.

Friedman, Milton, and David Meiselman. 1963. “The Relative Stability of Monetary Velocity

       and the Investment Multiplier in the United States, 1897-1958.” In Stabilization Policies,

       165-268. Prepared for the Commission on Money and Credit. Englewood Cliffs, N. J.:

       Prentice-Hall.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963a. “Money and Business Cycles.” Review of

       Economics and Statistics 45(2, supplement): 32-64.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1963b. A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-

       1960. Princeton, N. J.: Princeton University Press.

Friedman, Milton, and Anna J. Schwartz. 1982. Monetary Trends in the United States and the

       United Kingdom: Their Relation to Income, Prices, and Interest Rates. Chicago: Chicago

       University Press.

Gordon, Robert J. (ed.). 1974. Milton Friedman’s Monetary Framework: A Debate with his

       Critics. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Hammond, J. Daniel. 1996. Theory and Measurement: Causality Issues in Milton Friedman’s

       Monetary Economics. New York: Cambridge University Press.

Hansen, Alvin. 1953. A Guide to Keynes. New York: McGraw Hill.

Hester, Donald D. 1964. “Keynes and the Quantity Theory: A Comment on the Friedman-

       Meiselman CMC Paper.” Review of Economics and Statistics, November, 364-477




                                                                                           27
Hicks, Sir John R. (1937), “ Mr. Keynes and the ‘Classics’.” Econometrica, Vol. V, no.2, April.

       Reprinted in Critical Essays, Oxford Clarendon Press 1967.

Hirsch, Abraham, and Neil de Marchi. 1990. Milton Friedman: Economics in Theory and

       Practice. New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf.

Hoover, Kevin D. 1988. The New Classical Macroeconomics: A Sceptical Inquiry. Oxford:

       Blackwell.

Johnson, Harry G. 1971. “The Keynesian Revolution and the Monetarist Counter-Revolution.”

       American Economic Review 61: 1-14.

Keynes, John Maynard. 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest, and Money.

       London: Macmillan.

Laidler, David. 1981. “Monetarism: An Interpretation and an Assessment.” Economic Journal

       91: 49-55.

Lucas, Robert E., Jr. 1994. “Review of Milton Friedman and Anna J. Schwartz’s A Monetary

       History of the United States, 1867-1960. Journal of Monetary Economics 34(1):5-16.

Mayer, Thomas. 1978. The Structure of Monetarism. New York: W.W. Norton.

McCallum, Bennett T. 1999. “ Recent Development in the Analysis of Monetary Policy Rules.”

       Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review, November/December (1999): 3 –11.

McCallum, Bennett T., and Edward Nelson. 1999. “An Optimizing IS-LM Specification for

       Monetary Policy and Business Cycle Analysis.” Journal of Money, Credit and Banking

       31, 3 (August part1): 296-315.

Meyer, Laurence H. 2001. “Does Money Matter?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review,

       September-October: 1-15.




                                                                                          28
Miron, Jeffrey A. 1994. “Empirical Methodology in Macroeconomics: Explaining the Success of

       Friedman and Schwartz’s A Monetary History of the United States, 1867-1960. Journal

       of Monetary Economics 34: 17-25.

Modigliani, Franco. 1944. “Liquidity Preference and the Theory of Interest and Money.”

       Econometrica 12: 45-88.

Purvis, Douglas D. 1980. “Monetarisn: A Review.” Canadian Journal of Economics February:

       96-122.

Stein, Jerome L. (ed.). 1976. Monetarism. Amsterdam: North-Holland.

Summers, Lawrence H. 1991. “The Scientific Illusion in Empirical Macroeconomics.”

       Scandinavian Journal of Economics 93 (2): 129-148.

Tobin, James. 1970. “Money and Income: Post Hoc Ergo Propter Hoc?” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 84: 301-317.




                                                                                         29
