                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              A MULTINATIONAL PERSPECTIVE ON
                               CAPITAL STRUCTURE CHOICE AND
                                 INTERNAL CAPITAL MARKETS

                                              Mihir A. Desai
                                              C. Fritz Foley
                                            James R. Hines Jr.

                                           Working Paper 9715
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9715


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies was conducted at the International
Investment Division, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce under arrangements that
maintain legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed are those of the authors and do not reflect
official positions of the U.S. Department of Commerce. We thank William Zeile for helpful comments, and
the Lois and Bruce Zenkel Research Fund at the University of Michigan and the Division of Research at
Harvard Business School for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
© notice, is given to the source.
A Multinational Perspective on Capital Structure Choice and Internal Capital Markets
Mihir A. Desai, C. Fritz Foley, and James R. Hines Jr.
NBER Working Paper No. 9715
May 2003
JEL No. G32, H25, G38, F23

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper examines the impact of local tax rates and capital market conditions on the level and
composition of borrowing by foreign affiliates of American multinational corporations. The
evidence indicates that 10 percent higher local tax rates are associated with 2.8 percent higher
debt/asset ratios of American-owned affiliates, and that borrowing from related parties is particularly
sensitive to tax rates. Borrowing by American affiliates responds to local inflation and political risks,
and is more costly in countries with underdeveloped capital markets and those providing weak legal
protections for creditors. Affiliates in environments where external borrowing is costly borrow less
from unrelated parties: one percent higher interest rates are associated with 1.4 to 2.0 percent less
external debt as a fraction of assets. Instrumental variables analysis reveals that affiliates substitute
loans from parent companies for between half and three quarters of the reduced borrowing from
unrelated parties stemming from adverse local capital market conditions. These patterns suggest that
multinational firms are able to structure their finances in response to tax and capital market
conditions, thereby creating opportunities not available to many of their local competitors.


Mihir A. Desai                  C. Fritz Foley                          James R. Hines Jr.
Harvard Business School         University of Michigan                  University of Michigan
Morgan 363                      Business School                         Business School
Soldiers Field                  701 Tappan Street                       701 Tappan Street
Boston, MA 02163                Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234                Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1234
and NBER                        ffoley@umich.edu                        and NBER
mdesai@hbs.edu                                                          jrhines@umich.edu
1.     Introduction

       To what extent does corporate borrowing increase due to the tax deductibility of
interest expenses and decline in response to costs imposed by capital market
underdevelopment or unfavorable legal systems? Do firms use internal capital markets to
substitute for external finance when the latter is costly, and if so, how extensive is such
substitution? Empirical attempts to answer these fundamental questions face significant
challenges. Limited variation in tax incentives within countries makes it difficult to identify
the effects of taxes, and detailed information on the workings of internal capital markets is
scarce. Recent efforts using cross-country samples exploit the rich variation that
international comparisons offer, but frequently face problems associated with
nonstandardized measurement across countries and limited statistical power due to small
sample sizes.

       Cross-country studies of capital structure commonly ignore the many wrinkles
associated with multinational firms. These firms face differing tax incentives and legal
regimes around the world, making it possible to identify the impact of these factors on
financing choices. Analysis of the behavior of multinational firms promises clean estimates
of the sensitivity of capital structure choice to tax incentives, an understanding of the
mechanisms by which weak capital markets alter financing choices, and insight into the
ways in which internal capital markets can facilitate tax minimization and provide an
alternate financing source when external financing is most costly.

       This paper analyzes determinants of the capital structures of foreign affiliates of U.S.
multinational firms. The use of confidential affiliate-level data makes it possible to
distinguish the behavior of foreign affiliates of the same parent companies operating in
markets with differing tax rates and capital market regimes, and to differentiate the
determinants of internal and external borrowing. As a result, it is possible to obtain clean
estimates of the impact of taxation and local capital market conditions while implicitly
controlling for considerations that are common to all affiliates of the same company. The
sample includes information on the activities of roughly 3,700 U.S. multinational firms
operating in more than 150 countries through approximately 30,000 affiliates in 1982, 1989,



                                                                                                1
and 1994. Since all reporting follows generally accepted U.S. accounting principles, and all
financial information is filed through U.S. entities familiar with such practices, it is not
necessary to make problematic assumptions normally required in order to analyze financial
information collected in different countries.

        Three empirical findings emerge from the regressions. First, there is strong evidence
that affiliates of multinational firms alter the level and composition of debt in response to tax
incentives and capital market conditions. The estimates imply that 10 percent higher tax
rates are associated with 2.8 percent greater debt as a fraction of assets, and firms borrow
less in countries with underdeveloped capital markets and poor legal protections for
creditors. Internal finance is particularly sensitive to tax differences. While the estimated
elasticity of external borrowing with respect to the tax rate is 0.20, the estimated tax
elasticity of borrowing from parent companies is 0.34.

        Second, the evidence indicates that external borrowing is more costly in
environments in which creditor rights are weak and locally available external debt is scarce.
Interest rates on external debt differ for affiliates of the same American parent company
located in different host countries. Additionally, local capital market conditions and
creditor rights do not appear to affect interest rates charged on related party debt further
confirming this evidence.

        Third, the composition of affiliate leverage responds to differences in local credit
market conditions. Affiliates in countries with weak creditor rights and shallow capital
markets substitute internal borrowing from parent companies for costly external debt.
Instrumental variables regressions in which creditor rights and capital market conditions
serve as instruments for the price or quantity of external debt indicate that affiliates increase
related party borrowing by between half and three-quarters of the reduction in external
borrowing due to capital market conditions. All of these results control for other
considerations, such as the desire to hedge political risks and the inflationary environment,
that also appear to influence affiliate leverage and its composition. In particular,
multinational firms employ more local borrowing in response to higher inflation levels and
greater political risk.



                                                                                                2
         Section 2 of the paper reviews studies of the effect of tax incentives on capital
structure, the impact of local capital market conditions on financing decisions, and the
workings of internal capital markets. Section 3 describes the affiliate-level data and offers
summaries of the leverage and interest rate measures used in the analysis. Section 4
analyzes the determinants of affiliate capital structure and the use of internal capital to
substitute for external sources of funds. Section 5 concludes.

2.        Motivation and Hypotheses

         The financing of foreign affiliates is likely to be influenced by the effect of local tax
rates and capital market conditions on the after-tax cost of funds, conditioned on the ability
to obtain resources from parent companies. As a result, affiliate financing illuminates the
importance of taxes in influencing capital structure, the impact of institutions on financing
choices, and the workings of internal capital markets.

2.1.     Taxes and Capital Structure

         Since interest payments to lenders usually are fully deductible from taxable income,
while dividend payments to shareholders are not, tax systems typically encourage the use of
debt rather than equity finance.1 This incentive grows as the corporate tax rate rises, so high
corporate tax rates are often expected to be associated with greater corporate indebtedness.
As Auerbach (2002) and Graham (forthcoming) note, however, estimating the sensitivity of
capital structure to tax incentives has proven remarkably difficult, due in part to
measurement problems.2 Consequently, it is not surprising that several studies find no effect
or unexpected relationships between tax incentives and the use of debt.3 One problem in

1
  There are subtle differences between the tax incentives of domestic and multinational firms. American
multinational firms owe taxes to the United States on their foreign incomes, but defer U.S. taxes until profits are
repatriated, and are entitled to claim credits for foreign income taxes paid. The upshot of this system is that
American firms typically can arrange their finances to benefit from the deductibility of interest expenses in high-
tax countries, much as do domestic firms in those countries; for analyses see Hines and Rice (1994) and Hines
(1999).
2
  The Auerbach and Graham surveys provide exhaustive literature reviews that are beyond the scope of this
section. In particular, valuation effects of debt usage, as analyzed by Fama and French (1998) and Graham
(2000), are not considered, given the difficulty of identifying valuation changes attributable to individual foreign
affiliates.
3
  These results have also generated considerable skepticism on the importance of taxes to capital structure as
evidenced in Myers et al. (1998). Such skepticism does not conform to the survey results in Graham and Harvey
(2001).


                                                                                                                       3
identifying tax effects stems from the lack of variation in corporate tax rates. By focusing
on whether a firm is near tax exhaustion, Mackie-Mason (1990) avoids this constraint and
identifies evidence of tax effects, in which the deductibility of interest expenses appears to
encourage firms to use greater leverage than they otherwise would. Graham (1996),
Graham, Lemmon, and Schallheim (1998), and Graham (1999) employ a sophisticated
measure of the marginal tax rate in the United States based on simulations and prevailing tax
rules to investigate further the use of debt and the relevance of personal taxation. The use of
cross-country evidence has the potential to contribute further evidence by analyzing
outcomes when firms simultaneously select capital structures in several tax environments.
This approach is able to overcome some of the difficulties that arise in identifying the
marginal investor in general equilibrium, and in accounting for the numerous factors that
might give rise to deviations from a Miller (1977) equilibrium.

         Hodder and Senbet (1990) extend the logic of a Miller equilibrium to an international
setting to suggest that, in an integrated world capital market, all firms will locate debt in the
most tax-advantaged jurisdictions.4 As it is reasonable to posit that multinational firms
operate in integrated capital markets, a multinational firm faces a single cost of capital, and
therefore the relative tax advantage of debt in any market is simply a function of local tax
rates. As a result, the sensitivity of foreign affiliate capital structure to foreign tax rates
offers a powerful and clean test of the response of leverage to differential tax advantages to
debt.5

2.2.     Institutions, Markets and External Borrowing Conditions




4
  While Hodder and Senbet (1991) predict extreme outcomes, there are other factors (some of which are
considered below) that might constrain firms from corner solutions. Some countries impose “thin capitalization”
rules that limit the tax deductibility of interest paid by firms deemed to have excessive debt. These rules are
typically vaguely worded and seldom, though arbitrarily, imposed, making their effects difficult to analyze
quantitatively; though any impact they have is likely to reduce the estimated significance of factors influencing
total indebtedness. Also, “thin capitalization” rules generally do not affect the choice between different kinds of
debt. Other theoretical examinations of the effect of tax incentives on the use of debt within multinational firms
include Hines (1994), Chowdry and Nanda (1994), and Chowdry and Coval (1998).
5
  Other studies examine specific aspects of the effect of taxation on the financing of multinational firms. See
Froot and Hines (1995) on the effects of limits to the deductibility of interest expenses due to the U.S. allocation
rules, Desai and Hines (1999) on changes in joint venture capital structure in response to foreign tax credit
limitations, and Altshuler and Grubert (2003) on interaffiliate transactions motivated by tax rules.


                                                                                                                   4
           A large body of work indicates that there are important differences in the ability of
firms to raise capital in different countries. LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer and Vishny
(1998) trace these effects to differences in legal regimes, and create an index of creditor
rights in bankruptcy for a large sample of countries. In prior work (1997), these authors
show that these legal regimes have large effects on the size and breadth of capital markets:
countries with weak creditor rights have significantly smaller local debt markets. There is
evidence of other important determinants of financial development, but the empirical
observation that financial development varies widely is commonly noted.6

           Weak local financial markets appear to be associated with lower rates of investment
and economic expansion. Evidence of this effect is provided at the country level by King
and Levine (1993), at the industry level by Rajan and Zingales (1998), and at the firm level
by Demirguc-Kunt and Maksimovic (1998). However, existing work does not detail the
extent to which weak capital market conditions affect the cost of external borrowing, capital
structure choice, and the use of internal capital markets as substitutes for external capital
markets. In their cross-country analysis of the determinants of capital structure choice,
Rajan and Zingales (1995) focus on G-7 countries, finding limited evidence of systematic
differences across these similar countries. Booth, Aivazian, Demirguc-Kunt, and
Maksimovic (2001) analyze firms in ten developing countries, finding that these firms use
less long term debt than do comparable firms in developed countries, and that unspecified
country factors are significant determinants of capital structure. These studies leave open
questions of how capital market conditions might directly alter the cost of external debt, or
how these conditions might push firms to attempt to substitute for locally provided external
capital.

           In order for multinational affiliate capital structure decisions to illuminate the
mechanisms by which local contracting conditions impact borrowing costs, multinational
bankruptcies must follow local bankruptcy rules rather than the bankruptcy rules of the
home country. This is generally the case. As in international taxation, the two competing
principles of “universality” and “territoriality” govern the issue of how transnational
bankruptcies are resolved. Under universality, the jurisdiction where the primary

6
    See, for example, Rajan and Zingales (forthcoming).


                                                                                                   5
bankruptcy proceeding takes place would govern the assets and competing claims on those
assets wherever they are located. In contrast, territoriality asserts that bankruptcy laws
should not be respected beyond a state’s borders.

         As one might expect, states attempt to apply their laws to creditors and assets in
other states, but severely limit the application of foreign bankruptcy laws to cases involving
local creditors and local assets of a foreign debtor. Bebchuk and Guzman (1999) note that
while U.S. bankruptcy law clearly extends jurisdiction of the bankruptcy court and the estate
created by the filing of a bankruptcy proceeding to all assets worldwide, U.S. courts often
are unwilling to relinquish control over domestic assets to foreign bankruptcy proceedings.
The bankruptcy laws of many other countries are even more territorial in nature. Japanese
bankruptcy law clearly states that bankruptcy rulings in other countries are not effective in
Japan. Few bilateral bankruptcy treaties exist so any inconsistencies must rely on ad hoc
cooperation arrangements, which have not worked well.7 Recent multilateral efforts
“preserves to each state its local substantive law with respect to claims to the debtor’s assets
located in that state.”8 In short, there is a remarkable void in the laws governing
multinational bankruptcies, and the respect for territoriality suggests that local bankruptcy
rules would apply to the resolution of insolvency proceedings involving a multinational
affiliate.9

         As a result of the prevalence of territoriality, a multinational firm effectively is faced
with the opportunity of borrowing across a variety of creditor rights regimes. Real
borrowing rates should be higher (all other things equal) in countries in which lenders have
fewer rights in the event of default. Noe (2000) provides an equilibrium model of capital

7
  See Tagashira (1994) for further discussion of these kinds of efforts.
8
  Gitlin and Flaschen (1987) describe the substance of the 1980 Working Group Draft of the EEC which has yet
not been finalized. Section 304 of the U.S. bankruptcy code is unique in its recognition of foreign bankruptcy
proceedings although ambiguous in respect to how it should be implemented. Powers (1993) details a more
recent private effort to implement universality internationally.
9
  See, for example, Gitlin and Flaschen (1987). The messy resolution of the 1974 bankruptcy of the Herstatt Bank
bankruptcy was due in part to the prevailing confusion on these jurisdictional issues. For a more recent example,
see Flaschen and Silverman (1993) for a discussion of the Maxwell Communications Corporation (MCC)
insolvency. The jurisdictional “shopping” involved in the MCC case provides an interesting example of the
sensitivity of debtors to the biases of different legal codes. According to Flaschen and Silverman, after defaulting,
“MCC became concerned that banks might seek the commencement of insolvency proceedings in England, which
would effectively displace operating management. In response, MCC … filed a voluntary petition under Chapter
11 of the United States Bankruptcy Court.”


                                                                                                                   6
structure choice for multinational affiliates facing different legal regimes.10 The ability to
renegotiate strategically with creditors in times of fiscal distress is attractive to the distressed
firm but reduces its incentive to avoid bankruptcy, creating an agency problem that is
reflected in higher borrowing rates.

         Since shareholders bear agency costs, they want to minimize renegotiation
opportunities, and do so by concentrating their borrowing in creditor-friendly environments
while avoiding less-creditor-friendly environments. Moreover, internal capital markets can
be used to fund subsidiaries in weak-creditor rights environments with loans from
subsidiaries (or home operations) in strong-creditor-rights regimes. The analysis that
follows tests for the effects of different creditor regimes to see if multinationals capitalize
their affiliates and structure their internal financing in response to these regime differences.
In addition to these predictions on the level and composition of affiliate debt, the interest
rates paid by multinational firms should reflect the fact that lenders in countries with weak
legal protections receive less in adverse states of the world than do lenders in countries
providing strong legal protections. Furthermore, since there is adverse selection in the
lending market, and moral hazard once borrowers receive loans, local banks and other
lenders need to expend resources to investigate potential borrowers, monitor their behavior
once loans are granted, and deploy legal resources to enforce contracts. These are real
resource costs that should be reflected in still higher interest rates paid by borrowers and
received by lenders in countries with weak creditor rights.

2.3.     Internal Capital Markets

         The sensitivity of investment to internal cash flows noted since Meyer and Kuh
(1957) has drawn attention to the role of internal capital markets and how they are used by
firms in response to any differences between internal and external costs of funds. Many
efforts to examine the role of internal capital markets have been limited by relatively small
samples, as in Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1994) and Lamont (1997), or, as

10
   Shleifer and Wolfenzon (2002) analyze the impact of creditor rights on a variety of economic outcomes in
closed and open economies. They find that interest rates in closed economies react to the strength of investor
rights, though since they assume that monitoring and enforcement costs are effectively incurred by borrowers,
interest rates need not rise in settings with weak creditor rights. Their model does not provide for intermediate
cases where multinational firms trade-off borrowing opportunities across legal regimes, as Noe (2000) does.


                                                                                                                    7
noted by Kaplan and Zingales (1997), by questionable a priori assumptions about what
characterizes firms that face sizable wedges between internal and external costs of funds. It
is possible to address these concerns by focusing on a large sample of firms, by looking
across environments where differences between internal and external costs of funds differ
for systematic legal and capital market development reasons, and by directly analyzing the
allocation of funds within firms in response to these incentives.11

         Tests of the extent of substitution of internal capital for external capital across
different borrowing environments reveal the degree to which multinational firms can use
internal markets to overcome shortcomings associated with external credit market
conditions. These tests also produce powerful additional evidence of whether weak local
capital market conditions do indeed constrain local borrowers. If affiliates substitute parent
provided debt for external debt where creditor rights are weak, and where locally provided
debt is scarce or expensive, then the use of external debt must be a relatively unattractive
option in those locations. If local firms rely primarily on local sources of debt, then their
access to large internal capital markets may give multinational affiliates cost advantages
over local firms. Additionally, if tax incentives are operative, then internal capital markets
should be even more sensitive to local tax incentives than is arm’s-length borrowing,
providing a further test of the effect of taxes on financing choices.

3.       Multinational Affiliate Data

         The empirical work analyzes data collected by the Bureau of Economic Analysis
(BEA) for its Benchmark Survey of U.S. Direct Investment Abroad in 1982, 1989, and
1994, which includes information on the financial and operating characteristics of U.S. firms
operating abroad. As a result of confidentiality assurances and penalties for noncompliance,
BEA believes that coverage is close to complete and levels of accuracy are high.12 The
surveys ask reporters for details on each affiliates’ income statement, balance sheet,

11
   Stein (1997), Shin and Stulz (1998), and Scharfstein and Stein (2000), among others, discuss how internal
capital markets can either ameliorate or exacerbate other frictions. Hubbard and Palia (1999) emphasize
empirically how conglomerates may use internal capital markets opportunistically in response to costly external
financing.
12
   The International Investment and Trade in Services Survey Act governs the collection of the data and the Act
ensures that “use of an individual company’s data for tax, investigative, or regulatory purposes is prohibited.”
Willful noncompliance with the Act can result in penalties of up to $10,000 or a prison term of one year.


                                                                                                                   8
employment, and a variety of transactions between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates.
The foreign affiliate survey forms that U.S. multinational enterprises are required to
complete vary depending on the year, the size of the affiliate, and the U.S. parent’s
percentage of ownership of the affiliate. In each of the benchmark years considered (1982,
1989, and 1994), all affiliates with sales, assets, or net income in excess of $3 million in
absolute value, and their parents, were required to file extensive reports.13 Reporters must
abide by generally accepted U.S. accounting principles and follow FASB 52 when dealing
with foreign currency translations.14

         U.S. direct investment abroad is defined as the direct or indirect ownership or control
by a single U.S. legal entity of at least ten percent of the voting securities of an incorporated
foreign business enterprise or the equivalent interest in an unincorporated foreign business
enterprise. A U.S. multinational entity is the combination of a single U.S. legal entity that
has made the direct investment, called the U.S. parent, and at least one foreign business
enterprise, called the foreign affiliate.15 In order to be considered as a legitimate foreign
affiliate, the foreign business enterprise should be paying foreign income taxes, have a
substantial physical presence abroad, keep separate financial records, and should take title to
the goods it sells and receive revenue from its sales.

         The top panel of Table I displays the descriptive statistics for the sample of affiliates
in each of the three benchmark years. In 1994, 17,898 affiliates of 2,373 parent firms filed
forms, and these affiliates had mean and median assets of $74 million and $13 million
respectively. The main measure of leverage used in the analysis that follows is the ratio of
current liabilities and long-term debt to affiliate assets. This measure has a mean and
median of approximately 0.55 over the sample period. The main reason for focusing the
analysis on this measure of leverage is that the data allow this measure to be disaggregated




13
   The particularities of the reporting vary with ownership form and size. Majority-owned affiliates were required
to report a broader set of accounting items than minority-owned affiliates. Additionally, in 1989 and 1994 larger
affiliates were required to file longer forms than were smaller affiliates.
14
   Additional information on the BEA data can be found in Mataloni (1995).
15
   In order to determine ownership stakes in the presence of indirect ownership, BEA determines the percentage
of parent ownership at each link and then multiplies these percentages to compute the parent’s total effective
ownership.


                                                                                                                9
into the amount owed to an affiliate’s corporate parent and the amount owed to other
lenders.

         As the data in Table I indicate, the vast majority of debt comes from non-parent
sources. Net Current Liabilities and Long-Term Debt Owed to Parent/Assets is the ratio of
the difference between the level of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows
from, and lends to, its U.S. parent to total affiliate assets. This variable has a mean of
approximately 0.08 over the sample period, and a median that is just larger than zero.
Current Liabilities and Long-Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets, the ratio of the level
of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from non-parent sources to total
affiliate assets, has a mean of 0.44 and a median of 0.41 for the benchmark years. On
average less than 20 percent of current liabilities and long-term debt comes from parent
sources.16

         The BEA data also contain information on the interest expense associated with
affiliate debt, and it is possible to use this information to calculate an affiliate’s average
interest rate in a year. Because the data do not contain detailed information on interest rates
charged on individual loans or on which types of debt are interest bearing, the analysis uses
two estimates of interest rates. The first measure is the Interest Rate on Non-Parent
Liabilities and Debt, which is calculated by dividing affiliate interest payments to non-
parents by current liabilities and long-term debt borrowed from non-parent sources. This
variable has a mean of approximately 0.05 and a median of approximately 0.02 over the
sample period. One of the reasons that these average interest rates appear low is that the
broad measure of debt used in this calculation includes trade credit which is often non-
interest bearing.17

16
   Two shortcomings of the data potentially limit identification of external and parent borrowing. First, there is no
information on the extent to which parent companies guarantee affiliate loans. Second, back-to-back loans, in
which a parent lends to a multinational bank which in turn lends to an affiliate through a branch located abroad,
are recorded as external debt despite significant parent involvement. Unfortunately, there is no way of estimating
the extent to which firms use parental guarantees or back-to-back loans. Since these shortcomings blur the
distinction between external and parent borrowing, they may reduce the measured differences between these two
forms of debt. As a result, tests that distinguish the responsiveness of external and parent debt to taxes and
borrowing conditions using these data if anything underestimate true differences, and tests of the substitution of
parent provided debt for external debt if anything underestimate the extent of substitution.
17
   Interest rates are based on current interest payments, and therefore exclude payments to creditors in the event of
default. Capital market equilibrium implies that interest rates measured in this way should be higher in


                                                                                                                  10
         To ensure that the analysis of interest rates does not yield results that are spuriously
driven by differences in the use of trade credit, the analysis also employs Interest Rate on
Non-Trade Account Liabilities and Debt, which is the ratio of total interest paid to a
measure of current liabilities and long term debt that excludes trade accounts and trade notes
payable. This alternative interest rate variable has a mean of 0.08 and a median of 0.04.
Unlike the first interest rate variable, this measure combines both the interest expense
associated with, and the level of, related party and arm’s-length debt.

         The bottom panel of Table I provides summary statistics for independent variables
used in the regression analysis. Included among these variables are measures of affiliate
characteristics that have been shown to be correlated with leverage in other studies.18 These
are all drawn from BEA data and include a measure of the tangibility of affiliate assets (Net
Property, Plant and Equipment/Assets), the cash flow generating capacity of underlying
assets (EBITDA/Assets), and affiliate size (the natural logarithm of affiliate sales). In
addition, the relevant country-level measures of tax incentives, capital market depth, legal
protections, and macroeconomic and political stability are also summarized. The BEA data
is also the source of the tax rate data. The country tax rate is calculated by first taking the
ratio of foreign income taxes paid to foreign pretax income for each affiliate observation and
then using the medians of these rates as country-level observations for each country and
year.19 Mean and median country tax rates are equal to approximately 34 percent over the
sample period. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to
GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index
of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998) that ranges from 0 to 4 with higher levels indicating stronger legal

jurisdictions in which creditor rights are weaker, and expected default payments are lower. Interest payments are
recorded in U.S. dollars. The currency denomination of debt may be important to financial decision making
within a multinational firm, but it is impossible to tell from the BEA data in which currency debt is formally
denominated. See Kedia and Mazumdar (forthcoming) and Allayannis, Brown and Klapper (forthcoming) for
analyses of the determinants of the currency denomination of debt.
18
   See, for example, Titman and Wessels (1988) and Rajan and Zingales (1995).
19
   Affiliates with negative net income are excluded for the purposes of calculating country tax rates. For a more
comprehensive description of the calculation of affiliate tax rates, see Desai, Foley and Hines (2001). In
particular, these income tax rates do not include withholding taxes on cross-border interest payments to related
parties, since such taxes are endogenous to interest payments and in any case immediately creditable against
home-country tax liabilities. Desai and Hines (1999) report that adjusting country tax rates for withholding taxes




                                                                                                                11
protections. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-
1994 period derived from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0
and 1, with higher values indicating greater risk. The Average Rate of Inflation is the
average percentage change in the host country’s GDP deflator over the 1982-1994 period.

4.        Results

          The regressions reported in this section investigate three aspects of borrowing by
foreign affiliates: how total leverage is affected by local tax rates and legal protections
available to creditors, how interest rates on related party and external debt are affected by
legal protections and capital market depth, and how multinational firms use related party
debt to substitute for external debt in cases in which government policies make external debt
costly.

4.1.      Determinants of Affiliate Leverage

          Affiliates in countries with high local corporate tax rates face the strongest incentives
to finance their investments with debt rather than equity. Prior to investigating the
relationship between leverage and tax rates in a regression framework using country-
specific, firm-specific and affiliate-specific controls, it is useful to assess this relationship
with aggregate data. Figure 1 depicts the relationship between country tax rates and U.S.
affiliate leverage in 1994. Leverage is measured as the ratio of aggregate current liabilities
and long term debt to aggregate assets in each host country as published in the 1994
benchmark survey.20 Figure 1 indicates that affiliates in high tax countries generally make
greater use of debt to finance their assets than do affiliates in low tax countries. Affiliates in
tax havens such as Bermuda and Barbados have aggregate leverage ratios of 0.30 or less,
while affiliates in high tax countries such as Japan and Italy have aggregate leverage ratios
that exceed 0.53. Although the scatter plot in Figure 1 does not control for characteristics of
affiliates, or non-tax features of host countries, it does provide suggestive evidence that



does not affect the estimated impact of taxation on affiliate borrowing, due to the combination of creditability and
low withholding tax rates on related-party interest payments.
20
   See U.S. Department of Commerce (1998). When countries are equal weighted the measure of leverage
described in the text has a mean of 0.49 and a standard deviation of 0.13.


                                                                                                                 12
multinational parents capitalize their affiliates differentially in response to the incentives
associated with the relative tax advantage of debt.

        Figure 2 provides a similar descriptive scatter plot but emphasizes the relationship
between capital market depth, measured as the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money
banks in the host country to GDP, and aggregate leverage ratios of U.S. affiliates in 1994.
The upward-sloping pattern in Figure 2 suggests that there is a positive correlation between
levels of affiliate leverage and the local availability of credit. U.S. affiliates exhibit high
leverage ratios in countries such as Japan and Switzerland, which have very deep credit
markets, and considerably lower leverage ratios in countries such as Peru, the Dominican
Republic, and Panama, where domestic private credit is scarce. There are exceptions to this
pattern: affiliates have high leverage ratios in Honduras, Ecuador, Nigeria, Venezuela and
some other countries in which they seem to overcome shortcomings in local credit markets.
In order to isolate more carefully the relationship between affiliate leverage, corporate tax
incentives, and the strength of local credit markets, while also controlling for conflating
factors, it is helpful to run regressions, the results of which are presented in Table II.

        The dependent variable in the specifications reported in Table II is the same measure
of leverage employed in Figures 1 and 2, but is constructed at the affiliate level, so it equals
the ratio of affiliate current liabilities and long term debt to total assets. The data consist of
affiliate-year observations for affiliates of U.S. firms in 1982, 1989, and 1994. The
regressions reported in columns 1 and 2 of Table II suggest that affiliate leverage responds
strongly to local tax incentives. The 0.2508 estimated coefficient on the country tax rate in
the regression reported in column 1 implies that ten percent higher tax rates are associated
with affiliate leverage that is 2.5 percent greater as a fraction of assets.21 One difficulty with
interpreting the tax rate coefficient reported in column 1 is that the specification does not
control for other potential determinants of affiliate leverage, particularly those that vary
between companies and over time. Column 2 of Table II reports estimated coefficients from
a regression that includes a full set of year dummy variables, parent company dummy
variables, and affiliate industry dummy variables. As a result, firm-specific considerations




                                                                                                  13
and industry-specific considerations implicitly do not affect the estimates reported in column
2 and subsequent specifications reported in even-numbered columns of Table II. The
estimated effect of local tax incentives on affiliate leverage decisions is robust to the
inclusion of fixed effects (the estimated tax rate coefficient reported in column 2 is almost
identical to that reported in column 1), and to the inclusion of additional explanatory
variables in columns 3 through 10.

         The specifications presented in columns 3 through 10 of Table II also consider the
effect of capital market development and investor protections on levels of affiliate leverage.
In column 3, the estimated 0.0166 coefficient on private credit indicates that greater capital
market depth, as captured by ten percent greater use of private credit as a fraction of GDP,
corresponds to 0.166 percent greater affiliate leverage as a fraction of assets. This effect
disappears, however, when parent, industry and year fixed effects are included, as in the
regression presented in column 4. The regressions reported in columns 5 and 6 indicate that
stronger legal protections for creditors are associated with greater use of debt, and this effect
is robust to the inclusion of parent, industry, and year fixed effects. In the regression
reported in column 6, a one-point increase in the (5-point) creditor rights index is associated
with 0.82 percent higher affiliate leverage ratios.

         These regressions may in part reflect the impact of heterogeneous affiliate and
country characteristics that are unrelated to tax rates and creditor rights, but happen to be
correlated with them. It is possible to control for relevant observable aspects of
heterogeneity, such as the tangibility of affiliate assets, the cash flow generating capacity of
underlying assets, affiliate size, the political risk of the country of the affiliate, and the
average inflation experience of the affiliate’s host country. The regressions reported in
columns 7-10 of Table II add these variables to the specifications reported in columns 3-6.
Since affiliate characteristics are potentially endogenous to the tax and legal environment,
the purpose of including these variables is to see whether controlling for heterogeneity with
their inclusion greatly changes the estimated impact of tax rates and legal protections for
creditors. The sample size in these specifications is significantly smaller because

21
  Standard errors are in parentheses. The regression is based on treating each affiliate-year observation in the
panel as a separate observation; the standard errors in all of the tables correct for clustering of errors across



                                                                                                                    14
information required to construct the additional controls is collected only for a smaller set of
affiliates.22

         These other affiliate and country characteristics appear to also influence leverage
ratios. Affiliates with greater shares of assets in tangible property use less debt, although the
significance of this effect is sharply reduced with the inclusion of parent, industry and year
effects. Affiliates characterized by greater cash flow generating capacity have significantly
lower levels of affiliate leverage. While a country’s average inflation rate over the period
has no significant effect on affiliate leverage, multinational parents appear to employ greater
levels of leverage in more politically risky countries.23 These controls suggest that leverage
may be used to hedge political risks, and that borrowing needs are limited by the capacity
for producing internally generated funds. The inclusion of these additional affiliate and
country variables has little effect on the estimated impact of taxation and creditor rights on
affiliate leverage.

4.2.     Determinants of Interest Rates

         Tax policies and local capital market conditions influence leverage by affecting
after-tax borrowing costs. It is possible to examine these effects directly, by identifying the
impact of capital market conditions on pretax interest rates. One of the attractive aspects of
performing such an investigation using a panel of multinational affiliates is that it is possible
to compare interest rates faced by affiliates of the same parent firms in different countries.

         Table III presents regressions in which the dependent variable is the Interest Rate on
Non-Parent Liabilities and Debt. The regressions reported in the even-numbered columns of
Table III include parent, country, and year fixed effects, and all of the reported standard
errors allow for clustering at the country/industry level. Since only certain affiliates are




observations in country/industry cells.
22
   Specifically, all majority owned affiliates that report in 1982, and all majority owned affiliates that are large
enough to file the long form in 1989 and 1994 are included in the reduced sample. The sample size changes in
similar ways in Tables V, VI, VIII, and A1.
23
   These results on political risk are consistent with Novaes (2002) who demonstrates that foreign affiliates in
Brazil are more highly levered than local firms, and alter their leverage in response to political risk.


                                                                                                                       15
required to report certain items, the sample used in these specifications is the smaller sample
used in the regressions presented in columns 7-10 of Table II.24

           The regressions reported in columns 1-4 of Table III measure the interest rate impact
of capital market depth and creditor rights protection. The estimated –0.0443 coefficient
reported in column 1 indicates that ten percent greater host country use of private credit as a
fraction of GDP is associated with 0.4 percent lower interest rates. The regression reported
in column 2 shows that this effect persists when controlling for parent, industry, and year
fixed effects. The results presented in columns 3 and 4 suggest that stronger legal
protections for creditors reduce interest rates, a one-point improvement in legal protections
being associated with one percent lower interest rates. Columns 5-8 report regressions that
are the same as those reported in columns 1-4, but add controls for local tax rates, affiliate
level variation in tangibility of assets, cash-flow generating capacity, and size and country-
level variation in political risk and inflation. Better creditor rights and private credit
availability continue to be associated with lower interest rates, though the magnitudes of the
estimated effects are smaller in these regressions than in the corresponding regressions
reported in columns 1-4. Affiliates with greater earnings as a fraction of assets face lower
borrowing rates, as do affiliates with fewer tangible assets; higher levels of political risk and
inflation appear to increase local borrowing rates.

           The regressions presented in Table III indicate that interest rates are higher in
countries with underdeveloped capital markets and poor creditor legal rights. It is
noteworthy that, since parent company fixed effects are included as independent variables in
the regressions reported in the even-numbered columns of Table III, these interest rate
effects appear between affiliates of the same companies. This evidence is, however, subject
to two limitations. The first is that the denominator of the interest rate variable is total
liabilities, including trade credits on which explicit interest is seldom paid. As a result,
measured interest rates are somewhat low and may vary between countries due to trade
financing practices. The second limitation is that related-party and third-party debt are
treated symmetrically, which while statistically appropriate nonetheless obscures what might
be an important distinction. Since creditor rights are considerably less important for

24
     This same sample is also used in the specifications reported in Tables IV and VII.


                                                                                                 16
intrafirm contracting than they are for contracts between unrelated parties, it follows that the
interest rate effects of creditor rights (or capital market development) should be much
smaller in the case of related party debt.

         Table IV reports estimated coefficients from regressions designed to address these
issues. The dependent variable is again the interest rate, in this case constructed as the ratio
of total affiliate interest payments to other current liabilities and long-term debt, excluding
trade accounts. The estimated capital market effects obtained using this dependent variable,
reported in columns 1-4 of Table IV, have the same signs and smaller magnitudes than those
obtained using the first interest rate variable and reported in columns 1-4 of Table III. Thus,
the –0.0049 estimated coefficient in column 4 of Table IV indicates that a one-point
improvement in creditor rights is associated with 0.49 percent lower interest rates, or
somewhat greater than half the effect estimated using the other interest rate variable.

         Some care is necessary in order to identify differences in interest rates charged by
parent companies and interest rates charged by all other parties, since the data do not
distinguish trade credits from other sources of parent debt for all years. Columns 5-8 of
Table IV present regressions using the same dependent variable as in the regressions
reported in columns 1-4, but adding two independent variables: the share of debt from non-
parent sources,25 and the interaction between this share and measures of capital market
development or creditor rights. The results indicate that greater borrowing from non-parent
sources is associated with higher interest rates,26 and this effect is strongest where capital
markets are least developed or creditor rights are weakest. For example, the 0.0232
coefficient on the share of debt from non-parent sources reported in column 8 indicates that
external debt carries 2.32 percent higher interest rates than internal debt in countries with
creditor rights indices of zero. The –0.0078 coefficient on the interaction of creditor rights
and non-parent debt share in the same column implies that the interest rate effect of
borrowing from non-parents declines as creditor rights strengthen, disappearing at a creditor



25
   The share of debt from non-parent sources equals one minus the ratio of current liabilities and long-term debt
owed to the parent to total current liabilities and long-term debt.
26
   The estimated coefficients imply that greater use of non-parent debt increases interest rates at mean values of
the credit market and creditor rights variables, though not at all possible values.


                                                                                                                     17
rights index level of 3 (which greatly exceeds its mean value of 2).27 It is noteworthy that
the estimated effects of capital market development and creditor rights not interacted with
the share of non-parent debt do not differ significantly from zero in the equations reported in
columns 5-8, suggesting that parent debt is no more expensive due to these capital market
considerations.

4.3.     The Composition of Affiliate Leverage

         The finding that costs of external borrowing are particularly high where private
credit is scarce and creditor rights are weak raises the question of whether affiliates avoid
the use of external funds in these environments by relying on internal capital markets to a
greater extent. Figure 3 displays the relationship between the depth of local credit markets
and aggregate borrowing from non-parent sources. The scatter plot implies a positive
relationship between capital market depth and external borrowing. Comparing Figure 2 to
Figure 3 suggests that borrowing from non-parent sources is more sensitive to local capital
market conditions than is total leverage. Affiliates located in many of the countries with
weak credit markets, such as Honduras, Ecuador, Guatemala, Argentina, and Venezuela,
rely heavily on their parents for debt.

         Figure 4 offers additional evidence of the effect of the borrowing environment on the
composition of debt by graphing the relationship between creditor rights and different types
of debt. There is a subtle rise in the ratio of total current liabilities and long term debt to
assets as the creditor rights index increases from zero to four. However, this aggregate
measure obscures divergent effects of creditor rights on borrowing from parents and
borrowing from non-parent sources. The ratio of net parent borrowing to assets decreases as
creditor rights improve, while the ratio of aggregate arms length borrowing to aggregate
assets increases as creditor rights improve.

         In order to analyze these divergent effects more rigorously, Table V presents
regressions that evaluate the impact of tax incentives and measures of capital market depth


27
   It is unlikely that external debt actually becomes less expensive than parent debt in countries with creditor
rights indices above 3; this anomalous prediction instead stems from the imposed linearity of the regression
equation, while the true relationship may be nonlinear.


                                                                                                                   18
on net borrowing from parent companies; Table VI presents comparable regressions in
which the dependent variable is external borrowing. In the regressions reported in Table V,
the dependent variable is the ratio of net current liabilities and long term debt owed to
parents to total affiliate assets. Parent companies use more debt in high tax rate
environments, as evidenced by the positive estimated coefficients on the country tax rate
variable in Table V, and this effect is robust to the inclusion of parent, industry and year
effects as well as affiliate and country level control variables. The 0.0805 estimated tax rate
coefficient in the regression reported in column 8 of Table V, together with a sample mean
parent debt to assets ratio of 0.0801, and a sample mean tax rate of 0.3431, implies a tax
elasticity of parent borrowing equal to 0.34.28 While the estimated 0.2577 tax rate
coefficient in the external borrowing regression reported in column 8 of Table VI is
significantly larger, the implied elasticity of external borrowing is only 0.20, reflecting the
much larger mean volume of external borrowing.29 The greater tax rate sensitivity of
internal borrowing than external borrowing is consistent with the ability of multinational
firms to fine-tune their internal financial transactions to avoid taxes.

        Capital market depth and creditor rights have sharply differing effects on parent
borrowing and external borrowing. The results presented in Table V indicate that greater
availability of private credit and stronger creditor rights are associated with significantly
reduced borrowing from parents; these effects are robust to the inclusion of parent, industry
and year effects, and persist with the inclusion of affiliate and country level controls. For
example, the –0.0037 estimated coefficient in column 10 of Table V implies that a one unit
increase in the creditor rights index is associated with borrowing from parents that falls by
0.4 percent of total assets. Exactly the opposite pattern appears for external borrowing, as
indicated by the results appearing in Table VI, where arm’s-length borrowing increases in
deeper capital markets and in markets that provide for better creditor protections. For
example, the 0.0075 estimated coefficient in column 10 of Table VI indicates that a one unit
increase in the creditor rights index raises borrowing from external sources by 0.75 percent



28
  0.0805*(0.3431/0.0801) = 0.34.
29
  The sample mean ratio of borrowing from non-parents to total assets is 0.4439, and 0.2577*(0.3431/0.4439) =
0.20.


                                                                                                            19
of assets. Thus, it appears that the aggregate effects considered in Table II mask distinct and
contrary effects of capital market indicators on the components of borrowing.

4.4.   The Substitutability of External and Internal Funds

       The fact that multinational affiliates use less external debt and more related-party
debt in settings in which capital market conditions make external debt expensive is
consistent with the hypothesized effects but does not fully measure the degree to which
these alternative forms of financing serve as substitutes. The regressions presented in Table
VII make these comparisons more explicit in a first effort to identify the degree of
substitutability between parent and external debt. The left panel (first four columns) of
Table VII presents regressions in which the dependent variable is borrowing from non-
parent lenders, while the right panel (columns 5-8) presents regressions in which the
dependent variable is borrowing from parents. The independent variable of most interest in
these regressions is the interest rate paid on non-parent debt. Columns 3-4 and 7-8 report
estimated coefficients from instrumental variable (IV) regressions in which capital market
variables are used as instruments for these interest rates. The advantage of specifying these
equations as IV regressions is that doing so makes it possible to trace the effect of capital
market conditions on the cost of external borrowing and its subsequent impact on internal
and external leverage.

       The results indicate that borrowing is highly responsive to policy-induced interest
rate differences. The OLS regressions reported in columns 1-2 of Table VII show little
impact of interest rates on external borrowing, but this is neither surprising nor particularly
informative, given the potential endogeneity of interest rates to borrowing levels. The IV
results reported in columns 3 and 7 indicate that multinational firms reduce external
borrowing and increase parent borrowing in response to the increase in local interest rates
driven by reduced capital market depth. One percent higher interest rates due to capital
market underdevelopment are associated with 2.0 percent reduced external borrowing, and
1.4 percent greater parent borrowing, as a fraction of total assets. The use of creditor rights
as an instrument in the regressions reported in columns 4 and 8 produces somewhat smaller,
but otherwise similar, results. In these regressions, one percent higher interest rates due to



                                                                                                 20
poor creditor rights are associated with 1.5 percent reduced external borrowing, and 0.6
percent greater parent borrowing, as a fraction of total assets. The smaller estimated
magnitude of the interest rate effect on parent borrowing implies that substitution of parent
for external debt, while considerable, is incomplete – which is consistent with the effects of
capital market conditions on total borrowing reported in Table II.

       Estimated coefficients on control variables included in the regressions reported in
Table VII are consistent with the substitutability of parent and external debt. While other
variables have coefficients of the same sign in the regressions for parent and external
borrowing, multinational parents are particularly likely to lend to smaller affiliates (as
measured by sales) that may have difficulty borrowing locally. Similarly, affiliates borrow
more from unrelated parties in high-inflation countries, and reduce parent borrowing.
Assuming that arms-length debt is more likely denominated in local currencies, greater
external borrowing and reduced parent borrowing in high inflation countries is consistent
with hedging inflation risk through greater local borrowing. Similarly, the positive
estimated coefficients on the political risk index in the IV regressions presented in column 6
suggests that political risk is hedged by multinational firms through greater borrowing
externally and substitution of parent debt for equity.

       The extent to which firms substitute parent debt for external debt can be measured
directly, and that is purpose of the regressions reported in Table VIII, in which parent debt is
the dependent variable and arm’s-length debt is an independent variable. In this setting a
coefficient of –1.0 on arm’s-length debt would correspond to perfect substitutability
between parent and arm’s-length debt. Since external and arm’s-length debt are jointly
determined, it is important to use capital market depth and the creditor rights index as
instruments for levels of arm’s-length debt; these IV regressions are reported in columns 3-4
and 7-8 of Table VIII.

       The -0.9693 coefficient reported in column 3 of Table VIII implies that parent debt
substitutes almost perfectly for arm’s-length debt. This estimated degree of substitution
comes from using the extent of capital market development as an instrument for arm’s-
length interest rates, and is somewhat smaller (though still statistically indistinguishable



                                                                                               21
from unity) once affiliate and country controls are included, as in the regression reported in
column 7. Using the creditor rights variable as an alternative instrument produces an
estimated coefficient closer to -0.5 in the regressions reported in columns 4 and 8, which
corresponds to partial substitutability, in which parent lending makes up for half of any debt
reduction due to higher interest rates. All of the specifications imply significant
substitutability of parent borrowing for external borrowing in response to cost differences
driven by local economic policies. By implication, local firms not affiliated with
multinational parent companies face significantly higher costs of capital.

       Given that the measures of parent and external debt used in the regressions reported
in Table VIII are normalized by assets, and debt levels are highly correlated with total
assets, it is conceivable that the measured substitutability of parent for arm’s-length debt
might simply be a function of the way in which the variables are constructed. For example,
if all assets were financed with debt (which is not the case), then the sum of the parent debt
ratio and the arm’s-length debt ratio would equal one, and the estimated coefficient in an
OLS regression of parent debt on arm’s-length debt would be -1. This is unlikely to be a
problem for the IV estimates, which exploit only the part of the variation in arm’s-length
debt that is attributable to capital market considerations, but it is nevertheless useful to
consider alternative specifications for which the concern would not arise even in an OLS
setting. Appendix Table I presents regressions using the same specifications as those
presented in Table VIII, with the difference that the parent and arm’s-length debt measures
are normalized by affiliate owners’ equity instead of affiliate assets. The results are
consistent with those reported in Table VIII, suggesting that the measured substitutability of
parent for arm’s-length debt in the regressions reported in Table VIII is not the product of
the way in which the variables are constructed.

5.     Conclusions

       Understanding the causes and consequences of differences between external and
internal costs of finance – whether they arise from informational asymmetries, government
policies, poor contracting environments, or agency problems – is an important agenda in
finance. While theory illuminates many possible responses of capital structure to cost



                                                                                               22
differences, the empirical literature has struggled with the absence of institutional variation
to study these determinants of financing choices. Even identifying the responsiveness of
firms to the tax advantage of debt has proven challenging, much of the best evidence coming
from subtle differences introduced by firms transiting between taxable and tax-loss status.
One of the advantages of examining these issues across countries is that doing so permits the
use of rich variation in tax rates and government policies. The common difficulty that cross-
country studies encounter in comparing the behavior of heterogeneous firms whose actions
are measured using very different accounting conventions is greatly attenuated by the
analysis of within-parent firm variation in the financing choices of U.S. multinational firms
operating in countries with varied tax incentives and capital market conditions.

       Certain patterns appear consistently in the results. Affiliates in countries with
underdeveloped capital markets and weak creditor protections face higher interest rates on
arm’s-length borrowing than do affiliates in other countries. Firms respond to higher
interest rates by borrowing less from external sources and more from parent companies, on
net reducing the total amount that they borrow as a fraction of assets, since parent lending
replaces between one half and three quarters of the reduction in external borrowing. Higher
tax rates increase the use of debt from all sources, with related party borrowing exhibiting
greater responsiveness to tax rate differences than does arm’s-length borrowing.

       These findings not only offer evidence of the tax and capital market determinants of
capital structure, but also illustrate factors influencing the choice between external and
internal finance. While the centrality of internal finance to investment is widely-
appreciated, the allocation of funding within a firm is not well understood. This paper
examines the ways in which firms use internal capital markets opportunistically to
complement external financing opportunities when external finance is costly and when there
are tax arbitrage opportunities.

       These results also suggest that multinationals have significant advantages, as a result
of their internal capital markets, over local firms that are constrained by local contracting




                                                                                                23
environments.30 The combination of lower affiliate leverage, greater affiliate borrowing
from parents, and substitution between internal funds and external funds indicates that
countries with shallower capital markets and weak creditor rights offer multinational firms
advantages relative to local firms that are less able to access global capital markets.




30
  In a related vein, Desai, Foley and Hines (2003) find that multinational firms respond to capital controls
through transfer pricing and altered dividend policies. This ability to circumvent capital controls and to access
global capital markets appears to provide multinational firms with advantages relative to local firms in countries
with capital controls.


                                                                                                                 24
References

Allayannis, George, Gregory W. Brown and Leora F. Klapper (forthcoming), “Capital
    Structure and Financial Risk: Evidence from Foreign Debt Use in East Asia,” Journal
    of Finance.

Altshuler, Rosanne and Harry Grubert (2003), “Repatriation Taxes, Repatriation
    Strategies and Multinational Financial Policy,” Journal of Public Economics, 87:73-
    107.

Auerbach, Alan (2002), "Taxation and Corporate Financial Policy," in Alan Auerbach
   and Martin Feldstein (eds.) Handbook of Public Economics Volume III, 1251-1292.

Bebchuck, Lucian Ayre and Andrew T. Guzman (1999), “An Economic Analysis of
   Transnational Bankruptcies,” Journal of Law and Economics, 42:775-806.

Beck, Thorsten, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Ross Levine (1999), “A New Database on
   Financial Development and Structure,” mimeo.

Blanchard, Olivier, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer (1994), "What Do
   Firms Do with Cash Windfalls?," Journal of Financial Economics, 36:337-360.

Booth, Laurence, Varouj Aivazian, Asli Demirguc-Kunt and Vojislav Maksimovic
   (2001), “Capital Structures in Developing Countries,” Journal of Finance, 56:87-130.

Chowdry, Bhagwan and Vikram Nanda (1994) “Internal Financing of Multinational
   Subsidiaries: Parent Debt vs. External Debt,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 1:259-
   281.

Chowdry, Bhagwan and Josh Coval (1998), “Internal Financing of Multinational
   Subsidiaries: Debt vs. Equity,” Journal of Corporate Finance, 4:87-106.

Demirguc-Kunt, Asli and Vojislav Maksimovic (1998), “Law, Finance, and Firm
  Growth,” Journal of Finance, 53:2107-2137.

Desai, Mihir A. and James R. Hines Jr. (1999), "'Basket Cases': Tax Incentives and
   International Joint Venture Participation by American Multinational Firms," Journal
   of Public Economics, 71:379-402.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2001), "Repatriation Taxes and
   Dividend Distortions," National Tax Journal, 54:829-851.

Desai, Mihir A., C. Fritz Foley and James R. Hines Jr. (2003), "Capital Controls,
   Liberalization and Foreign Direct Investment," Harvard University Working Paper.

Fama, Eugene F. and Kenneth R. French (1998), “Taxes, Financing Decisions and Firm
   Value,” Journal of Finance, 53:819-843.



                                                                                         25
Flaschen, Evan D. and Ronald J. Silverman (1993), “Maxwell Communication
    Corporation plc: The Importance of Comity and Cooperation in Resolving
    International Insolvencies,” in Multinational Commercial Insolvency, American Bar
    Association.

Froot, Kenneth A. and James R. Hines, Jr. (1995), “Interest Allocation Rules, Financing
   Patterns, and the Operations of U.S. Multinationals,” in Martin Feldstein, James R.
   Hines, Jr. and R. Glenn Hubbard (eds.), The Effect of Taxation on Multinational
   Corporations, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Gitlin, Richard A. and Evan D. Flaschen (1987), “The International Void in the Law of
    Multinational Bankruptcies,” Business Law, 42:307-323.

Graham, John R. (1996), “Debt and the Marginal Tax Rate,” Journal of Financial
   Economics, 41:41-73.

Graham, John R. (1999), “Do Personal Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?,”
   Journal of Public Economics, 73:147-185.

Graham, John R. (2000), “How Big are the Tax Benefits of Debt?,” Journal of Finance,
   55:1901-1941.

Graham, John R. (forthcoming), “Taxes and Corporate Finance: A Review,” Review of
   Financial Studies.

Graham, John R. and Campbell Harvey (2001), “The Theory and Practice of Corporate
   Finance: Evidence from the Field,” Journal of Financial Economics, 60:187-243.

Graham, John R., Michael Lemmon and James S. Schallheim (1998), “Debt, Leases,
   Taxes and the Endogeneity of Corporate Tax Status,” Journal of Finance, 53:131-
   162.

Hines, James R., Jr. (1994), “Credit and Deferral as International Investment Incentives,”
   Journal of Public Economics, 55:323-347.

Hines, James R., Jr. (1999), “Lessons from Behavioral Responses to International
   Taxation,” National Tax Journal, 52:305-322.

Hines, James R., Jr. and Eric M. Rice (1994), “Fiscal Paradise: Foreign Tax Havens and
   American Business,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 109:149-182.

Hodder, James and Lemma Senbet (1990), “International Capital Structure Equilibrium,”
   Journal of Finance, 45:1495-1517.

Hubbard, R. Glenn and Darius Palia (1999), “A Reexamination of the Conglomerate
   Merger Wave in the 1960s: An Internal Capital Markets View,” Journal of Finance,
   54:1131-1152.



                                                                                        26
Kaplan, Steven and Luigi Zingales (1997), "Do Investment-Cashflow Sensitivities
   Provide Useful Measures of Financing Constraints?," Quarterly Journal of
   Economics, 112:169-216

Kedia, Simi and Abon Mozumdar (forthcoming), “Foreign Currency Denominated Debt:
   An Empirical Examination,” Journal of Business.

King, Robert G. and Ross Levine (1993), “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be
   Right,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 108:713-737.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1997),
   “Legal Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance, 52:1131-1155.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer and Robert Vishny (1998),
   “Law and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy, 106:1113-1155

Lamont, Owen (1997), “Cash Flow and Investment: Evidence from Internal Capital
   Markets,” Journal of Finance, 52:83-109

Mackie-Mason, Jeffrey (1990), “Do Taxes Affect Corporate Financing Decisions?,”
  Journal of Finance, 45:1471-1493.

Mataloni, Raymond (1995), “A Guide to BEA Statistics on U.S. Multinational
   Companies,” Survey of Current Business, 75:38-53.

Meyer, John R. and Edwin Kuh (1957), The Investment Decision: An Empirical Study,
  Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press.

Miller, Merton H. (1977), “Debt and Taxes,” Journal of Finance, 32:261-275.

Myers, Stewart, John McConnell, Alice Peterson, Dennis Soter and Joel Stern (1998),
  “Vanderbilt University Roundtable On The Capital Structure Puzzle,” Journal of
  Applied Corporate Finance, 11:8-24.

Noe, Thomas H. (2000), “Creditor Rights and Multinational Capital Structure,” Tulane
   University Working Paper.

Novaes, Walter (2003), “Political Risk and Capital Structure Choice of Foreign
   Subsidiaries: An Empirical Analysis,” University of Washington Working Paper.

Powers, Timothy E. (1993), “The Model International Insolvency Co-operation Act: A
   21st Century Proposal for International Insolvency Co-operation,” in Multinational
   Commercial Insolvency, American Bar Association.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales (1995), “What do We Know About Capital
   Structure? Some Evidence from International Data,” Journal of Finance, 50:1421-
   1460.




                                                                                        27
Rajan, Raghuram G. and Luigi Zingales (1998), “Financial Dependence and Growth,”
   American Economic Review, 88:559-586.

Rajan, Raghuram, and Luigi Zingales (forthcoming), “Great Reversals: The Politics of
   Financial Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics.

Scharfstein, David and Jeremy C. Stein (2000), ”The Dark Side of Internal Capital
   Markets: Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment,” Journal of Finance,
   55:2537-2564.

Shin, Hyun-Han and Rene Stulz (1998), "Are Internal Capital Markets Efficient?,”
   Quarterly Journal of Economics, 113:531-552.

Shleifer, Andrei and Daniel Wolfenzon (2002), “Investor Protection and Equity
   Markets,” Journal of Financial Economics, 66:3-27.

Stein, Jeremy C. (1997), “Internal Capital Markets and the Competition for Corporate
    Resources,” Journal of Finance, 52:111-133.

Tagashira, Shoichi (1994), “International Effects of Foreign Insolvency Proceedings: An
   Analysis of ‘Ancillary’ Proceedings in the United States and Japan,” Texas
   International Law Journal, 29:1-38.

Titman, Sheridan and Roberto Wessels (1998), “The Determinants of Capital Structure
   Choice,” Journal of Finance, 43:1-19.

United States Department of Commerce (1998), U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: 1994
   Benchmark Survey, Final Results (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce).




                                                                                       28
                                      Figure 1: The Relationship Between Tax Rates and Affiliate Leverage, 1994

                        0.8
                                                          Hong Kong
                                                                                                     United Kingdom
                        0.7                                                        Sweden
                                           China                                                        Honduras
                                              Switzerland                                                                                              Japan
                        0.6                         Ecuador                                                      Nigeria
                                                                              Finland             Austria Greece
                                                                                                  Australia
                                                                         Venezuela              France        South and
                                                                                                           Trinidad
                                                                                                       Turkey
                                                                                                      Germany        Africa
                                                                                                                          Tobago
                                                                             Guatemala
                                                                                   ArgentinaSpain NewPhilippines
                                                                                                       Zealand
                                                                                                           Portugal            Italy
  United
     0.5 Kingdom                                                                                               India
   Affiliate Leverage




                                                                                        Korea,
                                                                                           Norway Mexico
                                                                                               Republic   of
                                                                                                     NetherlandsCanada
Islands, Caribbean                                     Chile                                   Thailand
                                                                                                     Denmark
                                                      Egypt
                                                    Jamaica                         Singapore
                                                                                    Malaysia      Belgium
                        0.4                       Ireland                 Costa Rica                             Indonesia
                                                                          Israel
                                                                           Brazil Taiwan
                        Bahamas                                                               Peru Colombia
                        Barbados
                        0.3
                                                                         Luxembourg
                                                             Dominican Republic
                        Bermuda
                        0.2                                                                   Netherlands Antilles

                        0.1
                                              Panama

                        0.0
                           0.00        0.05        0.10           0.15         0.20         0.25        0.30           0.35       0.40          0.45     0.50          0.55
                                                                                            Country Tax Rate


Note: The figure provides a scatterplot of the relationship between affiliate leverage, on the y-axis, and local tax rates, on the x-axis, for 1994.
Affiliate leverage is the ratio of current liabilities and long-term debt to total assets as measured in the aggregate in the 1994 Benchmark Survey and
the tax rate is measured as the median tax rate, as defined in the text, for affiliates in a given country.


                                        Figure 2: The Relationship Between Capital Market Depth and Affiliate
                                                                    Leverage, 1994

                        0.8
                                                                                                          Hong Kong
                                                                                          United Kingdom
                        0.7            Honduras                                                         Sweden
                                                                                  China                                                                  Japan
                                                                                                                                                         Switzerland
                        0.6   NigeriaEcuador
                                         Greece                       Finland Austria
                               Venezuela  Trinidad and Tobago Australia FranceGermany
                                Turkey Philippines
                              Guatemala
                                                                                                 South Africa
                                 Argentina               Italy
                                                        Portugal          New Zealand
                                                                      Spain
                                       India
                        0.5
   Affiliate Leverage




                                              Mexico                     Canada
                                                                             Norway     Korea, Republic of               Netherlands
                                                               Chile                       Thailand
                                          Denmark
                                         Egypt                 Belgium           Singapore
                                                                                      Malaysia
                                      Jamaica
                                Costa Rica
                        0.4                        Indonesia     Ireland
                                            Brazil
                                          Colombia           Israel                                                      Taiwan
                               Peru                      Bahamas

                        0.3                        Barbados
                                  Dominican Republic
                        0.2                                Saudia Arabia


                        0.1
                                                                 Panama

                        0.0
                           0.00          0.25             0.50             0.75            1.00           1.25            1.50           1.75          2.00            2.25
                                                                                      Ratio of Private Credit to GNP

Note: The figure provides a scatterplot of the relationship between affiliate leverage, on the y-axis, and the ratio of private credit to GNP, on the x-
axis, for 1994. Affiliate leverage is the ratio of current liabilities and long-term debt to total assets as measured in the aggregate in the 1994
Benchmark Survey and the ratio of private credit to GNP is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999).
                                                              Figure 3: The Relationship Between Capital Market Depth and Arms-Length
                                                                                              Debt, 1994

                                                    0.8
   Ratio of Arms-Length Borrowing to Total Assets




                                                          Nigeria                                                       Hong Kong
                                                    0.7                                                   United Kingdom                                           Switzerland
                                                                                                                                                                    Japan
                                                    0.6
                                                           Costa Rica
                                                                   Greece                                         Sweden
                                                               Honduras
                                                                   Egypt
                                                                  Trinidad and Tobago Australia  France
                                                                                                      Germany  South Africa Netherlands
                                                    0.5                         Italy     Finland Austria
                                                           TurkeyIndia         Portugal   Spain
                                                                  Philippines
                                                                Jamaica                     New
                                                                                      Ireland     Zealand
                                                                                                China   Korea, Republic of
                                                                                                        Malaysia
                                                            Argentina Mexico
                                                          Guatemala
                                                          Venezuela                         Canada
                                                    0.4                             Belgium        Singapore
                                                                                                           Thailand
                                                                                    Chile
                                                           Peru Denmark Bahamas    Israel       Norway
                                                                     BrazilIndonesia                                        Taiwan
                                                    0.3                   Barbados
                                                                   Colombia    Saudia Arabia
                                                          Dominican Republic
                                                    0.2
                                                               Ecuador

                                                    0.1
                                                                                    Panama
                                                     0
                                                      0.00          0.25         0.50         0.75          1.00          1.25         1.50          1.75         2.00        2.25
                                                                                                     Ratio of Private Credit to GNP

Note: The figure provides a scatterplot of the relationship between arms-length borrowing, on the y-axis, and the ratio of private credit to GNP, on the
x-axis, for 1994. Arms-length borrowing is the ratio of borrowings from unrelated parties to total assets as measured in the aggregate in the 1994
Benchmark Survey and the ratio of private credit to GNP is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999).


                                                             Figure 4: The Relationship Between Creditor Rights and Affiliate Leverage, 1994

   0.6



   0.5



   0.4



   0.3



   0.2



   0.1



   0.0
                                                                0                         1                         2                         3                          4

                                                               Ratio of Debt to Assets   Ratio of Net Parent Borrowing to Assets   Ratio of Arms Length Borrowing to Assets

Note: The figure provides the median ratio of debt to assets, debt from the parent to assets, and unrelated party debt to assets by rating for
creditor rights in 1994.
                                                                                 Table I
                            Descriptive Statistics for Affiliates of U.S. Multinationals in 1982, 1989, 1994
                                                                                                          Benchmark Years
                                                                                              1982             1989                      1994              All Years
         Number of Affiliates                                                                14,918               15,243                17,898               32,342
          Number of Parents                                                                   1,902                1,989                 2,373                3,680
                                                 Mean                                       39,213                57,209               73,762                57,861
                   Assets                        Median                                      8,401                10,987               12,704                10,597
                                                 Standard Deviation                         181,507               290,062              356,849               291,098
                                 Mean                                                        0.5707               0.5434                0.5446               0.5518
Current Liabilites and Long Term
                                 Median                                                      0.5574               0.5256                0.5277               0.5364
          Debt/Assets
                                 Standard Deviation                                          0.2893               0.3000                0.3131               0.3023
                                                 Mean                                        0.0595               0.0435                0.0298               0.0493
    Interest Rate on Non-Parent
                                                 Median                                      0.0231               0.0138                0.0099               0.0163
        Liabilities and Debt
                                                 Standard Deviation                          0.1010               0.0883                0.0642               0.0922
                                                 Mean                                        0.1133               0.0659                0.0485               0.0775
   Interest Rate on Non-Trade
                                                 Median                                      0.0744               0.0269                0.0180               0.0367
   Account Liabilities and Debt
                                                 Standard Deviation                          0.1449               0.1196                0.0974               0.1267
Net Current Liabilities and Long Mean                                                        0.0845               0.0705                0.0846               0.0801
     Term Debt Owed to           Median                                                      0.0077               0.0032                0.0022               0.0041
         Parent/Assets           Standard Deviation                                          0.2464               0.2357                0.2616               0.2490
   Current Liabilities and Long                  Mean                                        0.4626               0.4433                0.4306               0.4439
    Term Debt Owed to Non-                       Median                                      0.4329               0.4098                0.3840               0.4074
         Parents/Assets                          Standard Deviation                          0.2798               0.2916                0.3008               0.2921

Descriptive Statistics for all Affiliate Years                                                Mean                Median               St. Dev
Country Tax Rate                                                                             0.3431               0.3404                0.1228
Private Credit                                                                               0.7927               0.7945                0.4478
Creditor Rights                                                                              1.9953               2.0000                1.3211
Net PPE/Assets                                                                               0.2360               0.1623                0.2357
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                0.1479               0.1378                0.2138
Log of Sales                                                                                 9.5549               9.5540                2.0431
Political Risk                                                                               0.2462               0.1906                0.1165
Average Rate of Inflation                                                                    0.4293               0.0561                1.5455
Share of Debt from Non-Parent Sources                                                        0.8148               0.9706                0.2795
Notes: The top panel provides descriptive statistics for dependent variables for all affiliates of U.S. multinationals by year and for the entire sample. Current
Liabilites and Long Term Debt/Assets is the ratio of affiliate current liabilities and long term debt to total affiliate assets. The Interest Rate on Non-Parent Liabilities
and Debt is the interest rate an individual affiliate pays for external debt, measured as the ratio of the value of affiliate interest payments to non-parents to current
liabilities and long term debt borrowed from non-parent sources. Interest Rate on Non-Trade Account Liabilities and Debt is the ratio of total affiliate interest
payments to current liabilities and long term debt, excluding trade accounts. Net Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Parent/Assets is the ratio of the
difference between current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from and lends to its U.S. parent to total affiliate assets. Current Liabilities and Long
Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets is the ratio of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from non-parent sources to total affiliate assets. The
bottom panel reports descriptive statistics for control variables for all affiliates across all years. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country
measured on an annual basis in the manner described in the text. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in
Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and
equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of
Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from the International
Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the
GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country over the 1982-1994 period. Share of Debt from Non-Parent Sources is the share of affiliate current liabilities and long
term debt owed to lenders other than the affiliate's parent.
                                                                                                               Table II
                                                 The Impact of Taxes and Capital Market Conditions on Multinational Affiliate Leverage
                                                                    Dependent Variable: Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt/Assets
                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                (6)                 (7)                (8)                (9)               (10)
Constant                                        0.4657             0.6827             0.4545             0.6878             0.4129             0.5782              0.4859             0.2942             0.4684             0.1690
                                               (0.0073)           (0.0665)           (0.0094)           (0.0799)           (0.0110)           (0.0496)            (0.0278)           (0.1020)           (0.0265)           (0.1125)
Country Tax Rate                                0.2508             0.2646             0.2469             0.2608             0.3082             0.3206              0.2499             0.2560             0.2713             0.2789
                                               (0.0230)           (0.0205)           (0.0250)           (0.0235)           (0.0273)           (0.0226)            (0.0314)           (0.0315)           (0.0309)           (0.0299)
Private Credit                                                                        0.0166             -0.0051                                                   0.0140             0.0060
                                                                                     (0.0061)           (0.0052)                                                  (0.0091)           (0.0078)
Creditor Rights                                                                                                             0.0153             0.0082                                                    0.0114             0.0060
                                                                                                                           (0.0030)           (0.0020)                                                  (0.0031)           (0.0024)
Net PPE/Assets                                                                                                                                                     -0.1430            -0.0199            -0.1554            -0.0239
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.0147)           (0.0160)           (0.0146)           (0.0166)
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                                                                                      -0.4443            -0.4192            -0.4494            -0.4266
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.0149)           (0.0162)           (0.0152)           (0.0166)
Log of Sales                                                                                                                                                       0.0027             0.0005             0.0036             0.0018
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.0018)           (0.0022)           (0.0018)           (0.0022)
Political Risk                                                                                                                                                     0.1719             0.1703             0.1257             0.1737
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.0364)           (0.0338)           (0.0338)           (0.0326)
Average Rate of Inflation                                                                                                                                          -0.0040            -0.0021            -0.0016            -0.0012
                                                                                                                                                                  (0.0017)           (0.0015)           (0.0018)           (0.0015)
Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                     N                  Y                  N                  Y                   N                  Y                  N                  Y                  N                  Y
No. of Obs.                                     44,460             44,460             42,639             42,639              39,995             39,995             19,983             19,983             19,209             19,209
R-Squared                                       0.0102             0.2286             0.0095             0.2329              0.0150             0.2460             0.1107             0.3339             0.1180             0.3453
Note: The dependant variable is the ratio of affiliate current liabilities and long term debt to total affiliate assets. All regressions are estimated by ordinary least squares, and the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10
include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck,
Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4
indicate stronger legal protections. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from the International Country Risk Guide,
rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country over the 1982-1994 period. Standard
errors that correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                Table III
                                                   Determinants of Local Interest Rates
                                Dependent Variable: Interest Rate on Non-Parent Liabilities and Debt
                                    (1)             (2)            (3)             (4)            (5)             (6)            (7)             (8)

Constant                          0.0833         -0.0387         0.0707         0.0254          0.0514         -0.0533         0.0410         -0.0097
                                 (0.0034)       (0.0337)        (0.0027)       (0.0223)        (0.0070)       (0.0222)        (0.0066)       (0.0239)
Country Tax Rate                                                                                0.0179         -0.0323         0.0203         -0.0321
                                                                                               (0.0084)       (0.0105)        (0.0084)       (0.0116)
Private Credit                    -0.0443        -0.0385                                        -0.0185        -0.0096
                                 (0.0033)       (0.0034)                                       (0.0022)       (0.0023)
Creditor Rights                                                  -0.0104        -0.0093                                        -0.0056        -0.0052
                                                                (0.0008)       (0.0008)                                       (0.0006)       (0.0006)
Net PPE/Assets                                                                                  0.0292         0.0395          0.0315         0.0404
                                                                                               (0.0034)       (0.0046)        (0.0036)       (0.0048)
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                   -0.0133        -0.0079         -0.0156        -0.0095
                                                                                               (0.0053)       (0.0059)        (0.0054)       (0.0060)
Log of Sales                                                                                    -0.0010        0.0011          -0.0019        0.0010
                                                                                               (0.0004)       (0.0005)        (0.0004)       (0.0005)
Political Risk                                                                                  0.0169         0.0463          0.0860         0.0880
                                                                                               (0.0094)       (0.0095)        (0.0113)       (0.0104)
Average Rate of                                                                                 0.0187         0.0181          0.0181         0.0176
Inflation                                                                                      (0.0010)       (0.0009)        (0.0010)       (0.0010)


Parent, Industry, and
Year Fixed Effects?                  N              Y               N              Y               N              Y               N              Y
No. of Obs.                       20,587         20,587          19,687         19,687          19,904         19,904          19,134         19,134
R-Squared                         0.0377         0.1791          0.0221         0.1758          0.1455         0.2797          0.1596         0.2931

Note: The dependant variable is the interest rate an individual affiliate pays for external debt, measured as the ratio of the value of affiliate interest
payments to non-parents to current liabilities and long term debt borrowed from non-parent sources. All regressions are estimated by ordinary least
squares, and the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in
an affiliate's host country. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt,
and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net
property, plant and equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and
amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political
risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating
higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country over the 1982-1994
period. Standard errors that correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                           Table IV
                                                                  Determinants of Interest Rates

                             Dependent Variable: Interest Rate Paid on Non-Trade Account Liabilities and Debt

                                                     (1)             (2)              (3)             (4)              (5)             (6)              (7)              (8)
Constant                                          0.0810          0.1203           0.0549          0.0861           0.0505          -0.0338          0.0221           0.0538
                                                 (0.0105)        (0.0557)         (0.0107)        (0.0564)         (0.0128)        (0.0472)         (0.0122)         (0.0580)
Country Tax Rate                                  0.0745          -0.0330          0.0828          -0.0328          0.0735          -0.0342          0.0841           -0.0319
                                                 (0.0139)        (0.0152)         (0.0141)        (0.0164)         (0.0138)        (0.0151)         (0.0140)         (0.0164)
Private Credit                                    -0.0322         -0.0093                                           -0.0157         0.0091
                                                 (0.0036)        (0.0033)                                          (0.0087)        (0.0088)
Creditor Rights                                                                    -0.0072         -0.0049                                           0.0008           0.0014
                                                                                  (0.0010)        (0.0008)                                          (0.0026)         (0.0026)
Share of Debt from Non-Parent                                                                                       0.0440          0.0278           0.0443           0.0232
Sources                                                                                                            (0.0103)        (0.0100)         (0.0084)         (0.0081)
Share of Debt from Non-Parent                                                                                       -0.0204         -0.0222
Sources * Private Credit                                                                                           (0.0101)        (0.0099)
Share of Debt from Non-Parent                                                                                                                        -0.0097          -0.0078
Sources * Creditor Rights                                                                                                                           (0.0030)         (0.0030)
Net PPE/Assets                                    0.0215          0.0378           0.0262          0.0369           0.0236          0.0390           0.0282           0.0381
                                                 (0.0052)        (0.0067)         (0.0054)        (0.0069)         (0.0051)        (0.0068)         (0.0052)         (0.0070)
EBITDA/Assets                                     0.0053          0.0165           -0.0006         0.0121           0.0011          0.0155           -0.0044          0.0115
                                                 (0.0075)        (0.0080)         (0.0076)        (0.0081)         (0.0075)        (0.0081)         (0.0076)         (0.0082)
Log of Sales                                      -0.0017         0.0015           -0.0028         0.0016           -0.0023         0.0015           -0.0033          0.0015
                                                 (0.0006)        (0.0008)         (0.0007)        (0.0008)         (0.0006)        (0.0008)         (0.0007)         (0.0008)
Political Risk                                    0.0003          0.0749           0.1024          0.1199           0.0060          0.0785           0.1083           0.1241
                                                 (0.0169)        (0.0154)         (0.0204)        (0.0172)         (0.0162)        (0.0153)         (0.0196)         (0.0171)
Average Rate of Inflation                         0.0207          0.0192           0.0207          0.0189           0.0205          0.0191           0.0205           0.0189
                                                 (0.0015)        (0.0013)         (0.0015)        (0.0013)         (0.0015)        (0.0013)         (0.0015)         (0.0013)
Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                       N               Y                N                Y               N                Y               N                Y
No. of Obs.                                       14,322          14,322           13,814           13,814          14,242           14,242          13,743           13,743
R-Squared                                         0.1041          0.3223           0.1133           0.3332          0.1081           0.3241          0.1171           0.3349
Note: The dependant variable is the interest rate an individual affiliate pays, measured as the ratio of total affiliate interest payments to current liabilities and long term
debt, excluding trade accounts. All regressions are estimated by ordinary least squares, and the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, and 8 include parent, industry, and year
fixed effects. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as
provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and
Vishny (1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Share of Debt from Non-Parent Sources is the share of affiliate
current liabilities and long term debt owed to lenders other than the affiliate's parent. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total
affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log
of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to
lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host
country over the 1982-1994 period. Standard errors that correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                                                                Table V
                                                                                Determinants of Net Borrowing From the Parent

                                                      Dependent Variable: Net Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Parent/Assets

                                                   (1)                 (2)                (3)                (4)                (5)                 (6)                (7)                (8)                (9)                (10)
Constant                                        0.0485              -0.1683            0.0691             -0.0649            0.0572              0.1000             0.1124             -0.1324            0.1141              0.0287
                                               (0.0064)            (0.1691)           (0.0071)           (0.0387)           (0.0079)            (0.0806)           (0.0231)           (0.1082)           (0.0207)            (0.0494)
Country Tax Rate                                0.0918              0.0515             0.0821             0.0689             0.0808              0.0501             0.1230             0.0800             0.1262              0.0805
                                               (0.0180)            (0.0156)           (0.0171)           (0.0162)           (0.0197)            (0.0190)           (0.0235)           (0.0236)           (0.0250)            (0.0254)
Private Credit                                                                         -0.0201            -0.0314                                                   -0.0091            -0.0147
                                                                                      (0.0045)           (0.0038)                                                  (0.0082)           (0.0065)
Creditor Rights                                                                                                              -0.0024             -0.0042                                                  -0.0020             -0.0037
                                                                                                                            (0.0020)            (0.0013)                                                 (0.0022)            (0.0016)
Net PPE/Assets                                                                                                                                                      0.0578             0.1013             0.0481              0.0918
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0110)           (0.0143)           (0.0113)            (0.0146)
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                                                                                       -0.2189            -0.2145            -0.2097             -0.2055
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0118)           (0.0127)           (0.0121)            (0.0126)
Log of Sales                                                                                                                                                        -0.0068            -0.0018            -0.0073             -0.0023
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0014)           (0.0018)           (0.0014)            (0.0017)
Political Risk                                                                                                                                                      0.0774             0.1108             0.0730              0.1297
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0272)           (0.0252)           (0.0269)            (0.0272)
Average Rate of Inflation                                                                                                                                           -0.0002            0.0004             0.0005              0.0005
                                                                                                                                                                   (0.0010)           (0.0010)           (0.0011)            (0.0010)
Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                     N                   Y                  N                  Y                   N                  Y                  N                  Y                   N                  Y
No. of Obs.                                     46,713              46,713             44,595             44,595              41,702             41,702             20,866             20,866              20,007             20,007
R-Squared                                       0.0021              0.2235             0.0026             0.1658              0.0015             0.2504             0.0489             0.2791              0.0457             0.2869

Note: The dependant variable is the ratio of the difference between current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from and lends to its U.S. parent to total affiliate assets. All regressions are estimated by ordinary
least squares, and the specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Private Credit is the ratio of private
credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny
(1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of
affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994
period derived from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an
affiliate's host country over the 1982-1994 period. Standard errors that correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                                                             Table VI
                                                                                  Capital Availability and External Borrowing

                                                   Dependent Variable: Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets

                                                   (1)                (2)                (3)                (4)               (5)                (6)                (7)                (8)                (9)                (10)
Constant                                        0.3544             0.2535             0.3364             0.2706             0.3108             0.5963            0.2898             -0.0433            0.2771             0.7048
                                               (0.0065)           (0.0292)           (0.0086)           (0.0298)           (0.0103)           (0.0633)          (0.0266)           (0.0590)           (0.0264)           (0.0896)
Country Tax Rate                                0.2618             0.2831             0.2434             0.2472             0.3012             0.3218            0.2119             0.2261             0.2342             0.2577
                                               (0.0217)           (0.0197)           (0.0235)           (0.0226)           (0.0263)           (0.0229)          (0.0297)           (0.0314)           (0.0307)           (0.0311)
Private Credit                                                                        0.0323             0.0218                                                  0.0183             0.0196
                                                                                     (0.0057)           (0.0053)                                                (0.0085)           (0.0084)
Creditor Rights                                                                                                             0.0149             0.0107                                                  0.0098             0.0075
                                                                                                                           (0.0030)           (0.0024)                                                (0.0034)           (0.0029)
Net PPE/Assets                                                                                                                                                   -0.1433            -0.0249            -0.1499            -0.0251
                                                                                                                                                                (0.0170)           (0.0159)           (0.0172)           (0.0167)
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                                                                                    -0.2635            -0.2440            -0.2688            -0.2502
                                                                                                                                                                (0.0145)           (0.0155)           (0.0148)           (0.0158)
Log of Sales                                                                                                                                                     0.0118             0.0043             0.0126             0.0050
                                                                                                                                                                (0.0017)           (0.0021)           (0.0017)           (0.0022)
Political Risk                                                                                                                                                   0.0642             0.0564             0.0309             0.0400
                                                                                                                                                                (0.0390)           (0.0355)           (0.0375)           (0.0341)
Average Rate of Inflation                                                                                                                                        -0.0010            -0.0007            0.0005             -0.0002
                                                                                                                                                                (0.0015)           (0.0014)           (0.0017)           (0.0015)
Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                     N                  Y                  N                  Y                  N                  Y                  N                  Y                  N                  Y
No. of Obs.                                     45,152             45,152             43,290             43,290             40,568             40,568             20,139             20,139             19,348             19,348
R-Squared                                       0.0119             0.2293             0.0121             0.2339             0.0153             0.2453             0.0592             0.2931             0.0637             0.3005

Note: The dependant variable is the ratio of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from non-parent sources to total affiliate assets. All regressions are estimated by ordinary least squares, and the
specifications in columns 2, 4, 6, 8, and 10 include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit
money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); higher levels
of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived
from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host
country over the 1982-1994 period. Standard errors that correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry cells are presented in parentheses.
                                                                                    Table VII
                                 The Responsiveness of External and Parent Debt to External Interest Rates
                                                 Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt                              Net Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt
       Dependent Variable:
                                                      Owed to Non-Parents/Assets                                              Owed to Parents/Assets

                                                   (1)              (2)              (3)             (4)                  (5)              (6)              (7)              (8)
Constant                                        0.4487           0.1139           0.3183          0.0224               0.0640           0.1970           -0.0481          0.0641
                                               (0.0050)         (0.0934)         (0.4432)        (0.3072)             (0.0030)         (0.0532)         (0.3249)         (0.2191)
Interest Rate on Non-Parent                     -0.0394          0.0010           -2.0077         -1.4749              0.2434           0.2697           1.4386           0.6488
Liabilities and Debt                           (0.0251)         (0.0280)         (0.7485)        (0.3167)             (0.0258)         (0.0259)         (0.5496)         (0.2259)
Country Tax Rate                                                 0.2326           0.1600          0.2128                                0.0888           0.1335           0.0973
                                                                (0.0289)         (0.0342)        (0.0245)                              (0.0230)         (0.0250)         (0.0175)
Net PPE/Assets                                                   -0.0267          0.0528          0.0355                                0.0881           0.0312           0.0552
                                                                (0.0159)         (0.0338)        (0.0188)                              (0.0146)         (0.0247)         (0.0133)
EBITDA/Assets                                                    -0.2464          -0.2632         -0.2666                               -0.2071          -0.1971          -0.1987
                                                                (0.0152)         (0.0140)        (0.0122)                              (0.0118)         (0.0099)         (0.0086)
Log of Sales                                                     0.0019           0.0033          0.0032                                -0.0019          -0.0039          -0.0032
                                                                (0.0021)         (0.0019)        (0.0017)                              (0.0018)         (0.0014)         (0.0012)
Political Risk                                                   -0.0023          0.1441          0.1649                                0.1114           0.0426           0.0658
                                                                (0.0309)         (0.0549)        (0.0373)                              (0.0235)         (0.0405)         (0.0266)
Average Rate of Inflation                                        -0.0005          0.0361          0.0263                                -0.0046          -0.0263          -0.0115
                                                                (0.0015)         (0.0138)        (0.0060)                              (0.0010)         (0.0102)         (0.0043)
Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                      N                Y               Y                Y                    N                Y                Y                Y
IV using Private Credit?                            N                N               Y                N                    N                N                Y                N
IV using Creditor Rights?                           N                N               N                Y                    N                N                N                Y

No. of Obs.                                     21,393           20,331           19,784           19,017              21,482           20,407           19,858           19,092
R-Squared                                       0.0002           0.2896                                                0.0100           0.2905

Note: The dependant variable in columns 1 through 4 is the ratio of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from non-parent sources to total affiliate assets.
The dependent variable in columns 5 through 8 is the ratio of the difference between current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from and lends to its U.S.
parent to total affiliate assets. The Interest Rate on Non-Parent Liabilities and Debt is the interest rate an individual affiliate pays for external debt, measured as the ratio of
the value of affiliate interest payments to non-parents to current liabilities and long term debt borrowed from non-parent sources. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in
an affiliate's host country. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings
before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of
political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks.
Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country over the 1982-1994 period. The specifications in columns 1, 2,
5, and 6 are estimated by ordinary least squares. The specifications in column 3 and 7 instrument for the Interest Rate on Non-Parent Debt using Private Credit. Private
Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). The specifications in column 4 and 8
instrument for the Interest Rate on Non-Parent Debt using Creditor Rights. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-
Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Specifications in columns 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8
include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 these errors correct for clustering of errors across
observations in country/industry cells.
                                                                         Table VIII
                                                      The Substitutability of Parent and External Debt

                           Dependent Variable: Net Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Parent/Assets

                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)               (6)              (7)               (8)
Constant                                       0.1404           0.0824           0.1988            0.0193           0.1559            0.0279           0.1739            0.0934
                                              (0.0050)         (0.0178)         (0.2272)          (0.1679)         (0.0225)          (0.0632)         (0.3802)          (0.2341)
Current Liabilities and Long                   -0.1346          -0.1177          -0.9693           -0.4758          -0.1691           -0.1665          -0.7471           -0.4976
Term Debt Owed to Non-                        (0.0066)         (0.0063)         (0.1224)          (0.0944)         (0.0097)          (0.0094)         (0.2996)          (0.1617)
Parents/Assets
Country Tax Rate                                                                                                    0.1576            0.1106           0.2484            0.1996
                                                                                                                   (0.0239)          (0.0246)         (0.0703)          (0.0439)
Net PPE/Assets                                                                                                      0.0355            0.1102           0.0814            0.0789
                                                                                                                   (0.0108)          (0.0159)         (0.0138)          (0.0110)
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                                       -0.2755           -0.2647          -0.4098           -0.3468
                                                                                                                   (0.0130)          (0.0132)         (0.0764)          (0.0427)
Log of Sales                                                                                                        -0.0044           0.0002           0.0010            0.0001
                                                                                                                   (0.0017)          (0.0023)         (0.0019)          (0.0015)
Political Risk                                                                                                      0.0841            0.1304           0.1568            0.1466
                                                                                                                   (0.0251)          (0.0242)         (0.0208)          (0.0209)
Average Rate of Inflation                                                                                           0.0005            0.0010           -0.0001           0.0006
                                                                                                                   (0.0011)          (0.0009)         (0.0012)          (0.0011)

Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                    N                 Y                Y                 Y                N                 Y                Y                Y
IV using Private Credit                           N                 N                Y                 N                N                 N                Y                N
IV using Creditor Rights                          N                 N                N                 Y                N                 N                N                Y

No. of Obs.                                    44,855           44,855            42,996           40,293            20,649           20,649           20,088            19,305
R-Squared                                     0.0259            0.2490                                               0.0895           0.3129

Note: The dependant variable is the ratio of the difference between current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from and lends to its U.S. parent to total affiliate
assets. Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets is the ratio of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from non-parent sources
to total affiliate assets. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total
affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of
affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie
between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country
over the 1982-1994 period. The specifications in columns 1, 2, 5 and 6 are estimated by ordinary least squares. The specifications in column 3 and 7 instrument for Current
Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets using Private Credit. Private Credit is the ratio of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as
provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). The specifications in column 4 and 8 instrument for Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-
Parents/Assets using Creditor Rights. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998);
higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Specificiations in columns 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8 include parent, industry, and year
fixed effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 these errors correct for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry
cells.
                                                                        Table A1
                                                    The Substitutability of Parent and External Debt
                   Dependent Variable: Net Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Parent/Owners' Equity

                                                  (1)              (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)              (6)               (7)              (8)
Constant                                       0.1342           -0.0035          0.0225            -0.1095          0.1976           -0.3458          -0.4915           0.1964
                                              (0.0062)         (0.0345)         (0.5994)          (0.4608)         (0.0434)         (0.1395)         (1.1944)          (0.9228)
Current Liabilities and Long                   0.0688           0.0723           -0.5039           -0.1959          0.0801           0.0825           -0.4599           -0.3642
Term Debt Owed to Non-                        (0.0044)         (0.0044)         (0.0972)          (0.0767)         (0.0064)         (0.0069)         (0.2369)          (0.2186)
Parents/Owners' Equity
Country Tax Rate                                                                                                    0.2068           0.1361           0.8244            0.7456
                                                                                                                   (0.0532)         (0.0590)         (0.3016)          (0.2883)
Net PPE/Assets                                                                                                      0.0501           0.1511           0.0669            0.0867
                                                                                                                   (0.0327)         (0.0404)         (0.0515)          (0.0463)
EBITDA/Assets                                                                                                       -0.3924          -0.4139          -0.8925           -0.8344
                                                                                                                   (0.0310)         (0.0347)         (0.2123)          (0.2044)
Log of Sales                                                                                                        -0.0110          0.0012           0.0298            0.0266
                                                                                                                   (0.0037)         (0.0046)         (0.0145)          (0.0137)
Political Risk                                                                                                      0.1508           0.2958           0.5006            0.4214
                                                                                                                   (0.0558)         (0.0624)         (0.1034)          (0.1061)
Average Rate of Inflation                                                                                           -0.0028          -0.0012          -0.0141           -0.0094
                                                                                                                   (0.0027)         (0.0029)         (0.0068)          (0.0062)

Parent, Industry, and Year
Fixed Effects?                                     N                Y                Y                Y                 N                Y                Y                 Y
IV using Private Credit                            N                N                Y                N                 N                N                Y                 N
IV using Creditor Rights                           N                N                N                Y                 N                N                N                 Y

No. of Obs.                                    35,056           35,056            33,638           31,608           16,600           16,600            16,160           15,563
R-Squared                                      0.0136           0.2454                                              0.0372           0.2644

Note: The dependant variable is the ratio of the difference between current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate borrows from and lends to its U.S. parent to total
affiliate owners' equity. Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Owners' Equity is the ratio of current liabilities and long term debt an affiliate
borrows from non-parent sources to total affiliate owners' equity. Country Tax Rate is the median tax rate in an affiliate's host country. Net PPE/Assets is the ratio of
affiliate net property, plant and equipment to total affiliate assets. EBITDA/Assets is the ratio of affiliate earnings before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization to
total affiliate assets. Log of Sales is the natural log of affiliate sales. Political Risk is an index of the average level of political risk over the 1982-1994 period derived from
the International Country Risk Guide, rescaled to lie between 0 and 1 with higher numbers indicating higher risks. Average Rate of Inflation is the average percentage
change in the GDP deflator of an affiliate's host country over the 1982-1994 period. The specifications in columns 1, 2, 5 and 6 are estimated by ordinary least squares.
The specifications in column 3 and 7 instrument for Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets using Private Credit. Private Credit is the ratio
of private credit lent by deposit money banks to GDP, as provided in Beck, Demirguc-Kunt, and Levine (1999). The specifications in column 4 and 8 instrument for
Current Liabilities and Long Term Debt Owed to Non-Parents/Assets using Creditor Rights. Creditor Rights is an index of the strength of creditor rights developed in
LaPorta, Lopez-de-Silanes, Shleifer, and Vishny (1998); higher levels of the measure which ranges from 0 to 4 indicate stronger legal protections. Specificiations in
columns 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, and 8 include parent, industry, and year fixed effects. Standard errors are presented in parentheses, and in columns 1, 2, 5, and 6 these errors correct
for clustering of errors across observations in country/industry cells. All observations in which owners equity is less than 0 are dropped.
