                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                  BUSINESS METHOD PATENTS,
                                   INNOVATION, AND POLICY

                                            Bronwyn H. Hall

                                          Working Paper 9717
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9717


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Bronwyn H. Hall. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Business Method Patents, Innovation, and Policy
Bronwyn H. Hall
NBER Working Paper No. 9717
May 2003
JEL No. K3, O0, L4

                                           ABSTRACT

The trickle of business method patents issued by the United States Patent Office became a flood
after the State Street Bank decision in 1998. Many scholars, both legal and economic, have critiqued
both the quality of these patents and the decision itself. This paper discusses the likely impact of
these patents on innovation. It first reviews the facts about business method and internet patents
briefly and then explores what economists know about the relationship between the patent system
and innovation. It concludes by finding some consensus in the literature about the problems
associated with this particular expansion of patentable subject matter, highlighting remaining areas
of disagreement, and suggesting where there are major gaps in our understanding of the impact of
these patents.

Bronwyn H. Hall
Department of Economics
549 Evans Hall
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720-3880
and NBER
bhhall@econ.berkeley.edu
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                      May 2003


            Business Method Patents, Innovation, and Policy
                                         Bronwyn H. Hall1

1     Introduction
        The explosion in business method patent applications and grants that occurred in 1999-
2001 has abated somewhat, but the many policy questions raised by the response of the financial,
e-commerce, and software industries to the well-known State Street Bank decision on the
patentability of business methods remain. Many scholars, both legal and economic, have written
on this topic and to a great extent it is possible to discern some points of agreement in their
arguments.2 Although much of this literature provides a fairly thorough analysis of individual
cases and what they signify, there is relatively little literature on the impact of business method
patents that is based on a more broad-based or empirical approach.
        The current paper does what it can using available sources to fill the gap by reviewing
some of the literature on patents in general in an attempt to infer the implications of this
literature for business method patents. The focus is on two issues: the role of patents in
encouraging innovation and the consequences of low patent quality. I begin by reviewing the
facts about business method patents briefly, and then survey what economists know about the
general relationship between patent systems and innovation, in order to draw some implications
for the likely impact of business method patents on innovation in industry. A discussion of the
patent quality issue is followed by a summary of the policy recommendations made by those
who have followed the evolution of legal standards as both software and business methods have




        1
            University of California at Berkeley and NBER. Paper prepared for the Atlanta Federal Reserve Bank
Conference on Business Method Patents, Sea Island, Georgia, April 3-5, 2003 and the EPIP Network Conference on
New Challenges to the Patent System, Munich Germany, April 24-25, 2003. Comments from participants in those
conferences are gratefully acknowledged. Thanks to Stuart Graham for giving me patent data updated to the end of
2002 in a very timely mannyer.
        2
            See, for example, Bakels and Hugenholtz (2002), Bessen and Maskin (1997), Blind et al (2001),
Cockburn (2001), Cohen and Lemley (2001), Davis (2002a,b), Dreyfuss (1999), Hart et al (1999), Hunt (2001),
Kasdan (1999), and Lerner (2001).


                                                           1
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                              May 2003


become acceptable subject matter. The paper concludes with a brief discussion of the one of the
chief recommendations, an enhanced post-examination patent review system.
       Most economists view the patent system as a necessary evil: with a patent grant we trade
off short term exclusive (monopoly) rights to the use of an invention in return for two things: 1)
an incentive to create the innovation; and 2) early publication of information about the
innovation and its enablement. The argument is that without the patent system, fewer innovations
would be produced, and those that were produced would be kept secret as much as possible to
protect the returns from misappropriation. Mazzoleni and Nelson (1998) expand on this analysis
and provide two further related arguments for the existence of a patent system: it serves as an
inducement for the needed investments to develop and commercialize inventions, and it enables
the “orderly exploration of the broad prospects” opened up by particularly novel inventions. In
considering the economic impacts of the implicit subject matter extension implied by the
increased use of patents to protect business methods, the tradeoff between these benefits and the
welfare cost of the grant of a monopoly right are at least as important as they are in any other
technological arena.
       Economic analysis says first that competition may suffer when we grant a monopoly
right to the inventor of a business method but it will benefit if this right facilitates entry into the
industry by new and innovative firms. Second, innovation in business methods will benefit from
the incentive created by a patent but may suffer if patents discourage the combining and
recombining of inventions to make new products and processes. Thus the relationship between
patents, competition, and innovation is guaranteed to be a complex one, and one that may vary
over time and across industries. Table 1 summarizes these trade-offs.


2     Background and history
       There is no precise definition of a business method patents, and in reading the literature it
becomes clear that many scholars make little distinction between business method patents,
internet patents, and software patents more broadly, at least when making policy
recommendations. This is inevitable in the present day, because many business method patents
are in fact patents on the transfer of a known business method to a software and/or web-based
implementation, so the distinction is hard to maintain. The USPTO defines a business method
patent narrowly, as a patent classified in US patent class 705, defined as “data processing:


                                                      2
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                            May 2003


financial, business practice, management, or cost/price determination.” Such patents are on
methods used for a variety of purposes in business such as the following:3
       • Financial - credit and loan processing, point of sale systems, billing, funds transfer,
             banking clearinghouses, tax processing, and investment planning
       • Financial instruments and techniques – derivatives, valuation, index-linking
       • Optimization – scheduling and resource allocation
       • Marketing - advertising management, catalog systems, incentive programs, and
             coupon redemption
       • Information acquisition, human resource management, accounting, and inventory
             monitoring
       • e-commerce tools and infrastructure – user interface arrangements, auctions, electronic
             shopping carts, transactions, and affiliate programs
       • Voting systems, games, gambling, education and training
       Examples of business method patents are the well-known one-click patents assigned to
Amazon.com, the Dutch auction patent of Priceline.com, and of course the Signature Financial
patent on a system of managing multiple mutual funds in a single account. Table 2 lists a number
of such patents that have been involved in disputes or controversy, either litigation, re-
examination, or attempted enforcement via licensing letters. Many such patents are patents on
methods of doing business on the internet.
       It is of course possible that patents we might view as business method patents are
classified elsewhere in the patent system. For example, patent number 5,854,117, which
describes a training system for training janitors, is classified as 434, “education and
demonstration.” Patent classes that contain business method patents, as broadly defined by other
researchers, are shown in Table 3. Some of these classes contain only a few such patents, e.g.,
class 84, music, which contains a patent on a method of teaching music, US patent number
6,015,947.
       Figure 1 gives an idea of the relative importance of software and business method patents
according to various patent class definitions. Under a broad definition of software/business
methods, the USPTO is now granting about 10 to 12 thousand patents per year, as opposed to


       3
           See the USPTO White Paper (1999) for further description and categorization of these patents.


                                                             3
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                              May 2003


fewer than a thousand before 1985. Pure business method patents (those in class 705) are still a
small share of the total, with fewer than 1000 granted per year, and with a notable decline in
grants in 2001 and 2002 because of the second review of this class that was instituted by the
USPTO.4 The number of actual financial services patents issued (subclasses 35-38 and 4 of class
705, plus class 902) is minuscule through December 2002.5
         As the low numbers of some of the classes indicate, business method patents of some sort
have existed for a long time, although not necessarily in large quantities. According to the
USPTO (1999), the earliest business method patents were for methods of printing money and
detecting counterfeit bills.6 A patent was issued in 1857 for the idea of including local
advertising in a hotel register. Recently the numbers have increased substantially, largely due to
a couple of major court decisions. Nevertheless, they are still on the order of one percent of all
patents applied for (USPTO 1999).
         Statutory subject matter for patenting is defined by section §101 of the U.S. code as any
new and useful machine, article, process, or composition of matter. Precedents set during the
long legal history of patentability have interpreted this definition to exclude laws of nature,
natural phenomena, and abstract ideas. It is presumably the shades of difference in meaning
between the definition of a “new and useful process” and an “abstract idea” that is the source of
the debate surrounding business methods as a suitable subject matter for patentability.
         In any case, the courts (in the person of Judge Rich) have now spoken, in State Street
Bank and Trust v Signature Financial Corporation.7 The Signature patent at issue was a “pure”



         4
             In discussion of this paper, Josh Lerner suggested that the decline may be partly due to strategizing on the
part of firms to avoid having a potential business method patent classified into 705, so that it would not be
scrutinized twice at the USPTO. This seems likely, but there is no way to measure this effect using publicly
available data.
         5
             Although class 902 seems from its description to be a likely repository of many financial services patents,
in fact only one such patent classified in 902 had been granted by the end of 2002, which is when my data sample
ends. Most such patents are in class 705.
         6
             The first financial patent was granted on March 19, 1799, to Jacob Perkins of Massachusetts for an
invention for “Detecting Counterfeit Notes.” Patent number X2301 was granted to John Kneass on April 28, 1815
for a “A Mode of Preventing Counterfeiting.” The hotel register patent is number 63,889. See USPTO (1999).
         7
             State Street Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368 (Fed. Cir. 1998).


                                                                 4
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                          May 2003


number - crunching type of application, which implemented financial accounting functions.8 The
Federal Circuit Court decision stated clearly that Section 101 is unambiguous - “any” means
ALL, and it is improper to read limitation into 101 not intended by Congress. Therefore,
mathematical algorithms are non-statutory only when “disembodied” and thus lacking a useful
application. The court went on to make sure that the decision was precedent-setting by stating
that with regard to the business method exception, “We take this opportunity to lay this ill-
conceived exception to rest.”
         In AT&T v Excel, where the patent at issue contained a method claim about adding a
data field to a record for use in a billing system, the Federal Circuit confirmed the State Street
decision, saying that a physical transformation was not required for a method claim to be
statutory and that mathematical algorithms were patentable if “embodied” in an invention. That
is, the State Street decision applies to methods as well as to machines.
         The success of the patentholder in these two cases has clearly emboldened others who
hold patents on internet-based methods of doing business. Table 2 lists some of these patents:
they include the well-known one-click patent of Amazon, the Priceline name-your-price auction,
and the widely critiqued Y2K windowing patent.9 Currently in litigation are the “Stambler”
patents, which are claimed to cover the SSL public key encryption methodology widely used by
secure websites. Recently SBC has attempted to collect license revenue from an broad patent for
a structure document browser. MercExchange has sued e-Bay for infringement of a series of
patents on computerized marketplaces. Many of the past cases have ended in some kind of


         8
             The description of the patent in the court’s decision was that it was "generally directed to a data
processing system (the system) for implementing an investment structure which was developed for use in
Signature's business as an administrator and accounting agent for mutual funds. In essence, the system, identified by
the proprietary name Hub and Spoke, facilitates a structure whereby mutual funds (Spokes) pool their assets in an
investment portfolio (Hub) organized as a partnership. This investment configuration provides the administrator of a
mutual fund with the advantageous combination of economies of scale in administering investments coupled with
the tax advantages of a partnership."
         9
             This author was one of many who was incredulous when this patent, which solves the Y2K 2-digit year
problem by redefining the base year, issued. Like some others, she had software (in this case, TSP) on the market
using this method a good 15 years before patent 5,806,063 was applied for. The Patent Commissioner ordered a re-
examination of this patent in 1999, but the outcome of this re-exam has not yet been reported on
<http://www.delphion.com>. Note that the USPTO does not report re-exam status on its website.


                                                              5
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                            May 2003


settlement with undisclosed terms, so it is difficult to form a precise picture of the licensing
royalties involved. It is, however, noteworthy that most of the cases concern internet patents
rather than “pure” business method patents. Following Lanjouw and Schankerman (2001), this
suggests that these are the high value and enforceable patents in this area. The more frivolous
business method patents (such as 6,257,248, for cutting hair with scissors in both hands) are
probably unenforceable.
         According to the TRIPS agreement of the WTO, neither business methods nor software
are specifically excludable subject matter for patentability (Diallo 2003). With respect to
software, national treatment varies, but in most countries at least some types of software
(especially those with a “technical effect” or where they are embodied in hardware) are now
patentable.10 At the present time, business methods are patentable in the United States, Australia,
Japan, and Korea, but not in Europe including the UK, and Canada. Therefore it would be
interesting to ask whether this difference in patenting systems has made any difference for
business method and internet innovation in the two sets of countries. Unfortunately, this
particular research has not yet been undertaken, probably because it is still too early for there to
be much evidence. Thus in the next section of the paper I review the limited empirical evidence
on the effects of having a patent system on innovation in general.


3      Does the patent system increase innovative activity?
         Although almost the holy grail of innovation policy research, this question has proved
exceedingly difficult to answer due to the absence of real experiments. As I suggested in the
introduction, economic theory does not supply an unambiguous answer to the question, so that it
is essential to rely on empirical observations where a patent system has been introduced,
eliminated, or changed in major ways. In this section of the paper, I first review the theoretical
results briefly and then turn to the empirical evidence on innovation and the patent system.
3.1      Theoretical results
         The first result from theory is the well-known argument that granting a patent on an
innovation will both incent the inventor, raising welfare, and create a temporary monopoly with


         10
              See Spindler (2003) for a useful discussion of the current state of play in Europe, and EC (2002) for the
draft European directive on software patent policy.


                                                                6
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                            May 2003


its attendant deadweight loss. This rather stark result is mitigated somewhat by two observations:
the first is that inventors are often motivated by a variety of factors, not all of which are
financial. The second is that innovators are often creative in securing returns to their inventions
even in the absence of a patent by bringing it to the market speedily and by secrecy. Based on
these observations, we might expect the patent system to be an important incentive system when
1) considerable funds are needed to develop an invention, as in the case of pharmaceuticals or
complex modern information technology, and 2) it is difficult to keep the innovation secret, or
imitation is easy.
       More recently, a number of theorists beginning with Scotchmer (1991) and Green and
Scotchmer (1995) have stressed the negative effects of patenting in industries with cumulative or
sequential technology where each innovation builds on the last, as well as the impossibility of
getting the incentives right unless there is enough information to enable contracts to be written
before the first invention. Incentives to develop follow-on innovation in these industries are
reduced by the need to pay licensing fees to the earlier inventors. In principle, for industries with
very complex technologies, the problem of contracting for many small pieces of technology may
be so severe that transactions costs discourage invention altogether (Heller and Eisenberg 1998;
Grindley and Teece 1997).
       For my purposes here, the work of Hunt (1991) is probably the most directly appropriate.
He modeled the phenomenon of sequential innovation with a variable standard of patentability
(non-obviousness) and asked how a patent system is likely to impact innovation in this case. He
assumes an environment where the profitability of inventions is continuously eroded by the
introduction of new, competing technologies and where the strength of the nonobviousness
requirement for obtaining a patent determines the proportion of new discoveries that do not
affect the profits earned by older proprietary discoveries. He then analyzes the consequences of
lowering the nonobviousness requirement, showing that there are two competing effects: a static
effect in which R&D incentives are increased because more inventions are patentable and a
dynamic effect in which incentives are decreased because the profit from any given invention is
lower since it will be replaced more quickly.
       Two conclusions are drawn from this analysis: 1) there exists a unique standard of
nonobviousness that maximizes the rate of innovation in a given industry; and 2) contrary to the
conventional wisdom, reductions in the nonobviousness requirement are more likely to


                                                     7
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                          May 2003


encourage innovation in industries that innovate slowly than in industries that innovate rapidly.
The implication is that in rapidly innovating industries where each new product builds on others,
welfare is more likely to be enhanced by having a high hurdle for obtaining a patent.
O’Donoghue (1998) uses a slightly different model of sequential innovation and draws a similar
conclusion, that increasing the standard of patentability can increase R&D as firms go after
larger innovations, even though the overall cost of obtaining a patent has risen.
       As a general rule, the theoretical work discussed here has abstracted from the frictions
introduced by uncertain patent validity, transaction costs such as those needed to negotiate
licenses, and the costs of litigation for infringement and validity that arise either because of
bargaining breakdown or real uncertainty about the patentability. Yet there is considerable
anecdotal and some empirical evidence (e.g., Lerner 1995) that these frictions can be an
important component of the cost of a patent system, and hence more patents or lower quality
patents may be a drag on innovation because they increase transactions costs without increasing
innovation incentives.
3.2    Empirical evidence
       Most researchers who have investigated the question of innovation and the patent system
empirically have looked at historical eras when there were changes to the system and examined
the consequences for subsequent innovative activity. Recently there have emerged a pair of
studies that use mainly 19th century data (when there was substantial variation across countries in
patent systems). One uses invention data from World’s Fairs and Expositions and one uses
patenting itself as the innovation measure.
       In a dissertation written at the University of California at Berkeley, Moser (2002) finds
that inventors in countries without a patent system do not innovate more than inventors in
countries with patent systems. However, inventors in countries without patent systems do tend to
innovate in areas that are more easily protected with trade secrecy. Lerner (2002) finds that when
a country strengthens its patent system, inventors from other countries patent more in that
country. However, inventors from the country itself do not appear to invent more – they neither
patent more in their own country, nor in Great Britain (which was chosen as a reference country,
because it was a very important market in the 19th century and one with a well-functioning patent
system that was widely used).



                                                     8
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                         May 2003


       Results using data from the 20th century are harder to find, but survey evidence exists.
The Carnegie-Mellon and Yale surveys (Cohen et al 2000 and Levin et al 1987) demonstrate
fairly clearly that patents are NOT among the important means to appropriate returns to
innovation, except perhaps in the pharmaceutical industry. Similar results have been obtained by
other researchers for Europe and Japan. Arundel (2001) reports the results of the PACE survey of
large European firms, accounting for more than 75% of the patenting in Europe. In both the
United States and Europe, firms rate superior sales and service, lead time, and secrecy as far
more important than patents in securing the returns to innovation. Patents are usually reported to
be important primarily for blocking and defensive purposes.
       Using a somewhat more complex economic model and the same survey evidence, Arora,
Ceccagnoli, and Cohen (2001) find that increasing the patent premium, which they describe as
the difference in payoffs to patented and unpatented inventions, does not increase R&D much
except in pharmaceuticals and biotechnology.
       The most positive results are those from Park and Ginarte. In a 1997 paper using
aggregate data across 60 countries for the 1960-90 period, they find that the strength of the IP
system (an index based on coverage, especially whether pharmaceuticals are covered;
membership in international agreements; lack of compulsory licensing and working
requirements; strength of enforcement; and duration) is positively associated with R&D
investment in the 30 countries with the highest median incomes (that is, G-7 and other developed
countries, mostly in Europe). In the other countries, the relationship is positive but not
significant. Unfortunately their estimates are cross-sectional and not corrected for the
simultaneity (reverse causality) between doing R&D and having a patent system, which may
explain why they are so different from those of Moser and Lerner.
       Sakakibara and Branstetter (2001) studied the effects of expanding patent scope in Japan
in 1988. According to the Japanese firms and patent attorneys that they interviewed, a statutory
change that allowed multiple claims per patent (as has always been true in the U.S.) had the
effect of increasing patent scope in Japan. They found that this change to the patent system had a
very small positive effect on R&D activity in Japanese firms.
       Hall and Ziedonis (2001) looked at a single industry (semiconductors) that doubled its
patenting-R&D rate after the creation of the CAFC and other changes to patent legislation in
1982. Interview evidence suggested that the increase was due to the fact that inventions in this


                                                    9
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                              May 2003


industry use technology that is covered by hundreds of patents held by a number of firms, and
that firms increasingly feared litigation and preliminary injunctions if they failed to have cross-
licensing agreements in place. Negotiating such agreements was greatly facilitated by having a
large patent portfolio of your own, so several firms, large and small, were engaged in defensive
drives to increase their patenting rate. This had little to do with encouraging innovation, and in
fact looked like a tax on innovative activity. The result also highlights the fact that the one
product/one patent model of innovation is very far from the reality in many industries.
       Hall and Ziedonis (2001) also noted another effect of stronger patents in the
semiconductor industry: it appears to have facilitated the entry of pure “design” firms, those
which produce semiconductor designs but do no manufacturing. This fact was supported both by
interview evidence (executives reported that patents were important for securing venture capital
financing where there were few other assets) and by the fact that the share of design firms in the
industry went from approximately zero per cent in 1982 (before the strengthening of the system)
to 30 per cent in 1995.
       Baldwin, Hanl, and Sabourin (2000) studied this question for Canada. Using the same
type of firm-level survey evidence on innovation as in the PACE survey, they find that the
relationship between innovation and patent use is much stronger going from innovation to patent
use than from patent use to innovation. Firms that innovate take out patents; but firms and
industries that make more intensive use of patents do not tend to produce more innovations.
       Lanjouw and Cockburn (2000) use new survey data from India, the results of interviews
with industry, government and multinational institutions, and measures of R&D activity
constructed from a variety of statistical sources to determine trends in the allocation of research
to products such as malaria vaccines that are specific to developing country markets. There is
some, although limited, evidence of an increase in such research in the mid- to late 1980s which
appears to have leveled off in the 1990s. The full effects of TRIPS on research directed to
developing country needs remains to be seen.
       The conclusions from this survey of empirical work on the effects of the patent system on
innovation are several. First, introducing or strengthening a patent system (lengthening the patent
term, broadening subject matter coverage, etc.) unambiguously results in an increase in patenting
and in the strategic uses of patents. It is much less clear that these changes result in an increase in
innovative activity, although they may redirect such activity toward things that are patentable


                                                      10
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                            May 2003


and/or are not subject to being kept secret within the firm. If there is an increase in innovation
due to patents, it is likely to be centered in the pharmaceutical and biotechnology areas, and
possibly specialty chemicals. Patents in these areas are relatively easy to define, because they are
based on molecular formulas, and therefore also relatively easy to enforce.
       The most interesting and possibly surprising conclusion is that the existence and strength
of the patent system has a tendency to affect the organization of industry, by allowing trade in
knowledge and facilitating the vertical disintegration of knowledge-based industries and the
entry of new firms that possess only intangible assets. It is very clear that this particular feature
of the patent system has been important with respect to business method and internet patents. In
many cases, the first step taken by an inventor/entrepreneur with an idea for an internet-based
business model is to attempt to acquire a patent on it, and certainly one of the first questions
asked by the venture capitalist he approaches for financing is whether the startup owns patents
on its technology.
3.3    Implications for business method innovation
       What does the body of literature just surveyed have to say about the implications of
allowing business method patents on innovation in business methods? The only conclusion that
is certain is that allowing business method patents will cause an increase in the patenting of
business methods, one we have already experienced. And along with this increase in patenting,
especially one that introduces patents of less certain quality, comes an increase in litigation,
raising the costs of the system as a whole.
       Unfortunately, it is much more difficult to make predictions about the effects of this
subject matter expansion on innovation that are not pure speculation. We know that patents are
not considered essential for capturing the returns to innovation in most industries, and there
seems no reason to think that this one is different. Casual observation suggests that business
method patents are not being used to provide innovation incentives as much as they are being
used to extract rents ex post, but this evidence could be misleading. We do not know whether
there would have been as much entry into internet businesses or new financial offerings in the
absence of the patent system.
       One possible evolution of practice in the banking and financial services industry can be
hypothesized, however. This industry depends heavily on secure communication and transactions
exchange among banks and brokerage houses, and such communications depend on standards,


                                                     11
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                       May 2003


that is, they depend on different institutions communicating information to each other in exactly
the same way. The industry carries out millions of such transactions daily and requires a very
high level of accuracy, which implies a need for highly stable common standards. If components
of new transactions’ standards or particular ways of doing things are patented by many different
institutions, it is possible that a situation could develop like that in the semiconductor/computer
industry, where it is necessary to have a portfolio of patents for cross-licensing purposes. This in
turn may raise the cost of doing business and make it harder for new firms to enter without
access to the requisite intellectual property. However, given the central role played by the
Federal Reserve Bank as regulator in at least part of the sector, such an outcome will probably be
avoided.


4      Patent quality11
        Many critics of the wave of business method patents in the first couple of years following
the State Street decision have pointed to their low quality rather than their existence as the real
policy problem (see Barton 2000, Dreyfuss 2001, and other references in Table 4). But what is
meant by patent quality? The statutory definition of a patentable invention is that it be novel,
non-obvious, and have utility.12 Both the economic and legal view suggest that high quality
patents are those which describe an invention that is truly “new,” rather than an invention that is
already in widespread use but not yet patented.13
        Besides the three statutory requirements, a fourth criterion for granting a patent on an
invention is that the patent application must disclose sufficient details about the invention. These
disclosures in the published patent can facilitate knowledge spillovers to others who might use or
improve upon the invention. Another criterion for a “high-quality patent” therefore is that it
enable those “skilled in the art” to comprehend the invention well enough to use the patent
document for implementation of the described invention. This dimension of patent quality,
however, is less likely to be affected by post-grant opposition proceedings.

        11
             Parts of this section are drawn from Graham, Hall, Harhoff, and Mowery 2003b.
        12
             See Lunney (2001) for an argument that the non-obviousness test has been weakened since the creation
of the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals in 1982.
        13
             Presumably, if the invention has already been reduced to practice by others, the potential gain from
incenting an inventor is zero, so we are left only with the deadweight loss from monopoly.


                                                             12
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                            May 2003


           From a social welfare perspective, an important characteristic of a high quality patent is
that there be relatively little uncertainty over the breadth of its claims, i.e., over what specific
features of a technical advance are claimed under the terms of the patent, as well as whether
these claims are likely to be upheld in legal proceedings following the issue of the patent.
Uncertainty about the validity of a patent has several potential costs: such uncertainty may cause
the patentholder to underinvest in the technology, it could reduce investment by potential
competitors in competing technical advances, and it may lead to costly litigation after both the
holder and potential competitors have sunk sizable investments.
4.1        Consequences of low patent quality
           Although some scholars, notably Lemley (2001), have argued that the costs of having
higher quality patents may exceed the cost, recent experience suggests that there are some
unintended consequences in the form of complicating property rights and feedback effects. In
this section we review the arguments for increasing patent quality.
           ”Low-quality patents” can create considerable uncertainty among inventors or would-be
commercializers of inventions and slow either the pace of innovation or investment in the
commercialization of new technologies. Lerner (1995) has shown that fear of litigation may
cause smaller entrant firms to avoid areas where incumbents hold large numbers of patents. Such
“entry-avoidance” may be rational and even welfare-enhancing if the incumbents’ patents are
known for certain to be valid, but low quality patents held by incumbents may also deter entry
into a technological area if the costs of invalidating the patents is too high. In these
circumstances, technological alternatives may not be commercialized and consumer welfare
suffers.
           The lack of relatively rapid processes for resolving patent validity and ensuring higher
patent quality also may slow the pace of invention in fields characterized by “cumulative
invention,” i.e., those in which one inventor’s efforts rely on previous technical advances or
advances in complementary technologies. But if these previous technical advances are covered
by patents of dubious validity or excessive breadth, the costs to inventors of pursuing the
inventions that rely on them may be so high as to discourage such “cumulative” invention.
Alternatively, large numbers of low-quality patents may dramatically increase the level of
“fragmentation” of property rights covering prior-generation or complementary technologies,
raising the transaction costs for inventors of obtaining access (e.g., through licenses) to these


                                                      13
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                                              May 2003


technologies. Finally, the issue of a large number of low-quality patents will increase uncertainty
among inventors concerning the level of protection enjoyed by these related inventions, which in
turn will make it more costly and difficult for inventors to build on these related inventions in
their own technical advances.
         The issuance of low-quality patents also is likely to spur significant increases in patent
applications, further straining the already overburdened examination processes of the USPTO. A
kind of vicious circle may result, in which cursory examinations of patent applications result in
the issue of low-quality patents, which triggers rapid growth in applications, further taxing the
limited resources of the USPTO, further limiting the examination of individual applications, and
further degrading the quality of patents.
         Recent decisions by the Court of Appeals for the Federal Circuit (CAFC), the specialized
appeals court for patent cases, concerning the validity of “important” patents (those deemed
sufficiently valuable by patentholder or competitor to litigate and appeal) create still another
reason for serious consideration of a nonjudicial process for post-issue validity challenges. For
example, in 2002 the CAFC ruled that the PTO had incorrectly rejected two applications for
“obviousness,” arguing that if an examiner rejects an application using “general knowledge,” that
knowledge “must be articulated and placed on the record.”14 According to deputy commissioner
Esther Kepplinger, this means “we can’t reject something just because it’s stupid.”15 This
decision could significantly weaken the level of scrutiny provided by the already costly and
overcrowded patent-litigation system. A system that enabled third parties (including competitors)
to bring such knowledge (in the form of written prior art) to bear on the patent could help in
making an obviousness determination. This idea is discussed further in the next section of the
paper.




         14
              This decision presumably made it more difficult to reject such patents as US 6368227, the patent on a
swinging method that uses a technique known by children for years, but not placed “on the record.” Note that this
particular patent has been subject to a re-examination request of the U.S. Patent Commissioner because of the
publicity it received. The problem with patents like this is not necessarily that they are enforceable in the courts, but
that they clog the system and raise its total cost.
         15
              As quoted on the Los Angeles Times, February 7, 2003.


                                                               14
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                          May 2003


5     Survey of policy recommendations
       This section of the paper collects and organizes the many policy recommendations with
respect to business method, internet, and software patents that have been made by other scholars,
in an effort to find a consensus. Table 4 summarizes the recommendations of a number of legal
and economic scholars. Several points emerge from this table and from a reading of the papers
referenced.
       First, there is a remarkable amount of agreement, if not a consensus, that the average
quality of patents being issued during the past decade or so is too low, especially in the software
and business method areas. There is also some agreement on the reasons: an overburdened patent
office, lack of expertise in the relevant areas, lack of prior art databases, and the weakening of
the non-obviousness test, partly through court decisions.
       Recommendations center on correcting these problems in software and business methods,
although many of the suggestions would apply more broadly. Many authors suggest that
standards of patentability and non-obviousness should be raised across all technologies, but
especially in software and business methods (Barton 2000, 2001, Kasdan 1994, Bakels and
Hugenholtz 2002, Lunney 2001, Quillen 2001, Dreyfuss 2001, Meurer 2002).
       On the other hand, there is considerable variation in the recommendations with respect to
subject matter extensions to software and business methods, ranging all the way from the AIPLA
position that business methods receive the same treatment as other technologies to Thomas’ 1999
recommendation that subject matter be restricted to “the repeatable production or transformation
of material objects.” Nevertheless, a number of legal scholars, including Dreyfuss, Meurer, and
Bakels and Hugenholtz, have called for reinstatement of the business method exception.
       With respect to software, Lemley and O’Brien (1997) and Somaya (2001) have argued
that patenting of software may have a beneficial effect if it leads to the reuse rather than the
reinvention of software components as a result of patent publication rather than the use of
secrecy to protect them. However, Lemley himself, along with Cohen, Warren-Boulton et al
(1995), and Samuelson (1995) have recommended both narrow construction of patents for
software and limited rights to reverse engineer in order to ensure interoperability and transparent
interfaces.
       Finally, several authors have endorsed the idea that a greatly strengthened inter partes
post grant re-examination system modeled on the European opposition system would encourage

                                                    15
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                           May 2003


competitors and other third parties to bring forth prior art, especially in new subject matter areas
where the PTO has inadequate searching facilities (Janis 1997, Levin and Levin 2002, Graham et
al 2003a,b, Wegner 2001). The primary argument for such a system is that it would lead to
invalidity determinations being made earlier and at less cost than the current system, which relies
primarily on infringement suits accompanied by countersuits for patent validity. A second
argument is that by housing validity determination within the patent office, useful feedback on
the performance and accuracy of examination can be generated relatively quickly and
communicated at somewhat lower cost than if it is generated by the courts. I refer the reader to
Graham et al (2003a,b) for further information on the comparative operation of the ex parte U.S.
re-examination system and the inter partes European opposition system.


6     Conclusions
       Broad evidence that the patent system encourages innovation always and everywhere is
hard to come by. The patent system does encourage publication rather than secrecy; it is
probably good at providing incentives for innovations with high development cost that are fairly
easily imitated and for which a patent can be clearly defined (e.g., pharmaceuticals). When
innovations are incremental and when many different innovations must be combined to make a
useful product, it is less obvious that benefits of the patent system outweigh the costs. Business
methods are more likely to fall into the second class than the first.
       It is useful to think about recommendations for policy towards business methods patents
in two very distinct levels: first, there is widespread agreement among legal scholars that the
nonobviousness test has not been applied carefully enough in the case of internet and business
method patents and that lack of prior art databases have led to many invalid patents issuing in
software and business methods. Second, some scholars go further and argue that business
methods per se should be excluded from patentability, Judge Rich not withstanding. Given the
number of such patents now outstanding, this outcome is unlikely.
       With respect to the former critique, a number of scholars have advanced the use of a
strengthened post-grant re-examination system in order to encourage third parties to bring prior
art to the attention of the patent office. Although the PTO recently strengthened the examination
process with respect to these patents (USPTO 1999), some believe that this proposal still has



                                                     16
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                           May 2003


some merit, especially if it could be used to weed out patents in these areas that were issued prior
to the administrative changes at the patent office.




                                                      17
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                        May 2003


                                             References
        Allison, J. R. and E. H. Tiller (2003). “Statistical Analysis of Internet Business Method
Patents,” in Cohen, W. M. (ed.), Intellectual Property in the Knowledge-Based Economy.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
        Arora, A., M. Ceccagnoli, and W. Cohen (2001). “R&D and the Patent Premium,”
Carnegie-Mellon University and INSEAD: paper presented at the ASSA Annual Meetings,
January 2002, Atlanta Georgia.
        Arundel, Anthony. (2001). “Patents in the Knowledge-Based Economy,” Beleidstudies
Technology Economie 37: 67-88.
        Bakels, R. and P. B. Hugenholtz (2002). “The Patentability of Computer Programs,”
Amsterdam: IViR.
        Baldwin, J. R., P. Hanel, and D. Sabourin (2000). "Determinants of Innovative Activity
in Canadian Manufacturing Firms: The Role of Intellectual Property Rights" Statistics Canada
Working Paper No. 122 (March).
        Barton, J. H. (2001). “Non-Obviousness.” Stanford University Law School (August).
        __________. (2000). “Reforming the Patent System,” Science 287: 1933-1934.
        Bessen, J. and E. Maskin (1997). “Intellectual Property on the Internet: What's Wrong
with Conventional Wisdom?” Cambridge, Mass.: photocopied.
        Blind, K., J. Edler, and R. Nack (2001). “Micro- and Macro-economic Implications of the
Patentability of Software Innovations. Intellectual Property Rights in Information Technologies
between Innovation and Competition,” Karlsruhe/Munich: Fraunhofer Institute and Max Planck
Institute.
        Cockburn, I. (2001). “Issues in Business Method Patents,” Boston University and NBER.
        Cohen, J. E. and M. A. Lemley (2001). “Patent Scope and Innovation in the Software
Industry,” California Law Review 89(1): 1-57.
        Cohen, W. M., R. R. Nelson, and J. P. Walsh (2000). “Protecting Their Intellectual
Assets: Appropriability Conditions and Why Firms Patent or Not?” NBER Working Paper No.
7552.
        Davis, L. (2002b). “Is Appropriability a "Problem” for Innovations in Digital Information
Goods?” In G. Eliasson and C. Wihlborg (eds.), The Law, Economics and Technology of the
Internet, unknown publisher.


                                                   18
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                       May 2003


       _______. (2002a). “Patents and the Internet.” In G. Eliasson and C. Wihlborg (eds.), The
Law, Economics and Technology of the Internet, unknown publisher.
       Diallo, B. (2003). "Historical perspectives on IP protection for software in selected
countries worldwide," World Patent Information 25: 19-25.
       Dreyfuss, R. C. (2001). “Examining State Street Bank: Developments in Business
Method Patenting,” Computer und Recht International 2001(1): 1-9.
       ___________. (2000). “State Street or Easy Street: Is Patenting Business Methods Good
for Business?” In Intellectual Property Law, Volume 6, Chapter 14. London: Juris Publishing
Company, Ltd.
       European Commission. (2002). “Proposal for a Directive of the European Parliament and
of the Council on the Patentability of Computer-implemented Inventions,” Brussels, Belgium.
       Graham, J. H. S. and D. C. Mowery (2002). “Intellectual Property Protection in the U.S.
Software Industry,” Berkeley, CA: Haas School, UC Berkeley.
       Graham, J. H. S., B. H. Hall, D. Harhoff, and D. C. Mowery. (2003a). “Post-issue Patent
‘Quality Control’: A Comparative Study of U.S. Patent Re-examinations and European Patent
Oppositions,” forthcoming in Cohen, W. (ed.), Intellectual Property in the Knowledge-Based
Economy. Washington, DC: National Academies Press. NBER Working Paper No. 8807
(February 2002).
       Graham, J. H. S., B. H. Hall, D. Harhoff, and D. C. Mowery. (2003b). “Prospects for
Improving U.S. Patent Quality via Post-grant Opposition,” paper prepared for the NBER
Conference on Innovation Policy and the Economy, April 15, 2003, Washington, DC.
       Green, J. and S. Scotchmer. (1995). "On the Division of Profit in Sequential Innovation,"
Rand Journal of Economics 26: 20-33.
       Grindley, P.C and Teece, D.J. (1997). “Managing Intellectual Capital: Licensing and
Cross-Licensing in Semiconductors and Electronics,” California Management Review 39: 1-34.
       Hall, B. H., and R. H. Ziedonis (2001). “The Patent Paradox Revisited: An Empirical
Study of Patenting in the U.S. Semiconductor Industry, 1979-1995,” Rand Journal of Economics
32:101-128.
       Hart, P., P. Holmes, J. Reid. (1999). The Economic Impact of Patentability of Computer
Programs, London: Intellectual Property Institute.




                                                     19
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                     May 2003


       Heller, M.A. and R.S. Eisenberg. (1998). “Can Patents Deter Innovation? The
Anticommons in Biomedical Research,” Science 280: 698-701.
       Hunt, R. M. (2001). “You Can Patent That? Are Patents on Computer Programs and
Business Methods Good for the New Economy?” Philadelphia Federal Reserve Bank Business
Review 2001(Q1): 5-15.
       __________. (1999). “Nonobviousness and the Incentive to Innovate: An Economic
Analysis of Intellectual Property Reform,” FRB-Philadelphia Research Department Working
Paper No. 99-3.
       Janis, M. D. (1997). "Rethinking Reexamination: Toward a Viable Administrative
Revocation System for U.S. Patent Law," Harvard Journal of Law and Technology 11 (1): 1-
122.
       Kasdan, J. (1999). “Obviousness and New Technologies,” New York, NY: Columbia
University Center for Law and Economics Studies Working Paper No. 146.
       ________. (1994). “Fascinatin’ Algorithm: Patent Protection for Computer Programs,”
Columbia University Center for Law and Economic Studies Working Paper No. 94.
       Lanjouw, J. O., and I. Cockburn (2000). “Do Patents Matter? Empirical Evidence after
GATT,” NBER Working Paper No. 7495.
       Lanjouw, J. O. and M. Schankerman. (2001). “Enforcing Intellectual Property Rights,”
London: LSE Toyota Centre Working Paper No. EI/30 (December).
       Lemley, Mark. 2001. "Rational Ignorance at the Patent Office," Northwestern University
Law Review 95 (4): 1495-1532.
       Lerner, J. (2002).“Patent Policy Shifts and Innovation over 150 Years,” American
Economic Review P&P (May), forthcoming.
       ________. (2001). “Where Does State Street Lead?” Harvard Business School Working
Paper No. 01-005.
       ________. (1995). “Patenting in the Shadow of Competitors,” Journal of Law and
Economics 38(2): 463-496.
       Levin, R. C., A. K. Klevorick, R. R. Nelson, and S. G. Winter. (1987). “Appropriating
the Returns to Industrial R&D,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: 783-820.
       Levin, R. C. and J. Levin. (2002). "Patent Oppositions," Yale University and Stanford
University Working Paper No. (March).


                                                20
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                       May 2003


       Lunney, G. S., Jr. (2001). "e-Obviousness," Michigan Telecommunications Technology
Law Review 7: 363-422.
       Mansfield, E. (1986). “Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study,” Management
Science 32: 173-81.
       Mazzoleni, R. and R.R. Nelson (1998). “Economic Theories about the Benefits and Costs
of Patents” Journal of Economic Issues 32(4): 1031-1052.
       Meurer, M. J. (2002). “Business Method Patents and Patent Floods,” forthcoming in the
Washington University Journal of Law and Policy.
       Moser, P. (2001). “How do Patent Laws Influence Innovation? Evidence from Nineteenth
Century World Fairs.” UC Berkeley: working paper.
       O'Donoghue, T. (1998). “A Patentability Requirement for Sequential Innovation,” Rand
Journal of Economics 29 (4): 654-679.
       Park, W. G., and J. C. Ginarte (1997). “Intellectual Property Rights and Economic
Growth,” Contemporary Economic Policy XV (July): 51-61.
       Quillen, Cecil D., Jr. 2001. “The U.S. Patent System: Is it Broke? And Who Can Fix it, if
it is? Presentation to the AGC.
       Sakakibara, M., and L. Branstetter (2001). “Do Stronger Patents Induce More
Innovation? Evidence from the 1988 Japanese Patent law Reforms,” Rand Journal of Economics
32: 77-100.
       Samuelson, P. (1995). "An Entirely New Legal Regime is Needed," The Computer
Lawyer 12 (2): 11-17.
       Scotchmer, S. (1996). “Protecting Early Innovators: Should Second Generation Products
be Patentable?,” Rand Journal of Economics 27: 322-331.
       _________. (1991). “Standing on the Shoulders of Giants: Cumulative Research and the
Patent Law,” Journal of Economic Perspectives. 5: 29-41.
       Somaya, D. (2001). “Incentives, Organizational Choices and Transactional Challenges in
Software Production,” College Park, MD: University of Maryland.
       Spindler, Gerald. (2003). “The European Legal Framework for Software Patents,” paper
presented at the EPIP conference on New Challenges to the Patent System, EPO, Munich,
Germany, April 24/25, 2003.
       Stallman, R. (2000). “The Anatomy of a Trivial Patent.” Linux Today website.


                                                   21
Bronwyn H. Hall                                                                      May 2003


       State Street Bank and Trust Co., Inc. v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368
(Fed. Cir. 1998).
       Thomas, John R. (1999). “The Patenting of the Liberal Professions.” Boston College Law
Review. 40: 1139-1190.
       USPTO. (1999). “White Paper on Automated Financial or Management Data Processing
Methods (Business Methods),” <http://www.uspto.gov/web/menu/busmethp/index2.htm>.
       Warren-Boulton, F. R., K. C. Baseman and G. A. Woroch. (1995). "Copyright Protection
of Software Can Make Economic Sense," The Computer Lawyer 12 (2): 18-28.
       Wegner, H. C. (2001). “Invalidity Defenses to e-patent Infringement: A Comparative
View of the Differing Ways to Achieve Patent Justice in the United States,” Paper presented at
the SOFTIC 2001 Symposium, Tokyo, Japan.




                                                 22
                                  TABLE 1
        The Patent System Viewed by a Two-Handed Economist
Effects on:   Benefit                              Cost

              creates an incentive for research    impedes the combination of new
              and new product/process              ideas & inventions; raises
              development; encourages the          transaction costs for follow-on
Innovation    disclosure of inventions             innovation
              facilitates the entry of new         creates short-term monopolies,
              (smal)l firms with a limited asset   which may become long-term in
              base or difficulties obtaining       network industries, where
Competition   finance                              standards important




                                      23
                                                                                      TABLE 2
                                                               Selected Software and Business Method Patent Disputes
                                                                                                                                       Date
 Patent Patent     Issue                                                                                    Date                     Outcome
number class        Date              Description            Plaintiff              Defendant               Filed     Court          of Action Outcome
                                                                                           Infringement Suits
                                                                                                                                                  Summary judgement; patent not valid; BT abandoned
4873662    711     1989 Hyperlink prototype patent           BT                     Prodigy (AOL, etc)    Dec 2000 New York          Sept 2002
                                                                                                                                                  patent
                        Data processing system for hub and
5193056 705/36     1993 spoke financial services           State Street             Signature Financial                                1998       State Street prevailed; business methods are patentable
                        configuration
                                                                                    RSA Security,
5267314    713     1993 Public key encryption (SSL)          Leon Stambler                                Feb 2001 Delaware                       Trial began 2/26/03
                                                                                    Verisign, etc
                        Call message recording for
                        telephone systems (use of an                                Excel                                                         CAFC reversed summary judgement, remanded to district
5333184    379     1994                                      ATT                                            1998                     April 1999
                        algorithm to assing billing codes of                        Communications                                                court
                        IXCs in customer's records)
                        computerized market place for                                                                                             still in litigation; ReturnBuy settled for non-exclusive
5845265 705/37     1995                                      MercExchange           eBay, Return Buy      Sept 2001 VA, Eastern
                        goods                                                                                                                     license in Dec. 2002, details not disclosed
                                                                                    Carlson Companies;                                            14 licensees with royalties of $6,000,000 per year
5774870 705/14     1998 Online incentive/award systems       Netcenter                                                CA, Northern
                                                                                    others                                                        collected by Netcenter
                        (Dutch auction) method and
                        apparatus for cryptographically
                                                             Priceline/Walker
5794207    705/1   1998 assisted commercial network                                 Microsoft/Expedia     Oct 1999 Connecticut       Jan 2001 Settled with undisclosed royalty payments
                                                             Digital
                        system designed to facilitate buyer-
                        driven conditional purchase offers
5960411 705/26     1999 One-click internet shopping          Amazon.com             Barnes and Noble      Oct 1999 Washington        Mar 2002 Settled with royalties to Amazon.com
                                                             Netcentives/Netcente   Carlson Companies;                                        14 licensees with royalties of $6,000,000 per year
6009412 705/14     1999 online incentive/award systems                                                                CA, Northern
                                                             r                      others                                                    collected by Netcentives
                           Use software search agents to
6085176 705/37     2000                                      MercExchange           eBay                  Sept 2001 VA, Eastern                   still in litigation
                           comb multiple marketplaces

6202051 705/27     2001 Automated auctions                   MercExchange           eBay                  Sept 2001 VA, Eastern                   still in litigation
                        (Dutch auction) method and
                                                             Priceline/Walker
5897620    705/5   1999 apparatus for the sale of airline-                          Microsoft/Expedia     Oct 1999 Connecticut       Jan 2001 Settled with royalties not disclosed.
                                                             Digital
                        specified flight tickets
                                                                                      Re-examination Requests
                                                             McDonnell
                                                                                                                                                  Licensing letters 1999-2000; USPTO re-examined at
5806063    707     1998 Y2K century windowing                Douglas/Bruce                                  1999
                                                                                                                                                  inventor and PTO request, no outcome as of Feb. 2003
                                                             Dickens
                        swinging a swing sideways or in a
6368227    472     2002 circular motion instead of back and Steven Olson                                    2003                                  USPTO-requested re-exam; no outcome noted.
                        forth by pulling on the chains
                                                                                Licensing Letters Requesting Royalties
                                                                                                                                                  Sony licensed the patent for $15M, other licenses have
                                                             Compression
4698672    375     1986 JPEGlike compression standard                                                     July 2002                               been asserted. The JPEG committee claims prior art
                                                             Labs/Forgent
                                                                                                                                                  invalidates the patent
                                                             Compton's
                           Multi-media search sustem with                                                                                         Re-examined at PTO request Dec/93, certificate issued
5241671    707     1993                                      Encyclopedia /                                                          July 2003
                           multiple paths (broad claims)                                                                                          July 2002 (!), with narrowed claims
                                                             Britannica
            715
5933841,                                                     SBCommunications/A                                                                   prior art: Netscape 2.0 (1995); OWL International (1988) -
           (was    1999 Structured document browser                             30 licensing letters      Feb 2003
6442574                                                      meritech                                                                             first commercial hypertext system
           707)

                                                                                                    24
                          TABLE 3
  Patent Classes with Software or Business Method Patents
Class   Description
                          Not Included on Figure 1
84      Music
119     Animal Husbandry
379     Telephonic Communications
434     Education and Demonstration
472     Amusement Devices
                            Included on Figure 1
380     Cryptography
382     Image Analysis
395     Information Processing System Organization
700     Data Processing: Generic Control Systems or Specific Applications
701     Data Processing: Vehicles, Navigation, and Relative Location
702     Data Processing: Measuring, Calibrating, or Testing

703     Data Processing: Structural Design, Modeling, Simulation, and Emulation
        Data Processing: Speech Signal Processing, Linguistics, Language
704     Translation, and Audio Compression/Decompression
        Data Processing: Financial, Business Practice, Management, or Cost/Price
705     Determination
706     Data Processing: Artificial Intelligence
        Data Processing: Database and File Management, Data Structures, or
707     Document Processing
        Electrical Computers and Digital Processing Systems: Multiple Computer
709     or Process Coordinating

710     Electrical Computers and Digital Data Processing Systems: Input/Output
711     Electrical Computers and Digital Processing Systems: Memory
        Electrical Computers and Digital Processing Systems: Processing
712     Architectures and Instruction Processing (e.g., Processors)
713     Electrical Computers and Digital Processing Systems: Support
715     Data Processing: Presentation Processing of Document
717     Data Processing: Software Development, Installation, or Management
902     Electronic Funds Transfer




                                     25
                                                                       TABLE 4
                                                         Recent Recommendations on Patent Policy
Author(s)*                          Date         Type      Recommendation(s)
                                               business    Prior art search weak; generates low quality patents; Costs of business method patents greatly
Dreyfuss                           2001         method     exceed benefits and they should be statutorily excluded
                                                           PTO and the courts should use the subject matter and nonobviousness standards for patentability to
                                                           limit grants of business method patents. Favors reversal of State Street and restoration of the
                                               business    business method exception. Short of reversal, argues for a narrow reading of State Street and
Meurer                             2002         method     rigorous application of the nonobviousness standard.

                                               business    Federal circuit has gone too far in loosening non-obvious test, requiring written documentation.
Lunney                             2001         method     Should limit e-commerce patents to those that are very creative (i.e., raise patentability standards)
                                                           Recommends that business methods with useful, concrete or tangible results, including Internet-
                                                           and software-implemented business methods, receive the same treatment as other technologies.
                                               business    Where implemented in software, business method patent applications should be examined as
AIPLA                              2000         method     software-related applications are examined today for compliance with 35 USC 101,102,103
                                                           Restrict patentable advances to the repeatable production or transformation of material objects, and
                                                           exclude subject matter founded upon the aesthetic, social observation or personal skill. Consistent
                                               business    with TRIPS, the industrial application requirement would restore a sense of patentable subject
Thomas                             1999         method     matter that matches our sensibilities.
                                               business    Favors opposition system modeled on Europe and Japan, also designated trail courts for patent
Wegner                             2001         method     cases
                                                           1) Stronger inventive step test; 2) Exclude Business Method patents "as such"; 3) Create a
Bakels and Hugenholtz              2002         software   European Patent Observatory to monitor system performance
                                                           1) Limited right to reverse engineer patented programs, in order to duplicate unprotected elements;
Cohen and Lemley                   2001         software   2) Courts should enforce doctrine of equivalents narrowly for software
Somaya                             2001         software   Software components should be reused, as in Lemley and O'Brien
                                                           Software patents will encourage the reuse of software components, because trade secrecy no
Lemley and O'Brien                 1997         software   longer necessary.
                                                           Software patents sound, although badly adminstered by PTO. Sui generis protection for software
Dam                                1995         software   not desirable
Samuelson                          1995         software   Recommends limited protection for software interfaces (sui generis)
Warren-Boulton,                                            1) Copyright should not extend to de facto standards; 2) software interfaces should not be
Baseman, and Woroch                1995         software   copyrighted, because of market power extension; 3) allow reverse engineering for interoperability
                                                           Lack of computer science personnel among PTO examiners means prior art search incomplete, e.g.
Kasdan                             1994         software   Knuth's book ignored; software patents undesirable
                                                           Lower cost of patent disputes in complex technologies via 1) Compulsory expert arbitration with
Kingston                           2001         general    legal aid; 2) Shared-risk compulsory licensing
Levin and Levin                    2002         general    Introducing a patent opposition process would give substantial welfare gains
                                                           Do not try to improve patent quality by increasing exam time, because PTO is "rationally ignorant,"
Lemley                             2001         general    given cost of higher quality patents
                                                           1) Raise standards for patentability; 2) Reduce resulting uncertainty and delay in validity
                                                           determination; 3) Reduce excessive damages in patent infringement litigation; 4) Return appellate
Quillen                            2001         general    jurisdiction to regional courts so alternative views can be heard on the same issue
                                                           1) Raise standards for patentability by using a real non-obviousness test; 2) Clarify research
                                   2000                    exemption; 3) Ease legal attack on invalid patents (strengthen re-exam, remove presumption of
Barton                             2001         general    validity)
                                                           Recommends an inter partes re-exam system modeled on trademark re-exam and similar to
Janis                              1997         general    European opposition system

*Complete citations are given in the Reference section

                                                                                  26
                                                                Figure 1
                                        US Patent Classes with Software/Business Method Patents
                                                           Granted 1966-2002
                         12000
                                                                                   State
                                                                                   Street
                         10000
Numberof patent grants




                                                                                                          All Software
                         8000                                                                             Classes 380, 382, 395
                                                                                                          Data proc excl 705
                                                                                                          Class 705
                         6000                                                                             Financial methods only




                         4000


                         2000


                            0
                                 1966   1970   1974   1978   1982   1986    1990   1994     1998   2002
                                                                Year


                                                                       27
                            TABLE A1
            Class 705 Patenters with 10 or more patents
Firm name                    1963-1980    1981-1990   1991-2000   Total
Pitney Bowes                    29           140         158       327
IBM                             13           27          169       209
Reliance Electric               10                                  10
Tokyo Electric                   9           14           3         26
Sharp                            6           40          14         60
Casio                            5           19          7          31
Omron Corp                       5           36           5         46
Canon                            1           2           9          12
H-P                              1                       18         19
EDS Corp                         1                       27         28
NCR                              1           7           71         79
Hitachi                          1           21          69         91
US Govt                          1           2            7         10
NEC corp                         1                        9         10
Alcatel                                      12           9         21
Toshiba                                      8           15         23
AT&T/Lucent                                  7           59         66
Merrill Lynch                                6           16         22
Unisys                                       4            9         13
Visa Intl Service                            4           18         22
Schlumberger                                 3           7          10
Mitsubishi                                   3           18         21
Francotyp-Postalia AG & Co                   3           26         29
Fujitsu                                      3           90         93
Catalina Marketing                           2           17        19
Citibank                                     2           47         49
Oki Electric Industry                        1            9         10
GE                                           1           13         14
Sony                                         1           12         13
Matsushita Electrical                        1           32         33
Walker digital/Priceline                                 65        65
Microsoft                                                33         33
Neopost                                                  28         28
Xerox                                                    20         20
Intel                                                    16         16
Sun micro                                                16         16
Veri-fone                                                16         16
e-Stamp corporation                                      15         15
i2 technologies inc                                      15        15
Northern Telecom                                         14         14
Health hero network                                      13         13
Andersen consulting                                      12        12
Siemens                                                  12         12
Motorola                                                 11         11
Nippon T&T                                               10         10
Other Firms                    124          259         1737      2120
Unassigned                     73           111         658        842
Total                          281          739         3654      4674



                                     28
