                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              FOOTLOOSE AND POLLUTION-FREE

                                            Josh Ederington
                                             Arik Levinson
                                             Jenny Minier

                                         Working Paper 9718
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9718


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




The authors thank the University of Miami School of Business Administration and the National Science
Foundation, grant #9905576, for support during this project. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Josh Ederington, Arik Levinson, and Jenny Minier. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.
Footloose and Pollution-Free
Josh Ederington, Arik Levinson, and Jenny Minier
NBER Working Paper No. 9718
May 2003
JEL No. F1, F14, F18

                                             ABSTRACT

In numerous studies, economists have found little empirical evidence that environmental regulations
affect trade flows. In this paper, we propose and test several common explanations for why the effect
of environmental regulations on trade may be difficult to detect. We demonstrate that while most
trade occurs among industrialized economies, environmental regulations have stronger effects on
trade between industrialized and developing economies. We find that for most industries, pollution
abatement costs are a small component of total costs, and are unrelated to trade flows. In addition,
we show that those industries with the largest pollution abatement costs also happen to be the least
geographically mobile, or "footloose." After accounting for these distinctions, we measure a
significant effect of pollution abatement costs on imports from developing countries, and in
pollution-intensive, footloose industries.

Josh Ederington                       Arik Levinson
Department of Economics               Department of Economics
University of Miami                   Georgetown University
P.O. Box 248126                       Washington DC 20057-1036
5250 University Drive                 and NBER
Coral Gables, FL 33124-6550           aml6@georgetown.edu
ederington@miami.edu


Jenny Minier
Department of Economics
University of Miami
P.O. Box 248126
5250 University Drive
Coral Gables, FL 33124-6550
jminier@miami.edu
1. Introduction

       Conventional wisdom in the U.S. is that environmental regulations have diminished the

ability of U.S. manufacturers to compete internationally, and thus have contributed to the relocation

of the U.S. manufacturing sector overseas and to the growing U.S. trade deficit. Discussion has

centered on the extent to which environmental regulations have imposed significant costs on

pollution-intensive industries located in the U.S., and the extent to which these regulations have

caused pollution-intensive industries to migrate to less regulated countries (the so-called “pollution

haven hypothesis”). The argument that stringent environmental regulations could affect comparative

advantage, altering international patterns of trade, is fairly intuitive and has considerable theoretical

support.1 However, there has been little empirical support for the proposition that environmental

regulations affect trade. In a survey article, Jaffe, Peterson, Portney and Stavins (1995) conclude

that while environmental regulations do impose large and significant costs on polluting industries,

these costs have not appreciably affected patterns of international trade.

       Given that the United States is the only country that has collected pollution abatement cost

data for a significant period of time, researchers have limited options for exploring the relationship

between environmental regulations and competitiveness. Previous studies have either taken the

approach of examining the effects of environmental controls on U.S. net imports (e.g., see Kalt

(1988) and Grossman and Krueger (1993)), or examining international trade patterns by relying on

qualitative measures of regulatory stringency in different countries (e.g., see Tobey (1977)). Neither

of these methods has resulted in quantitatively significant or robust evidence that environmental

regulations influence trade patterns. However, given the underlying logic of the pollution haven

hypothesis, researchers continue to attempt to explain why effects of environmental regulation on



1
See Pethig (1976), Siebert (1977), McGuire (1982), and Copeland and Taylor (1994).


                                                    2
competitiveness are so difficult to detect.2 In this paper we provide and test several candidate

explanations for the lack of evidence on the pollution haven hypothesis. These explanations share

the assumption that there is underlying heterogeneity in the relationship between environmental

regulations and trade flows that has been overlooked in previous research.

         Our first candidate explanation is that most trade takes place among developed countries,

which share similarly high levels of environmental stringency.3 As a result, the U.S. imports

relatively more from countries with relatively stringent regulations, a seeming violation of the

pollution haven hypothesis. Empirical work that aggregates trade flows across multiple countries

may mask significant effects of environmental costs for countries with distinct patterns of regulation.

         Our second hypothesis is that some industries are less geographically mobile, due to

transportation costs, plant fixed costs, or agglomeration economies. Consequently, these less mobile

industries will be insensitive to differences in regulatory stringency between countries because they

are unable to relocate easily. Cross-industry regressions that average over multiple industries could

conceal the effect of environmental regulations on trade in the more “footloose” industries.

         Finally, our third candidate explanation is that, for all but the most heavily regulated

industries, environmental regulation represents only a small portion of total production costs.

Therefore, for the majority of industries, the effect of differences in these small costs is

overwhelmed by differences in the prices of more important factors, and by noise in the data. Once

again, empirical approaches that average over multiple industries could mask the fact that


2
  For example, Ederington and Minier (2003) and Levinson (2003) argue that previous research has found little
evidence for the pollution haven hypothesis because it treats the level of environmental regulation as an
exogenous variable. Using instrumental variables, they find statistically significant, economically meaningful
negative effects of environmental regulations on economic activities when the level of environmental regulation
is treated as endogenous.
3
  In addition, even when there are substantial differences in regulations across countries, these differences may
be temporary given the tendency for convergence in environmental standards across countries. Thus, given the
costs of relocation, foresighted industries may not pursue the short-term gains from locating in less regulated
areas.


                                                       3
environmental regulations do affect trade in those industries where environmental costs are

significant. Moreover, the most polluting industries may be the least footloose, making the pollution

haven effect particularly difficult to detect. In the following sections, we test each of these

explanations in turn.



2. Baseline empirical specification

         The only country that has collected pollution abatement cost data for a significant time period

is the United States, in the form of the Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures (PACE) survey,

which publishes manufacturers’ pollution abatement costs at the 4-digit industry level. Because the

PACE pertains to U.S. manufacturers, the only way to use these data to estimate the effects of

environmental regulations on trade is to compare imports and exports from the U.S. as a function of

industry characteristics. This is the methodology employed by Grossman and Krueger (1991) in a

cross section, and by Ederington and Minier (2003) and Levinson (2003) exploiting the panel data.

In this paper we use a panel data set, constructed by Ederington and Minier (2003) which includes,

at the 4-digit SIC level, pollution abatement operating costs and a vector of industry characteristics

for the years 1978-92.4

         Following the previous literature, we regress net imports by industry i in year t (Mit) on the

industry’s environmental costs (Eit), trade barriers (τit), and a vector of factor intensity variables

(Fitn), as well as industry and time-specific fixed effects (ai and at):5




4
  We update the Ederington and Minier (2003) dataset by using the recently revised Feenstra (1996,1997)
dataset on industry trade flows and the NBER-CES Manufacturing Industry Database of Bartelsman, Becker
and Gray on industry characteristics.
5
  While trade economists recognize that a cross-industry regression of trade flows on factor intensities is not a
valid test of the Heckscher-Ohlin model of international trade, our motivation for including factor intensity
variables in the regression is simply to act as industry controls to better address the relationship between
environmental regulations and trade flows.


                                                        4
         M it = ai + at + b1 Eit + b2τ it + β Fitn + ε it                               (1)

The dependent variable (Mit) is net import penetration: U.S. imports minus exports scaled by total

U.S. shipments in industry i at time t. The stringency of environmental regulations (Eit) is measured

by the ratio of pollution abatement costs to total costs of materials, while τ is estimated by dividing

duties paid by total import volume to give a measure of average ad valorem tariffs. The factor

intensity variables measure the human and physical capital intensity of each industry. To calculate

the (direct) factor shares of both types of capital, we follow a procedure suggested by Grossman and

Krueger (1991) in which the payroll expenses of an industry are divided into payments to unskilled

labor and human capital and then scaled by value added. The remaining portion of value added is

assumed to be payments to physical capital. We discuss these variables in more detail in Appendix

A, and descriptive statistics for these variables appear in the first column of table 1.

        For comparison to previous empirical work, we begin by estimating equation (1), with year

and industry fixed effects.6 Here the estimated coefficient on environmental costs (0.20) is small

and statistically insignificant. The other coefficient estimates in table 1 are as expected: both human

and physical capital are sources of comparative advantage for the U.S. (indicated by negative

coefficient estimates), and higher tariffs are correlated with lower net imports. To understand the

magnitude of the estimated effect of environmental costs, consider it in elasticity terms. Evaluated

at the means of the environmental cost and net import variables, the implied elasticity is about 0.04.

A 20 percent increase in the environmental costs faced by an industry, relative to other industries, is

associated with less than a one percent increase in net import penetration in that industry.




6
  During the empirical estimation we discovered that our import regression was sensitive to the inclusion of
outlying observations. We used an approach suggested by Hadi (1992, 1994) to identify outliers in our dataset;
these eight outliers (0.2% of the full sample) were excluded from the analysis. See Appendix A for details.


                                                            5
       As is typical in the empirical literature, simple correlations between net imports and

environmental regulations fail to uncover a strong relationship. However, table 2 presents an

estimate of the average effect of environmental regulations on total trade flows between the U.S.

and all other countries, for all industries. We may be missing some important underlying

heterogeneity across industries or countries in the relationship between regulatory stringency and

competitiveness. In the following sections, we discuss and test several theories of the possible

sources of such heterogeneity.




3. Trade with high and low-standard countries

       The first hypothesis we investigate is whether similarities (or expected convergence) in

environmental standards across countries obscure the relationship between environmental

regulations and trade flows. Specifically, most of the world’s trade volume occurs among

developed countries, which have similar levels of environmental standards. Consequently, the U.S.

imports relatively more from countries with relatively stringent regulations. Moreover, if differences

in regulations between developed countries are perceived as temporary, then given the costs of

relocation, industries may not pursue the short-term gains from locating in temporarily less

stringently regulated areas.

       As a test of this hypothesis, we reconstruct the data by dividing trade flows in each industry

into trade with countries with high environmental standards (i.e., similar to the U.S.), and those with

low environmental standards; we also use high- and low-income countries to proxy for differences in

environmental standards. The idea is that an increase in U.S. environmental standards will have a

greater effect on U.S. trade with low-standard countries than with other high-standard countries.

The reason for this is two-fold. First, during the time period of our empirical analysis (1978-92), an



                                               6
increase in U.S. environmental regulations was less likely to be matched by a comparable increase in

environmental regulations in countries with low environmental standards. Second, even if firms

believed the increase in U.S. environmental regulations would eventually be matched in the future

by regulatory increases in other countries, the time horizon for that convergence is likely to be much

longer in the low-standard country, making firms more likely to pursue the gains to relocating to the

low-standard country.

        We use two different methods of dividing our sample into trade with high and low-standard

countries. First, in columns (1) and (2) of table 2, we divide the trading partners of the U.S. into

OECD and non-OECD countries under the assumption that OECD countries have environmental

standards more comparable to the U.S. than do non-OECD countries. Note that the explanatory

variables for each industry are identical in the two regressions (and identical to the panel regression

of column (2) of table 1). The difference is that the dependent variable is net imports to OECD

countries in column (1) and net imports to non-OECD countries in column (2). Second, we divide

trade based on an environmental stringency ranking provided by Eliste and Fredriksson (2002)

which is based on the rankings of Dasgupta et.al. (1995); these results appear in columns (3) and (4).

        The environmental stringency index in Eliste and Fredriksson (2002) covers 61 countries for

agricultural industries and 30 countries for manufacturing industries. Since the correlation

coefficient between agricultural and manufacturing stringency is 0.96 for the 30 countries with data

on both, we use the agricultural index to maximize country coverage. The ranking ranges from 49 to

186: the U.S. rank is 186 and the median is 92. We divided the sample between 117 (South Korea)

and 133 (Greece), which is the largest break in the data. This gives us 20 countries in the high

environmental standards sample, and 33 countries in the low-standard sample.7 Again, the


7
  Trade with 43 countries is omitted from this division due to missing data on environmental standards for these
trading partners.


                                                       7
dependent variable is net imports from these countries in regressions 3 and 4 respectively; the

explanatory variables are identical for each industry-year observation.

        For each sample we estimate equation (1). In both cases, the results support our

interpretation. Specifically, while the coefficient on environmental costs is negative (and not

statistically significant) for trade with the OECD countries, it is positive (and statistically significant)

for the non-OECD countries.8 Intuitively, while an increase in U.S. environmental costs will not

have a significant impact on trade with other OECD countries, it will lead to a statistically

significant increase in net imports from developing countries. In addition, while the coefficient

estimate on environmental costs for non-OECD countries (0.25) is comparable in magnitude to that

for the full sample (0.20), this implies a larger, more quantitatively significant effect since trade

volume is lower than in the full sample. Specifically, evaluated at the means of environmental costs

and net imports (scaled by industry size), the implied elasticity is about 0.2 for trade with non-OECD

countries (about five times greater than the elasticity for the full sample). Thus, we do find evidence

that estimating the average effect of an increase in environmental costs over all trade understates the

effect such an increase in regulatory stringency has on trade with low income or low standard

countries.



4. “Footloose” industries

        The second hypothesis that we investigate is whether the relationship between environmental

regulations and trade flows is obscured because pollution-intensive industries tend to be less

geographically mobile, or “footloose,” than other industries. As is common in the empirical

literature on trade and the environment, in section 2 we estimated the average effect of an increase in

8
  Perhaps not surprisingly, our results suggest that human and physical capital are sources of comparative
advantage for the U.S. only with respect to trade with low-income countries (indicated by negative coefficient
estimates).


                                                       8
environmental regulation on net imports across U.S. manufacturing industries. However, this

approach ignores the fact that an increase in environmental costs will likely have different effects on

different industries. Some industries (because of high transport or relocation costs) may be

insensitive to changing comparative advantage or changes in production cost, while other industries

(the footloose industries) are more sensitive. Cross-industry regressions that find little average effect

could conceal the relationship in more mobile industries. In what follows we explore three potential

determinants of geographic immobility: transportation costs in product markets, plant fixed costs,

and agglomeration economies. Complete definitions, data sources, and descriptive statistics appear

in Appendix A.

         Our first measure of industry mobility is the product-market transport costs of an industry.

Consider a high-transport-cost industry, such as cement (SIC 324). Even a large increase in

environmental costs will not significantly affect cement trade flows, because transport costs prevent

cement manufacturers from locating far from customers. By contrast, a low-transport-cost industry

can more freely relocate and will be more sensitive to environmental cost changes. Thus our

hypothesis is that an increase in environmental costs will have a greater effect on net imports in

industries with low transport costs. We estimate the product market transportation costs for each

industry by using freight costs controlling for the distance shipped.9

         Our second measure of immobility is the fixed plant costs of an industry. Consider an

industry with significant plant costs, such as building, paper and board mills (SIC 266). Such an

industry would be less likely to relocate or change jurisdictions because the relocation would incur

significant costs, specifically the sinking of a large amount of investment into a plant in the new

jurisdiction. Industries with large fixed costs may be less sensitive to increases in environmental


9
 Specifically, we use the fixed effects coefficients from a regression of transport costs on distance and distance
squared for the 15 largest trading partners of the U.S.; for details see Appendix A.


                                                        9
costs, since the costs of relocation might outweigh the gains to locating in a less stringent

jurisdiction, especially if differences in environmental regulations between jurisdictions were viewed

as temporary. Alternatively, an industry with few fixed costs might aggressively pursue even

temporary sources of comparative advantage since the costs of relocation are smaller. Thus our

hypothesis is that an increase in environmental costs will have a greater effect on net imports in

industries with low plant costs. As a measure of fixed plant costs, we use data from the NBER-CES

Manufacturing Industry Database of Bartelsman, Becker and Gray on real capital structures in an

industry.

         Our third measure of immobility is the extent of agglomeration economies of an industry.

While the sources of agglomeration economies are varied (e.g., knowledge spillovers, labor market

pooling), the effect is that firms will have an incentive to locate near one another. Consider an

industry with significant agglomeration economies, such as SIC 227, floor covering mills. Such an

industry may be insensitive to changes in environmental costs if the gain to remaining close to other

firms in the industry outweighs the gain from relocating to a less regulated jurisdiction.10 This

reasoning parallels that commonly given to explain how patterns of specialization can persist in

international trade even as relative production costs change over time. Thus our hypothesis is that an

increase in environmental costs will have a larger effect on net imports in industries with small

external economies. To estimate the extent of external economies in an industry, we use an index of

geographic concentration of U.S. manufacturing industries from Ellison and Glaeser (1997).11




10
   Note that external economies of scale in an industry could lead to a situation where it would be in the
industry’s best interest to change jurisdictions, but not in any firm’s individual interest to do so unilaterally.
11
   Note that since the Ellison and Glaeser (1997) index is based on geographic concentration, it is not a pure
measure of agglomeration economies and thus industrial immobility. Specifically, very mobile firms migrating
to an area of comparative advantage could also lead to a geographically concentrated industry, and such an
industry would remain sensitive to changes in environmental regulations.


                                                       10
         The results are in table 3, where we add interaction terms between environmental costs and

these three measures of immobility, as calculated as in Appendix A, to equation (1). If our

hypotheses are correct, these interactive terms will have negative coefficients, indicating that

changes in environmental costs only have large effects on trade flows in more footloose industries.

In column (1), the measure of industry immobility is (distance-controlled) transport costs, and the

interaction term is negative and statistically significant. Evaluated at the average transport costs for

an industry (0.009), this implies a coefficient estimate on environmental costs of 0.17, which is very

similar to that computed in the base regression of Table 1.12 In addition, the negative coefficient on

the interactive term implies that, as predicted, industries with above average transport costs will be

less sensitive to changes in environmental costs.

         Column (2) of table 3 repeats the analysis of column (1), but with plant fixed costs as the

measure of geographic immobility. In this case, the coefficient estimate for an industry with average

plant costs (0.237) is higher than that of the base regression of table 1 (a coefficient estimate of 0.82

rather than 0.20). However, as predicted, the negative coefficient on this interactive term implies

that industries with plant costs above (below) average will be less (more) sensitive to changes in

environmental regulations (and this difference is statistically significant). In column (3) of table 3

we use agglomeration economies as our measure of industry immobility. Evaluated at the average

degree of agglomeration for an industry (0.051), this implies a coefficient estimate on environmental

costs of 0.22, similar to that calculated in the base regression of Table 1. As in the previous

regressions, the negative coefficient estimate on the interactive term implies that this coefficient

estimate will be higher for industries with below average agglomeration economies, although in this



12
   Note that our measure of transport costs is a fixed-effect coefficient, and thus is roughly centered around
zero, with positive measures implying industries with above average transport costs and negative measures
implying industries with lower than average transport costs.


                                                       11
case the interactive term is not statistically significant. In all three regressions we find support for

our hypotheses.

       To compare the quantitative significance of these results, column (4) repeats the analysis

including all three measures of industry immobility. As can be seen in column (4), the interactive

term on plant costs is the only interactive term that remains statistically significant. (It is also the

most quantitatively significant, as it explains the majority of the sensitivity differences across

industries in the analysis that follows). Our results suggest that, for an industry which has the

median level of all three immobility measures, an increase in environmental costs of one percentage

point would result in a decrease in net imports of 0.96 percentage points. Evaluated at the mean of

both environmental cost and net imports, this results in an implied elasticity of about 0.2. In

contrast, in a less mobile industry (in the top 20th percentile of all three measures of industry

immobility), the same increase in environmental costs would result in a decrease in net imports of

only 0.2 percentage points (an implied elasticity of only 0.04). Likewise, in a more mobile industry

(in the bottom 20th percentile of all three immobility measures), the same increase in environmental

costs would decrease net imports by 1.5 percentage points (an implied elasticity of 0.32, which is 8

times greater than that for the top 20th percentile). We interpret this as evidence that estimating the

average effect of an increase in environmental costs over all industries understates the effect such an

increase in regulatory stringency has on trade in the more footloose industries.




5. Small environmental costs

       The final hypothesis that we investigate is whether environmental regulations have little

effect on measures of industrial competitiveness because, for all but the most heavily regulated

industries, the costs of compliance with U.S. environmental regulation make up a relatively small



                                                12
portion of total production costs. In our dataset, environmental costs average around one percent of

total material costs. Thus, the stringency of environmental regulations may not be a significant

determinant of comparative advantage for most U.S. industries, since it may be dwarfed by other

determinants of industry location, such as labor costs or infrastructure. However, environmental

costs do comprise a large share of total cost for a few pollution-intensive industries (chemical

manufacturing, petroleum, primary metals, etc.). Environmental regulatory stringency may be a

significant determinant of net imports in these more pollution-intensive industries, and cross-

industry regressions that estimate the average effect may obscure the effect in high-cost industries.

        To test this hypothesis, we compute the average of environmental costs for each industry

over 1978-92 as a measure of the importance of environmental regulation in that industry. We then

estimate a version of equation (1) in which we include the interaction between the average

environmental costs in an industry, and the current level in any year. If more polluting industries are

more sensitive to environmental cost increases, we expect the coefficient on this interactive term to

be positive. Instead, the coefficient in table 4 (-31.13) is negative, although only statistically

significant at the 90% level. This result suggests that the effect of an increase in environmental costs

is actually smaller in the more pollution-intensive industries.

        One explanation for why industries with large average pollution abatement costs may be less

sensitive to increases in those abatement costs over time is because the more pollution-intensive

industries also may be less footloose. To test this hypothesis, in column (2) of table 4 we included

both an interactive term for average pollution abatement costs and the interactive terms for our three

immobility measures. While the coefficient estimates for our three immobility measures are largely

unchanged from table 3, the coefficient estimate on average pollution abatement costs is much

smaller than in regression (1) of table 4 (-3.6) and not at all statistically significant. This result lends



                                                13
credence to the argument that one reason for the lack of empirical evidence for the pollution haven

hypothesis is the lack of geographic mobility on the part of the more pollution intensive industries.




6. Conclusion

       The lack of empirical support for the proposition that environmental costs affect trade flows

has been a puzzle in the trade and environment literature. In this paper, we propose and test three

explanations for why previous research may have failed to find any robust relationship between

environmental regulations and trade flows. We find support for two explanations. First, we find that

estimating the average effect of an increase in environmental costs over all trade flows understates

the effect of environmental regulations on trade with low-income or low-standard countries.

Second, we find that estimating the average effect of an increase in environmental costs over all

industries understates the effect that regulatory stringency has on trade within the geographically

mobile (i.e., footloose) industries. Importantly, polluting industries also appear to be relatively

immobile. Failing to take account of this correlation can give the counter-intuitive finding that

polluting industries are less sensitive to increases in environmental costs.

       We find no evidence for our third hypothesis, that trade flows are more sensitive to changing

environmental regulations in the more pollution-intensive industries (where environmental costs are

a greater percentage of total costs). In a way, the lack of support for this hypothesis is also a

noteworthy finding, as the argument that environmental costs are simply too small in most industries

to appreciably affect industry location is one of the most common arguments advanced for the lack

of empirical evidence for the pollution haven hypothesis. Indeed, this is typically the explanation

that is given both in survey articles (see, e.g., Jaffe, et. al (1995) and Levinson (1996)) and in more

mainstream discussion of the trade-environmental relationship. However, we find little relationship


                                               14
between the stringency of environmental regulations in an industry and the sensitivity of that

industry to changes in environmental costs.

       In summary, our results suggest that in predicting the effects of environmental regulations on

industries, it is important to account for these industry characteristics: the amount of trade with low

income countries and the geographic mobility of the industry. And while this paper focuses on the

effects of environmental regulations, the intuition behind the results applies to any regulatory

change. It would be an interesting topic of future work to see if the same patterns exist for other

regulations such as health and safety standards or labor regulations.




                                              15
References
Bartelsman, E. and W. Gray (1996). “The NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database,” NBER
Technical Working Paper No. 205.

Copeland, B. and S. Taylor (1994). “North-South Trade and the Environment,” Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109, 755-87.

Dasgupta, S., A. Mody, S. Roy, and D. Wheeler (1995). “Environmental Regulation and
Development: A Cross-Country Empirical Analysis,” World Bank Policy Research Development
Working Paper No. 1558.

Ederington, J. and J. Minier (2003). “Is Environmental Policy a Secondary Trade Barrier? An
Empirical Analysis,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 36(1); 137-54.

Eliste, P. and P. Fredriksson (2002). “Environmental Regulations, Transfers and Trade: Theory and
Evidence,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 43, 234-50.

Ellison, G. and E. Glaeser (1997). “Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing Industries: A
Dartboard Approach,” Journal of Political Economy, 105, 889-927.

Feenstra, R. (1996). “NBER Trade Database: U.S. Imports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances,”
NBER Working Paper No. 5515.

Feenstra, R. (1997). “NBER Trade Database: U.S. Exports, 1972-1994: Data and Concordances,”
NBER Working Paper No. 5990.

Grossman, G. and A. Krueger (1993). “Environmental Impacts of a North American Free Trade
Agreement,” in Garber, P. ed., The Mexico-U.S. Free Trade Agreement, Cambrige; MIT Press, 13-
56.

Hadi, A. (1992). “Identifying Multiple Outliers in Multivariate Data,” Journal of the Royal
Statistical Society, 54, 761-77.

Hadi, A. (1994). “A Modification of a Method for the Detection of Outliers in Mutivariate
Samples,” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, 56, 393-96.

Jaffe, A., S. Peterson, P. Portney, and R. Stavins (1995). “Environmental Regulation and the
Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What does the evidence tell us?” Journal of Economic
Literature, 33, 132-63.

Keller, W., and A. Levinson 2002. “Environmental Regulations and FDI Inflows to U.S. States,”
Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(4).

Levinson, A. (1996). “Environmental Regulations and Industry Location: International and
Domestic Evidence,” in Bhagwati, J. and R. Hudec (eds.), Fair Trade and Harmonization:
Prerequisites for Free Trade? Volume 1. MIT Press, Cambridge.


                                             16
Levinson, A. (2003). “Trade and the Environment: Unmasking the pollution haven hypothesis,”
manuscript, Georgetown University.

McGuire, M. (1982). “Regulation, Factor Rewards and International Trade,” Journal of Public
Economics, 17, 335-54.

Pethig, R. (1976). “Pollution, Welfare and Environmental Policy in the Theory of Comparative
Advantage,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 2, 160-9.

Siebert, H. (1977). “Environmental Quality and the Gains from Trade,” Kyklos, 30, 657-73.




                                            17
                                  Table 1: Means and Baseline Regression

                                                           Means (s.e.)                    Baseline
                                                                (1)                          (2)
Dependent variable:                                       0.051
net imports / value shipped                              (0.279)
Environmental cost                                        0.011                        0.20
                                                         (0.014)                      (0.27)
Tariff                                                   0.046                        -0.37*
                                                         (0.073)                      (0.05)
Human capital                                            0.230                        -0.30*
                                                         (0.091)                      (0.14)
Physical capital                                         0.605                        -0.16
                                                         (0.123)                      (0.10)
Observations                                             3,818                        3,818
Number of industries                                       382                          382
Notes to Table: The regression is estimated with year and industry fixed effects, and covers the period 1978-92
(1979 and 1987 are omitted due to missing data). * indicates statistical significance at the 5% level.




                                                      18
                          Table 2: Trading partners’ environmental standards




                        OECD                    Non-OECD           High-standard      Low-standard
                       (1)                     (2)                   (3)               (4)
Environmental cost   -0.22                    0.25*                -0.23               0.11
                     (0.15)                  (0.10)                (0.15)             (0.07)
Tariff               -0.02                   -0.13*                -0.01              -0.05*
                     (0.03)                  (0.02)                (0.03)             (0.01)
Human capital         0.11                   -0.25*                 0.11              -0.20*
                     (0.08)                  (0.05)                (0.08)             (0.04)
Physical capital      0.12*                  -0.15*                 0.12*             -0.12*
                     (0.06)                  (0.04)                (0.06)             (0.03)
Observations         3,818                   3,816                 3,818              3,815
Number of industries 382                     382                   382                382
Notes to Table: The dependent variable in each regression is net imports weighted by value shipped to
specified trading partners (OECD countries in regression 1, non-OECD in regression 2, countries with high
environmental standards in regression 3 and low standards in regression 4). All regressions include year
and industry fixed effects.
*
  indicates statistical significance at the 5% level.




                                                     19
                                           Table 3: “Footlooseness”

                              Transport costs     Plant costs        Agglomeration       All three
                                (1)                 (2)                (3)                 (4)
Environmental cost             0.30                2.12*              0.29                1.99*
                              (0.27)              (0.54)             (0.33)              (0.55)
Tariff                        -0.37*              -0.37*             -0.37*              -0.37*
                              (0.05)              (0.05)             (0.05)              (0.05)
Human capital                 -0.31*              -0.30*             -0.30*              -0.31*
                              (0.14)              (0.14)             (0.15)              (0.14)
Physical capital              -0.16               -0.16              -0.15               -0.16
                              (0.10)              (0.10)             (0.10)              (0.10)
Interaction terms:
Transport costs ×             -14.69*                                                    -12.31
   environmental cost         (7.37)                                                     (7.89)
Plant costs ×                                     -5.47*                                 -5.39*
   environmental cost                             (1.33)                                 (1.37)
Agglomeration                                                        -1.35                2.84
   economies ×                                                       (2.87)              (3.10)
   environmental cost
Observations                  3,818               3,818              3,818               3,818
Number of industries          382                 382                382                 382
Notes to Table: The dependent variable in each regression is net imports weighted by value shipped.
Regressions are estimated with year and industry fixed effects.
*
  indicates statistical significance at the 5% level.




                                                     20
                                         Table 4: Pollution Intensity

                                                            (1)                  (2)
                                                                  *
Environmental cost                                         1.15                  2.05*
                                                          (0.58)                (0.65)
Industry average environmental cost ×                     -31.13                -3.60
    environmental cost                                    (16.76)               (18.42)
Tariff                                                    -0.37*                -0.37*
                                                          (0.05)                (0.05)
Human capital                                             -0.31*                -0.31*
                                                          (0.15)                (0.14)
Physical capital                                          -0.16                 -0.16
                                                          (0.10)                (0.10)
Transport costs × environmental cost                                            -12.28
                                                                                (7.90)
Plant costs × environmental cost                                                -5.28*
                                                                                (1.48)
Agglomeration economies × environmental cost                                     2.88
                                                                                (3.11)
Observations                                              3,818                 3,818
Number of industries                                      382                   382
Notes to Table: The dependent variable is net imports weighted by value shipped. The regressions are
estimated with year and industry fixed effects.
*
  indicates statistical significance at the 5% level or better.




                                                     21
Appendix A: Data

Omitted Outliers:
Because the regressions were highly sensitive to several outlying observations, we performed the
analysis of Hadi (1992, 1994), which identified outlying observations in three industries.
Industry 3489 (ordnance and accessories) is identified as an outlier for years after 1987, due to what
appears to be an error in the concordance (its environmental costs jump significantly post-1987, to as
high as 62% of total costs in 1991).
Industry 3263 (fine earthenware food utensils) has non-missing data on environmental cost only in
1985 and 1986; it is identified as an outlier due primarily to very high levels of net imports in those
years (9.0 and 14.2, relative to a sample mean of 0.05).
Industry 3332 (primary lead) in 1981 is an outlier for the human and physical capital variables (6.1
and -8.1, respectively, relative to sample means of 0.2 and 0.6).
We omitted the above 8 observations from the original sample of 3,826.

Transport Costs:
To compute transport costs, we used data at the industry level by country of export, for the 15 largest
exporters to the U.S. in 1990 (Canada, Japan, Mexico, Germany, Taiwan, United Kingdom,
Republic of Korea, China, France, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, Hong Kong, Venezuela, and
Brazil). At the 10-digit HS code level, we downloaded import data from each of these countries to
the U.S., summing over all ports of entry. At this level of disaggregation, the data include both the
customs value and the CIF value of imports; total transport costs are the difference between these as
a percentage of CIF value. We aggregated data from the HS level to the MSIC level (provided in
data set). For 1988-92, we converted the data from 1987-MSIC to 1972-MSIC using a concordance
from the Feenstra CD-rom. Then all data were converted from 1972-MSIC to 1972-SIC using a
concordance from Chris Magee.

To estimate transport costs controlling for distance, we ran a fixed-effects panel regression of these
estimated transport costs on distance and distance squared, including time and industry fixed effects
(distance is the great circle distance between country capitals, from Jon Haveman’s website).
Specifically, we estimate

       Cijt = α1Dj + α2Dj2 + ∑t βtIt + ∑i δiIi

where Cijt represents transport costs as a percent of the CIF value of imports for industry i from
country j in year t, D is the distance between country j and the U.S., It is an indicator variable equal
to one in year t, and Ii is an indicator variable equal to one for industry i. Our measure of distance-
controlled transport costs for each industry is the coefficient δi.

Plant Fixed Costs:
Our measure of plant fixed costs is taken from Bartelsman, Becker and Gray (“The NBER
Manufacturing Productivity Database,” NBER Technical Paper 205, as updated on website), and is
defined as real structures capital stock. We scale this by industry shipments; the data are provided at
the 1972-SIC level. We use industry means over the observations included in the sample (i.e., data
not included in the 3,818 observation sample are not used to compute the means).




                                                 22
Agglomeration Economies:
To measure agglomeration economies, we use the index of geographic concentration proposed by
Ellison and Glaeser (1997). This measures deviations from randomly distributed employment
patterns (γ, their measure, equals zero when industry employment is randomly distributed). These
data are provided at the 1987-SIC level; we convert them to 1972-SIC using the Bartelsman, Becker,
and Gray concordance.

To provide some description of our measures of industrial immobility, in table A1 we list the highest
and lowest values for each measure at the 3-digit SIC (3-digit values are computed by averaging
over the values for the 4-digit industries within the 3-digit category). We also include descriptive
statistics of our measures in table A2.



                Appendix Table A1: High and Low Values of Immobility Variables

Plant Costs
Highest Values                                Lowest Values
324         Cement, hydraulic                 274        Miscellaneous publishing
321         Flat glass                        273        Books
266         Building, paper and board mills   375        Motorcycles, bicycles and parts
261         Pulp mills                        201        Meat products
221         Weaving mills - cotton            272        Periodicals
Agglomeration Economies
Highest Values                                Lowest Values
227         Floor covering mills              302        Rubber and plastic footwear
228         Yarn and thread mills             205        Bakery products
222         Weaving mills and synthetics      271        Newspapers
225         Knitting mills                    323        Products of purchased glass
213         Chewing and smoking tobacco       276        Manifold business forms
Transport Costs
Highest Values                                Lowest Values
271         Newspapers                        334        Secondary nonferrous metals
324         Cement, hydraulic                 372        Aircraft and parts
325         Structural clay products          391        Jewelry, silverware and plated ware
327         Concrete, gypsum and plastic      376        Guided missiles, space vehicles
            products                                     and parts
241         Logging camps and logging         357        Office and computing machines
            contractors




                                              23
                            Appendix Table A2: Means of Immobility Variables

Transport costs                      estimated industry fixed effects f 0.009 (0.034)
                                     panel regression controlling for
                                     distance (authors’ construction)
Plant fixed costs                    Bartelsman, Becker, and Gray 0.237 (0.140)
Agglomeration economies              Ellison and Glaeser                0.051 (0.075)
Notes to Table: In the regressions of Table 3, each of these variables is multiplied by the environmental cost v
to construct the interaction terms.



Environmental Costs:
The environmental cost variable is gross annual pollution abatement operating costs as a percentage
of total materials costs. Pollution abatement expenses are taken from the Current Industrial
Reports: Pollution Abatement Costs and Expenditures reports by the Census Bureau/U.S.
Department of Commerce, 1972-92. The data from 1989-92 are provided at the 4-digit 1987 SIC
level; we used the concordance described in the NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database to
allocate those data to 1972 SIC industries. Pollution abatement operating costs include all costs of
operating and maintaining plant and equipment to abate air or water pollutants, and expenses to
private contractors or the government for solid waste management. Pollution abatement operating
costs were not collected in 1987, and totals by industry were not reported in 1979, so these years are
dropped from our sample. Due to the incompatibility (in the treatment of small plants) between the
data collected in the first several years and later years, we include only data since 1978. Materials
costs (the denominator) is taken from the NBER Manufacturing Productivity Database (Bartelsman,
Becker, and Gray).

Net Imports and Tariffs:
The net import variable is the customs value of imports minus exports, scaled by industry shipments.
The measure of tariffs is the ratio of duties paid to customs value. Both are taken from the NBER
Trade Database, available on Robert Feenstra’s website. Imports and exports are provided at the
level of 4-digit 1972 SIC codes. Value of shipments is taken from Bartelsman, Becker, and Gray.

This database provides data on U.S. customs duties for 1972-94. For 1989-94, these data are
provided at the 4-digit 1987 MSIC level. We converted these data to 1972 MSIC industries using
the concordance provided in the Feenstra (NBER) CD-rom (which allocates 1987 MSIC imports to
1972 industries in proportion to their 1988 customs value ratios—import data for 1988 are presented
for both 1972 and 1987 MSIC industries). Data for all years are then converted from 1972 MSIC to
1972 SIC using a concordance provided by Chris Magee. Dividing by total import volume gives a
measure of the average ad valorem tariff.




                                                       24
Human and Physical Capital Shares:
The variable for human capital share is total payroll minus payments to unskilled labor, scaled by
industry value added. The measure for physical capital share is payroll’s share of value added
subtracted from unity. Payments to unskilled labor are estimated as the number of workers in the
industry multiplied by the average annual income of workers with less than a high school education
in the industry (income data were computed for each year from the Current Population Survey, May
supplemental surveys). Payroll data and value added are taken from Bartelsman, Becker, and Gray
(provided at the 4-digit 1972 SIC level).




                                            25
