                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           SPECIALIZATION, FIRMS, AND MARKETS:
                              THE DIVISION OF LABOR WITHIN
                                 AND BETWEEN LAW FIRMS

                                             Luis Garicano
                                           Thomas N. Hubbard

                                           Working Paper 9719
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9719


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




Thanks to Tim Bresnahan, Judy Chevalier, Rob Gertner, Jack Heinz, Ed Laumann, Jonathan Levin, Kevin
Murphy, Bob Nelson, Ben Pollack, Canice Prendergast, Tano Santos, Jeffrey Sheffield, Bob Topel, Mike
Whinston and many seminar participants for useful discussions, and to the Chicago GSB and the Kaufmann
Foundation for support. The research in the paper was conducted while the authors were Census Bureau
research associates at the Washington and Chicago Research Data Centers. Research results and conclusions
are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of the Census. This paper
has been screened to insure that no confidential data are revealed.The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.
Specialization, Firms, and Markets: The Division of Labor Within and Between Law Firms
Luis Garicano and Thomas N. Hubbard
NBER Working Paper No. 9719
May 2003
JEL No. L11, L14, L22, L84

                                           ABSTRACT

What is the role of firms and markets in mediating the division of labor? This paper uses confidential
microdata from the Census of Services to examine law firms' boundaries. We find that firms' field
scope narrows as market size increases and individuals specialize, indicating that firms' boundaries
reflect organizational trade-offs. Moreover, we find that whether the division of labor is mediated
by firms differs systematically according to whether lawyers in a particular field are mainly involved
in structuring transactions or in dispute resolution. Our evidence is consistent with hypotheses in
which firms' boundaries reflect variation in the value of knowledge-sharing or in the costs of
monitoring, but not in risk-sharing. Our findings show how the incentive trade-offs associated with
exploiting increasing returns from specialization lead the structure of the industry to be fragmented,
but highly-skewed.


Luis Garicano                                  Thomas N. Hubbard
University of Chicago                          University of Chicago
Graduate School of Business                    Graduate School of Business
1101 East 58th Street                          1101 East 58th Street
Chicago, IL 60637                              Chicago, IL 60637
luis.garicano@gsb.uchicago.edu                 and NBER
                                               thomas.hubbard@gsb.uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

        As economists since Adam Smith have observed, individuals tend to become more
specialized as the size of the market increases. Once individuals specialize, economic institutions
become necessary to mediate relationships among them. When is the division of labor efficiently
mediated by firms? When is it efficiently mediated by markets? In addressing these questions,
we seek to illuminate the role firms and markets play in the organization of human capital. This
organizational issue has become increasingly salient as service sectors’ share of developed
economies has grown, because these sectors tend to be human capital-intensive.1
        This paper investigates the determinants of law firms’ field boundaries. Our analysis
relies on law office-level data collected by the Bureau of the Census. A key question in the
survey form law offices receive asks how many lawyers in the office specialize in each of 13
areas of the law. This question provides evidence not only on law firms’ scope, but also the
scope of individual lawyers’ expertise.          It allows us to examine patterns of individual
specialization, how specialists are organized into firms, and relationships between the two: how
does the division of labor across individuals affect the division of labor across firms? The data
provide us a rare opportunity to empirically investigate the organization of human capital, and
study the role of firms in facilitating specialization.
        We employ two empirical approaches. The first approach investigates whether and how
firms’ boundaries are sensitive to the division of labor.       We investigate whether lawyers
specialize more as market size increases, and if so whether the share of lawyers working in field-
specialized firms increases as well.       This provides evidence regarding whether law firms’
boundaries reflect only the distribution of individual clients’ demands, or reflect organizational
trade-offs: whether firms or markets best mediate relationships between lawyers. The latter
affect firms’ boundaries only when fields are covered by multiple lawyers. The second approach
examines which types of specialists tend to work in the same firm and which tend not to do so.
Unlike the first approach, this approach provides no evidence on how firms’ boundaries change
with the division of labor, since individuals’ specialties are held constant. But it provides more
detailed evidence with respect to law firms’ field composition. We use this evidence to examine




                                                                                                 1
various hypotheses regarding what drives organizational trade-offs with respect to firms’
boundaries: if law firms’ boundaries reflect Coasian organizational trade-offs, what is the nature
of such trade-offs?       These hypotheses focus on the benefits and costs of revenue-sharing
arrangements. In particular, we consider the possibility that law firms’ field boundaries reflect
variation in the value of knowledge-sharing, risk-sharing, and monitoring costs.
        Results from the first approach indicate that lawyers specialize more as market size
increases. We find that the share of lawyers that work in field-specialized firms does as well.
This is evidence firms’ boundaries sometimes narrow as market size increases and individuals
specialize.    It is inconsistent with the proposition that firms’ boundaries reflect only the
distribution of clients’ demands, and consistent with the hypothesis that they are shaped by
organizational trade-offs: whether firms or markets best mediate relationships between lawyers.
We find that this relationship differs systematically across fields according to whether clients
primarily demand expertise in the process of structuring transactions (“ex ante” fields) or in the
process of resolving disputes revolving around existing contractual relationships (“ex post”
fields). We find no evidence that firms’ boundaries narrow as individuals’ specialize in ex ante
fields: as lawyers specialize more in ex ante fields such as corporate law, there is no indication
that relationships between them and lawyers in other fields are increasingly mediated by markets
rather than firms. In contrast, our evidence suggests that firms’ boundaries narrow as lawyers
specialize in ex post fields: fields such as insurance law tend only to be covered in the same firm
as other fields when insurance law and other fields are covered by the same lawyer.
        Results from our second approach indicate that lawyers are more likely to work at the
same firm with other lawyers in the same field than in any other field. We also find that lawyers
in ex ante fields that serve business demands tend to work at the same firm as lawyers in any of
the ex ante business fields, and tend not to work at the same firm as lawyers in either ex post
business fields or fields that serve individual demands. For example, specialists in corporate law
tend to work at the same firm as specialists in real estate law, but not specialists in insurance or
criminal law. There are two exceptions to this general pattern. One is that patent lawyers
generally do not work at the same firm as specialists in other ex ante business fields. The other



1
  In the U.S., the service sector's share of GDP (not including financial services) increased from 12% to 22%
between 1970 and 2000; this sector is currently about 40% larger than manufacturing. In contrast, manufacturing's
share fell from 24% to 16% during this time. See Economic Report of the President, February 2002, p. 336.

                                                                                                               2
is that probate lawyers, specialists who serve individual clients, tend to work at the same firm as
ex ante business specialists. For example, the scope of firms that have corporate or real estate
specialists generally tends not to include patent law but does tend to include probate law,
accounting for patent and probate lawyers’ share of the industry overall.
           We conclude that this second set of results provides no evidence for the hypothesis that
law firms’ field boundaries are shaped by revenue sharing arrangements’ risk-sharing benefits:
specialists in fields with positively correlated demands tend to work at the same, not different,
firms. Some version of knowledge-sharing or monitoring cost hypotheses could explain these
results. Absent detailed information about knowledge sharing patterns or monitoring, it is
difficult to distinguish among these hypotheses because they all imply that the relative benefits
of mediating relationships within firms should be higher for fields that are somehow closely
related. We therefore provide some additional evidence on compensation and collaboration
patterns from a recent survey of Chicago lawyers taken by researchers at the American Bar
Foundation. Results from this survey indicate that encouraging referrals, knowledge-sharing
about economic opportunities, is an important organizational objective within law firms. Other
results indicate that if within-firm monitoring is important, it must support incentive instruments
that do not directly affect how revenues are shared. Finally, we find that a substantial share of
partners rarely, if ever, collaborate with other partners in their firm, indicating that the
organizational benefits of revenue-sharing arrangements extend beyond facilitating the exchange
of client or legal knowledge between lawyers.
           Beyond deepening our knowledge of the role of firms in human capital intensive
contexts, our findings help illuminate several other issues, traditionally addressed by different
literatures. First, our findings on the horizontal scope of firms have bearing on the determination
of industry structure, a key concern of the industrial organization literature.2 Second, an
understanding of the effect of market size in the organization of work and the horizontal division
of labor is key to the study of the sources of agglomeration effects in cities and their role in
economic growth, a concern of the new urban economics literature.3 Third, our empirical
evidence illuminates the grouping of task types into jobs and of jobs into firms in law firms and,
as such, is of interest to the recent labor economics literature dealing with the problems of the


2
    Sutton (1991, 1998).
3
    See e.g. Glaeser et al (1992), Lucas and Rossi-Hansberg, (2002).

                                                                                                 3
breadth of task assignment and of job design.4 Finally, understanding the sources of the trade-
offs involved in the coordination of specialists is relevant to the growth literature that, building
on Smith and Young (1928), investigates the determinants of specialization and the impact of
specialization on economic growth.5
        The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses Coasian and non-
Coasian views of firms’ boundaries, relates them to our context, and describes our general
empirical approaches. Section 3 presents the data. Section 4 presents results from our first
empirical approach, which investigates whether and how firms’ boundaries change with the
division of labor. Section 5 presents and discusses results from our second empirical approach,
which analyzes patterns in firms’ field composition. Section 6 presents survey evidence on
compensation and collaboration patterns within law firms. Section 7 concludes.


2. Understanding the Boundaries of the Law Firm
        2.1. Law Firms and the Scope of Client Demands

        A prevailing view of the scope of law firms is that it is client-centered. Support for this
view can be found in Heinz and Laumann’s (1982) study of the Chicago bar.6 This study, which
is perhaps the leading sociological analysis of the organization of professional services, stresses
how the type of client served shapes the organization of legal services. Heinz and Laumann
conclude that the bar is divided in two “hemispheres” that correspond to client type: the
corporate bar and the individual bar. Lawyers in these two hemispheres are so distinct in their
training, practice, and socio-economic characteristics so as to be considered within different
professions (1982:174). These authors conjecture that this division of the bar’s social structure is
reflected by a sharp distinction between law firms that serve corporate and individual clients;
those that serve corporate clients do not serve individual clients and vice-versa. Within each of
these “hemispheres,” and particularly in the corporate one, lawyers will tend to specialize, but
the firm will “feel the pressure to serve a broad range of the demands of the firm’s clients”
(1982:131).



4
  See e.g. Holmstrom and Milgrom, (1991), Olsen and Torsvik, (2000).
5
  See e.g. Romer (1986, 1987).
6
  The study is based on hour long interviews with 777 Chicago lawyers. Being the first in-depth study of a
profession, it is now considered a classic in sociology.

                                                                                                        4
        An analogous, demand-centric view of firms’ scope exists within the industrial
organization literature as well. This view posits that scope economies can be demand-based,
derived from “one-stop-shopping” economies. A precise modern statement of this view holds
that in the presence of shopping costs7 multiproduct firms exist to “offer a variety of products at
a single destination” (Klemperer and Padilla, 1997:472).8 The scope of the firm is then shaped by
firms’ desire to capture externalities between product lines due to these shopping costs. As
applied to legal services, this view has implications that are similar to the sociological view
depicted above: law firms’ scope should reflect only the scope of clients’ needs, and not
problems associated with mediating relationships between lawyers.

        An implication of these demand-centric views is that firm scope should not change as
market size increases if the composition of demand is held constant. If firms’ scope simply
reflects the scope of individual clients’ demands, doubling market size by simply replicating the
demands of existing clients should not affect firms’ scope, since replicating demands does not
alter the scope-distribution of clients’ demands.



        2.2. Organizational Trade-offs and Law Firm Boundaries

        Since Coase (1937), economists have viewed firms and markets as alternative
institutional structures through which economic activity is coordinated.                     Whether firms or
markets efficiently mediate the division of labor, and thus best promote specialization, depends
on which structure minimizes transaction costs. Modern theories of organization have since built
from Coase by proposing what differentiates transacting within versus between firms, then
analyzing the trade-offs associated with using firms and markets. While the details of these
theories differ, they share the Coasian view that firms’ boundaries reflect organizational trade-
offs; in this context, that they reflect whether relationships between lawyers are best mediated
within firms or by markets. What distinguishes this view from the demand-centric views above
is that it emphasizes that firms’ boundaries are determined not by demand patterns (e.g., whether




7
 Shopping costs are the real or perceived costs of using additional suppliers (Klemperer (1992)).
8
 Strategy researchers have also argued that offering demanders one-stop-shopping is a particular advantage of broad
scope (e.g. Porter (1985)).

                                                                                                                 5
clients find expertise in different fields complementary), but by how relationships between
suppliers are best organized.
       In the rest of this subsection, we discuss a general implication of the Coasian view; in the
subsection that follows, we propose what defines firms’ boundaries in the context of legal
services, and discuss in more detail what might drive differences in the relative costs of
transacting within and between firms in this context.
       The Coasian logic suggests a natural way for investigating whether organizational trade-
offs affect firms’ boundaries: examine whether firms’ boundaries narrow as market size
increases and individuals become more specialized. We depict this in Figure 1. Suppose one
can partition knowledge into fields of expertise.       The dashed lines depict the scope of
individuals’ expertise, and the solid lines depict how individuals are grouped into firms. In the
Figure, one individual covers both field A and other fields in small markets but different
individuals cover field A and other fields in large markets. As market size increases, individuals
specialize in field A.
       When a single individual covers both field A and other fields, the scope of his or her firm
includes field A and other fields. Organizational trade-offs, which appear only when different
individuals cover field A and other fields, do not affect whether the firm’s scope includes field A
and other fields. Firms’ scope tends to be broad because individuals cover multiple fields. But
once individuals specialize, firms’ scope depends not just on the range of individuals’ expertise,
but also on whether firms or markets mediate the division of labor efficiently. When firms do,
firms’ boundaries should not change as individuals specialize.         When markets do, firms’
boundaries should narrow. In the Figure, if markets efficiently mediate relationships between
individuals in field A and other fields, then firms’ scope should include field A and other fields
only when these fields are covered by the same individual.
       One can therefore test whether organizational trade-offs affect firms’ boundaries by
examining whether firms’ boundaries change with increases in the size of demand, holding
constant the distribution of demands. If organizational trade-offs associated with the division of
labor do not affect firms’ boundaries, then firms’ boundaries should not narrow as market size
increases and individuals specialize.    This is the case when, as depicted in the previous
subsection, firms’ boundaries merely mirror the distribution of demands of individual
demanders. Finding instead that firms’ boundaries narrow as individuals specialize is therefore


                                                                                                 6
evidence that organizational trade-offs associated with the division of labor affect firms’
boundaries.9
        2.3 Law Firms’ Boundaries: The Benefits and Costs of Ex Ante Revenue Sharing
Arrangements

        Beyond testing whether organizational trade-offs in general affect law firms’ scope, our
analysis will also provide some evidence with respect to different classes of theories that broadly
share the Coasian view.
        Regardless of their legal form of organization, law firms in the U.S. are always structured
around “ex ante” revenue-sharing arrangements among the firm’s partners, i.e. arrangements that
are in place before individuals obtain information about specific economic opportunities, and
have the feature that all individuals receive some share of revenues from the services any of them
supply (although the share the involved individuals receive may be higher). Firms’ horizontal
scope reflects the fields that partners cover. From the perspective of the partnership, whether a
field is covered by the firm is equivalent to whether an individual with expertise in the field is
included in the revenue-sharing arrangement. Thus, when discussing the organizational trade-
offs with respect to law firms’ scope, we emphasize the benefits and costs associated with ex
ante revenue-sharing arrangements.10
        The production of legal services also involves the use of other resources such as office
space, office equipment, libraries, or secretaries. Although scale economies exist with respect to
these resources, it common for them to be shared across lawyers in different firms when these
resources would be otherwise underutilized.11 This feature of the industry suggests that law
firms’ boundaries are shaped primarily by contractual trade-offs rather than technological trade-
offs, consistent with the view taken by the economics of organization literature. Our analysis

9
  The idea that firms’ boundaries may narrow as market size increases is not new to industrial organization. It is an
implication in Stigler (1951). The Coasian logic discussed here is not part of Stigler’s analysis.
10
   We focus on issues that bear on revenue sharing arrangements’ effect on firm scope. Revenue sharing
arrangements may have other roles as well, such as encouraging the hiring of high-ability individuals (Levin and
Tadelis (2002)). Similarly to Holmstrom and Milgrom (1994) and Holmstrom (1999), our account emphasizes how
firms can outperform markets by weakening individual incentives. Because the trade-offs we investigate are
different, so are our predicted relationships between specialization (job design) and optimal organizational form.
We do not address other incentive problems, such as those deriving from the risk of expropriation of specific
investments (Klein, et al. (1978)) or to the role of physical assets in providing incentives in the presence of
incomplete contracts (Grossman and Hart (1986), Hart and Moore (1990)), which may be more important in other
environments.



                                                                                                                   7
will thus focus on contractual issues rather than scale or scope economies associated with inputs
other than lawyers’ human capital.


        a. Knowledge Sharing
        An important problem created by specialization is the need for individuals with different
expertise to share knowledge.           This knowledge could be about the existence of economic
opportunities or it could concern expertise relevant to addressing a client’s legal problem.

        Consider first the problem of sharing knowledge about the existence of an opportunity
between lawyers with different expertise. A lawyer who knows that a particular client has a legal
problem may conclude that she herself has a comparative advantage in addressing this problem
or, alternatively, she may determine that some other lawyer is better qualified to deal with the
problem. In the latter case, she must refer it to another lawyer, potentially losing the rents that
could be derived from serving the client herself.

        This problem was studied by Garicano and Santos (2002). They note that information
asymmetries favor those who have private information about opportunities, regardless of whether
firms or markets mediate relationships between individuals. Giving away this information is
equivalent to giving away rents. As a result, referrals take place under some incomplete
information, with an informational asymmetry that favors the referrer. In this context, ex ante
revenue sharing arrangements facilitate the exchange of referrals.                      When firms mediate
relationships between individuals, individuals share revenues regardless of who supplies the
service.    In contrast, when markets mediate such relationships, individuals with private
knowledge about an opportunity only share revenues with others if a referral actually takes
place.12 Individuals' incentives to hold on to problems that others have a comparative advantage
in solving are weaker when firms mediate relationships than markets, because they share
revenues even when no referral takes place.




11
   Results from the Heinz and Nelson survey described below report that most sole practitioners share office space,
copying machines, libraries, and other fixed inputs with lawyers in other firms.
12
   Lawyers in different firms are generally allowed to compensate each other for referrals as long as the terms are
disclosed to clients. This is unlike the medical profession, in which compensation for referrals is (nominally)
prohibited.

                                                                                                                 8
        Ex ante revenue sharing arrangements effectively tax individuals when they hold on to
opportunities themselves, thus weakening their incentives to hold on to opportunities for which
they are not best qualified to serve. Thus, one benefit of partnership-like arrangements – the
benefit of transacting “within a firm” – is that they improve the efficiency of the exchange of
referrals relative to alternative organizational structures.

        Specialists not only need to share knowledge about opportunities among each other; they
sometimes must also collaborate by sharing substantive knowledge such as legal expertise or
knowledge about clients. Again, incentive problems can arise from the exchange of knowledge
because when one lawyer shares knowledge with another, he or she gives up informational rents.
When lawyers share knowledge with one another, they reduce their future value to clients
relative to those with whom they share it.
        A similar logic to that proposed by Garicano and Santos explains the advantage of ex
ante revenue sharing arrangements in this case. Revenue sharing arrangements facilitate the
exchange of knowledge for two reasons. First, the receiver of knowledge shares with the
transmitter a share of his future revenues, so that the sender benefits in the future from the more
extensive knowledge of the receiver. Second, the sender shares with the receiver his present and
future revenues, thus diminishing the extent to which he appropriates returns from his own use of
this knowledge. Revenue sharing arrangements increase the extent to which the sender benefits
when others use his knowledge relative when he uses it himself.
        It follows that lawyers should be more likely to work within the same versus different
firms, the more valuable knowledge sharing – referrals or collaboration -- is. Thus, lawyers in
fields across which knowledge-sharing is valuable should be more likely to be found within the
same firm than those in fields across which knowledge-sharing is less valuable.
        b. Risk Sharing
        An alternative view of the benefits of revenue-sharing arrangements is that they facilitate
risk sharing among specialists. This is proposed by Gilson and Mnookin (1985). In this view,
revenue sharing arrangements insure lawyers against fluctuations in demand for their expertise.
It follows that such arrangements would be particularly valuable for lawyers in fields where
demands are negatively correlated, and least valuable for lawyers in fields where demands are
highly positively correlated.
        c. Free Riding and Monitoring


                                                                                                 9
       The general drawback to revenue-sharing arrangements, the drawback to transacting
within firms in this context, is that free-rider problems emerge. Individuals do not appropriate
the full value of their efforts under such arrangements, and this weakens effort incentives.
(Alchian and Demsetz (1972), Holmstrom (1982)) Revenue-sharing arrangements could weaken
lawyers’ incentives to do high-quality work.          The agency costs associated with such
arrangements are one reason firms’ boundaries might narrow as market size increases and
individuals specialize.
       Partnerships have other incentive instruments in addition to revenue-sharing
arrangements, such as bonuses. If used effectively, these instruments can mitigate free-rider
problems to some extent, and thus decrease the cost of transacting within firms. Using these
effectively, however, requires that lawyers be able to assess each others’ output. Because of this,
all of these incentive instruments tend to become less useful as specialization increases, since
agents’ expertise overlaps less. As lawyers become more specialized, the cost of transacting
within firms tends to increase. This would be particularly the case when different lawyers
specialize in fields where the fundamental legal doctrines have little overlap (banking law and
criminal law, for example), if it is difficult for them to assess each others’ work. An implication
is that lawyers in fields across which monitoring is more efficient should be more likely to work
in the same firm than those across which monitoring is less efficient, since the cost of transacting
within firms is lower.


       2.4. Empirical Strategy and Implications

       We provide empirical evidence with respect to whether these sources of variation affect
firms’ boundaries in two ways. One extends the exercise described above: we analyze how
firms’ boundaries narrow as market size increases and individuals become more specialized.
Specifically, we determine which fields tend to be covered in the same firm as other fields only
when they are covered by the same individual – that is, for which specialties the pattern looks
like the top rather than the bottom in Figure 1. Once individuals specialize in these fields, they
tend to work in field-specialized firms. Relationships between them and specialists in other
fields tend to be mediated by markets, not firms. The other approach simply assesses which
pairs of specialists tend to work in the same firm with one another versus not. Unlike the
approach described above, this holds individuals’ specialization constant, and thus provides no


                                                                                                 10
evidence on whether changes in the division of labor are associated with changes in firms’
boundaries. But it provides additional evidence with respect to the scope of non-specialized
firms. Returning to Figure 1, while the first approach could detect whether specialists in field A
work in the same firm as specialists in other fields, it could not detect which other fields.
Evidence on which specialists work at the same firm as individuals in field A and which do not
sheds some light on whether firms’ scope corresponds to variation in the value of knowledge
sharing, risk sharing, and monitoring costs.

          This evidence will be more successful in distinguishing between some explanations than
others.    In particular, one would expect firms’ boundaries to differ sharply, depending on
whether they reflect risk-sharing benefits or the other two sources of variation.                    If firms’
boundaries were primarily driven by risk-sharing benefits, one would expect fields that differ
sharply in their client base to be more likely to be found within the same firm than fields with
similar client bases. This pattern would differ from the pattern one would expect if firms’ scope
were driven by knowledge sharing or monitoring cost considerations, both of which broadly
imply that specialists in unrelated fields should be mediated by markets. Distinguishing between
knowledge sharing and monitoring cost explanations is far more difficult, since many patterns
that one might expect if firms’ boundaries reflect knowledge sharing benefits – for example, that
specialists in corporate law are more prone to work at the same firm with specialists in banking
law than with specialists in negligence law – could also be explained by variation in monitoring
costs.

          Our discussion of our empirical evidence will reflect this. We first distinguish between
risk-pooling and these other explanations. We then go on to discuss the results of our two
empirical exercises in light of knowledge sharing and monitoring cost explanations, and
conclude that some version of each of these explanations could explain the main patterns that we
uncover.13 We will then discuss results from a recent survey taken by John P. Heinz and Robert
Nelson as part of a follow-up study to Heinz and Laumann (1982). These results shed light on
compensation patterns and the organization of work within law firms, and provide evidence on
the role of monitoring and knowledge sharing among law firm partners.


13
  Distinguishing among these definitively probably requires direct evidence on how referrals, collaboration, and
monitoring differ across combinations of fields, something that our main data source does not provide.

                                                                                                             11
3. Data

       The data are from the legal services portion of the 1992 Census of Services. Like in other
industries, the Census surveys individual establishments in this industry. Forms are sent to all
law offices that surpass a size threshold (approximately ten employees) or that are part of multi-
establishment firms. In addition, forms are sent to a random sample of smaller offices, where the
sampling rate is set to obtain reliable MSA-level estimates. In all, the Census sends survey
forms to law offices that account for approximately 80% of revenues in the industry. Details are
in Bureau of the Census (1996). The Census publishes MSA-level estimates derived from this
survey in Bureau of the Census (1996). In this paper, we use establishment-level data, which are
not publicly available.
       Along with standard questions regarding revenues, payroll, and employment, the survey
asks law offices industry-specific questions that provide detailed information about the
distribution of lawyers across field-defined specialties. (See Appendix 1.) It asks respondents to
categorize the lawyers that work in the establishment by their primary field and report how many
are in each category: how many lawyers at the establishment specialize in corporate law, for
example. When lawyers work in multiple fields, they are classified as “general practitioners.”
The survey thus provides unusually detailed information about organization and specialization at
the establishment level. We use data from 1992 because it is the most recent year for which the
Census asks the specialty questions.
       In all, the Census received responses to these organizational questions from about 28,000
law offices. We omit from our sample law offices with inconsistent responses for the total
number of lawyers; for example, those where the number of lawyers summed across the
specialty categories does not equal the number of partners plus the number of associates. Our
final sample includes 26,151 law offices and 219,033 lawyers. These constitute about 17% of
law offices and 50% of privately-practicing lawyers in the United States in 1992.
       We merged these data with data from 1992 County Business Patterns. County Business
Patterns (CBP) provides county-level information regarding the distribution of employment
across industries and the employment size distribution of establishments.           We compute
employment shares for each of seven major (one-digit) industries (e.g., manufacturing) for each
county; although information is available for more detailed industry definitions for many


                                                                                               12
counties, the Census withholds more detailed data in many cases because of confidentiality-
related restrictions.14 We also compute the share of establishments within various employment
size categories in the county, and an estimate of employees per establishment by major sector.
We derive the latter by multiplying the size category shares by the midpoints of the employment
size categories.
        The CBP data thus provide information about the distribution and size of local demand
for legal services. The employment shares characterize the local economy, and depict the extent
to which local demand for legal services comes from different classes of firms: manufacturing
versus financial services, for example. They also depict whether local demanders are small or
large firms overall and within sectors. For example, counties where the average establishment
size in financial services is large contain the country’s most important financial districts.
Holding constant employment shares, cross-county differences in total employment pick up
differences in the size of local demand for legal services. If the employment shares capture
differences in the distribution of local demand well, one can think of increases in total
employment, conditional on these shares, as rotations in the demand curve for legal services:
proportionate increases in the various legal problems encountered by individuals and businesses
located in the county.15
        Using these variables to capture differences in demand has drawbacks. One important
drawback is that while the vast majority of most lawyers’ business comes from local demanders,
some lawyers serve regional or national markets rather than local ones.                       If employment
differences between the very largest counties and smaller counties understate differences in the
demand faced by lawyers in these counties, relationships between specialization and employment
size will tend to overstate true relationships between specialization and market size. One would
expect this issue to arise particularly for lawyers in multi-office firms, in part because they might
serve clients based in all of the regions their firm is located.
        We address this in a manner that we describe in the following section. At a narrow level,
what we do controls for the possibility that lawyers in multi-office firms may draw clients from


14
   We have run specifications with two-digit controls, using imputations for county-sectors for which the Census
does not report figures. None of the results differ from those reported below, that use one-digit controls.
15
   Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) use rotations in the demand curve to identify relationships between competitive
conduct and entry in concentrated markets. The main issues in this paper – the specialization of individuals and
firms’ scope – play no role in their analysis.

                                                                                                             13
other markets in which their firm has offices; more broadly, it controls for the possibility that
such lawyers draw clients from systematically wider geographic regions than those in single-
office firms. Our main results primarily reflect relationships between specialization and market
size for lawyers in single-office firms, so the market definition issue is largely confined to
lawyers in single-office firms. This does not eliminate the issue: some lawyers in single-office
firms – particularly those in big cities such as New York and Los Angeles -- may serve broad
geographic markets. However, we do not think that this effect is driving our results. As we
report below, our main results appear even when looking across relatively small markets, regions
where it is unlikely that many lawyers in single-office firms serve many non-local clients.
        Another theoretically important drawback is that individuals as well as businesses
demand legal services, and employment-based measures may not capture the size and
distribution of individual demand well.              Better measures of individual demand would be
population- rather than employment-based, and demographic variables might capture certain
demands well (for example, the demand for probate work should be higher in regions with many
elderly residents). We have run specifications that use such controls. While some of the controls
do help explain differences cross-market differences in specialization patterns, none of our
results of interest – which concern relationships between specialization and market size – change
when including these additional controls.16
        Table 1 contains some summary statistics. The average law office has 3.56 lawyers, and
the average firm has 3.65 lawyers, a reminder that the average law firm in the U.S. is a very
small, single-establishment enterprise.           71% of the lawyers in our sample are reported to
specialize in one of the Census-defined fields. 37% of law offices and 28% of firms are
specialized, in the sense that all lawyers in the office or firm specialize in the same field. 28% of
lawyers work in multiestablishment firms, but only 5% of offices are part of multiestablishment
firms. Although only 2% of the law firms in our sample have multiple locations, those that do
are much larger than most single establishment firms.
        Table 2 provides a more detailed look at specialization patterns. We report these patterns
for each of the Census-defined fields. To facilitate analysis both here and below, we present
patterns for groups of fields that differ in the source and timing of demands. “Individual fields”


16
   We do not report these results here because they are very similar to those reported below, and releasing results
from multiple, closely related specifications can raise disclosure issues for the Bureau of the Census.

                                                                                                                14
are those where all or nearly all demand comes from individuals; in our data, these include
criminal, domestic relations, negligence-plaintiff, and probate. We label the rest of the fields,
fields where a substantial part of demand comes from businesses, as “business fields.” Within
these groups, fields differ according to the timing of demands. We propose that demand for legal
services can arise either before a contractual arrangement is agreed upon, when lawyers may be
involved in drafting agreements and predicting the contingencies that agreements should address,
or after contractual terms are agreed upon and take force, when lawyers may be involved in
dispute resolution and litigation. We label these “ex ante” and “ex post” fields respectively.
Among the business fields, we classify insurance and negligence-defendant as ex post fields, and
the rest as ex ante fields. Expertise in insurance law is generally demanded to assess insurance
claims or provide defense for parties covered by insurance. (Abrams (2000)) Expertise in
negligence is demanded by defendants in tort-related matters. Among individual fields, we
classify probate as ex ante and the rest as ex post.17
        Survey data confirms these cross-field differences in the source and timing of demands.
Table 3 reports results from an extensive interview-based survey (“Chicago Lawyers II”) of
Chicago lawyers completed in 1995 by Jack Heinz and Bob Nelson of the American Bar
Foundation.18 Questions in this survey ask privately-practicing lawyers what share of their time
they spend on business, non-business organizational (e.g., governmental), and individual clients,
and how many days per month they spend in state and Federal court. Days per month in court is
a good indicator for the degree to which lawyers provide “ex ante” or “ex post” services. We
report the average response by specialty for categories that closely match those defined in the
Census data.19 The table indicates a sharp break in the share of time lawyers in different fields
spend on business clients. Specialists in personal injury (on the plaintiff’s side of the bar),


17
   We report these together in Table 2 because there is only one ex ante individual field.
18
   These data were collected as a follow-up project to Heinz and Laumann (1982). Heinz and Nelson surveyed a
random sample of Chicago-based lawyers taken from the State of Illinois’ lawyer registration records. They
collected the data by conducting one-hour interviews with subjects at their offices. In all, 788 lawyers from this
random sample were interviewed, 526 of whom were in private practice. See Heinz, et. al. (1998) for more details.
We are extremely grateful to Jack Heinz and Bob Nelson for sharing their data.
19
   Even these do not always match perfectly. For example, the Chicago Lawyers II survey does not include a
separate category for “insurance law,” but the Census data does. Jack Heinz reported to us that he believes that most
of those reporting “insurance law” to the Census would classify themselves in the Chicago Lawyers II survey as
“personal injury-defendant.” Fifteen lawyers in the Chicago Lawyers II report themselves to be specialists in
“securities;” these lawyers would probably be classified as “corporate” in the Census data. These lawyers’
responses to the time allocation and days in court questions are very similar to the “general corporate” lawyers
reported in Table 1.

                                                                                                                 15
criminal, divorce, and probate law spend almost all of their time on individual clients. The rest
(except specialists in municipal law, which predominantly have governmental clients) spend the
majority of their time on business clients. Likewise, personal injury, criminal, and divorce
specialists spend more days in court than lawyers in any of the other specialties, consistent with
the idea that demands for expertise in these fields tend to be more “ex post” than other fields.
Although the number of observations is very low, probate specialists appear to spend less time in
court than other specialists that serve individual clients, reflecting that the demand they face
tends to be more for “ex ante” services.
          The first column of Table 2 reports the share of lawyers in each of the Census fields and
groups of fields. 27% of lawyers specialize in an "ex ante" business field; about a third of these
are corporate law specialists. 13% specialize in an "ex post" business field. 15% specialize in an
individual field; about half of these are classified as "negligence-plaintiff." The second and third
columns report the share of lawyers working in specialized offices and firms, by specialty.
These figures are very similar because individual offices within large multi-establishment firms
are generally not specialized by field: if a multi-establishment firm contains lawyers in different
specialties, its offices usually do as well. The final column reports the fraction of specialists that
work in specialized firms, by specialty. The notable pattern here is that, with the exception of
patent lawyers, ex ante business specialists are less prone to work in a specialized firm than ex
post business or individual specialists. Over a third of ex post specialists and nearly half of
individual specialists work at specialized firms, but less than 20% of ex ante specialists do. The
lowest fraction among the specialties is for corporate law: only 5% of corporate law specialists
work at firms with only corporate law specialists.
          Table 2 thus provides some initial evidence regarding firms’ scope. This evidence,
however, does not indicate that firms’ boundaries are sensitive to the division of labor: the fact
that ex post business and individual specialists are more likely to work in field specialized firms
than most ex ante business specialists may just reflect differences in the scope of clients’
demands. Furthermore, it provides no evidence on the scope of non-specialized firms: with
which other lawyers do lawyers in ex ante business specialties work? The following two
sections, which present the main empirical analysis in the paper, provide evidence on these
fronts.




                                                                                                   16
4. Market Size, Specialization, and Organization
       4.1     Empirical Framework

       The first step in our empirical work examines relationships between market size and the
probability that lawyers specialize in one of the Census-defined fields. Our basic empirical
framework for examining relationships between market size and individual specialization is
simple. Let the probability that lawyer i in market j is a specialist of some sort be pi, where:
                                            pi = f ( X j β1 )

Xj is a vector of observable characteristics of local market j and β1 is a parameter vector. The
coefficient on our proxy for local market size, county employment, will be of particular interest.
We interpret variation in this variable, conditional on our controls for the distribution of local
demand, as proportionate differences in the demand for the spectrum of services lawyers
provide.
       Our data are at the level of the law office rather than the lawyer. We thus estimate β1
using the expression:
                                            sk = f ( X j β1 )

where sk is the share of lawyers in law office k that are specialists of some sort, weighting each
observation by the number of lawyers working at the law office. To make interpreting the
coefficient estimates simple, we assume that f is linear, so:
                                           sk = X j β1 + ε1k

This produces a grouped data analog to the linear probability model; β1 can thus be interpreted as
a probability derivative. It captures reduced-form relationships between specialization shares
and market characteristics.
       We estimate analogous specifications for particular specialties and for groups of
specialties. These, for example, relate market size and composition to the share of lawyers who
specialize in corporate law, or in any one of the ex ante business fields.
       This specification contains an important assumption concerning market definition:
lawyers’ specialization decisions reflect only the size and distribution of demand in the area in
which their office is located. But as noted above, this assumption is problematic when lawyers
work in multi-office firms. If lawyers in multi-office firms serve clients based in other markets




                                                                                                   17
in which their firm has offices, these lawyers’ specialization decisions could reflect the size of
demand in these other markets as well as their own.
        To account for this, we estimate specifications where our proxy for market size is:
                                                                    γ
                                                    ∑ empmδ mk 
                                             emp j  m          
                                                    emp j      
                                                              

where empj is employment in county j (“local market size”), m indexes counties, and δmk equals
one if office k’s firm has an office in market m and zero otherwise. The numerator of the
bracketed expression can be thought of as “firm-level market size.” It is just employment
summed across all of the counties where office k’s firm has an office. γ is a parameter that
indicates the degree to which lawyer specialization reflects local or firm-level market size. If
γ=0, the bracketed expression drops out and only the size of the local market matters; if γ=1,
empj drops out and lawyer specialization reflects firm-level market size.
        Market size enters our empirical specifications in log form. Thus, market size enters
these specifications through the expression:
                                        β1 ln(emp j ) − β1γ ln( sharekj )
where sharekj is local market size divided by firm-level market size for office k. Note that
ln(sharekj) = 0 for offices in single-office firms. Including ln(sharekj) controls for the possibility
that lawyers in multi-office firms may base specialization decisions on demand outside of their
local market.
        Below we present specifications that include and exclude ln(sharekj).                      None of our
estimated relationships between specialization and market size change when doing so, indicating
that these estimates are robust to how we define the geographic market for lawyers in multi-
office firms. This probably reflects that our results are driven by the nearly three-quarters of
lawyers that work in single-office firms, so this issue is irrelevant for the vast majority of our
sample.
        The second step in our empirical approach estimates specifications that relate the
probability that an individual works at a field-specialized law firm to market characteristics.20

20
  Very few lawyers work in field-specialized offices that are part of non-specialized multi-office firms. Thus, our
results and conclusions would be exactly the same if we analyzed relationships between market size and the
specialization of law offices rather than firms.

                                                                                                                18
Let pisf denote the probability that an individual is a specialist and works at a field-specialized
firm.21 We specify:
                                                 pi sf = f ( X j β 2 )

As before, because the unit of observation is the law office rather than individual, we estimate
specifications based on the equation:
                                        sk sf = f ( X j β 2 ) = X j β 2 + ε 2 k

where sksf is the share of lawyers at office k who are in a specialized firm and we weight
observations by the number of lawyers. Note that sksf = 0 if lawyers at office k do not share the
same specialty as all other lawyers in their firm and sksf = 1 if they do; this is a discrete
dependent variable model.           As above, we estimate analogous specifications for individual
specialties and groups of specialties, and where our proxy for market size reflects both local and
firm-level market size.
        Combined, β1 and β2 depict how much individual specialization increases with market
size, and whether increases in the division of labor across individuals take place within or
between law firms. They thus provide evidence regarding whether firms’ scope merely reflects
the scope of individual clients’ demands. If β1 > 0 and β2 = 0, this indicates that although
individuals specialize more as market size increases, the share of individuals working in field-
specialized firms does not. This pattern corresponds to the upper arrow in Figure 1, in which
firms’ boundaries do not narrow as market size increases and individuals specialize. In contrast,
if β1 > 0 and β2 > 0, this indicates that both the share of individuals who specialize and the share
of individuals who work in field-specialized firms increase with market size.                        This would
indicate that sometimes the pattern corresponds to the lower arrow in Figure 1, in which firms’
boundaries narrow as market size increases and individuals specialize. When β1 > 0, β2/β1
reflects the degree to which increases in the division of labor are mediated by markets. Finding
such a pattern is therefore evidence against the hypothesis that law firms’ boundaries reflect only
the distribution of clients’ demands. It would indicate that firms’ boundaries sometimes change




21
  Our results are unchanged if we define a specialized firm as one where most of the lawyers (rather than all) share
the same specialty, for example as one where 75% or 90% do.

                                                                                                                 19
with the division of labor, consistent with the view that organizational trade-offs – whether firms
or markets best mediate relationships between lawyers – influence law firms’ scope.22


         4.2       Market Size and Lawyer Specialization

         Table 4 contains results regarding individual specialization and market size. It presents
estimates of β1, the coefficient on ln(county employment), from twelve different regressions. In
the top panel, the dependent variable is sk, the share of lawyers at law office k who are
specialized in one of the fields described above. In the first column, there are no control
variables. β1 is positive and significant: the share of lawyers who specialize in one of our fields
is higher in larger counties. The point estimate indicates that doubling market size is associated
with a 9.2% increase in the share of lawyers who are specialists. Moving from the smallest
counties in our sample to the largest changes the predicted share of specialists from about 40% to
about 85%.
         Moving to the right, the second column contains results including a set of controls that
reflect the composition of the local economy in which the law office is located: sector
employment shares, average establishment size by major sector, and a state capital dummy. The
estimate of β1 falls by about 10% from 0.092 to 0.083 when introducing these controls.23 While
part of the simple relationship between individual specialization and county employment reflects
differences in the composition of demand for legal services between small and large markets, the
relationship between market size and specialization remains strong when including these
controls. The notable patterns in the controls are that specialization is greater in counties with
than without state capitals, and in counties where the average establishment size in construction,
manufacturing, transportation/utilities, or financial services is large. Specialization tends to be
low in counties where the share of employment in the manufacturing or wholesaling sectors is


22
   The ratio β2/β1 is an instrumental variables estimate of the effect of lawyer specialization on law firm
specialization if county employment is a valid instrument for lawyer specialization. This can be seen by writing the
ratio as: β 2 / β1 = [∂sk / ∂ (ln( county employment ))] /[∂sk / ∂ (ln( county employment ))] = ∂sk / ∂sk . This identification
                      sf                                                                         sf



strategy requires that market size be related to firms' boundaries only through its effect on lawyers' specialization
decisions. In Garicano and Hubbard (2003), we discuss why this assumption is plausible in human capital intensive
contexts in light of recent organizational theory. We do not emphasize causal interpretations of β2/β1 in this paper.
23
   We have run various specifications that control for the composition of the local market in various ways – for
example, controlling for the size distribution of firms with employment size class shares rather than averages. The
coefficient on ln(county employment) changes little.

                                                                                                                           20
low relative to the omitted category, which includes construction and mining. (See Table A1 for
the full set of estimates.)
        The third column includes ln(share) in the specification. As outlined above, including
this variable accounts for the possibility that lawyers in multi-office firms may base
specialization decisions on demand in markets outside of their local area. The estimate of β1
barely changes when including this variable, indicating that the pattern in the second column is
primarily driven by relationships between specialization and market size for lawyers in single-
office firms. This is not surprising given that most lawyers work in such firms.
        The bottom three panels present results from analogous specifications, where the
dependent variable is the share of individuals that specialize in ex ante business fields, ex post
business fields, and individual fields, respectively. In each of these panels, the estimates of β1 in
the second and third columns are positive, significant, and of about the same magnitude: about
0.020.24 Table 5 reports results from 13 additional regressions where the dependent variables are
the share of lawyers that specialize in each of the fields in our data. The estimates of β1 are
positive and significant for some of the ex ante business fields and both of the ex post ones. In
contrast, the only individual field for which the coefficient is positive and significant is
negligence-plaintiff; there is no evidence that the share of lawyers specializing in probate,
criminal, or domestic law increases with market size. Indeed, the share specializing in probate
and domestic law decreases slightly.
        Assuming that changes in our market size measure alter the size but not the distribution
of demand for legal services, fields for which the coefficients are positive – banking, corporate,
real estate, insurance, and negligence law -- are those that tend to be covered by "general
practitioners" in small markets but specialists in large ones.
        In sum, our evidence on lawyer specialization is that lawyers specialize more in several
business-oriented fields as market size increases, but we find no evidence that this is true for
most individual-oriented fields. Increases in specialization with market size reflect that lawyers
serving businesses in small markets supply services that usually cross field boundaries, but this
becomes less and less true as market size increases. The next section examines whether firm



24
  Ln(county employment) ranges from about nine to about fourteen in our data. Hence, the coefficient estimate
implies a difference in each of these three specialty shares of about ten percentage points between very small and
very large markets.

                                                                                                               21
specialization increases in the same way. In fields in which lawyer specialization increases with
market size, this will indicate the degree to which increases in the division of labor take place
within or between firms, and provide evidence whether organizational trade-offs affect firms’
boundaries.


       4.3      Market Size and the Division of Labor Within and Between Firms

       The first row of Table 6 contains results from regressions that are analogous to those in
the middle column of Table 4, but use sksf rather than sk as the dependent variable. These
regressions relate the share of lawyers working in field-specialized law firms to market size and
composition. These relationships are of particular interest for fields in which individual lawyers
specialize more with market size. Finding that lawyers become more specialized and work more
in field-specialized firms as market size increases indicates circumstances where organizational
trade-offs influence firms’ boundaries; in these cases, the division of labor tends to be mediated
between rather than within firms.
       In the first column, the dependent variable is the share of lawyers who work in a field-
specialized law firm. β2, the coefficient on ln(county employment), is positive and significant: as
market size increases, a larger share of lawyers works in field-specialized firms. The point
estimate is 0.039, indicating that doubling market size is associated with a 3.9 percentage point
increase in the share of lawyers working at specialized firms. This is about one-fourth of the
sample mean of 16.2%. The bottom of the table contains the estimates of β1 from the middle
column in Table 4, which track relationships between individual lawyer specialization and
market size. The ratio of the point estimates, β2/β1, equals 0.47, indicating that about half of the
overall increase in the division of labor is happening between rather than within firms. This
indicates that in some cases, firms’ field scope narrows as market size increases, suggesting that
firms’ boundaries do not merely reflect the distribution of demands. This evidence is consistent
with the hypothesis that organizational trade-offs, which appear only when fields are covered by
different individuals, influence firms’ boundaries.
       The other three columns break things down by specialty class as before. In the second
column of the top row, the dependent variable is the share of lawyers that work at an office
where all lawyers specialize in a single ex ante business field. The coefficient on market size is
very small and not statistically significantly different from zero. Table 4 indicated that as market


                                                                                                 22
size increases, lawyers specialize more in these fields; this result indicates that lawyers are not
more likely to work in field-specialized firms. The ratio β2/β1 is approximately zero, indicating
that all of the increase in the division of labor is occurring within rather than between firms. In
contrast, in the next column of the top row, the dependent variable is the share of lawyers that
work at an office where all lawyers specialize in a single ex post business field. Here, the
coefficient on market size is positive and significant. From before, as market size increases,
more lawyers become insurance and negligence-defendant specialists. Here, we see that a
substantial fraction of these specialists work in specialized law firms. The ratio β2/β1 provides an
estimate of this fraction: 57%. Like the ex ante business fields, the division of labor increases
with market size; unlike the ex ante business fields, a significant fraction of it happens between
rather than within firms.
       This result indicates that ex post business fields tend only to be covered in the same firm
as other fields when they are covered by the same person, but ex ante business fields tend to be
covered in the same firm as other fields even when they are covered by different individuals.
Assuming that variation in our market size proxy captures differences in the size but not the
distribution of demand, demand for services that involve each of these fields of the law exists in
smaller markets, but the individuals supplying these services tend not to be specialized. For
example, lawyers who advise clients on insurance law issues might also advise clients on
corporate and tax law issues. When individual lawyers have multiple specialties, so do firms.
As market size increases, lawyers specialize more: different lawyers begin to advise clients on
different areas of the law. As lawyers specialize, some specialties remain within the firm and
some are spun off: the scope of the firm continues to include corporate and tax law, but it often
no longer includes insurance law.
       Table 7 provides a more detailed view. The dependent variables in these regressions,
analogous to the top panel of Table 6, are the share of lawyers working at firms that specialize in
the different fields. The contrast in Table 6 between ex ante and ex post specialties holds in this
table as well. None of the coefficient estimates in the first row show statistically significant
relationships between market size and the fraction of lawyers working in field-specialized firms.
But both of the coefficient estimates in the second row are positive and significant. As market
size increases, a greater share of lawyers specializes in both insurance and negligence-defense,
and a greater share of lawyers work in offices that specialize in each of these fields. β2/β1 for


                                                                                                 23
insurance and negligence-defense equals 0.58 and 0.30, respectively. In contrast, while the
division of labor increases with market size for some of the ex ante specialties, there is no strong
evidence that much of this is taking place between firms. Firms’ boundaries often change once
individuals specialize in ex post fields, but there is little evidence that they do once individuals
specialize in ex ante fields.
        Figures 2 and 3 summarize the general patterns for ex ante and ex post business fields,
respectively. The top line in each represents the share of lawyers in a specialized field, and the
bottom line represents the share of lawyers working at a field specialized law firm. For the ex
ante fields, the distance between the lines increases with market size; an increasing share of
lawyers work as specialists but in non-specialized firms. The bottom line is flat. For the ex post
fields, the distance between the lines increases somewhat but the bottom line is upward sloping.
More lawyers specialize in these fields as market size increases, and an increasing share of
lawyers work in specialized firms.
        The final column in Table 6 examines relationships between market size and the
likelihood an individual works at a firm that specializes in a field that tends to serve individuals.
The coefficient is positive and significant, indicating that the share of lawyers working in such
firms increases with market size. The coefficient estimate is 0.019, which is about the same as
the analogous estimate in bottom panel. This suggests that as lawyers specialize more in
individual fields, the division of labor between them and lawyers in other specialties takes place
entirely between firms.         Table 7 provides more detail. Recall that the only individual field
where we find that individuals specialize more as market size increases is negligence-plaintiff.
The coefficient on ln(county employment) in the negligence-plaintiff column in Table 7 indicates
that as market size increases, the share of lawyers working at firms that specialize in this field
increases. The ratio β2/β1 equals 0.72, indicating that most of the increase in the division of labor
between negligence-plaintiff specialists and other lawyers is taking place between rather than
within firms.
        Finally, Table 8 reports estimates of β1 and β2 when running the regressions on
observations in small and large markets separately. We divide the sample roughly in half,
distinguishing between offices in counties with less than and greater than 200,000 employment.25


25
  Counties with approximately 200,000 employees include Fresno County, CA, and Polk County, IA. The latter is
the county in which Des Moines is located.

                                                                                                          24
The main result from this table is that the overall relationships between lawyer and firm
specialization and market size in Table 8 appear throughout the range of our sample.26
        This robustness is of interest for the following reasons. First, as alluded to earlier, it
gives us some confidence that our results are not driven by assumptions about market definition.
A county-based definition for lawyers’ geographic market seems particularly sensible for
lawyers in small markets, and our results show up when restricting the analysis to such markets.
The other reason concerns the β1 estimates. One might not expect β1 to be positive in the bottom
panel, since markets with at least 200,000 employees (at least the size Fresno, CA or Des
Moines, IA) are probably large enough to support individual specialization in any of the fields in
our data. The positive coefficients on β1 in the bottom panel suggest to us that lawyers specialize
along multiple dimensions, including some that are not captured by the Census’ categories: for
example, for example, by industry. If this is the case, then it is easy to explain why field-based
specialization might increase with market size, even when comparing relatively large markets.
In medium-sized markets, some lawyers specialize by industry but not field (e.g., they handle
corporate and tax work for utilities); as market size increases, they specialize by industry and
field. The idea of examining how firms’ boundaries change with individual specialization
produces interesting results across a surprisingly large range of the data because individuals
specialize by field more in larger markets, even when comparing relatively large markets.


5. The Field Composition of Law Firms

        The previous section analyzed relationships between the division of labor and law firms’
scope. This provided evidence that firms’ boundaries reflect not just the scope of individual
clients’ demands, but also organizational trade-offs. However, this exercise provided limited
evidence about law firms’ field composition. Thus, while it provided evidence that firms’
boundaries reflect not just the scope of individual clients’ demands but also organizational trade-
offs, it could not provide much evidence on the nature of these trade-offs. This section deepens
the previous analysis by providing evidence on which types of specialists tend to work at the




26
   One can see this as well using a series of market size dummies rather than ln(county employment) in the
regressions.

                                                                                                       25
same firm with one another and which do not.27 We then interpret the patterns in light of the
knowledge-sharing, risk-sharing, and monitoring cost hypotheses discussed above.
         We develop a statistic that indicates the degree to which lawyers in one field work in the
same firm with lawyers in other fields, relative to a benchmark in which the field-shares of
lawyers in each firm is the same as the field-shares of lawyers in the economy.28 Let Ni be the
number of lawyers in firm i and nij be the number of those lawyers who specialize in field j. We
start by computing the share of field a lawyers in the average field b lawyer’s firm. Define this
share as sab:
                                                           nib nia
                                               s ab = ∑
                                                          ∑ nib N i
where all the sums are taken over i. sab is a weighted average of the share of lawyers in field a,
where the average is taken across all firms in the economy and the weight for each firm i is the
share of b lawyers in the economy who work in firm i. We then normalize sab by the share of
lawyers in field a in the economy. Thus for any pair of fields a and b, this statistic is:
                                                  s ab 1        nib nia
                                         Γ ab =       =    ∑
                                                  sa sa        ∑ nib N i
Γab is the share of field a lawyers in the average field b lawyer’s firm, normalized by sa, the share
of lawyers in field a in the economy. It is straightforward to show that this statistic is symmetric:
i.e. Γab = Γba.
        This statistic is easy to interpret. Γab = 1 if the share of field a lawyers in each firm
where field b lawyers work is equal to the share of field a lawyers in the economy. If Γab > 1,
this indicates that most field b lawyers work in firms with high shares of field a lawyers, relative
to the share of field a lawyers in the economy. Γab = 1.30 indicates the share of field a lawyers in
the firm where the average field b lawyer works is 30% higher than in the population as a whole.
Γab = 0.70 indicates that it is 30% lower.
        Table 9 presents our results from this approach. We note four important patterns. First,
the general pattern with the off-diagonal terms is that ex ante business specialists tend to work at


27
   See also Phillips and Zuckerman (2000), who analyze the determinants of whether Silicon Valley law firms’
scope includes family law.
28
   Previous versions of this paper reported versions of the Ellison-Glaeser statistic (Ellison and Glaeser (1997)),
which uses random allocation rather than a uniform distribution as a benchmark. The results are very similar. We
report the uniform-benchmarked statistics described here because the magnitudes are more readily interpretable.

                                                                                                               26
the same firm as one another, but most other pairs of specialists tend not to do so. Most of the
statistics in the upper left of the figure are greater than one; most in the rest of the figure are less
than one. The second and third patterns are the exceptions to this rule. The second is that
specialists in patent law, classified as an ex ante business field, tend not to work at the same firm
with specialists in other ex ante business fields (or any other field, for that matter). Unlike other
ex ante business specialists, patent lawyers tend to work in firms that are field-specialized. The
third is that specialists in probate law, an individual field, tend to work in the same firm with ex
ante business specialists. In fact, they are more likely to work at the same firm as banking,
corporate, environmental, and other ex ante business specialists than other types of individual
specialists. This is the exception to the general rule that specialists in business and individual-
oriented fields tend not to work at the same firm with each other. Last, the diagonal terms are
systematically greater than the off-diagonal terms. Some of this is artificial, since part of the
high value of the diagonal reflects that specialists always work at firms where the share of their
own field is positive – their firm reflects themselves. At the bottom of the table we report
statistics for the diagonal terms that do not include this effect; these statistics remain greater than
any of the associated off-diagonal terms. Lawyers are more likely to work at the same firm with
lawyers in their own field than with lawyers in any other field. This reflects groups of partners
and associates in the same field working at the same firm.29
        Broadly, these patterns provide no support for the hypothesis that law firms’ field
boundaries strongly reflect the risk-sharing benefits of revenue-sharing arrangements. Lawyers
in the same field or fields where demands are closely related tend to work at the same firm more
than lawyers in fields where demands are less closely related. Demand for the services supplied
by banking, corporate, real estate, and other ex ante business specialists is likely positively
correlated, but specialists in these fields tend to work at the same firm with each other.
        It is far more difficult to distinguish between knowledge-sharing and monitoring cost
explanations of these patterns, and between knowledge-sharing explanations that emphasize
referrals and collaboration. The basic problem is that these hypotheses share the feature that the
net benefits of transacting within a firm should be higher when fields are closely related in some



29
  A next step in our research agenda is to study organizational issues other than law firms’ field scope, such as
partner-associate ratios and scale within fields. This step would provide further investigate the organization of
specialists in the same field.

                                                                                                              27
way. As we explain below, some version of each of these theories could explain the bulk of the
patterns in Table 9. Detailed evidence on cross-field referral, collaboration, and monitoring is
probably necessary to provide definitive evidence with respect to these hypotheses; we provide
some preliminary evidence along these lines in the section that follows.
       For example, one explanation of the off-diagonal patterns is that they reflect differences
in the value of cross-field referrals. One would expect knowledge-sharing about opportunities to
be more valuable across ex ante fields than ex post fields if clients’ ability to assess the scope of
their legal problem – their ability to self-refer -- differs with the timing of demand. Clients
demand ex ante services in anticipation of potential future disputes among parties or conflicts
with the law; these problems often potentially can involve many different areas of the law.
(Does this deal have important tax implications or create regulatory problems?) Legal expertise
is valuable for determining which of these areas are important. In contrast, it tends to be less
difficult for clients demanding ex post services to determine the range of relevant legal expertise.
The interaction between a client's situation and the law is often clear, even to non-experts. For
example, expertise in insurance law is valuable for a company with a complicated insurance
claim; expertise in torts is valuable to a company being sued for negligence. While legal
expertise is generally valuable for such clients, referrals across specialists in different areas of
the law tend not to be because the scope of most clients' legal problems is well-defined at this
point in contractual time. If this is true, this could explain why lawyers in ex ante fields tend to
work in the same firm with each other, while lawyers in ex post fields tend to work in field-
specialized firms. It could also explain the exceptions to the general empirical pattern. Patent
law is fairly distinct from other areas of the law, and is probably an exception to the rule that
clients have difficulty judging the scope of services they need for ex ante problems. Referrals
between ex ante business specialists and probate lawyers may be valuable, as when the senior
management of corporate clients need help arranging wills and estates.
       Alternatively, most of these patterns could reflect differences in the value of knowledge-
sharing in collaboration or in monitoring costs. The value of sharing legal expertise or client
knowledge may be systematically greater across ex ante business fields than between these and
other fields, and one can construct plausible explanations for why patent and probate law are
exceptions. Variation in monitoring costs could also explain this general pattern, especially if ex
ante business fields (except patent law) are conceptually close to one another. However, we do


                                                                                                  28
not believe that the monitoring cost hypothesis provides a convincing story of why probate
lawyers work at the same firms with other ex ante specialists. It is unlikely that, for example,
corporate lawyers and probate lawyers have a comparative advantage in assessing each others’
work because the conceptual connections between probate law and other ex ante fields are weak.
An indication of this is provided by the finding in Heinz and Laumann (1982) that non-
specialized individuals who do probate work very rarely also do work in corporate law or other
business fields.
       Likewise, any of these hypotheses can explain why lawyers in the same field tend to
work with one another in the same firm more than lawyers in different fields. This empirical
finding could reflect that the value of collaboration is high or monitoring costs are low when
lawyers work in the same field. It could also reflect that referrals tend to be valuable within
fields; revenue-sharing arrangements may help encourage lawyers who are overloaded with work
to refer them on to others with similar expertise.
       We next turn to survey evidence, which will provide some more detailed data about
compensation and collaboration patterns within law firms. These data provide evidence on
revenue-sharing arrangements’ objectives. We view this evidence as a first step in sorting out
these knowledge-based and monitoring cost explanations of law firms’ boundaries.


6.     Survey Evidence

       Table 10 contains additional evidence from the Chicago Lawyers II survey described
above. Law firm partners were asked: “How important are each of these factors in decisions
regarding the division of the profits of the firm?” The table contains the share of partners
reporting “very important” and “important” for each of seven factors. Most partners in this
survey report that “bringing in new business,” “hours billed,” and “client ties” are either
important or very important. Other factors are important far less frequently. For example, only
38% of partners report that a senior partner’s decision is important or very important, and an
even lower share report that personal favoritism is.     Few partners report that seniority is




                                                                                             29
important, indicating that “lock-step” compensation methods, where all partners where equal
seniority share equally in the income of the firm, are rare.30
        We draw two inferences from this table. First, encouraging referrals is an important
organizational objective addressed by revenue-sharing arrangements. While a simple revenue-
sharing arrangement would accomplish this to some degree, basing revenue shares on business
generation as well as hours billed accentuates this. This provides support for the hypothesis that
a benefit of transacting within firms has to do with knowledge-sharing about opportunities.
        Second, partners’ assessments of each others’ work generally does not affect their
compensation directly. If firms commonly base profit shares directly on such assessments, one
would expect more partners to report that their firms divide profits on the basis of subjective
factors such as senior partners’ decisions (and perhaps personal favoritism). Note, however, that
this evidence does not imply that one can reject the monitoring cost hypothesis outright; the table
provides no direct evidence on monitoring, and only provides evidence on one particular
incentive instrument. Variation in monitoring costs may affect law firms’ boundaries, but if
within-firm monitoring is important, it must support incentive instruments that do not directly
affect how revenues are shared. For example, lawyers who are perceived by others in their firm
to do high quality work may be rewarded via greater demand for their services – they receive
more referrals from others in their firm -- or those who are perceived to do low quality work may
be more likely to be asked to leave the firm.
        The Chicago Lawyers II survey also sheds some light on how frequently partners
collaborate with each other. It asks lawyers working in firms with at least five lawyers how
frequently they work with lawyers at the same level or at levels above them. As Table 11 shows,
of the 182 partners answering the question, 34 report that they seldom or never work with others
at the same or higher levels.31 This strongly suggests that while most partners in this survey
collaborate with other partners at least occasionally, a substantial fraction does not.                   One
explanation would be that partners who do not collaborate with other partners work in very small
firms or departments. However, as depicted in the table, these respondents work in large

30
   Cotterman (1995) reports that only a small number of firms employ lock-step methods, although this group
includes some prestigious law firms, such as Cravath, Swaine, and Moore; Cleary, Gottlieb, Stein, Hamilton; and
Covington and Burling.




                                                                                                            30
divisions of large, multi-divisional law firms: on average, they are in divisions with 22 partners
and firms with 79 partners. Moreover, partners who do not collaborate with other partners report
similar revenue sharing arrangements to those that do collaborate.32
        It is not unusual for revenue sharing arrangements to include partners who rarely
collaborate with any other partner in their firm, and there is no evidence that how revenues are
shared differs for lawyers who do and do not collaborate. Revenue-sharing arrangements’ role
extends beyond facilitating the exchange of substantive or client knowledge, since lawyers who
rarely collaborate with any other partner in their firm nevertheless take part in such
arrangements.


7. Conclusion
        Economists have long recognized that economic activity is organized, in part, to exploit
increasing returns.        For example, a large literature in industrial organization analyzes
relationships between industry structure and scale economies; these economies are generally
depicted as arising from fixed costs associated with physical capital. But physical capital is not
the only source of increasing returns that can affect how production is organized into firms.
Rosen (1983) emphasizes that there are increasing returns to human capital, as the cost of
learning a skill is independent of its subsequent utilization rate. It follows that the organization
of industries where production is knowledge-intensive should reflect problems associated with
exploiting returns to human capital specialization. That is, it should reflect trade-offs that have
traditionally been examined in the economics of organizations literature starting with Coase
(1937) rather than the industry structure literature.
        This paper provides new empirical evidence on how one human-capital-intensive
industry, legal services, is organized. Our evidence indicates that organizational trade-offs affect
firms’ field scope: firms’ field scope tends to narrow as market size increases and lawyers
specialize. Moreover, this pattern varies across fields. As market size increases, the division of
labor between lawyers in fields involved in structuring transactions tends be mediated within

31
   While some of these may be their firm’s highest-ranked partner, it is unlikely that many of them are. One third of
these lawyers work at firms with one class of partners, and two thirds report that they have never served on their
firm’s management committee.




                                                                                                                 31
firms. In this segment of the market, firms’ scope does not narrow as market size increases. In
contrast, the division of labor between lawyers in fields involved in dispute resolution and
litigation and lawyers in other fields tends to be mediated by markets. Firms’ boundaries narrow
with market size as individuals become more specialized; in larger markets, these services tend
to be supplied by lawyers in field-specialized firms. These and other patterns are inconsistent
with the hypothesis that firms’ field boundaries reflect variation in the benefits of risk-sharing,
and are consistent with the hypotheses that they reflect variation in the value of knowledge-
sharing or in monitoring costs. Additional evidence confirms the importance of knowledge-
sharing about opportunities within law firms.
         These findings have implications for the industry structure. Two notable features of the
legal services industry in the United States are that the average firm size is small, and that the
size distribution of firms is highly skewed: even within large markets, the largest firms have
many times more lawyers than the median firm. Our findings suggest that the incentive trade-
offs associated with exploiting increasing returns from specialization in this industry differ
across fields, and help lead the structure of the industry to be fragmented, but highly-skewed.
The fragmentation results from the fact that, for the reasons we discuss above, the division of
labor between lawyers in different fields is usually best mediated by markets. The skewness in
part reflects that relationships between lawyers in ex ante fields such as corporate, tax, and real
estate law are often best mediated by firms. Future research is needed to investigate how the
organizational trade-offs that shape the structure of the legal services industry – including those
associated with knowledge sharing and monitoring – influence the structure of other human-
capital-intensive industries.




32
  One cannot reject the null that lawyers’ reports of these structures are the same across these categories, using chi-
squared tests of any conventional size. The details of how lawyers are compensated may, of course, differ. We
have also checked whether specialization patterns differ across these categories and find no evidence that they do.

                                                                                                                   32
References

       Abrams, Lisa L. The Official Guide to Legal Specialties, Barbri, Chicago, 2000.


       Alchian, Armen A., and Harold Demsetz. “Production, Information Costs, and Economic
Organization.” American Economic Review, 62 (1972), 777-795.


       Bresnahan, Timothy F., and Peter C. Reiss. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated
Markets.” Journal of Political Economy, 99 (1991), pp. 977-1009.


       Bureau of the Census.     1992 Census of Service Industries: Miscellaneous Subjects,
Washington, G.P.O., 1996.


       Coase, R. H. “The Nature of the Firm.” Economica, 4 (1937), pp. 386-405.


       Cotterman, J. D. ed. Compensation Plans for Law Firms, Altman, Weil, Pensa Inc.
(1995), Newton Square, PA.


       Ellison, Glenn and Edward L. Glaeser, "Geographic Concentration in U.S. Manufacturing
Industries: A Dartboard Approach," Journal of Political Economy, 105 (1997), pp. 889-927.


       Garicano, Luis, and Thomas N. Hubbard. “Firms’ Boundaries and the Division of Labor:
Empirical Strategies,” Journal of the European Economic Association, forthcoming, 2003.


       Garicano, Luis, and Jesus Santos. "Referrals," University of Chicago, July 2002.


       Gilson, Ronald J. and Robert Mnookin. “Sharing Among the Human Capitalists: An
Economic Inquiry into the Corporate Law Firm and How Partners Split Profits,” 37 Stanford
Law Review 313 (1985).




                                                                                            33
          Glaeser, Edward, Hedi D. Kallal, Jose A. Scheinkman and Andrei Shleifer “Growth in
Cities”, Journal of Political Economy, 100 (1992), pp. 1126-52.


          Grossman, Sanford J., and Oliver D. Hart. "The Costs and Benefits of Ownership: A
Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration," Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 94 (1986), pp.
691-719.


          Hart, Oliver and John Moore. “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm”, Journal of
Political Economy, 98 (1990), 1119-58.


          Heinz, John P., and Edward O. Laumann. Chicago Lawyers: The Social Structure of the
Bar, Evanston, Northwestern University Press, 1982.


          Heinz, John P., Edward O. Laumann, Robert L. Nelson, and Ethan Michelson. “The
Changing Character of Lawyers’ Work: Chicago in 1975 and 1995,” Law and Society Review, 32
(1998), 751-775.


          Holmstrom, Bengt. “Moral Hazard in Teams.” Bell Journal of Economics, 13 (1982), pp
324-340.


          Holmstrom, Bengt. "The Firm as a Subeconomy." Journal of Law, Economics, and
Organization, 15 (1999), 74-102.


          Holmstrom, Bengt and Paul Milgrom “"Multi-Task Principal-Agent Problems: Incentive
Contracts, Asset Ownership and Job Design." Journal of Law, Economics and Organization, 7,
(1991).


          Holmstrom, Bengt, and Paul Milgrom. "The Firm as an Incentive System," American
Economic Review, 84 (1994), pp. 972-991.




                                                                                            34
        Hubbard, Thomas N. "Contractual Form and Market Thickness in Trucking," Rand
Journal of Economics, 32 (2001), pp. 369-386.


        Klein, Benjamin, Robert G. Crawford, and Armen A. Alchian. "Vertical Integration,
Appropriable Rents, and the Competitive Contracting Process," Journal of Law and Economics,
21 (1978), pp. 297-326.


        Klemperer, Paul. “Equilibrium Product Lines: Competing Head-to-Head May Be Less
Competitive.” American Economic Review, 82 (1992), pp. 740-755.


        Klemperer, Paul, and A. Jorge Padilla. “Do Firms’ Product Lines Include Too Many
Varieties?” Rand Journal of Economics, 28 (1997), pp. 472-488.


        Levin, Jonathan and Steven Tadelis. "A Theory of Partnerships," Stanford University,
2002.


        Lucas, R. E., Jr. and Esteban Rossi-Hansberg. “On the Internal Structure of Cities,”
Econometrica, 70 (1992), 1445-1476.


        Olsen,Trond E. and Gaute Torsvik “Discretion and Incentives in Organizations”, Journal
of Labor Economics, vol. 18, No. 3. (Jul., 2000), pp. 377-404.


        Phillips, Damon, and Ezra Zuckerman.          "Middle-Status Conformity: Theoretical
Restatement and Empirical Demonstration in Two Markets," University of Chicago, 2000.


        Porter, Michael E. Competitive Advantage. New York, Free Press, 1985.


        Romer, Paul, Increasing Returns and Long Run Growth," Journal of Political Economy
94 (1986), pp. 1002-37.




                                                                                           35
       Romer, Paul. “Growth Based on Increasing Returns Due to Specialization” American
Economic Review, 77 (1987), pp 56-62.


       Rosen, Sherwin. "Specialization and Human Capital," Journal of Labor Economics, 1,
(1983) pp. 43-49.


       Stigler, George J. “The Division of Labor is Limited by the Extent of the Market,”
Journal of Political Economy, 59 (1951), pp. 185-193.


       Sutton, John. Sunk Costs and Market Structure: Price Competition, Advertising, and the
Evolution of Concentration, MIT Press, 1991.


       Sutton, John.   Technology and Market Structure: Theory and History, MIT Press,
Cambridge, 1998.


       Young, Allyn A. “Increasing Returns and Economic Progress,” Economic Journal, 38
(1928), pp. 527-42.




                                                                                          36
Table 1
Summary Statistics -- Lawyers, Law Offices, and Law Firms

                                           Lawyers                  Offices                 Firms

N                                           219033                  26151                   23465

Average Number of Lawyers                                            3.56                   3.65

Share Specialized                            0.71                    0.37                   0.28
Share Multiestablishment                     0.28                    0.05                   0.02

Averages and shares computed using sampling weights supplied by the Bureau of the Census.
Table 2
Shares of Lawyers in Specialized Fields, Offices, and Firms
                                        Share of Lawyers        Share of Lawyers         Share of Lawyers     Fraction of Specialists
                                      In Specialized Fields   In Specialized Offices   In Specialized Firms    In Specialized Firms

Ex Ante Business Specialty                   0.270                    0.047                   0.044                   17.4%

      Banking                                0.047                    0.006                   0.005                   12.9%
      Corporate                              0.083                    0.004                   0.004                    4.8%
      Environmental                          0.016                    0.001                   0.001                    6.2%
      Governmental                           0.015                    0.002                   0.002                   13.7%
      Patent                                 0.020                    0.014                   0.014                   70.4%
      Real Estate                            0.062                    0.014                   0.013                   22.7%
      Tax                                    0.028                    0.005                   0.005                   17.9%

Ex Post Business Specialty                   0.128                    0.044                   0.044                   34.5%

      Insurance                              0.061                    0.025                   0.023                   40.8%
      Negligence-Defendant                   0.066                    0.018                   0.018                   27.2%

Other Specialized Field                      0.155

Individual Specialty                         0.158                    0.071                   0.071                   44.9%

      Criminal                               0.024                    0.012                   0.012                   49.7%
      Domestic Relations                     0.026                    0.009                   0.009                   34.8%
      Negligence-Plaintiff                   0.074                    0.042                   0.041                   57.1%
      Probate                                0.035                    0.008                   0.008                   23.1%

General Practice                             0.289

All shares computed using Census-provided sampling weights.
Table 3
Share of Time on Business Clients, Days per Month in State or Federal Court
Selected Specialties


                                              Share of Time       Days per Month      N
Specialty                                    Business Clients   In State or Federal
                                                (percent)              Court

Commercial Law: Banking                           91.3                    6.4         8
General Corporate                                 86.1                    1.8         12
Municipal Law                                     35.6                    0.5         6
Environmental Law                                 82.3                    2.8         12
Real Estate                                       69.9                    2.9         43
Tax                                               64.7                    1.3         32
Patents, Trademarks or Copyrights                 89.8                    2.0         25
Personal Injury -- Defendant                      88.3                   11.6         20
Personal Injury -- Plaintiff                       7.6                   13.9         16
Criminal                                          10.0                   16.7          9
Divorce (including family, adoption, etc.)         8.0                   16.7         7
Probate (wills and trusts)                         3.8                    6.0         4

Source: Chicago Lawyers II survey.
Specialty categories are as listed on Chicago Lawyers II survey forms.
Table 4
Market Size and Lawyer Specialization
Estimates of Beta1 in Individual Specialization Regressions

Dependent Variable


Share Any Specialty                              0.092                0.083                 0.084
                                                (0.002)              (0.003)               (0.003)


Share Ex Ante Specialty                          0.050                0.020                 0.022
                                                (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.002)


Share Ex Post Specialty                          0.014                0.021                 0.021
                                                (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.002)


Share Individual Specialty                       -0.008               0.017                 0.016
                                                (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.002)


Controls

Employment Shares in Major Sectors                 N                    Y                     Y

Avg. Estab. Size in Major Sectors                  N                    Y                     Y

Ln(Share)                                          N                    N                     Y

Table contains estimates of the coefficient on ln(county employment) in 12 different regressions.
N=26130


                                                                                                     40
Table 5
Market Size and Lawyer Specialization

Ex Ante Business Specialties
                                Share           Share             Share           Share             Share       Share       Share
Dependent Variable             Banking         Corporate      Environmental    Governmental         Patent    Real Estate    Tax

ln(county employment)            0.008           0.005            0.000             -0.001           -0.001      0.010       0.000
                                (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.000)           (0.001)          (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)


Ex Post Business Specialties
                                 Share          Share
Dependent Variable             Insurance    Negligence-Def

ln(county employment)            0.015           0.006
                                (0.001)         (0.001)


Individual Specialties
                                Share           Share            Share             Share
Dependent Variable             Criminal      Domestic Rel.   Negligence-Pla       Probate

ln(county employment)            0.001           -0.002           0.022             -0.004
                                (0.001)         (0.001)          (0.002)           (0.001)


N=26151
All regressions contain segment shares, average employment size within segments, state capital as controls.




                                                                                                                                 41
Table 6
Market Size, Lawyer, and Law Firm Specialization

                                     Share                Share                Share                 Share
Dependent Variable                Any Specialty          Ex Ante              Ex Post              Individual
                                                    Business Specialty   Business Specialty        Speciality

Market Size and Law Firm Specialization Regressions (Beta2)


ln(county employment)                 0.039                0.000                0.012                0.019
                                     (0.003)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)

Market Size and Individual Specialization Regressions (Beta1)

ln(county employment)                 0.083                0.020                0.021                0.017
                                     (0.003)              (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.002)


Beta2/Beta1                           0.47                 -0.02                0.57                 1.12


Controls include share of employment in 7 major sectors, average establishment size within each of these
sectors, and a state capital dummy




                                                                                                                42
Table 7
Market Size and Law Firm Specialization
Estimates of Beta2, by Specialty


Ex Ante Business Specialties
                                Share             Share               Share             Share                 Share       Share       Share
Dependent Variable             Banking           Corporate        Environmental      Governmental             Patent    Real Estate    Tax

ln(county employment)            0.000             0.001              0.000              0.000                -0.001       0.002       -0.001
                                (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.000)            (0.000)               (0.001)     (0.001)     (0.001)

Ex Post Business Specialties
                                 Share            Share
Dependent Variable             Insurance      Negligence-Def

ln(county employment)            0.009             0.003
                                (0.001)           (0.001)

Individual Specialties
                                Share             Share              Share               Share
Dependent Variable             Criminal        Domestic Rel.     Negligence-Pla         Probate

ln(county employment)            0.003             0.001              0.016              -0.001
                                (0.001)           (0.001)            (0.001)            (0.001)


N=26151
All regressions contain segment shares, average employment size within segments, state capital as controls.




                                                                                                                                        43
Table 8
Market Size, Lawyer, and Law Firm Specialization
Small and Large Markets

                                     Share                 Share                Share                 Share
Dependent Variable                Any Specialty           Ex Ante              Ex Post              Individual
                                                     Business Specialty   Business Specialty        Speciality

Small Markets Only (counties with employment less than 200,000)


Beta2                                 0.051                 -0.010               0.012                0.032
                                     (0.005)               (0.002)              (0.002)              (0.003)

Beta1                                 0.113                 0.020                0.031                0.046
                                     (0.006)               (0.002)              (0.003)              (0.004)


Large Markets Only (counties with employment greater than 200,000)


Beta2                                 0.026                 -0.004               0.011                0.023
                                     (0.006)               (0.003)              (0.003)              (0.003)

Beta1                                 0.084                 0.022                0.020                0.018
                                     (0.005)               (0.004)              (0.004)              (0.004)


Beta1 is the coefficient on ln(county employment) in regressions where the dependent variable is the share of
individuals who are specialized.

Beta2 is the coefficient on ln(county employment) in regressions where the dependent variable is the share of
individuals who work in field-specialized firms.

Controls include share of employment in 7 major sectors, average establishment size within each of these
sectors, and a state capital dummy                                                                               44
Table 9
Normalized Composition of Law Firms
By Specialty of the Lawyer




                                                                                                                          Negligence-Defense




                                                                                                                                                                        Negligence-Plaintiff




                                                                                                                                                                                                                  General Practice
                                                             Environmental
                                             Governmental




                                                                                     Real Estate
                                Corporate




                                                                                                              Insurance




                                                                                                                                                            Domestic
                                                                                                                                                Criminal
                      Banking




                                                                                                                                                                                                Probate
                                                                                                    Patent




                                                                                                                                                                                                          Other
                                                                              Tax
Banking              7.52
Corporate            1.27       4.42
Government           1.06       1.26        24.28
Environmental        1.34       1.50        2.36            13.61
Tax                  1.18       1.84        1.13            1.39             10.90
Real Estate          1.44       1.18        0.85            0.96             1.07    6.79
Patent               0.35       0.63        0.42            0.62             0.53    0.25          39.05
Insurance            0.61       0.50        0.56            0.99             0.37    0.35          0.01      11.75
Neg-Def              0.73       0.65        0.71            1.04             0.60    0.54          0.17      0.58         9.83
Criminal             0.33       0.48        0.47            0.44             0.41    0.49          0.07      0.19         0.19                 26.97
Domestic             0.61       0.49        0.80            0.47             0.40    0.74          0.07      0.30         0.33                 1.61        20.80
Neg-Pla              0.64       0.31        0.37            0.26             0.22    0.60          0.05      0.14         0.37                 0.84        0.78        10.03
Probate              0.97       1.12        0.81            0.86             1.62    1.27          0.22      0.52         0.64                 0.59        1.10        0.43                    11.31
Other                0.65       1.05        0.73            1.02             0.89    0.68          0.31      0.23         0.26                 0.28        0.38        0.18                    0.53       4.20
Gen Prac             0.30       0.25        0.29            0.31             0.27    0.25          0.09      0.12         0.15                 0.16        0.29        0.13                    0.29       0.18    2.95


Diagonal             4.47       3.48        13.93           10.38            3.73    2.63          32.62     9.95         8.23                 6.43        5.95        4.50                    3.02       2.83    1.38
(colleagues only)

Bold indicates values greater than 1.00.




                                                                                                                                                                                                                                45
Table 10
How Are Profits Divided Within Law Firms?
Partners Only
                                                                           Share
Factor                             Share          Share               Very Important
                               Very Important   Important              or Important

Bringing In New Business           52.3           38.6                     90.9
Hours Billed                       26.7           58.5                     85.2
Client Ties                        29.5           54.9                     84.4
Seniority                           8.2           31.9                     40.1
Decision of a Senior Partner       10.6           27.6                     38.2
Area of Practice                    2.4           28.0                     30.4
Personal Favoritism                 2.4           17.5                     19.9


Source: Chicago Lawyers II survey.
Question was asked of 176 partners of Chicago law firms with five or more lawyers.




                                                                                       46
Table 11
Work Patterns and Organizational Characteristics
Partners Only

                                    Seldom or Never            All Others
                                    Work with Others
                                   At or Clearly Above
                                        Their Level

N                                            34                   148

Average Department Size                      43                    37
  Partners                                   22                    18
  Associates                                 21                    19

Average Firm Size                           192                   148
  Partners                                   79                    71
  Associates                                113                    77

Firm Divided Into Departments?              73.5                  71.4

Share Reporting that Factor Is Very Important or Important in How Profits of Firm Are Divided (percent)

    Bringing In New Business                91.2                  91.5
    Hours Billed                            85.3                  85.6
    Client Ties                             88.2                  83.3
    Seniority                               45.5                  54.4
    Decision of a Senior Partner            29.4                  40.8
    Area of Practice                        38.2                  28.6
    Personal Favoritism                     33.3                  16.7

Source: Chicago Lawyers II survey.
Differences in shares at the bottom of the table are not statistically significant, using a
chi-squared test of size 0.05.

                                                                                                          47
                             Figure 1
          Specialization and Organizational Trade-Offs




             firm mediates
             division of labor
                                                     A   Other

A,Other


              market mediates                       A    Other
              division of labor




             Market Size Increases




                                                                 48
                                  Figure 2
        Share of Lawyers in Specialized Fields, Field Specialized Firms
                           Ex Ante Business Fields



share




                                       share of lawyers in specialized fields




                                       share of lawyers in field-specialized firms




                                                      market size




                                                                                     50
                                  Figure 3
        Share of Lawyers in Specialized Fields, Field Specialized Firms
                           Ex Post Business Fields

share




                                       share of lawyers in specialized fields




                                       share of lawyers in field-specialized firms




                                                      market size




                                                                                     51
Appendix 1




             52
Table A1
Market Size and Lawyer Specialization
                               Share              Share                Share            Share
Dependent Variable          Any Specialty        Ex Ante              Ex Post         Individual
                                            Business Specialty   Business Specialty   Speciality

ln(county employment)           0.083             0.020                0.021            0.017
                               (0.003)           (0.002)              (0.002)          (0.002)

sh(mfg)                         -0.515            0.259                -0.526          -0.115
                               (0.115)           (0.092)              (0.084)          (0.089)
sh(trans/util)                  -0.181            0.275                -0.287           0.191
                               (0.229)           (0.185)              (0.168)          (0.178)
sh(wholesale)                   -1.052           -0.326                 0.478          -0.688
                               (0.211)           (0.171)              (0.155)          (0.164)
sh(retail)                       0.159           -0.206                 0.055           0.591
                               (0.161)           (0.130)              (0.118)          (0.125)
sh(FIRE)                        -0.119            1.285                -0.778          -0.702
                               (0.144)           (0.117)              (0.106)          (0.112)
sh(services)                     0.175            0.441                -0.249          -0.165
                               (0.119)           (0.096)              (0.087)          (0.093)
state capital                    0.028            0.042                 0.007          -0.039
                               (0.008)           (0.006)              (0.005)          (0.006)
emp/estab -- construction        0.007            0.003                 0.001           0.000
                               (0.001)           (0.001)              (0.001)          (0.001)
emp/estab -- mfg                 0.001            0.000                 0.001           0.000
                               (0.000)           (0.000)              (0.000)          (0.000)
emp/estab -- trans/util          0.003            0.001                 0.001          -0.001
                               (0.001)           (0.000)              (0.000)          (0.000)
emp/estab -- wholesale          -0.001            0.002                -0.006          -0.002
                               (0.001)           (0.001)              (0.001)          (0.001)
emp/estab -- retail             -0.002            0.007                -0.001          -0.005
                               (0.001)           (0.002)              (0.001)          (0.002)
emp/estab -- FIRE                0.003           -0.002                0.003            0.004
                               (0.001)           (0.001)              (0.001)          (0.001)
emp/estab -- services           -0.008           -0.003                 0.000           0.001
                               (0.002)           (0.001)              (0.001)          (0.001)
C                                0.463           -0.164                 0.260           0.197
                               (0.109)           (0.088)              (0.080)          (0.085)


N=26130




                                                                                                   53
