                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                               DOES THE FORMAT OF A
                          FINANCIAL AID PROGRAM MATTER?
                    THE EFFECT OF STATE IN-KIND TUITION SUBSIDIES

                                          Bridget Terry Long

                                          Working Paper 9720
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9720


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




The author gratefully acknowledges invaluable comments from Caroline Hoxby, Larry Katz, Claudia Goldin,
Richard Murnane, and members of the Harvard University Department of Economics Labor Seminar. Early
work on this project was supported by a grant from the American Educational Research Association which
receives funds for its “AERA Grants Program” from the National Center for Education Statistics, the Office
of Educational Research and Improvement (U.S. Department of Education), and the National Science
Foundation under NSF Grant #RED-9452861. Opinions reflect those of the author and do no necessarily
reflect those of the granting agencies. Send comments to longbr@gse.harvard.edu. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Bridget Terry Long. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Does the Format of a Financial Aid Program Matter? The Effect of
State In-Kind Tuition Subsidies
Bridget Terry Long
NBER Working Paper No. 9720
May 2003
JEL No. I2, H7

                                            ABSTRACT

Does the format of a financial aid program influence how it affects college decisions? This paper
examines this question by focusing on state appropriations to public postsecondary institutions.
While these funds subsidize tuition costs for in-state students, the in-kind format of the aid and
resulting price gap between public and private colleges could also affect choices between colleges.
The paper analyzes this possible effect utilizing a conditional logistic choice model, which exploits
extensive match-specific information between individuals and nearly 2,700 colleges. Using
estimates of how price, quality, and distance influence college decisions, I examine the impact of
several dissimilar state subsidy regimes and simulate how decisions would change if the aid were
awarded in other ways. The results suggest that the level and distribution pattern of state subsidies
strongly influence decisions. When in-kind subsidies are large, students appear to choose public
colleges even if the gap in resources between public and private options is substantial. If the aid
were instead distributed as a credit applicable to any in-state college, up to 29 percent more students
would prefer to attend private four-year colleges. The results also suggest that the in-kind subsidies
create incentives for students to favor public four-year colleges over two-year institutions.



Bridget Terry Long
Graduate School of Education
Harvard University
Gutman Library 465
Appian Way
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
longbr@gse.harvard.edu
SECTION I: INTRODUCTION
     State appropriations to public colleges form the most significant higher education aid policy in

the United States. During the 2002-03 school year, contributions by state governments totaled $63.6

billion, nearly four times the amount of grant aid administered by the federal government (Palmer, 2003).

These state subsidies constitute nearly two-fifths of the total revenue received by public colleges while,

in contrast, private institutions rely primarily on tuition income (nearly half of their total revenues). This

difference in revenue source is apparent from the average tuition costs of colleges in each sector. During

2002-03, four-year private colleges charged a mean list price of $18,273 while public four-year colleges

charged only $4,081 for in-state students (College Board, 2002). After accounting for the fraction of the

disparity attributable to differences in expenditures, the price gap remains large and could affect the

sector and quality of colleges students choose.1 Therefore, while state subsidies may reduce price

barriers to postsecondary education by allowing public colleges to charge in-state students a discounted

price, they may also affect choices between colleges.2 This paper examines how the in-kind format of a

financial aid program influences the effect it has on college decisions about enrollment and choice.

        Governments have implemented several types of financial aid programs to reduce college price

barriers and lower the cost of capital for liquidity-constrained individuals. Fungible aid, such as the

federal Pell Grants, may be applied to any school and thereby extends the entire budget constraint of a

student. Quite the opposite, in-kind aid is linked to specific colleges and extends the budget constraint

only for particular choices. State tuition subsidies thereby disturb tradeoffs between colleges since

tuition costs for schools in the unsubsidized private sector are expensive relative to state-supported

public institutions. Because colleges vary in the resources they offer, this price distortion could affect

college investment decisions in nontrivial ways. There may be important quality differences between the

institutions in a student’s opportunity set, and the price gap created by the in-kind subsidies could


1
  During the 1991-92 school year, the focus of this study, private four-year colleges spent $1,258 more per student
on instruction, academic support, and student services than public four-year colleges. Privates spent $4,245 more in
terms of total educational and general expenditures. Source: Calculated by the author using the 1991-92 IPEDS.
2
  Given budget constraints, state aid allows for reductions in other sources of revenue at public colleges, most
notably tuition. The correlation between the mean tuition cost of four-year, public colleges and the mean amount of
state appropriations received by such schools was –0.7 from 1977 to 1997 (NCES data). In practice, schools are
generally discouraged by the state from increasing the tuition above a certain percentage each year unless state
appropriations are reduced thereby implicitly linking the subsidy and tuition level.


                                                                                                                   1
persuade individuals to choose schools that devote fewer resources, such as expenditures, faculty, or

peers, to the production of education.3 As a result, this particular form of aid could cause individuals to

invest in less quality-adjusted human capital than they would if the grants were fungible and perhaps less

than they would in the absence of aid. Peltzman (1973) concludes that in-kind tuition subsidies therefore

could reduce the aggregate consumption of higher education, contrary to the aims of an aid policy.

           The price distortion may also affect the incentives of public institutions. If the subsidies enable

public colleges to avoid competing directly with private institutions, then they will have less incentive to

maximize educational quality while minimizing costs. In fact, if private colleges are more efficient,

inducing students to attend the subsidized, public colleges would result in a welfare cost (Sonstelie,

1982). Recently, several states, most notably Colorado, have begun to consider reforms that would

reduce state operational subsidies in favor of college vouchers for students with the hope that such

changes would force public colleges to be more responsive to students’ needs.

           Many also question whether aid irrespective of income is the best method to provide support

since the subsidies may primarily help inframarginal students who are without need even when facing

unsubsidized costs. Moreover, the method of financing the aid may cause unintended redistribution.

State appropriations per student vary greatly across colleges, and therefore, attendance patterns have a

substantial impact on the amount of aid students of each income level receive. Using California data,

Hansen and Weisbrod (1969a and 1969b) found that college attendance at highly-subsidized schools is

primarily a middle- to upper-income activity. Because all income groups pay taxes, they argue that state

subsidies could therefore be regressive depending on the progressivity of state sales, income, and

property taxes. These findings have sparked an ongoing debate about the incidence of state tuition

subsidies.

           This paper focuses on the effect of in-kind state tuition subsidies on several aspects of the

enrollment decision. First, how does the aid affect whether individuals choose to attend college and

which school they choose? Second, do in-kind subsidies induce students to choose lower-quality

colleges than they would otherwise as asserted by Peltzman? That is, does the practice of subsidizing

3
    Since students are considered inputs as wells as outputs in educational production, students with lower test scores



                                                                                                                          2
public colleges negatively distort human capital investment decisions? Finally, the paper examines the

counterfactual proposition of how student decisions would change if the state aid were no longer in-kind

and instead were given as direct grants to students that could be applied towards the tuition costs of any

in-state college. This simulation provides a sense of the proportion of students’ decisions that are

affected by the in-kind nature of the aid.

        To assess the impact of tuition subsidies on college investments, this paper estimates a model of

college choice developed in Long (forthcoming). It is designed to take advantage of important match-

specific information between students and potential colleges. Unlike previous work that has had to rely

upon state means or greatly simplified the college decision, I estimate a conditional logistic model in

which each individual’s match with 2,669 potential colleges is examined. Tuition costs are individual-

specific based on state of residence net an expected Pell Grant. Variables also measure the similarity of

the student to prospective college peers and the distance of the college from the student. Finally, the

model includes several variables to measure the educational resources available to students, including

peer and faculty quality and expenditures. While this model estimates the probability of attending each

college in the choice set, conditional on college enrollment, a second model estimates whether the

student would enroll in college at all.4 Students who do not attend college in one state might decide to do

so in another given a different set of alternatives and prices. To account for this, I estimate the likelihood

of attendance using a basic logistic model with controls for background, local labor market conditions,

and the characteristics of the college most-likely to be attended.

        The parameters of this two-step college choice model are identified off of the considerable

variation in states’ in-kind subsidy programs. For example, during the 1991-92 school year (the focus of

this study), state appropriations per public college student ranged from $10,296 in Alaska to $3,021 per

student in Vermont. Likewise, the subsidized tuition prices of public four-year colleges differed by state:

that year California charged only $1,448 on average while Vermont charged $4,625.5 However,

distinctions between state programs involve not just the average amount of the subsidy but how the

could provide less-favorable peer effects than higher-achieving students.
4
  While ordinarily a nested logit model would be used to estimate the two decisions simultaneously, the conditional
logit model is too complex for a simple application of the theory, and therefore, a two-step method is applied.



                                                                                                                      3
subsidies are distributed among schools with different degrees of selectivity (student body aptitude),

expenditure levels, and levels (two-year versus four-year). Several possible subsidy regimes exist. At

one extreme, a state could offer highly-selective, subsidized public colleges. For example, California

supports UC Berkeley, which boasts a median student body SAT of 1250 and 1991-92 student

expenditures over $12,000 per student (see Figure 1). In contrast, a state may only support schools with

average-ability students. For example, Massachusetts does not offer public colleges with a student body

SAT median above 950 or student expenditures above $5,900 per student (see Figure 2).6 Rather than

mask this variation by using the average characteristics of the colleges in a state as has been done in the

previous literature, this study attempts to account for the substantial heterogeneity in the market of higher

education and test how the distribution of colleges could affect enrollment decisions.

         Because populations vary by region, linking state aid to the investments made by each state’s

students would be misleading. However, estimates from this college choice model allow me to assess

the impact of state in-kind support by simulating the effect of different subsidy regimes on a common

group of students. To test Peltzman’s hypothesis, the paper demonstrates what would happen if

individuals were presented with the level and distribution of subsidies they would face in several,

dissimilar states. While there may potentially be endogeneity between state policies and their

populations, states with similar demographics pursue vastly different policies providing the opportunity

to do such a comparison. Further simulations explore how decisions would change if states used their

current appropriations to fund a college voucher. Public college prices are adjusted upward to account

for the loss of state appropriations, and in-state tuition amounts are reduced by the value of the state

voucher. The results suggest that the level and distribution of state subsidies strongly influence college

investment decisions, and Peltzman’s hypothesis is valid. When in-kind subsidies are medium to large,

students appear to choose public colleges even if the gap in resources between public and private options

is substantial. If states instead awarded individuals with a voucher that could be applied to any in-state

school, the number that would prefer to attend private four-year colleges increases by 20 to 29 percent.


5
 Digest of Education Statistics (1993). Per student figures are in terms of fulltime equivalent (FTE) enrollments.
6
 In 1992 dollars. The college selectivity measures are from Barron’s Educational Guides (1997). Student
expenditures are defined as funds for instruction, academic support, and student services.


                                                                                                                     4
SECTION II: LITERATURE REVIEW

In-kind Financial Aid and College Demand

        Several justifications for the state support of higher education are rooted in economic theory.

First, capital markets for financing higher education are imperfect, and liquidity-constrained individuals

may not be able to secure the funds necessary to make their optimal investments. State subsidies address

this market imperfection by providing a long-term loan: individuals benefit as students and repay the

state in taxes over the rest of their lives. Furthermore, state aid could induce society-at-large to invest at

a more optimal level. The private investment considerations of an individual ignore the positive

externalities education produces for society and may lead students to underinvest in education. A policy

that increases individual investments, and the resulting education externalities, could therefore move the

economy toward a social optimum. Aid to educational institutions may also be justified if colleges and

universities provide beneficial public goods such as products or information for the state. Finally, the in-

kind format of the aid and the fact that public institutions are the providers of the product reduces the

likelihood that the service rendered will be inadequate or below expectations.

        While economic theory suggests that state subsidies could help remedy market imperfections, in-

kind aid could also generate distortions. Peltzman (1973) suggests that in-kind subsidies may discourage

students from investing in education beyond what is offered at the subsidized schools. Of particular

concern are students who, in the absence of subsidies, would choose to invest in slightly more education

than that offered by public colleges. Figure 3 illustrates the logic. Individuals have a budget constraint

that relates the level of investment in higher education to the consumption of other goods. Private

options sit on the curve (which has been drawn as linear for simplicity). However, due to the state

subsidy, the price of a public college, for any given level of educational expenditures, is lower than that

of a private school. Public options allow students to invest in more human capital than is dictated by

their original budget constraint and still consume the same amount of other goods. Therefore, an

individual’s budget constraint becomes “kinked” at the public options. Individuals will tend to gravitate

towards the public options due to the accompanying increase in the consumption of other goods. If a



                                                                                                          5
sufficient number of students adjust their investments downward in terms of expenditures and quality,

then aggregate educational investment could fall (Peltzman, 1973).

         The insurance properties of state aid generate further concerns about college demand. Since state

aid is funded by income taxes, individuals are not held fully responsible for the costs of higher education

if they do not realize a large educational return. Therefore, adverse selection may be a problem if the

subsidies encourage college attendance among individuals who know they have a low probability of

earning enough later in life to fully “repay” the state for its expenditure on their education. Furthermore,

a moral hazard problem may exist if individuals invest in a great deal of education but elect never to

work and therefore do not “repay” the state at all.


Estimates of the Effect of Price on Student Demand

         Economists have utilized the demand framework to study how changes in the price of higher

education have affected individuals’ choices about college. College demand will depend upon the cost

of education, the prices of alternatives, and the preferences of the individual subject to a budget

constraint. Therefore, investment in higher education should be negatively related to tuition costs, and

public tuition subsidies should increase the probability of enrollment.

         Most studies on the effect of cost relate college investment to tuition and/or aid levels using

variation across time or geographic region. Campbell and Siegel (1967) were likely the first to do this

when examining the demand for higher education from 1919 to 1964. Building upon this approach,

Hopkins (1974) exploits 1963 state-level variation with controls for state education and income levels

and finds a demand elasticity of -0.10 with respect to net public tuition (mean state charges minus mean

state scholarship aid). In other words, the discouragement effect of a $1,000 increase (1992 dollars) in

public tuition in 1963 would have caused a ten percent drop in attendance.7 Hopkins also documents a

substitution effect: he finds that private college enrollments increase when public tuitions rise thereby

highlighting the importance of relative costs in students’ decisions between colleges in different sectors.



7
  Figures are reported in 1992 dollars so as to make them comparable to the results of this study. A $1,000 change
is equivalent to a $222 increase in 1963 dollars or doubling the mean tuition cost of public colleges at that time.
Source: Statistical Abstract of the U.S.


                                                                                                                      6
Hopkins concludes that policies that lower public tuition levels could cause some inframarginal students

who would have otherwise chosen a private college to reallocate themselves to the public sector.

        Manski and Wise (1983) try to more precisely approximate the college outlook of a student using

a multinominal logistic model of school choice. They define the opportunity set of a student by

exploiting information about the student’s application set and nearest community college and find tuition

costs to have the expected negative effect. Similar to the majority of studies reviewed by Leslie and

Brinkman (1988), Manski and Wise predict that a $1,000 change in price would result in a three- to five-

percentage point change in college attendance. The magnitude of the effect is found to be approximately

equal for changes in scholarship aid.

        Kane (1995) provides more recent estimates of the importance of public tuition levels by

examining both between-state differences and within-state changes in public tuition prices during the late

1970s and 1980s. Using several data sources (the High School and Beyond, National Longitudinal

Survey of Youth, and October Current Population Survey), he finds a response of -0.10 to -0.20 for a

$1,000 increase (1992 dollars) in public two-year tuition. This translates into an elasticity of demand of -

0.20. Kane also find that low-income students and those attending two-year colleges appear to be most

affected by price changes. McPherson and Schapiro (1991) provide further support for the notion that

low-income students are more sensitive to price. They estimate that a $150 increase (1994 dollars) in net

price over time led to a 1.6-percent decline in enrollment among poorer students (an elasticity of -0.41).

McPherson and Schapiro do not find evidence that increases in net cost inhibit enrollment for more

affluent students.

        While these studies have established the importance of price in college decisions, Ganderton

(1992) provides the first direct test of the Peltzman hypothesis. Ganderton examines the effect of state

subsidies on students’ college choices particularly focusing on school quality. Defining college quality

using the mean student body SAT scores of a school, he finds that students choose a substantially less

selective public college than they would have chosen in the private sector thereby providing suggestive

support of Peltzman’s hypothesis.




                                                                                                        7
Concerns about Aggregation

           While college demand studies based on cross-sectional variation in state-level tuition data have

been informative of the responses of students to college price and aid, the results are primarily identified

by fixed differences between states. These estimates could therefore be misleading because it is difficult

to distinguish the impact of tuition from any other characteristic of the state that has remained constant

over time. As Kane (1995) and Rouse (1994) caution within their own work, interpreting state variation

as a natural experiment for tuition changes has the problem that omitted state factors may be correlated

with enrollment, subsidy level, and tuition. For example, if unobserved state preferences for higher

education cause a state to provide larger tuition subsidies, the unobserved preferences could be

negatively correlated with the mean tuition level of the state. The resulting parameter on tuition would

be biased downward. This would suggest that the relationship between enrollment and tuition cost has

been underestimated using state cross-sectional data. However, state income per capita may be

positively correlated with tuition levels. This would result in the relationship between enrollment and

price being exaggerated in estimation.

           Another weakness of cross-sectional data at the state level is that it masks much of the

heterogeneity in the market of higher education. While state subsidy and tuition levels vary significantly

by state, most of the variation exists at a finer level. Tuition levels and subsidy amounts vary greatly

among different levels of schools within a state. Public universities typically receive the largest

subsidies, nearly the double the subsidy of public two-year colleges and on average ten percent more

than that of public four-year colleges. Tuition levels differ in a similar manner by type of school with

universities costing the most and two-year colleges the least. These differences also exist between four-

year, public colleges and universities. In California, for example, each University of California branch

campus receives at least two and a half times the amount of state appropriations of a California State

University site. In 1991-92, UC Davis received state appropriations that amounted to $11,536 per full-

time equivalent (FTE) student while CSU Fullerton only received $2,962 per FTE student. Likewise,

tuition costs vary. That year UC Davis charged $2,980 while CSU Fullerton cost only $1,480.8 Cost is


8
    Calculated by the author using the 1991-92 Integrated Postsecondary Education Data System (IPEDS).


                                                                                                         8
not the only variation that state-aggregation would mask. State variation in the number and quality of

schools available to students is also substantial. States like California and Pennsylvania offer over thirty

public, four-year institutions while states like Michigan and Virginia offer only fifteen. In terms of

student body aptitude, a proxy for peer resources at the school, only Virginia and California offer public

institutions rated as the most selective.9

         Using state means masks much of the variation in cost, subsidies, and quality that could more

clearly influence enrollment. For example, an above-average student in Massachusetts would have a

very different opportunity set than one from California (review Figures 1 and 2). While each student

would face similar costs for any private college in the country (except for traveling costs), the resident of

California would have cheap public colleges available to her that provide substantial educational

resources and peers of high-ability. If the student chose a public college in California rather than

Massachusetts because it more closely matched his characteristics, there would be no way to distinguish

in the data why. In fact, in a case like this, if the mean tuition levels in the state in which a college was

not chosen were lower, it would appear that higher tuition costs increase the likelihood of attendance

although unobserved school differences are really the motivating factor. Because ignoring the

distribution of resources to different types, levels, and qualities of schools within a state could bias

estimation of the parameters of college decisions, college heterogeneity is a major source of

identification problems in determining the effect of tuition price and state subsidies. This study will

avoid these problems using a framework designed to account for this variation.



SECTION III: FRAMEWORK AND MODEL

         This section explains how this study accounts for heterogeneity in the college market using a

conditional logistic choice model and a basic logistic enrollment model as developed in Long

(forthcoming). Remaining concerns about the possible endogeneity of subsidy levels and an explanation

of the data used are also discussed.



9
 Since students are considered inputs as wells as outputs in educational production, students with lower test scores
could provide less-favorable peer effects than higher-achieving students.


                                                                                                                       9
Theoretical Framework

        Assume an individual has J colleges from which to choose. Each school, j, can be characterized

by a vector Y which is composed of measures of college price and resources:


(1)              Yj = { Pj , EXj , SBj }


where Pj is the tuition price of school j. School resources are divided into two parts: expenditures

(including faculty resources), denoted by EXj, and peers, measured by student body aptitude, SBj. In this

way, each college can be viewed as a package containing resources for a given price. From these

characteristics, an individual can infer how much value-added each school will produce for his human

capital and consider the consumption goods the college offers.10

        A vector X contains the individual’s attributes such as high school performance, family income,

and residence, which might affect his demand for education and his opportunity set. For example, his

prior performance and ability will affect his likelihood of being accepted by a highly-selective college as

opposed to a junior college. Let the value of the jth college to the ith decision maker be given by U(Yj,

Xi). This value may partly depend on an interaction of the individual’s characteristics with those of the

school. For example, the distance of college j for person i is determined by the residence of the student

relative to the location of the school. Additionally, a discount for college j (e.g. a state tuition subsidy)

may depend on the residence of the individual. Utility may have random elements so that all individuals

with Xi are not assumed have the same tastes:


(2)              U (Yj, Xi) = Ū (Yj, Xi) + εij


That is, there are random deviations from the mean valuation Ū. If we assume that the non-random part

of utility is a linear function of individual and college characteristics we get:


(3)              U (Yj, Xi) = Zij1β1 + Zij2β2 + Zij3β3 + . . . + Zijkβk + εij



10
  These two components of human capital accumulation, production and consumption, are an implication of the
Becker and Rosen models of human capital. They are denoted as an institution’s quality in this study.


                                                                                                              10
where β is a vector of parameters, Zij are the variables that affect utility, and k is the total number of

variables. Z may include variables that describe the elements of Y (i.e. EXj and SBj), interact Y and X to

form match-specific measures (i.e. Dij), or dummy variables.

         Individuals compare the potential returns to attending different colleges along with the option of

not enrolling and entering the labor market directly. The college decision is therefore made up of two

simultaneous choices. The individual must determine his best college option and concurrently decide

whether to attend college at all. The individual chooses the option that maximizes his lifetime utility

subject to his budget constraint as shown in (4).


(4)               choose Yk iff U (Yk, Xi) ≥ U (Yj, Xi) ∀ k ≠ j with Pik ≤ Ii


where Ii is the budget constraint and is related to income.


The College Choice Model

         The above framework emphasizes several points that must be addressed in estimating how

individuals choose between colleges conditional on enrollment.11 First, there is substantial heterogeneity

among colleges that must be adequately characterized using institutional information on each school’s

tuition price, expenditures, and student body characteristics. Second, match-specific information is an

important part of the model since colleges treat students differently depending upon residence.

Furthermore, a particular college may not suit all students well, and this will depend on how the

student’s characteristics compare with those of the college’s student body. Finally, to understand how

students make decisions the framework needs to adequately capture the full opportunity set of

individuals so that tradeoffs between the opportunity chosen and the alternatives not taken can be

explored. This requires characterization of the nearly 2,700 colleges a student could attend. Therefore,

unlike ordinary regression analysis, the model must be equipped to handle multiple alternatives.

11
   The group that did not attend college enters the analysis in a separate model. This is due to several reasons. First,
describing the “not attend” option as an alternative with zero tuition cost, zero median test scores, and a distance of
zero would bias parameter estimates. Since some individuals would choose not to attend (the option with no cost),
the negative effect of tuition price on college choice would be exaggerated. In addition, the decision of whether to
attend college is most likely nonlinear relative to choosing between different schools. Therefore, estimates of the




                                                                                                                     11
        The conditional logistic regression model is well-suited for this framework since it both allows

for multiple alternatives and can be used to exploit match-specific information. Also known as

McFadden’s choice model (1973), the conditional logit has been used to study choice behavior with such

applications as choice of travel mode and occupation, but computational limitations has not until now

allowed its application to college choice.12 While the form of the likelihood function is similar to that of

the multinomial logistic regression, the variables are choice-specific attributes rather than individual-

specific characteristics.13

        For the conditional logistic model, the data are organized as pair-wise combinations of each

student i with each school j so that there are a total of i × j observations. This allows for match-specific

variables that interact information about the student with that of the college. Using these combinations,

the conditional logit model is made up of j equations for each individual i, with each equation describing

one of the alternatives. The dependent variable, signifying the choice of the individual, equals one for

the alternative that was chosen. The conditional logit model then calculates the probability of enrollment

at each of the colleges in the stratum (i.e. it considers the probability of a person attending any one of the

available schools). It does this by computing the likelihood of enrollment at each school relative to all

alternatives so that the probabilities sum to one for each individual (or within one stratum). Under the

assumption that the εij’s are independent and identically distributed with the extreme value distribution,

we get the conditional logit functional form:


(5)              Pr (Eij) = e Zijβ / ( eZi1β + eZi2β + . . . + eZiJβ )

                                    where Zijβ = β1 Pij + β2 EXj + β3 SBj + β4Dij + … + εi




model including the “no college” option are unlikely to accurately describe both the college choice and the decision
of whether to attend.
12
   Manski and Wise (1983) acknowledge the need to account for the many alternatives available to a prospective
individual and outline the use of the conditional logit. However, limitations in computing power forced them to use a
multinomial logit to analyze the decisions of individuals in the NLS72.
13
   If the independent variables were instead attributes of the individuals rather than alternatives, then the models
would be the same. However, the multinomial logit model forces one to aggregate information about choices and
enter them in a restrictive manner. The use of the conditional logit is therefore preferable for analyzing differences
in states in-kind subsidy regimes.


                                                                                                                  12
The probability of individual i attending college j, Pr (Eij), will be a function of the variables that define

Zij including elements that describe the school and individual characteristics. The format allows for

maximum likelihood estimates of β, and the probability of any particular choice can be calculated using

the conditional logit specification displayed in (5).

        Since the likelihood of attendance at each college is calculated relative to the alternatives within

each stratum, there must be variation within the strata for estimation purposes. For this reason, student

characteristics cannot be included independently in the estimation.14 The estimation, therefore, does not

identify the causal effect of a student’s attributes on enrollment. Instead, the estimates indicate how

school characteristics affect the likelihood of an individual enrolling at a school. Dummy variables are

used to understand how reactions vary for different types of students. For instance, a low-income person

may have a high cost of capital so that small price increases could greatly affect the probability of

enrollment. To examine the effect of price and distance on low-income students, I interact these

variables with a low-income dummy variable. Likewise, a high-ability individual may be influenced

differently by school characteristics. If ability and school quality are assumed to be complements in the

production of education, higher-ability students could expect to realize greater gains from schools with

more resources. School expenditures could therefore be more important in their decisions of whether to

choose a college, and the variable is interacted with a dummy variable for high ability.

        If the Independence of Irrelevant Alternatives (IIA) condition is met, the estimates will be

consistent even if the decision to attend college at all is endogenous. Possible endogeneity in the choice

set develops from the fact that colleges available to a student will depend upon the previous decision of

where to apply. This application decision is based upon a student’s ranking of the colleges, and

therefore, the opportunity set that a student will ultimately face is partly endogenous. However, as long

as students apply to schools that they determine to be most preferred, estimation will retain good

statistical properties due to the IIA property.15


14
   The j equations within a stratum are not independent, and a person’s gender, for example, would difference out of
all the equations within one stratum since each contains data on only one individual. Therefore, unlike the
multinomial regression model, non-college alternatives such as local labor market conditions can not be included
within the model since they are individual-specific.
15
   See Manski and Wise (1983) for further discussion. Also see Luce (1959) and McFadden (1979).


                                                                                                                 13
The Decision of Whether to Attend

        The conditional logit model above will estimate the choice between colleges, but an individual

must also decide whether to attend college at all. As stated in equation (4), the individual will compare

his options and choose the alternative that maximizes his lifetime utility subject to his budget constraint.

His options will include attending college, entering the labor force, or not working at all. Traditionally,

researchers have used state-level measures of college characteristics to approximate the college option,

but as discussed above, this masks a great deal of heterogeneity and may not be a good proxy for the

actual school the individual might be considering.16 Therefore, using the parameters of the conditional

logit model, I predict the college that is the most likely college alternative if the individual does decide to

attend. A basic logistic model is then used to estimate the likelihood of enrollment with the

characteristics of this most likely school being used to understand how individuals weight the prospects

of college attendance against outside options.

        This estimation strategy assumes that individuals make decisions between colleges in the same

way regardless of whether they decide to attend or not. This may be a concern if students who do not

attend do not properly weight their options or lack the information needed to make decisions that would

maximize their utility. However, for most students likely to be on the margin of attendance, the

predicted option is the nearest two-year or four-year, public college. Most students are aware of these

local options from peers, high school resources, and the local press. Furthermore, the data suggests the

individuals with similar observable characteristics make different college decisions due to the local

higher education options available to them. Several studies suggest that individuals from more

disadvantaged backgrounds are more likely to attend if they have a nearby college option with a

reasonably low tuition price (Rouse, 1994; Kane, 1995). Therefore, differences in enrollment may be

due to the options available and not that the decision-making process differs by background. In any case,

using the “most-likely” college is a better approximation of the outlook of a prospective student than the

state-level measures of public tuition levels previously used.




                                                                                                        14
        In analyzing the determinants of the enrollment decisions, I focus on the group with the highest

propensity to be on the margin and compare the opportunities of those who attended to those who did

not. This group includes low-income, low-ability individuals who are likely to face high costs for

securing capital and fewer benefits from college attendance assuming that ability and education are

complements. As such, this group will be highly sensitive to the opportunities they face. While they

may decide to invest in higher education given one set of opportunities, when presented with another set

of alternatives, they may not enroll at all. By exploiting the variety of opportunities available to students

based on their residence, I estimate the effect of college characteristics on the attendance decision.


Concerns about Endogeneity and the Supply Side of College Demand

        The conditional logit choice model avoids some of the fears of misinterpretation associated with

aggregated, cross-sectional analysis since I am able to view the specific options available to a student

rather than just the means of groups of alternatives. However, endogeneity problems could arise if

individual or group preferences within a state influence aid policy. Unobserved tastes for education

could affect how and why subsidies are distributed within a state in a certain way, and these preferences

would in turn influence college decisions, thereby biasing estimates. For example, states with stronger

preferences for education might choose to support a wide range of options in order to attract and educate

all types of students. Meanwhile, a state without these preferences might choose to offer colleges that

only provide basic education and are not selective. Therefore, whether a high-ability student is able to

attend a competitive, in-state public college would be influenced by the underlying preferences of his or

her state of residence. Moreover, how a state prioritizes the education of certain groups could also have

an affect on the distribution of subsidies. For instance, a state’s commitment to the education of low-

income, low-ability, or older individuals might affect its generosity to two-year colleges. Concerns

about endogeneity are mitigated by the fact that states with similar observable characteristics have vastly




16
  Manski and Wise (1983) highlight the importance of an appropriate choice set by utilizing information on the
colleges accepted to and the nearest community college as possible college options. Then, they estimate a
multinomial logit to explain the choices individuals made between college and outside opportunities.


                                                                                                                 15
different subsidy schemes. One reason for this is that the patterns of public colleges in a state and the

distribution of tuition subsidies are strongly influenced by historical factors.17

        The problem of unobserved preferences is likely to be most serious for marginal students because

these individuals are most sensitive to the specific characteristics of potential colleges. To illustrate,

suppose state preferences affect the placement of colleges in particular areas of the state. Since the

proximity of schools appears to be a determining factor in the attendance decisions of marginal students,

this group would therefore be influenced by the state’s unobserved preferences interacted with each

individual’s specific residence. However, because colleges appear to be distributed among

heterogeneous communities in more populous states, this is a potential problem for estimation mainly in

more-rural states. To address the concern that the assignment of location could unduly drive the choices

of some individuals, specification tests are used to verify the results.18

        Another concern of this methodology is its focus on the demand side of college decisions without

explicit treatment of supply-side constraints. It is first important to note that the vast majority of

institutions are not selective and a large majority of students are accepted into their first-choice college.19

Moreover, the conditional logistic choice model accounts for supply considerations in two ways. First,

because a student’s ability relative to that of a college’s student body may be an important determinant of

enrollment at that school, the model includes variables that measure the difference between the student’s

SAT percentile score and the median percentile score of the school. These variables, therefore, account

for the likelihood of admission and prevent the model from predicting that individuals with low test

scores would be accepted into the most selective schools. Additionally, the model includes controls for

undergraduate enrollment to account for the fact that larger schools have a higher level of visibility and

are able to admit greater numbers of students.


17
   See Goldin and Katz (1999) and Quigley and Rubinfeld (1993) for a discussion of how historical factors
influenced the development of public higher education.
18
   For the state simulations, I randomized each student’s location assignment several times to examine whether the
results vary. They changed little and never disputed the paper’s basic results. See below for further discussion.
19
   According to Breland, Maxey, Gernand, and Trapani (2002), only 13 percent of public four-years and 20 percent
of private four-years have competitive admissions processes. Most other four-year schools do impose selective
criteria such as high school course requirements and minimum test scores, but they accept nearly everyone who




                                                                                                                16
The Data

         Several data sets provide the necessary individual, institutional, and state-level data. First, the

National Education Longitudinal Study (NELS) provides information on the characteristics, ability, and

family background of approximately 8,000 students from eighth grade to age twenty.20 During this time

frame, I am able to observe transitions from high school to postsecondary education or the workforce

including the application to and enrollment in college. A second study, the Integrated Postsecondary

Education Data System (IPEDS) provides extensive information on postsecondary institutions within the

United States including financial expenditures and revenues, tuition costs, and enrollment.21 These data

were supplemented by information from the Digest of Educational Statistics and U.S. Department of

Commerce for state-level characteristics. Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges provided information

on college competitiveness and student body test scores.22

         In order to have a better sense of net price, the amount of Federal Pell Grants that a person could

expect to receive was subtracted from the list tuition price. The lack of information about aid beyond

Pell Grants is not a great concern given few students receive substantial grants. In 1991-92, the median

college spent only $193 in institutional aid per student. Moreover, according to the 1992-93 National

Postsecondary Student Aid Survey (NPSAS), only one-third of students at private four-year colleges and

ten percent of students at public four-year colleges received any institutional grant aid.23 Students who


meets those criterion. Ninety-one percent of public two-year colleges and 46 percent of private two-year colleges
have completely open admissions without requirements. The rest have minimum standards.
20
   While the original data set in 1988 contained 14,622 observations, once accounting for attrition by 1994, only
7,870 observations remained with the necessary information. This sample has slightly higher mean years of
parental education (14.07 years in the original compared to 14.44 years), slightly higher family income (as
measured by a categorical variable), and were more likely to have attended a private high school (9.7 percent
compared to 14.7 percent). If the student’s SAT score was not available, then either: (i) an available ACT score was
converted, or (ii) high school GPA was used to predict the SAT with controls for demographics.
21
   The sample was limited to nonspecialized, undergraduate institutions. Carnegie codes and school names were
used to drop the following schools from the sample: graduate programs and other specialty schools (art college,
seminaries, etc.); college administrative offices; schools without tuition and enrollment information; single-sex
colleges. For schools that did not have student expenditure information in 1992, figures from other years were used
and deflated. A total of 2,669 colleges remained in the sample.
22
   If the median score was missing for a college but the school was grouped into a competitiveness category, the test
score assigned is equal to the mean score of colleges in that category. Since two-year colleges do not customarily
require or request test scores, all were assigned an SAT composite of 700, a level that qualifies basically all
students.
23
   Institutional Aid is most likely to affect the net price for high-ability students. To address this concern, I tried an
alternative measure of price equal to the list tuition price minus the expected Pell Grant minus the mean institutional
grant per FTE student at a college (a proxy for net price). When using this alternative measure, price is estimated to


                                                                                                                       17
do receive scholarships or grants often do so from only a few schools within their opportunity sets

making the awards school-specific and nearly impossible to predict. Furthermore, information on a

student’s specific need is unavailable. Distance from a school was calculated using the zip code of the

student’s high school (the finest geographical indicator in the NELS) and the potential college.

        To measure college resources, the models include expenditures. However, because total college

expenditures include many items that do not directly affect education production (i.e. research and

infrastructure), I only include student-focused expenditures: funds spent on instruction, academic

support, and student services.24 Median student body SAT score proxy for peer resources. Since a

difference of 100 points does not mean the same thing at all places in the distribution of scores (e.g. a

400 versus 500 compared to a 1500 versus 1600), the median score was transformed into a percentile to

better standardize the measure. Quadratic tuition, distance, test score, and student expenditure variables

along with a cubic distance variable are included to allow for nonlinear relationships. This is necessary

because, for example, the difference between a distance of 20 to 30 miles may not be the same as a

difference of 1200 to 1210 miles. Table 1 summarizes the data and variable definitions.



SECTION IV: THE DETERMINANTS OF COLLEGE CHOICE AND ENROLLMENT

Estimates of the Decisions between Colleges

        Table 2 displays the estimates of the conditional logistic model using students in NELS that

attended college. I estimate the probability of choosing at a particular college conditional on attending

any postsecondary institution. As shown in specification 1, a higher tuition price has a negative effect on

the probability of enrollment at a particular school. A student is 39 percent less likely to attend a college

that charges an additional $1,000 in tuition costs, ceteris paribus (1992 dollars). This translates into an




have a more negative effect on the likelihood of choosing a particular college. However, the alternative measure of
price did not improve the predictive value of the model. The original measure of price produced better predictions
of the students’ actual choices even among the high-ability students. The college with the highest choice probability
is the same with each price measure 91 percent of the time.
24
   Schools found to have unreasonably high student expenditures in comparison with similar schools were assigned
the mean expenditures for that type, quality, and level of school. Data for 11 colleges had to be adjusted.


                                                                                                                  18
own-price elasticity of –2.8.25 However, each additional $1,000 has a less negative effect on choice.

Distance, another measure of cost, also negatively affects the likelihood of attendance at a school. A

student is 81 percent less likely to attend a school that is 100 miles farther away than a similar college,

but the marginal negative effect of distance decreases.

         In contrast, school resources, as measured by expenditures, the student-faculty ratio, and the

percent of the faculty with a Ph.D. or other terminal degree, have a positive effect on the likelihood of

choosing a college. The student-college match and school resources are also found to be important

determinants of college choice. The likelihood of attendance at a college decreases 29 percent for every

ten percentile-points that the student’s score is above that of the college’s average student. The

relationship is found to be positive if the school’s scores are higher perhaps signifying that students try to

attend colleges with peers of higher quality. However, as the marginal difference between a student’s

test score and that of a school grows, individuals become less likely to attend that college. School size is

also positively related to the likelihood of attendance.

         Since the effect of school costs and resources may differ by student, interactions were utilized in

specification 2. The impact of cost on low-income individuals is examined using an interaction with a

dummy variable equal to one for individuals with family incomes below $20,000 in 1991. While tuition

is not found to have an additional negative effect on the likelihood of choosing a college, distance,

another measure of cost, reduces the likelihood of enrollment by an additional 35 percentage points.

High-ability students also seem to be affected differently by school characteristics. Tuition has a less

negative effect perhaps suggesting that high-ability students expect a higher return to college and are

therefore willing to pay more for their educations. It could also reflect the fact that this group is more

likely to receive institutional financial aid, which could help to cover higher costs, or that they may be

more likely to come from more affluent backgrounds. Moreover, a college that is 100 miles farther away

is only 36 percent less likely to be chosen by a high-ability student while a $1,000 increase in student




25
  While there is limited empirical evidence on the specifics of competition between colleges, several other papers
have found significant cross-price effects for specific institutions (see Allen and Shen (1999) for further discussion).
However, this is the first paper to estimate such effects for the entire higher education market.


                                                                                                                     19
expenditures multiplies the likelihood of attendance by an additional 15 percentage points for the first

$1,000, ceteris paribus.


Estimates of the Enrollment Decision

        The second specification in Table 2 gives a prediction of what school an individual would choose

conditional on attendance. However, some students will elect not to enroll in college at all. This could

be related to the opportunities available since an individual might not attend college facing one set of

alternatives and prices but do so given a different distribution of subsidies and costs. Individuals for

whom the enrollment decision is uncertain are most likely of lower ability (and therefore confront

uncertain or low returns to education) or low-income (and face extremely high capital costs). This seems

to be true as evidenced by the mean demographics of the group in the NELS that elected not to attend

college.26 Therefore, to analyze the attendance decision, the group of students who did not attend college

are compared to individuals with similar characteristics but who decided to attend college using logistic

regression models.27

        This marginal group presumably considers local public college options, particularly two-year

colleges, when deciding whether to attend since these schools are less of a commitment in terms of cost

and distance.28 Therefore, in order to estimate how local higher education opportunities affect the

likelihood of enrollment, the characteristics of the closest two-year public college and the closest four-

year public college were used. As shown in Table 3, specification 1, while distance and student ability

appears to affect college attendance, the price of the closest public two-year net an expected Pell Grant

does not. When the closest public four-year college is used as the focus, neither price nor distance are

found to affect likelihood of attendance. However, the characteristics of the nearest public two-year or

four-year college may not be true variables of interest for a student considering enrollment.

Specification 3 instead uses the college predicted to be the most likely choice from the conditional logit

26
   Individuals who did not attend college had a mean family income of $34,818 while the families with child who
enrolled made on average $57,370. Likewise, the mean SAT scores for the groups were 786 and 913, respectively.
27
   The criteria for this group were: (1) family income below $30,000, or (2) parents’ with less than 13 years of
education, or (3) SAT scores below 900. The sample included 2,177 students who did not and 3,484 who did
attend.




                                                                                                              20
model in Table 2, specification 2. These predicted colleges are often either the closest two-year public

college (14 percent of the time) or the closest four-year public college (36 percent of the time), and

therefore, specification (3) is partly a combination of the first two specifications.

         Using the school predicted to be the student’s most likely choice, it is estimated that an additional

$1,000 in list tuition price reduces the likelihood of attendance by 7.8 percent suggesting a price

elasticity of –0.30. This elasticity is a third larger than that found by Kane (1995). This may suggest

that previous estimates of the price elasticity have underestimated the influence of cost by using

aggregated measures. The state mean tuition level or nearest public college may not approximate very

well the college characteristics important to students in the early 1990s perhaps due to the decreasing

cost of distance. However, given that this sample of marginal students is expected to be more responsive

to price than others, it is likely that this estimate of the price elasticity is an upper bound.


Comparing Actual to Predicted College Investments

         In order to test the ability of the model to adequately predict the college decisions of individuals,

Table 4 compares the actual choices of individuals and their predicted choices using the parameters in

Tables 2 and 3. The entire sample of individuals (whether they attended college or not) was used for the

predictions in the following way. First, I calculated the probability that an individual would choose a

particular school relative to their other options using equation (5) and the parameters of the model in

Table 2, column 2. Second, I calculated the likelihood of attendance for each person given the

characteristics of the most-likely college. This develops from the parameters of the model in Table 3,

column 3.29 Each student-college match was then weighted by each of these probabilities. This process

gives mean statistics taking into account both the relative odds of choosing a particular school and the

likelihood of enrollment.

         As shown in Table 4, the model predicts college choices with very similar statistics as those

schools that were actually attended. For example, while 3,841 individuals in the sample actually


28
   Rouse (1994) suggests that junior colleges provide a place in higher education for those not traditionally served
by the four-year college system. She also demonstrates that proximity is important to the marginal group.
29
   The parameters are used to calculate the probability of enrollment for each individual in the marginal group at
each potential college. Individuals not in the marginal group were given an enrollment probability of one.


                                                                                                                       21
attended a four-year college, the model predicts that 3,829 would. In addition, the mean list tuition at the

colleges attended was $5,863 while the model predicted it would be $5,634, a four-percent difference.

The model does a slightly better job predicting the college costs and resources of those that attend four-

year schools than those that attend two-year colleges. However, the model does overestimate the

proportion of students that choose to attend public, four-year colleges.

        Differences between the actual and predicted choices could be due to several reasons. First,

prospective students may not have full information about all of their potential schools in order to make

the most optimal decisions. For example, they may elect to attend a more expensive school if they do not

know about a cheaper option with the same student expenditures that is a similar distance away. The

differences could also occur since the variables do not perfectly describe each college option. Colleges

may have more to offer than can be measured by expenditures and student body test scores, and these

qualities may be perceptible to students. Furthermore, differences may be due to the fact that private and

institutional financial aid enable students to attend more costly colleges with more resources. I am

unable to incorporate these types of aid into the model due to a lack of information (see the earlier

discussion of this point).

        Another explanation for the differences is the lack of explicit supply constraints in the model. I

do not directly take into account admissions policies, and therefore, students could possibly be predicted

to attend a college they have little likelihood of being accepted into. However, the test score difference

variables in the model seem to account for most of the selectivity issues. On average, the school

percentile predicted does not differ much from what it was in reality. The model avoids predicting

options in which there are great differences between the test scores of the individual and of the school.

        Further support that the model does a good job of predicting decisions comes from the fact that

the actual school attended was one the top three predictions in nearly one-third of the cases. However,

the fact that the model does not always predict the exact school an individual attended does not matter if

the school predicted is similar to the school actually chosen (e.g. Harvard is predicted but Amherst is

chosen). This is because the important characteristics of the schools, tuition and student expenditures,

will be the same in the data. There would be concern if Harvard was the predicted choice, but the



                                                                                                        22
student attended a community college instead. The predictions do follow the general trend that high-

ability students opt for schools with higher test scores and student expenditures while low-income

students attend two-year colleges more often, travel shorter distances, and pay less in tuition.



SECTION V: THE EFFECT OF IN-KIND TUITION SUBSIDIES

        Because tuition costs seem to greatly affect the probability of enrollment at a particular college,

individuals may accept lower quality (i.e. fewer resources) for the sake of price. The state subsidization

of public colleges and resulting price gap between public and private options provides an opportunity to

test this notion set forth by Peltzman. Two sets of simulations are performed. The first involves altering

the state of residence of the individual to see how his decision would change given a new distribution of

subsidies and colleges. This simulation compares how state regimes affect enrollment levels, the prices

charged, and the resources received. The second simulation explores the counterfactual of what would

happen if the aid were not in-kind. Using the same state spending amounts, I examine how decisions

would change if students were instead given a voucher that was applicable to any in-state college.


State Simulations

        As shown in Figures 1 and 2, California and Massachusetts have considerably different systems

in terms of the distribution and level of state in-kind tuition subsidies. However, each seems to have a

strong commitment to education. Massachusetts has long been a leader in education indicators, and in

1992, the percentage of its population with a bachelor’s degree was the highest in the nation (27.2

percent). Likewise, California has a very educated population with almost a quarter of its people with at

least a bachelor’s degree. The substantial financial state support of colleges in California may also be

taken as a signal of its commitment to higher education. Therefore, with strong preferences for

education and subsidy policies that differ significantly, Massachusetts and California are excellent states

to compare and assess the effect of dissimilar state in-kind tuition programs. To round out the state

comparisons, predictions are also made for Illinois and Nebraska. Each has a distribution of subsidies in

the middle of Massachusetts and California. Unlike Massachusetts, Illinois (Figure 4) offers a highly

competitive, public option, but it is the only option, and it does not receive as much state aid or spend as


                                                                                                        23
much in resources as the top-rated schools in California. Finally, Nebraska (Figure 5) has a similar

distribution of public schools as Massachusetts, but the state aid level is higher allowing a good test of

whether large subsidies influence students to forego private options. However, unlike the other states,

Nebraska does not have any private colleges ranked in the Most or Highly Competitive groups, but

students at Creighton University receive the same amount in expenditures as do students at many

colleges rated Most Competitive.

         To compare the decisions that would be made under each state’s subsidy regime, the sample was

first given the characteristics of a state resident. For example, for the California predictions, the tuition

values became in-state costs for California colleges and out-of-state costs for other schools. Location in

the state was randomized based on the distribution of the population among zip codes (i.e. Los Angeles

zip codes were assigned to members of the sample in an equal proportion to the number of Californians

that reside there). For each location assignment, a new distance variable was calculated to each potential

college.30 Table 5 displays the summary statistics of the predicted college decisions when presented with

the revised opportunity sets based on residence within each state.

         The greatest differences are between the states with the two extreme subsidy systems. California,

with the most generous state support, has the highest percentage of students in public colleges and the

lowest mean four-year tuition cost of the four states. Even with the lower cost, students under the

California system are predicted to experience the highest level of college expenditures and median

student body SAT percentile due to the quality of institutions supported and the large tuition subsidies.

At the other end of the spectrum, Massachusetts, with much less state support, is predicted to have more

than one-third fewer students in public colleges with students paying nearly three times more in four-

year tuition costs on average without increases in college expenditures. More students are predicted to

attend college under the generous California regime although many are predicted to attend two-year


30
   As mentioned earlier, this methodology could affect the results because the placement of colleges may not be
random, and proximity is an important determinant of enrollment. For example, community colleges may be
located in poorer areas, but since poorer individuals are not necessarily assigned to live in those areas, their
likelihood of attendance may be underestimated. However, in metropolitan areas, community colleges are found in
both poor and rich areas minimizing this type of problem. This is a greater concern for rural areas. In order to get
the most reliable results, the simulations were run several times for each state with a new random location
assignment each time. The predictions did not significantly differ thereby suggesting this concern is not significant.


                                                                                                                    24
colleges with an average tuition price one-eighth the average cost of the two-year colleges chosen in

Massachusetts.

        The differences among the subset of high-ability students are also striking. Nearly three times as

many high-SAT students are predicted to choose public four-year colleges in California, and they are

predicted to be charged one-third of the average tuition relative to Massachusetts. More specifically, as

residents of California, many high-ability students would attend UCLA or UC Berkeley due to their low

costs and substantial resources. However, in Massachusetts some high-ability students would elect to

attend selective private institutions such as Harvard University and pay five and a half times more while

only receiving 30 percent more in student expenditures. Although this study does not take into account

institutional scholarships, this aid is unlikely to completely close the tuition gap between Harvard and

UC Berkeley for middleclass families. In summary, when faced with California’s generous subsidies

and diverse system of public colleges as opposed to Massachusetts’ less generous and limited array of

public options, individuals paid far less but received a similar amount in resources.

        Illinois and Nebraska demonstrate how choices are affected in subsidy regimes closer to what

most states offer. In each case, more students are predicted to choose public colleges than under the

Massachusetts system, but unlike in California, students do not receive as much on average in college

expenditures and student body quality (SAT percentile). The reason stems from the fact that neither state

offers public institutions with nearly as much in resources or peer quality as California but the low price

of these colleges is sufficient enough to encourage students to attend them. For example, in the Illinois

simulation, many high-ability students are predicted to choose the University of Illinois-Urbana over

Northwestern University and the University of Chicago. This suggests that the discounted tuition price

of an in-state, public four-year university is enough to encourage some individuals to forego schools with

more resources, the precise concern of Peltzman. Further evidence of the Peltzman hypothesis is found

by examining the predictions for Nebraska. Approximately 76 percent of four-year college students

would choose to attend a public institution if they were residents of Nebraska, and the mean student

expenditures and student body test scores are the lowest of the four states. The fact that none of the




                                                                                                      25
public options in Nebraska fit the criteria of more selective schools translates into less in college

financial and peer resources.

        The Peltzman hypothesis, therefore, appears valid in situations in which the level of state aid is

average to high but the availability of public options with high levels of resources is limited. Such

circumstances are predicted to induce students to choose public colleges that offer fewer resources than

private, more expensive options. In essence, students are enticed by lower prices to forego college

resources. It is also worth noting that low-income students appear to be particularly attracted to the

public options regardless of the state subsidy level or distribution of public college quality. The

percentage of low-income students predicted to choose public colleges in Massachusetts is only one-

quarter less than in California, a far smaller difference than that found for the sample overall or among

the subset of high-ability students.


Voucher Simulations

        A better way to test the importance of the Peltzman hypothesis is to simulate what choices would

be made if the aid were not in-kind. Tables 6 and 7 describe five alternative ways in which the aid could

be distributed. It is important to note that these simulations do not estimate general equilibrium

outcomes. While the simulations incorporate some thought to how student decisions might change under

different circumstances, I do not adequately incorporate a student behavioral response in the

simulations.31 Furthermore, I do not account for how the supply of higher education might change under

different distribution regimes. If a college voucher encouraged more students to choose private colleges,

it is unclear whether the private institutions would be able to accommodate the additional students or by

how much or how fast they would try to increase their capacity. However, the simulations do provide a

manner with which to judge the magnitude of the influence of the in-kind format. In effect, the

predictions suggest how college preferences or intended choices might change if state subsidies were not

distributed in an in-kind format.



31
  For example, the voucher simulations assume that a greater proportion of students might choose to attend four-year
colleges and that more students might choose to remain in state. The simulations also assume perfect information, a
particularly troublesome assumption for low-income students.


                                                                                                                26
         Column 1 of Tables 6 and 7 presents the mean tuition prices and predicted college decisions

under the current in-kind subsidy system. However, at the other extreme, states could elect not to

appropriate any operational support to public colleges thereby eliminating in-kind tuition subsidies.32 As

shown in column 6 of Table 6, the prices of public colleges are assumed to increase by the amount of

state appropriations per FTE student at each public college.33 While tuition costs do not vary

significantly among public four-year colleges of different competitiveness levels under the current

system, if state subsidies were taken away, the more selective schools would be much more expensive

than the less competitive and noncompetitive colleges. This reflects the larger amount of state aid

directed to more selective public institutions. Additionally, the gap between public two-year and four-

year colleges would grow since four-year institutions receive more in state operational subsidies. The

price of private colleges would not change. However, even under a situation of no state support, private

colleges are still more expensive than public colleges of similar competitiveness. For example,

competitive public colleges cost 28 percent less than competitive private colleges on average, partly due

to differences in expenditures per student. Therefore, public colleges continue to have a relative price

advantage even without the state support.

         Table 7, column 6 displays how college decisions are predicted to change under a system

with no state support. Two major trends are evident. First, state support is found to significantly

affect the choice of college sector. The simulation without state support suggests far fewer students

would choose to attend public four-year colleges. Although 71 percent of four-year attendants are

predicted to do so under the current system, only 56 percent would choose publics if there were no

state support. In terms of the number of students, 29 percent fewer individuals would choose public

four-year colleges under a system without state aid (2,706 versus 1,925 students). Low-income

students would be especially impacted, as 38 percent fewer would choose public four-year colleges

without a subsidy. At the same time, the number electing to attend a private college is predicted to


32
   All of the following simulations assume that state grant programs are not affected. The focus here is on how state
appropriations to colleges could be redistributed.
33
   The price of in-state public colleges is assumed to be the in-state price plus the increase due to the loss of state
appropriations. Out-of-state public colleges are assumed to charge the greater of the out-of-state price and the
revised in-state price.


                                                                                                                    27
increase by one-third from 1,123 to 1,489 students. This suggests that state in-kind subsidies

strongly influence students to favor public colleges over private institutions.

        A second observation is that more students would attend two-year rather than four-year

colleges if states did not provide operational support. The number predicted to enroll in two-year

colleges increases by 14 percent. The shift in enrollment is more substantial among low-income

students: one-third more low-income students are predicted to choose to attend two-year colleges.

This result implies that the current pattern of in-kind subsidies encourages students to not only attend

public colleges, but in particular, public four-year colleges. Note also that although total enrollment

is not predicted to significantly drop without state support, a shift in enrollment towards community

colleges would have important implications for the general skill level of the labor force given the

differences in resources and programs available at colleges of different levels.

         The remaining simulations consider how prices and decisions would change if states continued

to provide the same amount in appropriations for higher education, but the subsidies were distributed in

the form of a direct voucher to students. In this way, the state aid would be similar to the Pell Grant in

that it would follow the student to the institution of his or her choice. The value of the voucher is the

total state appropriations for nonspecialized colleges divided by the FTE number of students attending

these colleges (for simulations 2 and 3, only students attending public colleges were counted).34 In the

simulations in which the four-year voucher is twice as large as the two-year voucher (simulations 3 and

5), 70 percent of students are assumed to attend four-year schools.35

        For the simulations in columns 2 and 3, the state subsidy could be used at any in-state public

college. In column 2, the voucher is the same regardless of the level of the public college (this is similar

to the current Colorado college voucher proposal) while the voucher is twice as large for four-year

colleges in column 3. These simulations not only remove the in-kind format of the aid, but they also

equalize the amount of operational support among public colleges within a state. As shown in Table 6,

because two-year public colleges often receive less than half of what four-year colleges receive, under a


34
  This assumes a usage rate of 100 percent. Presently, around 85 percent of students remain in state for college.
35
  The value of the voucher for four-year colleges can be found by solving: appropriations/student = .7x + .3(x/2).
This is slightly larger than the proportion that does so under the current system.


                                                                                                                     28
public voucher plan, many of these schools would experience reductions in price in comparison to the

current in-kind system. Moreover, because the more selective institutions receive a larger share of state

appropriations, this redistribution scheme would cause many of the public flagship colleges to raise their

prices. These price shifts influence how enrollment might change under a public college voucher system.

As shown in Table 7, columns 2 and 3, the vouchers are predicted to increase the number of students

who would choose two-year colleges. This change is particularly large among high-ability students of

whom 53 percent more are predicted to choose two-year colleges if the voucher was the same regardless

of level. Overall, the resources available to students at their chosen institutions would slightly decrease.

This suggests that if state support were equalized across all public colleges, the Peltzman problem would

be far greater. The incentives created under such a system would cause many more students to forego

educational resources for the sake of price.

         The remaining price gap between public and private colleges and the continued favoritism of

public schools under the public college voucher simulations results in nearly the same proportion of

students choosing public colleges. The last two simulations remove the public dimension of the aid

completely by allowing students to apply the state voucher to any in-state public or private institution.

As shown in columns 4 and 5 of Table 6, the voucher was recalculated as total state appropriations

divided by the total FTE enrollment at all in-state nonspecialized colleges. This amount was then

subtracted from all in-state college prices, public and private. This thereby equalizes the distribution of

the subsidy by level and selectivity but also by sector. The only remaining difference between public

and private schools is control. In comparison to the current in-kind subsidy system, this voucher plan

would reduce the costs of less competitive colleges the most while also reducing the price difference

between public and private institutions.

        When the state aid is distributed as a voucher that could be applied to any in-state public or

private college, the number of students predicted to choose public four-years falls (columns 4 and 5 of

Table 7). If the voucher were equal regardless of the level, the number of students enrolled at public

four-year colleges would fall 24 percent. While many students would shift to public two-year colleges,

the number choosing private four-year colleges is predicted to increase 20 percent in comparison to the



                                                                                                         29
level under the current in-kind subsidy system. If the voucher for four-year colleges was instead twice as

large, the number at public four-year colleges is predicted to fall 14 percent but many more students

would choose private institutions. The number electing to attend a private four-year institution would

increase 29 percent. This difference lends support to Peltzman’s assertion that in-kind tuition subsidies

at public colleges draw students away from private options. However, the change in sector did not result

in an increase in the mean resources received by students. In each case, the response of low-income

students is predicted to be far greater. This suggests that the distortion created by the in-kind state

subsidy is strongest for these students possibly due to their heightened sensitively to price. In summary,

without the in-kind format, many more students would opt out of the public higher education system.



SECTION VI: CONCLUSION

        The conditional logit model is an improvement in estimating the determinants of college choice.

While models that use state cross-sectional variation to estimate student decisions ignore much of the

heterogeneity in the market for higher education, my model exploits this variation to estimate the effect

of cost and quality on the decisions of whether to go to college and which college to attend. Conditional

on college attendance, higher tuition costs and distance reduce the likelihood of choosing a particular

college while student expenditures increase the probability. These effects differ for particular groups.

High-ability individuals are more influenced by quality measures, and low-income students are more

responsive to distance. When individuals consider whether to enroll, price appears to be an important

factor. Once determining the college the individual is most likely to consider by using the choice model,

the elasticity of price with respect to enrollment is estimated to be much larger than previously found.

        Using this college choice model to examine students’ decisions, it is clear that the current state

in-kind subsidy system creates a series of incentives in terms of college decisions. First, students are

induced to favor in-state, public institutions. As shown by the simulations, the larger the tuition subsidy,

the more likely students will forego a private or four-year option even if it offers far more in resources.

Therefore, there appears to be validity to Peltzman’s hypothesis that in-kind subsidies could reduce

educational investment.



                                                                                                          30
        Removing the in-kind format and public focus of the aid would avoid some of the concerns of

Peltzman by reducing the price gap between public and private colleges. As shown by the voucher

simulations, up to 24 percent of first-year students would no longer prefer a public, four-year school if

given the money as a voucher that could be applied to any in-state college (the decrease is smaller if the

voucher were twice as large for four-year colleges). As a result, the number that would choose to enroll

in a private four-year college would increase 20 to 29 percent. Given enrollment rates in 1992, this

suggests that an additional 80,000 to 120,000 freshman would prefer to attend a private four-year college

each year if the in-kind format of state subsidies was removed. The number of students choosing to

attend private four-year colleges would increase by 575,000 to 830,000 students. While this is not a true

estimate of the general equilibrium outcome of a voucher program given the absence of behavioral and

supply responses, these results do suggest that the distortion of choice by the in-kind format is

substantial. If states stopped giving subsidies altogether, the difference would be even larger. Without

any state support, 29 percent fewer students overall and 38 percent of low-income students are predicted

to attend public four-year colleges. The number attending private four-year colleges would increase by

one-third.

        In addition to creating preferences for public colleges, the pattern of state in-kind subsidies also

favors public four-year over two-year institutions and more selective schools over those that are less

competitive Simulations in which the state subsidies are equally distributed among public colleges

suggest that students would choose inexpensive two-year colleges over four-year school with far greater

resources. This provides further support of the influence of the in-kind aid can have on college

decisions. However, because the four-year institutions have more in resources, the distortion in price

between two- and four-year public schools is probably beneficial in terms of individual college

investments.




                                                                                                       31
REFERENCES

Allen, Robert F. and Jianshou Shen. “Some New Evidence of the Character of Competition among
        Higher Education Institutions.” Economics of Education Review, vol. 18, no. 4, 1999.
Barron’s Educational Series. Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges. 21st Edition. Hauppauge, New
       York: Barron’s Educational Series, 1997.
Borsch-Supan, Axel. “Econometric Analysis of Discrete Choice.” In M. Backmann and W. Krelle, eds.
       Lecture Notes in Economics and Mathematical Systems. Berlin: Springer-Verlag, 1987.
Breland, H., J. Maxey, R. Gernand, T. Cumming, and C. Trapani. Trends in College Admission 2000.
       ACT, Inc.; Association for Institutional Research; Educational Testing Service; the National
       Association for College Admission Counseling; and the College Board, 2002.
Cameron, Stephen and James Heckman. “Can Tuition Policy Combat Rising Wage Inequality?” In
      Marvin H. Kosters, ed. Financing College Tuition: Government Policies and Educational
      Priorities. Washington: The American Enterprise Institute Press, 1999.
Campbell, R. and B. Siegel. “The demand for higher education in the United States 1919–1964.”
      American Economic Review, vol. 57, 1967.
Clotfelter, C. T. “Public Spending for Higher Education: An Empirical Test of Two Hypotheses.” Public
        Finance, vol. 31, 1976.
College Board. Trends in College Pricing. Washington: The College Entrance Examination Board, 2002.
Ganderton, Philip T. “The Effect of subsidies in kind on the choice of a college.” Journal of Public
       Economics, vol. 48, 1992.
Goldin, Claudia and Lawrence Katz. “The Shaping of Higher Education: The Formative Years in the
       United States, 1890 to 1940.” Journal of Economic Perspectives, vol. 13, no. 1, 1999.
Gottlieb, Bruce. “Do Public In-Kind Subsidies to Education reduce Social Welfare?” Harvard University
        mimeo, 1997.
Hansen, W. Lee and Burton Weisbrod. “The Distribution of Costs and Direct Benefits of Public Higher
       Education: The Case of California.” Journal of Human Resources, vol. 4, no. 2, 1969a.
Hansen, W. Lee and Burton Weisbrod. “On the Distribution of Costs and Direct Benefits of Public
       Higher Education: Reply.” Journal of Human Resources, vol. 4, no. 3, 1969b.
Hopkins, T.D. “Higher Education Enrollment Demand.” Economic Inquiry, vol. 12, 1974.
Hoxby, Caroline. “The Changing Market Structure of U.S. Higher Education.” Harvard University
       mimeo, 1997.
Hoxby, Caroline and Bridget Terry (Long). “Explaining Rising Income and Wage Inequality among the
       College-Educated.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 6873, 1999.
Johnson, George. “Subsidies for Higher Education.” Journal of Labor Economics, vol.2, no. 3, 1984.




                                                                                                   32
Kane, Thomas. “Rising Public College Tuition and College Entry: How Well do Public Subsidies
       Promote Access to College?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 5164,
       July 1995.
Leslie, Larry and Paul Brinkman, The Economic Value of Higher Education. New York: Macmillan
        Publishing Company, 1989.
Long, Bridget Terry (forthcoming) “How Have College Decisions Changed Overtime? An Application
       of the Conditional Logistic Choice Model.” Journal of Econometrics.
Luce, R. Individual Choice Behavior. New York: Wiley, 1959.
McFadden, Daniel. “Conditional Logit Analysis of Qualitative Choice Behavior” In P. Zarembka, ed.
      Frontiers in Econometrics. New York: Academic Press, 1973.
McFadden, Daniel. “Quantitative Methods for Analyzing Travel Behavior of Individuals: Some Recent
      Developments.” In D. Hensher and P. Stopher, eds. Behavioural Travel Modelling. London:
      Croom-Helm, 1979.
McPherson, Michael and Morton O. Schapiro. “Does Student Aid affect College Enrollment? New
      Evidence on a Persistent Controversy.” American Economic Review, vol. 81, no. 1, 1991.
Manski, C. and D. Wise. College Choice in America. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1983.
National Center for Education Statistics. Digest of Education Statistics. Washington, D.C.: Department
       of Education, various years.
Palmer, James. Grapevine. Bloomington, IL: Illinois State University, Center for the Student of
       Education Policy, 2003.
Pechman, Joseph. “The Distributional Effects of Public Higher Education in California.” Journal of
      Human Resources, vol. 5, no. 3, 1970.
Pechman, Joseph. “A Note on the Intergenerational Transfer of Public Higher-Education Benefits.”
      Journal of Political Economy, vol. 80, no. 3, Part II, 1972.
Peltzman, Sam. “The Effect of Government Subsidies-in-Kind on Private Expenditures: The Case of
       Higher Education.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 81, no. 1, 1973.
Poterba, James. “Government Intervention in the Markets of Education and Health Care: How and
       Why?” in Victor R. Fuchs, ed. Individual and Social Responsibility. Chicago: The University of
       Chicago Press, 1996.
Quigley, John and Daniel Rubinfeld. “Public Choices in Public Higher Education.” In Charles T.
       Clotfelter and Michael Rothschild, eds. Studies of Supply and Demand in Higher Education.
       Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1993.
Rouse, Cecelia. “What to do after High School: The Two-Year versus Four-Year College Enrollment
       Decision.” In Ronald G. Ehrenberg. Choices and Consequences: Contemporary Policy Issues in
       Education. Ithaca: ILR Press, 1994.
Sonstelie, Jon. “The Welfare Cost of Free Public Schools.” Journal of Political Economy, vol. 90, no. 4,
        1982.



                                                                                                   33
FIGURE 1: CALIFORNIA – Four-year Colleges and Universities
 Tuition        PUBLIC Institutions                     PRIVATE Institutions                      Tuition
                             Most Competitive (SAT 625-800 or ACT 30-26)
                                    Student Expenditures per Pupil = $21,571
                                                             California Institute of Technology
   $3,248    University of California - Berkeley             Stanford University                  $15,767
                                                             Harvey Mudd College
                  state aid = $10,364/student                Pomona College
                                                             Claremont McKenna College
                                Highly Competitive (SAT 575-625 or ACT 28-29)
                                    Student Expenditures per Pupil = $17,438
   $2,903    University of California – Los Angeles                   None                         ----
                  state aid = $10,820/student
                                 Very Competitive (SAT 525-575 or ACT 25-27)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $9,806
             University of California – San Diego            Thomas Aquinas College
   $2,448    University of California – Davis                Occidental College                   $13,233
             University of California – Irvine               Scripps College
                                   and three others                   and ten others
                  state aid = $7,829/student
                                   Competitive (SAT 450-525 or ACT 22-24)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $6,190
             Univ. of California – SantaBarbara              Saint Mary’s College of CA
             University of California – Riverside            Christian Heritage College
             California State Univ. – Bakersfield            Chapman University
  $1,700     California State Univ. – Fresno                 University of the Pacific            $10,134
             California State Univ. – Long Beach             Whittier College
             California State Univ. – Chico                  Fresno Pacific College
                                    and eight others                  and fifteen others
                  state aid = $5,704 /student
                               Less Competitive (SAT below 450 or ACT below 21)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $6,160
             San Jose State University                       Samuel Merritt College
             California State Univ. - Stanislaus             Cogswell College
  $1,459     California State Univ. – San Marcos             West Coast University                $9,631
                                    and four others                 and two others
                  state aid = $6,496 /student
                                                   Noncompetitive
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $3,908
                                                             Simpson College
    ----                None                                 Antioch University – Los Angeles     $6,110
                                                                           and fifteen others


Sources: Barron’s Educational Guides and 1991-92 IPEDS. Notes: Amounts are in 1992 dollars. State aid is
appropriations divided by FTE students. Aid, tuition, and expenditures are reported as means for the group.




                                                                                                              34
FIGURE 2: MASSACHUSETTS – Four-year Colleges and Universities
   Tuition         PUBLIC Institutions                 PRIVATE Institutions                        Tuition
                            Most Competitive (SAT 625-800 or ACT 30-26)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $16,685
                                                             Harvard University
   ----                       None                           Amherst College                      $17,271
                                                             Massachusetts Institute of Tech.
                                                                     and three others
                                Highly Competitive (SAT 575-625 or ACT 28-29)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $11,432
                                                             Boston College
    ----                      None                           Worcester Polytechnic Institute      $16,472
                                                             Tufts University
                                                                     and three others
                                 Very Competitive (SAT 525-575 or ACT 25-27)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $7,745
                                                             Brandeis University
     ----                     None                           Wheaton College                      $14,621
                                                             Babson College
                                                                     and seven others
                                   Competitive (SAT 450-525 or ACT 22-24)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $5,380
                University of Mass. - Amherst                Gordon College
                Framingham State College                     Northeastern University
   $3,520       Worcester State College                      Eastern Nazarene College             $10,395
                University of Mass. - Dartmouth              Simmons College
                University of Mass. - Lowell                 Endicott College
                                  and four others                     and eight others
                  state aid = $3,039 /student
                              Less Competitive (SAT below 450 or ACT below 21)
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $5,420
                Fitchburg State College                      Springfield College
   $3,021       Massachusetts Maritime Academy               Western New England College          $10,180
                Salem State College                          Hebrew College
                   state aid = $5,943 /student                        and seven others
                                                 Noncompetitive
                                     Student Expenditures per Pupil = $5,627
                                                             Lasell College
     ----                     None                           Saint Hyacinth College               $8,912
                                                             Bay Path College




Sources: Barron’s Educational Guides and 1991-92 IPEDS. Notes: Amounts are in 1992 dollars. State aid is
appropriations divided by FTE students. Aid, tuition, and expenditures are reported as means for the group.




                                                                                                              35
FIGURE 3: In-Kind Subsidies to Public Institutions


    Other Goods


                                                         In-Kind Subsidy
                                                     (extended budget constraint)




                                                                                    Public Options
                                                                                    (state-subsidized)

                                                                                    Private Options




       Original
       Budget
      Constraint



                                                                                            Educational
                                                                                              Units




                                                                                                         36
FIGURE 4: ILLINOIS – Four-year Colleges and Universities
                   Public Institutions           Private Institutions
                                                   Most Competitive
                                         Student Expenditures per Pupil = $24,511
                   ---                None                                     Two           $16,226
                                                  Highly Competitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $7,707
              $3,458                  One                                     Three          $11,857
                            state aid = $7,373 /student
                                                   Very Competitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $6,625
                   ---                None                                    Seven          $11,489
                                                          Competitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $5,221
              $2,672                 Seven                                Twenty-eight       $9,108
                            state aid = $4,172 /student
                                                    Less Competitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $4,091
              $2,013                  Two                                     Three          $9,536
                            state aid = $3,575 /student
                                                    Noncompetitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $5,341
              $2,035                  Two                                     Nine           $6,285
                            state aid = $3,426 /student
See the notes to the next figure.



FIGURE 5: NEBRASKA – Four-year Colleges and Universities
                 Public Institutions          Private Institutions
                                                   Most Competitive
                   ---                None                                    None           ---
                                                  Highly Competitive
                   ---                None                                    None           ---
                                                   Very Competitive
                                         Student Expenditures per Pupil = $18,182
                   ---                None                                     One           $9,670
                                                          Competitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $4,659
              $1,954                  Two                                     Seven          $7,439
                            state aid = $4,172 /student
                                                    Less Competitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $4,226
              $1,467                  One                                      Two           $8,450
                            state aid = $2,504 /student
                                                    Noncompetitive
                                          Student Expenditures per Pupil = $2,949
              $1,615                 Three                                    Three          $3,063
                            state aid = $2,631 /student
Sources: Barron’s Educational Guides and 1991-92 IPEDS. Notes: Amounts are in 1992 dollars. State aid is
appropriations divided by FTE students. Aid, tuition, and expenditures are reported as means for the group.




                                                                                                              37
TABLE 1: Variable Descriptions and Summary Statistics
                                                                                                        Mean
 Variable                                                Description
                                                                                                  (standard deviation)
 A. Student Characteristics (NELS88)
    Student SAT               Student SAT, converted ACT score, or predicted SAT based                    878
                                  on high school GPA                                                     (212)
    Student SAT percentile    SAT score transformed into a percentile                                     49
                                                                                                         (29)
    High-Ability              Dummy Variable for Students with SAT greater than or                       0.152
                                 equal to 1100
    Low-Income                Dummy Variable for Students with a family income less                      0.201
                                 than $20,000 in 1991

 B. College Characteristics (1991-92 IPEDS unless otherwise noted)
    Student Expenditures      Expenditures on instruction, academic support, and student                $4,452
                                 services per pupil (school resources)                                  (3,516)

    School SAT                Median student body SAT score (peer resources) (Barron’s                    835
                                 Profiles of American Colleges)                                          (153)

    School SAT percentile     Median student body SAT transformed into a percentile                       43
                                                                                                         (23)
    FTE Enrollment            Full-time Equivalent Undergraduate Enrollment in 1991-92                   3,304
                                                                                                        (4,389)
    Student-Faculty Ratio     FTE Undergraduate Enrollment divided by FTE Faculty                        15.2
                                 (Source: American Survey of Colleges, 1991-92)                          (4.6)

    Percent of Faculty        Percent of faculty with a Ph.D. or other terminal (Source:                 31.4
      with a Ph.D.                American Survey of Colleges, 1991-92)                                 (26.1)

    College                   Groupings based on student test scores, high school rank,                   ---
     Competitiveness             and college acceptance rate (Source: Barron’s Guide)

    Two-year                  Dummy Variable for Two-year colleges                                       0.430
    Public                    Dummy Variable for Public colleges                                         0.538

 C. Match-Specific Variables (Interacting Student Characteristics with College Characteristics)
   List Tuition Price         In-state tuition if a resident of the state; Out-of-State tuition         $6,202
                                   if not                                                               (3,684)

   Distance                   The number of miles between the student’s high school and                  1,031
                                  the college based off zip codes                                        (725)

   SAT Difference: Student    Equal to the difference in SAT percentiles if the student’s                18.4
     %tile higher                SAT is greater than the school’s                                       (22.9)

   SAT Difference: School     Equal to the difference in SAT percentiles if the school’s                 12.3
     %tile higher                median SAT is greater than the student’s                               (19.7)




                                                                                                                  38
TABLE 2: Conditional Logistic Estimation of the Decisions between Colleges
Marginal Effect on the Probability of Enrollment (z-statistics in parentheses)
Dependent Variable: Attended College j within Two Years of Graduation
                                                                     Low-Income High SAT
                                    (1)                    (2)
                                                                     Interactions Interactions
College Costs
   Tuition Price net Pell         -.3930                 -.4054         -.0066         .0819
     (per $1,000)                 (42.92)                (35.63)        (0.20)         (2.96)
   Tuition Squared                 .0186                  .0193         .0033          -.0036
     (per $1,0002)                (36.60)                (28.66)        (1.85)         (3.29)
   Distance                       -.8099                 -.8133         -.3461         .4479
     (per 100 miles)              (81.06)                (76.55)        (9.78)        (13.07)
   Distance Squared                .1206                  .1175         .0190         -.0135
     (per 1002 miles)             (45.25)                (45.83)       (10.31)        (10.12)
College Quality and Size
   Student Expenditures            .0425                 .0825                         .1451
     (per $1,000)                  (2.67)                (3.77)                        (4.45)
   Student Exp. Squared            -.0005                -.0047                        .0012
     (per $1,0002)                 (1.03)                (5.40)                        (1.09)
   Student-Faculty                 .0106                 .0117
     Ratio                         (2.49)                (2.73)
   Percent of Faculty with         .0056                 .0053
     Ph.D. (per 10 pts)            (5.75)                (5.46)
   FTE Enrollment                  .1549                  .1548
     (per 1,000)                  (33.20)                (32.99)
Student-College Match
   Student %tile larger           -.2883                 -.2822
     (per 10 pts)                 (11.45)                (10.81)
   Student larger Squared          -.0124                -.0048
     (per 102 pts)                 (2.83)                (1.00)
   School %tile larger             .1916                 .2872
     (per 10 pts)                  (5.03)                (7.04)
   School larger Squared           -.2883                -.0569
     (per 102 pts)                 (9.28)                (9.99)
Two-year Colleges
  Two-Year College                 .3800                 .3152
     Dummy Variable                (4.99)                (4.16)
Strata (individuals)               5,683                    5,683
N (combinations)                15,167,927               15,167,927
Pseudo R-squared                   .3999                    .4080
Sources: NELS88 individual data and 1991-92 IPEDS college data.
Notes: Sample includes only those who attended college. Marginal effects are interpreted as the percentage by
which the probability favoring attendance at college j is affected with a one-unit increase in that variable. Monetary
amounts are in 1992 dollars. Tuition is defined as list tuition price net the student’s expected federal Pell Grant
(based on income). Student expenditures are defined as instruction, academic support and student services. FTE
Enrollment is for undergraduates in 1991. Low income is defined as a family income below $20,000 in 1991. High-
SAT is defined as scoring 1100 or above. The model also includes: cubic distance and FTE enrollment squared.



                                                                                                                   39
TABLE 3: Logistic Estimation of the College Enrollment Decision
Marginal Effect on the Probability of Enrollment (z-statistics in parentheses)
Dependent Variable: Attended Any College within Two Years of Graduation
                                    (1)                        (2)                               (3)
                           Closest Two-year           Closest Four-year             Predicted College Choice
                                                                                        Main           Two-Year
                            Public College             Public College
                                                                                        Effect         Interaction
 Tuition Price                    .0060                      -.0010                   -.0776**           .0355
    (per $1,000)                  (0.14)                     (0.02)                     (2.23)           (0.56)

 Tuition Squared                  -.0059                     -.0035                    .0085**
    (per $1,0002)                 (0.94)                     (0.62)                     (3.74)

 Distance                        -.4463**                    -.1186                   -.1930**           .3696
    (per 100 miles)                (3.88)                    (0.88)                     (2.08)           (1.35)

 Distance Squared                .0702**                     .0039                      .0060
    (per 1002 miles)              (2.57)                     (0.16)                     (1.34)

 Student SAT percentile          .0037**
    (per 10 pts)                  (3.14)

 Student %tile larger                                       -.1216**                  -.0908**
    (per 10 pts)                                              (4.55)                    (2.05)

 School %tile larger                                        -.0888**                  -.0425**
    (per 10 pts)                                              (6.15)                    (2.00)

 FTE Enrollment                   -.0080                     -.0117                     .0107            -.0096
    (per 1,000)                   (0.64)                     (1.46)                     (0.95)           (1.01)

 FTE Enrollment Squared           -.0003                     .0003                     -.0003
    (per 1,0002)                  (0.68)                     (1.46)                    (1.12)

 Public, Two-year                                                                     -.3179**
   Dummy                                                                                (2.50)

 County Unemployment              .0156                      .0150                      .0174
  Rate (1992)                     (1.50)                     (1.42)                     (1.63)
Pseudo R-squared                  5,661                      5,661                      5,661              ---
Observations                      .0479                      .0500                      .0522              ---
** Significant at the 5% level       * Significant at the 10% level
Sources: NELS88 individual data and 1991-92 IPEDS college data.
Notes: Marginal effects are interpreted as the percentage by which the probability favoring attendance at any college
is affected with a one-unit increase in that variable. Figures are in 1992 dollars. FTE Enrollment is for
undergraduates in 1991. All regressions include the following controls: gender, race (Black, Hispanic, Asian,
Native American), 1991 family income, parents’ education, private high school dummy, and a dummy for
completing the GED. The predicted college choice (specification 3) is determined by the conditional logistic model
in Table 2, specification 2. The predicted college choice is the closest public, two-year college for 14.1% and the
closest public, four-year college for 35.6% of the sample. Of the remaining colleges, 74.9 percent are public, four-
year colleges, 14.0 percent are public, two-year colleges, and 11.1 percent are private, four-year colleges.




                                                                                                                     40
TABLE 4: Comparing Actual to Predicted College Investments (means reported)
                                   Actual College Choices                           Predicted Choices
                                  Four-Year         Two-Year                    Four-Year         Two-Year
                                   Colleges          Colleges                    Colleges          Colleges
 A. The Whole Sample
    Attended or
                                    3,841             1,842                       3,829              1,857
    Predicted to Attend
    Number to Publics            2,547 (66%)       1,764 (96%)                 2,706 (71%)       1,749 (94%)
    List Tuition                    $5,863           $1,621                       $5,634            $2,030
    Distance (miles)                 231                89                         188                181
    Student Expenditures            $7,466           $3,388                       $7,422            $3,487
    SAT Percentile                  67.60               ---                       67.61               ---
 B. High-Ability Students (SAT ≥ 1100)
    Attended or
                                     966               109                         980                107
    Predicted to Attend
    Number to Publics             506 (52%)         107 (98%)                   539 (55%)         100 (93%)
    List Tuition                    $8,600           $1,563                       $8,484            $2,261
    Distance (miles)                 337               117                         311                344
    Student Expenditures           $10,492           $3,407                      $10,643            $3,749
    SAT Percentile                  79.79               ---                       78.17               ---
 C. Low-Income Students (family income below $20,000 in 1991)
    Attended or
                                     507               370                         542                373
    Predicted to Attend
    Number to Publics             377 (74%)         356 (96%)                   434 (80%)         352 (94%)
    List Tuition                    $4,335           $1,476                       $4,004            $1,970
    Distance (miles)                 181                86                         139                159
    Student Expenditures            $6,396           $3,445                       $6,315            $3,440
    SAT Percentile                  59.84               ---                       62.20               ---
Sources: NELS88 individual data and 1991-92 IPEDS college data.
Notes: Colleges were weighted by: (1) the relative odds of that person choosing that college (calculated from Table
2, specification 2), and (2) the individual likelihood of attendance (calculated from Table 3, specification 3).
Figures are in 1992 dollars. List tuition is the in-state price if the student attended high school in that state;
otherwise it is the out-of-state price. Student expenditures are funds for instruction, academic support and student
services.




                                                                                                                  41
TABLE 5: State Simulations – Predicted Choices as a Resident of each State (means reported)
                                  CALIFORNIA               ILLINOIS            NEBRASKA             MASSACHUSETTS
 State Subsidy Level                  High                 Medium                 Medium                      Low
 Public College Quality            Much variation        Some variation        Little variation         Little variation
 A. The Whole Sample
   Total Predicted to Attend            5,785                 5,692                 5,768                   5,731
   Four-year Colleges
      Predicted to Attend               3,377                 3,718                 4,367                   3,903
       Number to Publics            3,110 (92%)           2,529 (68%)           3,329 (76%)             2,293 (59%)
       List Tuition                    $2,826                $5,781                $4,065                  $8,252
       Student Expenditures            $9,244                $7,369                $5,759                  $8,085
       SAT Percentile                   68.74                 65.41                 60.22                   67.73
   Two-year Colleges
     Predicted to Attend               2,408                  1,974                 1,401                   1,828
       Number to Publics            2,367 (98%)           1,852 (94%)           1,339 (96%)             1,629 (89%)
       List Tuition                    $405                  $3,038                $2,194                  $3,199
 B. High-Ability Students (SAT ≥ 1100)
   Total Predicted to Attend       1,088                      1,079                 1,072                   1,111
   Four-year Colleges
     Predicted to Attend                 978                   967                   948                   1,025
       Number to Publics             880 (90%)             558 (58%)             605 (64%)               330 (32%)
       List Tuition                    $3,755                $7,946                $6,302                 $11,991
       Student Expenditures           $12,759               $10,448               $8,149                  $12,979
       SAT Percentile                   80.22                 75.04                 68.29                  80.86
   Two-year Colleges
     Predicted to Attend                110                   112                   124                      86
       Number to Publics             105 (96%)             104 (93%)             116 (93%)                75 (88%)
       List Tuition                    $670                 $3,132                $2,627                   $3,400
 C. Low-Income Students (Family income below $20,000 in 1991)
  Total Predicted to Attend       945                 918                            938                     934
   Four-year Colleges
     Predicted to Attend                525                   503                    676                     544
       Number to Publics             481 (92%)             367 (73%)             525 (78%)               380 (70%)
       List Tuition                   $2,721                $4,938                 $3,356                  $6,875
       Student Expenditures           $8,688                $6,838                 $5,240                  $6,870
       SAT Percentile                  67.38                 62.57                  57.72                   62.92
   Two-year Colleges
     Predicted to Attend                   420                     415                  262                       390
       Number to Publics               408 (97%)              391 (94%)              252 (96%)                350 (90%)
       List Tuition                       $545                   $3,080                $2,130                   $3,173
Sources: NELS88 individual data and 1991-92 IPEDS college data.
Notes: Colleges were weighted by: (1) the relative odds of that person choosing that college (calculated from Table
2, specification 2), and (2) the individual likelihood of attendance (calculated from Table 3, specification 3).
Figures are in 1992 dollars. List tuition is the in-state price if the student attended high school in that state;
otherwise it is the out-of-state price. Student expenditures are funds for instruction, academic support and student
services.



                                                                                                                     42
TABLE 6: Mean Voucher and Tuition Price under Different Aid Schemes
                               In-kind                  Voucher to                      Voucher to any              No State
                               Subsidy           In-State Public Colleges              In-State College             Support
    Voucher Details          Current system       2yr = 4yr      2yr = ½ 4yr        2yr = 4yr     2yr = ½ 4yr         None
                                  (1)                (2)             (3)               (4)            (5)              (6)
 A. Mean State Voucher
                                                    3,344          4,227              2,603         3,167
    Four-years Colleges          None                                                                                 None
                                                    (555)          (702)              (567)         (769)
                                                    3,344          2,114              2,603         1,583
    Two-years Colleges           None                                                                                 None
                                                    (555)          (351)              (567)         (384)
 B. Mean Tuition Price – Public Colleges
    Public Four-years
       Most, Highly, and         2,821              5,656          4,694              6,432         5,823             9,038
       Very Competitive         (1,100)            (3,280)        (3,225)            (3,280)       (3,262)           (3,281)
                                 2,291              3,341          2,491              4,073         3,517             6,672
       Competitive
                                 (814)             (2,278)        (2,252)            (2,389)       (2,444)           (2,271)
                                 1,982              2,346          1,546              2,988         2,415             5,774
       Less Competitive
                                 (790)             (1,621)        (1,616)            (1,747)       (1,830)           (1,566)
                                 2,720              2,280          1,718              3,081         2,728             5,447
       Noncompetitive
                                (1,326)            (1,601)        (1,510)            (1,777)       (1,797)           (1,605)
    Public Two-years
                                 1,260               419           1,067               759          1,478             3,041
       Noncompetitive
                                 (961)             (1,045)        (1,339)            (1,286)       (1,484)           (1,494)
 C. Mean Tuition Price – Private Colleges
    Private Four-years
       Most, Highly, and        13,161           Same as the     Same as the         10,727        10,223          Same as the
                                                   current         current                                            current
       Very Competitive         (3,686)          in-kind aid     in-kind aid
                                                                                     (3,816)       (3,868)         in-kind aid
                                 9,204              system          system            6,705         6,202             system
       Competitive                                  for all         for all                                           for all
                                (2,320)                                              (2,515)       (2,571)
                                                    private         private                                           private
                                 7,562             colleges        colleges           4,979         4,464            colleges
       Less Competitive
                                (2,356)                                              (2,594)       (2,684)
                                 5,714                                                3,063         2,519
       Noncompetitive
                                (2,391)                                              (2,517)       (2,497)
    Private Two-years
                                 6,164                                                3,727         4,692
       Noncompetitive
                                (2,161)                                              (2,254)       (2,216)
Source: 1991-92 IPEDS college data and college groupings from the Barron’s Profiles of American Colleges.
Notes: Figures are in 1992 dollars. Where applicable, the tuition price is adjusted for the loss of state appropriations
per FTE student minus any voucher. The voucher value was calculated as the total state appropriations for
nonspecialized colleges divided by the FTE number of students attending these colleges (for simulations 2 and 3,
only students attending public colleges were counted). In the simulations in which the four-year voucher is twice as
large as the two-year voucher (simulations 3 and 5), 70 percent of students are assumed to attend four-year schools.
Given the distribution of different types and levels of colleges across states with different levels of support, the
mean values do not reflect the simple subtraction of the voucher amount from the unsubsidized cost.




                                                                                                                     43
TABLE 7: Predicted College Investments under Different Aid Schemes
                                                     Voucher to any                  Voucher to any
                            In-kind Subsidy                                                                 No State Support
                                                 In-State Public College            In-State College
    Voucher Details         Current system     2yr = 4yr        2yr = ½ 4yr    2yr = 4yr      2yr = ½ 4yr        None
                                 (1)              (2)               (3)           (4)              (5)            (6)
A. The Whole Sample
  Total Enrollment                5,686          5,643            5,702          5,611          5,664            5,535
  Four-year Colleges
    Predicted to Enroll           3,829           3,370            3,749          3,396          3,766            3,414
    No. to Publics            2,706 (71%)     2,371 (70%)      2,778 (74%)    2,050 (60%)    2,321 (62%)      1,925 (56%)
    Tuition Price                $5,634          $5,723           $4,953         $5,840         $5,272           $7,956
    Expenditures                 $7,422          $6,814           $6,642         $6,802         $6,643           $7,245
    SAT percentile                67.61           64.95            64.52          64.61          64.07            66.22
  Two-year Colleges
    Predicted to Enroll           1,857           2,273            1,953          2,215          1,898            2,121
    No. to Publics            1,749 (94%)     2,161 (95%)      1,840 (94%)    2,033 (92%)    1,744 (92%)      1,943 (92%)
    Tuition Price                $2,030          $1,666           $2,095         $1,833         $2,332           $3,328
B. High-Ability Students (SAT ≥ 1100)
  Total Enrollment             1,087             1,085            1,083          1,084          1,084            1,096
  Four-year Colleges
    Predicted to Enroll            980            921             948            924             951              954
    No. to Publics             539 (55%)      503 (55%)        551 (58%)      455 (49%)       480 (50%)        431 (45%)
    Tuition Price                $8,484         $8,663          $7,938         $8,621          $8,125           $10,407
    Expenditures                $10,643         $9,915          $9,629         $9,973          $9,787           $10,688
    SAT percentile                78.17          75.44           74.87          75.44             75             77.17
  Two-year Colleges
    Predicted to Enroll           107            164              135            160             133              142
    No. to Publics             100 (93%)      154 (94%)        126 (93%)      146 (91%)       42 (31%)         129 (91%)
    Tuition Price                $2,261         $1,832           $228          $1,994          $2,494           $3,343
See the notes on the following page.




                                                                                                                               44
TABLE 7: Predicted College Investments under Different Aid Schemes – continued
C. Low-Income Students (Family income below $20,000 in 1991)
  Total Enrollment           915                 904                           912                    898               906                       864
  Four-year Colleges
    Predicted to Enroll            542                     500                529                    497               536                       446
    No. to Publics              434 (80%)              384 (77%)           417 (79%)              324 (65%)         354 (66%)                 268 (60%)
    Tuition Price                 $4,004                 $4,799             $4,455                 $4,804            $4,471                    $7,000
    Expenditures                 $6,315                 $5,764              $5,808                 $5,699            $5,701                    $6,069
    SAT percentile                 62.2                   59.71              59.87                  59.11             59.19                      60.3
  Two-year Colleges
    Predicted to Enroll            373                    404                 383                    401               370                       418
    No. to Publics              352 (94%)              379 (94%)           359 (94%)              363 (91%)         338 (91%)                 381 (91%)
    Tuition Price                 $1,970                 $2,902             $2,956                 $2,884            $3,019                    $3,806
Sources: NELS88 individual data and 1991-92 IPEDS college data.
Notes: Colleges were weighted by: (1) the relative odds of that person choosing that college (calculated from Table 2, specification 2), and (2) the individual
likelihood of attendance (calculated from Table 3, specification 3). Figures are in 1992 dollars. Where applicable, the tuition price is adjusted for the loss of
state appropriations per FTE student minus any voucher. The voucher value was calculated as the total state appropriations for nonspecialized colleges divided
by the FTE number of students attending these colleges (for simulations 2 and 3, only students attending public colleges were counted). In the simulations in
which the four-year voucher is twice as large as the two-year voucher (simulations 3 and 5), 70 percent of students are assumed to attend four-year schools.




                                                                                                                                                                45
