                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                              VERTICAL PRODUCTION NETWORKS
                                 IN MULTINATIONAL FIRMS

                                          Gordon H. Hanson
                                        Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr.
                                         Matthew J. Slaughter

                                           Working Paper 9723
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9723


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




For assistance with data we thank Bruce Blonigen, Fritz Foley, Jon Haveman, and James Rauch. For helpful
comments we thank David Belli, Lael Brainard, Fritz Foley, Ann Harrison, Jim Hines, Ned Howenstine, Tom
Hubbard, Jorg Mayer, Peter Merrill, Richard Sansing, Doug Staiger, Adrian Tschoegl, Obie Whichard,
William Zeile and conference and seminar participants at the American Economics Association, the
Brookings Institution and International Tax Policy Forum, Erasmus University, the Federal Reserve Board,
the London School of Economics, the National Bureau of Economic Research, Stanford University, the U.S.
Bureau of Economic Analysis, University of Chicago Graduate School of Business, the Wharton School, and
Yale University. For financial support Hanson and Slaughter gratefully acknowledge the National Science
Foundation. Views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect those of the
Bureau of Economic Analysis. The statistical analysis of firm-level data on U.S. multinational companies
reported in this study was conducted at the International Investment Division, U.S. Bureau of Economic
Analysis, under arrangements that maintained legal confidentiality requirements. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Gordon H. Hanson, Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Vertical Production Networks in Multinational Firms
Gordon H. Hanson, Raymond J. Mataloni, and Matthew J. Slaughter
NBER Working Paper No. 9723
May 2003
JEL No. F2, F1, L1

                                           ABSTRACT

In recent decades, growth of overall world trade has been driven in large part by the rapid growth
of trade in intermediate inputs. Much of this input trade involves multinational firms locating input
processing in their foreign affiliates, thereby creating global vertical production networks. In this

paper, we use firm-level data on U.S. multinationals to examine trade in intermediate inputs for
further processing between parent firms and their foreign affiliates. We estimate affiliate demand

for imported inputs as a function of host-country and industry trade costs, factor prices, and other
variables. Among our main findings are that demand for imported inputs is higher when affiliates
face lower trade costs, lower wages for less-skilled labor (both in absolute terms and relative to
wages for more-skilled labor), and lower corporate income tax rates. These results contrast with

many findings in previous research.


Gordon H. Hanson                                      Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr.
IR/PS                                                 U.S. Department of Commerce
University of California, San Diego                   Bureau of Economic Analysis
9500 Gilman Drive                                     Mail Stop: BE-50
La Jolla, CA 92093-0519                               1441 L Street, NW
and NBER                                              Washington, DC 20230
gohanson@ucsd.edu                                     raymond.mataloni@bea.gov


Matthew J. Slaughter
Tuck School of Business
Dartmouth College
100 Tuck Hall
Hanover, NH 03755
and NBER
matthew.slaughter@dartmouth.edu
1. Introduction

    History has seen multiple waves of “globalization.” On many measures, recent decades

constitute another such wave. All waves are not the same, however. Two novel features of the

current process of globalization are increased trade in intermediate inputs and increased flows of

foreign direct investment (FDI).

    Intermediate inputs play an important role in the recent growth of world trade. Yeats (2001)

finds that trade in inputs has grown much faster than trade in final goods, and he estimates that

intermediates now account for 30% of world trade in manufactures.1 Hummels, Ishii, and Yi

(2001) identify vertical specialization, which they define as production arrangements in which

firms make final goods via multiple stages located in multiple countries, as an important aspect

of overall input trade.2 They calculate that from 1970 to 1990, the increase in exports associated

with vertical specialization accounted for one-third of world export growth. During the early

20th century, in contrast, inputs played only a small role in U.S. trade (Feenstra, 1998).

    As for FDI, the rising share of multinational enterprises in overall production helps

distinguish the current phase of globalization from previous episodes (Bordo, Eichengreen, and

Irwin, 1999). Multinationals now mediate a large fraction of world trade. In the United States,

they account for over half of total exports (Slaughter, 2000). Within manufacturing, the majority

of these exports are of intermediates. In 1999, 93% of exports by U.S. parent firms to their

foreign manufacturing affiliates were inputs for further processing (U.S. BEA, 2002).

    Parent-to-affiliate input trade is one element of what we shall call vertical production

networks in multinationals. The term “vertical” captures two key features of these networks: (i)

within these firms the parent and each affiliate performs a narrow rather than broad range of


1 See also Campa and Goldberg (1997).




                                                  1
production activities and (ii) the parent and its affiliates are linked by intra-firm flows of inputs

and outputs. In the jargon of trade theory, vertical production networks are a form of “vertical

FDI” through which multinationals spread across different locations the different activities that

they perform, such as R&D, input production, and input processing.

    To fix ideas on vertical production networks, consider the well-known example of

automobile production in North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) countries. Canadian

and Mexican auto plants have extensive intra-firm links with their U.S. counterparts, mediated

by large flows of inputs across borders. It is estimated that every day $250 million in autos and

auto parts crosses the Ambassador Bridge that connects Detroit, Michigan with Windsor,

Ontario. When the U.S. government closed this bridge and other entry points after the terrorist

attacks of September 11, 2001, several NAFTA auto plants had to shut down within 48 hours

because of input shortages (Council on Foreign Relations, 2002).

    The extent of vertical production networks, however, varies across both countries and

industries. In Brazil, which is protected by common external tariffs under the Common Market

of the Southern Cone (Mercosur), multinational auto manufacturers tend to set up integrated

production facilities that engage in relatively little international trade with their parent firms or

with other affiliates of the same parent (Hanson, 2001). In many countries, other industries, such

as chemicals and non-metallic minerals, also exhibit high degrees of integration.

    What accounts for this variation? Theories we discuss below offer several explanations for

vertical production networks, including cross-country and/or cross-industry differences in trade

costs, factor prices, and the technological separability of production. While there is anecdotal

evidence to support these theories, little work goes beyond documenting broad facts to provide a


2 This phenomenon has been given various names, including de-localization, disintegration of production, fragmentation, global
production sharing, foreign outsourcing, and slicing up the value chain. See Feenstra and Hanson (2002) for a discussion.


                                                              2
theoretically informed, micro-level empirical analysis of the importance of these explanations.

In this paper we provide such an analysis using firm-level data on U.S. multinationals.

    These data come from legally mandated confidential surveys conducted by the U.S. Bureau

of Economic Analysis (BEA) of all U.S. multinationals. For majority-owned foreign affiliates in

manufacturing in 1994, we have a direct measure of input flows associated with vertical

production networks: imports from U.S. parent firms (and other U.S. entities) of intermediate

inputs for further processing.3 We use a standard cost-minimization framework to derive the

demand for imported inputs by foreign affiliates, and we then estimate the sensitivity of this

demand to host-country/industry trade costs, factor prices, taxes, and other variables suggested

by theory. Our estimation combines data from the BEA surveys with data from outside sources

on host-country policies and characteristics. Having comprehensive data on the foreign activities

of U.S. multinationals allows us to address several important estimation issues, such as the

absence of data on transaction prices between parent firms and their affiliates.

    Our empirical analysis yields a number of results on the determinants of vertical production

networks in multinational firms.                 One is that imports of intermediate inputs are strongly

negatively correlated with trade costs facing affiliates. Our preferred estimates, which appear

robust to a range of estimation choices, imply an elasticity well over unity: a 1% fall in trade

costs leads to a 2%-4% increase in the quantity of imported intermediate inputs for further

processing. This responsiveness of vertical production networks to trade costs appears consistent

with recent theoretical work (e.g., Yi, 2003) in which small changes in tariffs produce large

changes in input trade. Previous empirical work on multinationals (e.g., Carr, Markusen, and



3 We examine one component of vertical production networks:           the processing by foreign affiliates of intermediate inputs
imported from their U.S. parents. Unfortunately, the BEA data do not track production networks involving arm’s-length inter-
firm transactions. We do not observe processing trade between U.S. parents and foreign entities that they do not own. Thus, our
data are not well suited to consider questions of optimal firm boundaries.


                                                               3
Maskus, 2001), finds that the scale of foreign-affiliate operations is greater the higher are host-

country tariffs and transportation costs. These results have been interpreted to mean that higher

trade costs encourage FDI. When a multinational intends to sell goods in a particular foreign

market, higher trade costs may indeed encourage locating production in that market. But our

results suggest that when multinationals serve various foreign markets via vertical production

networks, higher trade costs may deter FDI instead.

   A second finding is that vertical production networks are sensitive to labor costs. Imported-

input demand is decreasing in host-country wages for less-skilled workers and increasing in host-

country wages for more-skilled workers. Here again, our results contrast with previous empirical

literature (e.g., Brainard, 1997), which tends to find that, if anything, U.S. firms prefer to locate

in high-wage countries.     We find that foreign affiliates do more processing of imports in

countries with relatively cheap less-skilled labor.

   A third finding is that vertical production networks also depend on other host-country

policies and characteristics. Imported-input demand is higher in host countries with export-

processing zones, and is decreasing in host-country market size and corporate tax rates. While

many studies document how taxes affect aggregate FDI (Hines, 2001), there is little work on

how taxes or other host-countries policies affect the composition of FDI.

   Our paper has four additional sections. In section 2 we discuss related research. In section 3

we present our empirical framework. In section 4 we discuss the data and present summary

statistics. In section 5 we report our estimation results. And in section 6 we conclude.


2. Related Research

   Our work is relevant to several bodies of literature on trade in intermediate inputs and

multinational enterprises. The first is research on the impact of declining trade barriers. Many



                                                  4
studies conjecture that falling trade costs contribute to vertical production networks. In an

important recent paper, Yi (2003) argues that standard models of trade in final goods cannot

account for how the modest observed declines in trade barriers could have produced the dramatic

observed growth in world trade. Yi shows theoretically how trade in inputs allows declining

trade barriers to trigger magnified decreases in production costs and thus dramatic increases in

total trade flows. We examine (and find support for) this hypothesis by estimating the sensitivity

of demand for imported intermediate inputs to trade costs.

    The second body of literature to which our paper relates is empirical work on theories of

multinational firms. Theory tends to view multinationals as the result of either horizontal

expansion (in which firms save on trade costs associated with exporting by setting up foreign

facilities whose range of production activities mirrors the operations they perform at home) or

vertical expansion (in which firms fragment different production stages across different countries

to arbitrage international differences in factor prices).4 Casual evidence suggests that horizontal

FDI is the dominant strategy of U.S. multinationals. In 1998, OECD countries accounted for

76.6% of sales by affiliates of U.S. firms (Hanson, et al, 2001), giving the impression that market

size (and not wage levels) is the host-country feature U.S. multinationals care most about.

    Several recent studies test theories of FDI rigorously by using aggregate data on the total

sales of U.S. foreign affiliates by country (or by country and industry). 5 Most studies find that

affiliate sales are higher in larger countries and in countries with higher tariffs and transport costs

on U.S. goods, but not in countries with larger skill differences relative to the United States.

These results are interpreted as evidence in favor of horizontal FDI and against vertical FDI.


4 On the former, see Markusen (2002) and Markusen and Venables (2000). On the latter, see Helpman (1984), Helpman and
Krugman (1985), and Yeaple (2001). Ekholm, Forslid, and Markusen (2003) model “export platform” FDI, in which most
affiliate output is exported out of the host country, an affiliate activity that shares both horizontal and vertical features.




                                                              5
    In our work, we do not treat horizontal and vertical FDI as mutually exclusive options. The

same U.S. multinational might choose to operate in France an integrated plant to produce for the

domestic market and might also choose to operate in China a specialized factory to assemble

components manufactured by the U.S. parent. The French affiliate would be the result of

horizontal FDI, the Chinese affiliate vertical FDI. Having firm-level data allows us to examine

the factors that determine where different affiliates fall in a continuum with pure horizontal FDI

at one extreme and pure vertical FDI at the other extreme. This goes beyond previous research

by addressing the factors that shape the composition of production inside affiliates.

    Existing work most closely related to ours includes Feinberg and Keane (2001), who

examine the determinants of bilateral trade between U.S. parents and their Canadian affiliates

over the period 1983-1992. They find that affiliate total imports from U.S. parents have little

association with Canadian tariffs, though in the reverse direction they find that parent imports

from Canadian affiliates negatively vary with Canadian tariffs. They also find that import flows

have no correlation with Canadian or U.S. wages. Our work differs from theirs by focusing on

trade in intermediate inputs, rather than total trade, and by analyzing affiliates worldwide, rather

than just in Canada. Their finding of no wage impacts on parent-affiliate trade, for example,

might simply reflect small Canadian-U.S. wage differences. In support of this idea, Hanson,

Mataloni, and Slaughter (2001) and Borga and Zeile (2002) find that foreign affiliates of U.S.

multinationals engage in relatively more intra-firm trade in low-wage countries.6

    Other bodies of literature to which our work relates includes studies on the labor-market

consequences of foreign outsourcing (see the survey in Feenstra and Hanson, 2002), empirical


5 See Brainard (1997); Markusen and Maskus (1999); Blonigen, Davies, and Head (2002); and Helpman, Melitz, and Yeaple
(2003). Yeaple (2001) finds the impact of host-country education on affiliate sales to be weaker for less-skill-intensive
industries, suggesting that multinationals in these industries prefer less-skill-abundant countries.




                                                           6
studies on the magnitude of spillovers associated with FDI (e.g., Haskel, Pereira, and Slaughter,

2001), and recent theoretical work on how trade costs shape ownership and outsourcing

decisions in multinational firms (Grossman and Helpman, 2002a,b).


3. An Empirical Model

    In this section, we develop an empirical framework for how U.S. multinationals organize the

operations of their foreign affiliates. Consistent with our data, we focus on affiliate operations at

a given point in time (see note 7). We assume that U.S. parent firms have previously chosen in

which countries to locate affiliates. The remaining decision is over which production activities

affiliates should perform. For simplicity, consider two production stages: input manufacturing

and input processing. Input manufacturing often involves producing sophisticated componentry,

and so is likely to be relatively skill and capital intensive. Input processing often is limited to

assembly, and so is likely to be relatively labor intensive.

    Consider two alternative strategies for FDI. A vertical production network would have

foreign affiliates import inputs from their U.S. parents, process these inputs into final products,

and then ship these processed inputs on to destination markets. By locating labor-intensive input

processing abroad and capital-intensive input production in the United States, this strategy could

allow the multinational to take advantage of international differences in factor prices. But

shipping inputs between countries results in high transport costs. An alternative strategy would

have foreign affiliates both produce and process inputs. In this case, the firm replicates abroad

the production activities of the U.S. parent. This strategy minimizes transport costs, since there

is no need for affiliates to import inputs, but it also prevents the multinational from taking full


6 For related evidence, see Kumar (1994) and Barba Navaretti, Haaland, and Venables (2002). Again using aggregated data,
Shatz (2000) and Markusen and Maskus (2001) study the exporting behavior of U.S. multinationals.




                                                           7
advantage of factor-price differences across countries. In reality, firms may choose a strategy

between the two extremes just described, with this choice depending on trade costs, labor costs,

and on other host-country and industry characteristics.



3.1 Empirical Specification

     Consider a foreign affiliate of a U.S. parent firm. Let the cost function for the affiliate be

C(w, Y). Here, Y represents affiliate total output and w is a vector of factor prices facing the

affiliate, including wage rates for labor used in input production, wage rates for labor used in

input processing, the rental price of capital, the price of manufacturing inputs imported from the

parent, and the price of services imported from the parent.

     There are two items to note about this cost structure. The first is its static nature. This

follows from our data being a cross-section and not a panel of affiliates.7 The second is that we

assume the affiliate cost function is separable from that of the U.S. parent. This allows us to

examine activity choices of affiliates in isolation, and is appropriate so long as input production

and input processing are technologically separable activities and affiliates face output prices set

on the world market. In the estimation, we allow for the possibility that within a multi-affiliate

firm, the same affiliates of a given U.S. parent use similar production technology and face

common prices for inputs or services imported from the parent.

     To derive an estimating equation, we need to select a functional form for costs. A convenient

choice is the translog form, which Diewert (1974) introduced and Kohli (1978, 1991) used

initially in the international-trade literature. In our case, this function can be written as


7 Data on input trade between affiliates and their U.S. parents do exist for a few other BEA “benchmark” years (e.g., 1989). We
have not added these years to our sample because for earlier years we lack corresponding non-BEA data on key regression
variables. Adding additional years would probably not greatly enhance the estimation. Over short to medium time horizons, the
primary variation in key variables including wages, tariffs, and tax rates is across countries and not time. Having additional years
of data would allow us to control for affiliate fixed effects, but this would come at the potential cost of losing much of the



                                                                 8
                                         H                         H H
                                                              1
                       ln C = α 0 +     ∑ α h ln w h +        2   ∑ ∑ γ hj ln w h ln w j
                                       h =1                       h =1j =1
                                                                                                                       (1)
                                                                        H
                                                 1
                                 + β y ln Y +      β ln Y 2         + ∑ φ hy ln w h ln Y
                                                 2 yy
                                                                       h =1

where wh denotes the prices of the optimally chosen variable inputs h=1,…,H.

    The usefulness of the translog function becomes evident when we compute first derivatives,

∂lnC/∂lnwh = (∂C/∂wh)(wh/C). By Shepard’s Lemma, ∂C/∂wh equals the demand for input h. It

follows that (∂C/∂wh)(wh/C), the elasticity of total cost with respect to price h, equals the share of

factor h in total costs, which we denote by the cost-share sh. Differentiating equation (1) with

respect to lnwh yields the following expression,

                                                       H
                                        s = α h + ∑ γ hj ln w j + φ hy ln Y ,
                                         h
                                                                                                                       (2)
                                                       j =1

for h=1,…,H.8 The expression in (2) relates the demand for input h, measured as its share in

total costs, to prices of variable inputs and the level of output.

    These cost shares are the basis for our empirical work. We estimate the cost-share equation

for the key input of imported intermediates for further processing, and we denote the share of

imported intermediate inputs in total costs by sm.9 We interpret affiliates with higher values of

sm to be affiliates that are more specialized in the activity of processing parent-produced inputs.



systematic variation in our regressors. Even with just a single year of data, we are able to control for parent-by-industry fixed
effects. This, as we discuss, allows us to address what appear to be the more important estimation issues—e.g., measuring prices.
8 In the event there are constant returns to scale, φ =0. We find evidence consistent with affiliate technology being constant
                                                       hy
returns. That affiliates exhibit constant returns in no way implies that parents do as well (given the importance of R&D and other
fixed costs in parent operations, we expect their technology to exhibit increasing returns).
9 Given data limitations, we cannot estimate cost shares for other inputs. BEA data only report aggregate employment of capital
and labor for an affiliate. When an affiliate, say, hires labor we do not know whether it is to produce inputs, process inputs, or
both. By estimating a single cost-share equation, we cannot impose cross-equation parameter restrictions implied by the
symmetry of cross-price derivatives and by the fact that the cost shares sum to one.


                                                                   9
Accordingly, we interpret our estimates of the sm equation to inform about the determinants of

vertical production networks in multinational firms.10

     Given our definition of sm, an estimating equation for affiliate a in industry i belonging to

U.S. parent p and located in host-country c is,


  m                                                                                     hq
s aipc = α ip + γ ms ln w sc + γ mu ln w cu + γ mk ln raipc + γ mm ln p ipc
                                                                        m
                                                                            + γ mo ln p ipc                     m
                                                                                            + φ my ln Yaipc + ε aipc
                                                                                                       (3)


where α ip is a parent- and industry-specific constant term; w sc is the price of skilled labor in

country c; w cu is the price of unskilled labor in c; raipc is the affiliate’s rental price of capital; p ipc
                                                                                                          m



    hq
( p ipc ) is the price of intermediate inputs (headquarter services) imported from parent p in

industry i and country c; Yaipc is affiliate output; and ε aipc
                                                           m
                                                                is a disturbance term.

     After estimating equation (3) it is straightforward to calculate the cross- and own-price

elasticities of factor demand.                The own-price elasticity of demand for factor m, imported

intermediate inputs, is given by,

                                                       γ mm + s m (s m − 1)
                                         PED mm      =                                                                       (4)
                                                               sm

where γ mm is a parameter to be estimated and s m is calculated at the mean for the regression

sample. The cross-price elasticity of demand between inputs m and h is given by,

                                                           γ mh + s m s h
                                              PED mh =                                                                       (5)
                                                                sm




10 Strictly speaking, our interpretation of sm requires the assumption that affiliates all sell the same output in terms of the location
on the value-added chain. Otherwise, differences in cost shares could reflect differences in affiliate location along the chain of
production, independent of the range of activities affiliates perform. The BEA data contain no such information on output stages,
as is the case for many similar micro-level data sets. See Adelman (1955) for a discussion of these measurement issues.


                                                                  10
An advantage of the translog framework is that it does not impose restrictions on the pair-wise

elasticities of substitution between inputs (as do Cobb-Douglas or CES).



3.2 Estimation Issues

                                                                                              m
    Several important estimation issues merit attention. One is that we do not have data on p ipc

     hq
or p ipc , the transaction prices that affiliates pay for inputs and services they import from their

parents. This limitation is hardly surprising. There is little price data for trade flows anywhere,

let alone for individual businesses operating in hundreds of countries and industries. We can

address this problem by exploiting the structure of the BEA data; specifically, the fact that most

foreign affiliates share a U.S. parent with at least one other affiliate.

                   m
    Suppose that p ipc can be expressed in log terms as the sum of two parts: the f.o.b. price in the

                                                                                      m
United States for that import, and a host-country wedge between that U.S. price and p ipc that is

due to trade costs. For example, a U.S. parent that manufactures electrical appliances may obtain

tungsten in the United States for all its light-bulb affiliates abroad, but different affiliates may

pay different prices based on the trade costs they face. In our analysis, we model this price

                                                                               m
wedge as the sum of import tariffs and transport costs, allowing us to write p ipc as,

                                     m          m
                                ln p ipc = ln p ip + ln(1 + τ ic + f ic )                       (6)

where p ipm is the f.o.b. price of the input in the United States, τic is the ad valorem tariff rate that

country c levies on imports in industry i, and fic is the ad valorem freight rate on imports from

the United States in country c for industry i.

    We have data on trade costs but not on p ipm . We do, however, observe the activities of

multiple affiliates that operate in the same industry and that share the same parent. If the parent


                                                     11
charges its affiliates in the same industry the same f.o.b. price for inputs, then trade costs will be

                                  m
the only source of variation in p ipc across affiliates in the same industry belonging to the same

                              m
parent. We can then measure p ipc in two parts: (a) a full set of parent-by-industry dummy

           ~ =α +γ
variables, α               m
             ip ip mm ln p ip , which captures industry-and-parent specific technology, αip,


and the unobservable f.o.b. price, p ipm ; and (b) host-country trade costs, which we measure using

data on host-country and industry tariffs, non-tariff barriers, and freight rates.11

    Allowing for parent-by-industry fixed effects, rather than just parent effects, allows for the

fact that many multinationals are multi-product firms whose affiliates span diverse industries.

Thus, a parent firm’s light-bulb affiliates can face different imported-input prices from its

refrigerator affiliates. These parent-by-industry controls also address differences in the extent of

vertical production networks due to technological primitives or firm business practices (e.g.,

networks may be less feasible in food industries with highly perishable inputs).

                                                                                      hq
    By the same logic, we also control for unobservable headquarter-service prices, p ipc . The

                             ~ , capture any unobserved components of service prices that
parent-by-industry controls, α ip

parents charge to all affiliates in the same industry; measures of trade costs capture country-

and/or industry-specific components.                  Affiliates may import from parents a wide range of

headquarter services, such as use of patents, copyrights, and trademarks, analysis of market

conditions, or advice about management strategy.                         Parents may receive payment for these

services through either fees or repatriated earnings. The price parents charge may vary across

affiliates due to transport costs (e.g., more-remote affiliates may be more costly to service), in a

manner similar to imported manufacturing inputs. This price may also vary across affiliates due


11 In host countries, multinationals are sometimes accused of attempting to influence trade policy to their advantage. Given this



                                                              12
to host-country corporate income taxes (e.g., higher tax rates may make repatriated earnings less

attractive), and so we include this variable as a regressor.

                                             m         hq
     An important aspect of measuring both p ipc and p ipc is transfer pricing. It is commonly

asserted that multinationals price intra-firm transactions such that firm-wide pre-tax profits

accrue to affiliates in low-tax jurisdictions.12 We have no direct data on transfer pricing, but our

               m         hq
treatment of p ipc and p ipc summarized in (6) should control for at least some of any unobservable

transfer-pricing motives. The parent-by-industry controls capture differences in the average

propensity to transfer price across U.S. parents, which may result from variation in their global

foreign-tax-credit status with the Internal Revenue Service. And the inclusion of corporate

income tax rates controls for transfer-pricing motivations that vary across host-countries.

     A second estimation issue is that we do not observe prices for any intermediate inputs that

affiliates may purchase locally. In principle, the price for local inputs should be an additional

regressor in equation (3). In practice, these prices may be well captured by our just-discussed

               m         hq
measures for p ipc and p ipc . If local input prices are set on the world market, and so equal to

world input prices plus trade costs, then including as regressors parent-by-industry dummy

variables and trade costs controls for their presence.

     A third estimation issue involves the regressand.                           In our data, the dependent variable

  m
s aipc takes a value of zero for many affiliates. This may be due to the technological infeasibility

of separating input production and processing, which would result in an affiliate strategy of

integrating both activities. One approach to this problem would be to include in (3) measures of

the technological separability of production as regressors and then estimate (3) as a Tobit.


possibility, in the estimation we allow for the possible endogeneity of host-country industry tariffs.




                                                                 13
Below, we experiment with one possible industry-level proxy. The parent-by-industry dummy

variables could also proxy for these measures, but the presence of a large number of unobserved

fixed effects complicates use of the Tobit. With few observations per indicator variable category

(i.e., small numbers of affiliates of the same parent firm and in the same industry), there is the

risk that Tobit estimates of parameter coefficients would be inconsistent (Wooldridge, 2002).

    Instead, we address zero observations in the dependent variable in two ways. First, we drop

from the sample affiliates in industries in which imports of inputs for further processing are

rare.13 The excluded industries—e.g., food processing, pulp and paper, newspapers, soap and

cleansers—appear to be primarily ones in which either there is a single stage of production or

technology or transport costs make it prohibitively expensive to geographically separate input

production and input processing. Second, we check the consistency of our OLS estimates of (3)

by using a Tobit with a more-aggregate set of indicator variable categories. Fewer parent-

industry combinations increase the observations per category and thus improve consistency.

    A fourth estimation issue is how to measure wages. In equation (3) wages are assumed to

vary only across countries. This would be the case if affiliates are price-takers in labor markets

and if labor markets are national in scope. In practice, wages may vary across other dimensions

as well. For instance, wages may vary by industry, consistent with evidence on inter-industry

wage differentials, and particular multinationals may offer wage premia to attract more able

workers.      In the empirical analysis, we use as a baseline wages at the country level and

experiment with measures at the industry or affiliate level.

    A final estimation issue is that there may be country-level policies and characteristics that

influence how foreign affiliates organize their activities. To control for this possibility, we


12 See Sansing (1999) for an overview of U.S. tax code regarding multinational transfer pricing and for a theoretical analysis of
transfer-pricing rules. For empirical evidence on transfer pricing, see Clausing (2001) and Grubert and Mutti (1991).



                                                              14
include as additional regressors measures of host-country investment and exchange-rate policies

and of the quality of its financial, legal, and political institutions.



3.3 Summary of Estimation Strategy

     To summarize our estimation strategy, our goal is to explain the variation in imported

intermediate inputs across foreign affiliates that are in the same industry and that share the same

U.S. parent. In controlling for parent-by-industry fixed effects, we identify the responsiveness of

processing imported inputs to trade costs, wages, tax rates, and other factors by exploiting the

cross-country variation in these variables. Our baseline estimating equation is:

                      m
                    s aipc  ~ + γ ln w s + γ ln w u + γ ln r + γ ln(1 + τ + f )
                           =α ip ms    c    mu    c    mk   aipc mm      ic  ic

                                                                                                               (7)
                                  + γ mt ln(1 − t c ) + φ my ln Yaipc + βX ic + ε aipc
                                                                                  m




where, among the new variables relative to (3), τic is the host-country industry ad valorem tariff

rate; fic is the host-country industry ad valorem freight rate; tc is the host-country corporate tax

rate; and Xic are measures of other host-country and/or industry policies and characteristics.

Coefficient estimates from (7) will thus provide insight about the determinants of vertical

production networks in multinational firms.



4. Data Description and Summary Statistics
4.1 Data Sources

     The primary data for this project are for the operations of U.S. multinationals, both of their

U.S.-based parents and their foreign affiliates, as collected by the BEA in legally mandated

confidential surveys. An appendix describes in detail these and related non-BEA data.



13 The cutoff we apply is an industry mean of imported inputs for further processing as a share of total sales of greater than 5%.



                                                                15
    We use BEA data from its 1994 “benchmark” survey, which covers the entire population of

U.S. multinationals in that year. Less data are collected for minority-owned affiliates, so we use

the population of majority-owned affiliates in manufacturing, of which there were 6,955 in 1994

(out of 8,014 total manufacturing affiliates linked to 1,456 U.S. parent enterprises). This group

of majority-owned affiliates spanned 54 manufacturing industries and 105 host countries; the

related group of parents has a median of four affiliates (with a maximum of 146). Each affiliate

is classified in a single industry of primary business based on the distribution of its sales across

industries. Controlling for parent-industry fixed effects require us to exclude from the sample

any affiliates that are the sole affiliate of a parent/industry.

                                                                          m
    For our regression analysis in equation (7), the dependent variable s aipc is the share in total

affiliate costs of imports for further processing from the United States (either from the U.S.

parent or from another U.S. entity).14 Total economic costs are proxied by total accounting

revenues plus inventory changes. We use two affiliate-level regressors: the capital rental rate

and output. Rental rates are defined in the appendix. Total output is measured as BEA gross

output (i.e., value added).

    Turning to other regressors, we do not observe the true marginal prices for labor w cu and w sc

facing each affiliate. We approximate marginal prices using wage unit values (compensation

divided by employment) constructed from the United Nations’ Industrial Statistics Database. As

discussed in Section 3.2, for robustness we also try other wage measures.

    Our primary trade-cost measures are tariffs, non-tariff barriers (NTBs), and transportation

costs; all are bilateral for the host country vis a vis the United States and all vary by country and


14 The BEA tracks imported inputs from both from U.S. parents and from non-parent U.S. entities. Approximately 90-95% of
imports from the United States by foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals are from parent firms. Even where affiliate imports




                                                             16
industry. Tariffs and NTBs come from the United Nations’ TRAINS (Trade Analysis and

Information System) database; transportation costs were generated from data files in Feenstra

(1996). Tariffs and transport costs are ad valorem measures; NTB presence or absence is a

categorical measure. Adjacency to the United States is an additional proxy for trade barriers.15

    The remaining regressors capture additional host-country or industry policies and

characteristics.      From the University of Michigan World Tax Database, we have statutory

corporate income tax rates that measure maximum marginal tax rates facing these businesses.

To measure market size in the host-country, we use Hanson and Xiang’s (2002) measure of

market potential: national GDP plus a distance-weighted sum of GDP in neighboring countries.

We include an indicator variable for English as the primary language. We also include several

policy-related regressors: an indicator for the presence of export-processing zones (EPZs) and

the value-added tax rate, both from PricewaterhouseCoopers; an indicator for whether the host

country fixes the value of its currency to the U.S. dollar, from Shambaugh (2002); and measures

of “economic freedom” and of “FDI openness,” both from the Heritage Foundation and Wall

Street Journal. Finally, we include materials purchases as a share of shipments in the United

States for the affiliate’s industry. This share may reflect the technological feasibility of an

industry to organize its constituent activities into global production networks.

    For the sample used to estimate our initial specifications of equation (7), Table 1 reports

summary statistics for our regressand and several regressors. Relative to the full population of

6,955 majority-owned affiliates in manufacturing, our baseline sample is smaller due to missing

host-country data. This baseline sample spans 39 industries (and is linked with 632 U.S. parents,



come from an entity other than the parent, the parent may still have arranged the transaction. As we discuss later, estimation
results from using just imports from parents are nearly identical to those we report.
15 In unreported results, we included distance from the United States to the host-country as a regressor. After controlling for
transportation costs and adjacency to the United States, distance was insignificant in most specifications.


                                                             17
leading to 777 parent-industry effects) across 42 host countries. For the average affiliate in our

sample, 11% of its total costs are accounted for by imports of intermediate inputs for further

processing. Average host-country/industry import tariff and freight rates are each about 5% (and

these two variables have a sample correlation of 0.22). The mean less-skilled wage is just over

half the value of the average more-skilled wage.



4.2 Preliminary Evidence

   Before showing regression results, Table 2 first shows patterns of vertical production

networks by broad industry and country groups in our data. Each cell of this table reports the

mean share of imported inputs for further processing as a share of total revenues.

   Input processing is most prominent in regions that have low trade costs and/or low labor

costs vis a vis the United States. Mexico is the most obvious example. It is a low-wage country,

and in 1994 it benefited not just from adjacency to the United States but from the start of lower

trade barriers in the NAFTA. Canada is another example. While a high-wage country, it has

even lower trade costs than Mexico. Canada’s major production centers are located quite near

industrial regions of the United States, and the Canadian-American Free Trade Agreement was

signed in 1989. Input processing is also relatively common in East Asia. While distant from the

United States, the region has moderate labor costs and open markets, at least in certain industries

such as electronics. Consistent with theory, poor candidates for input processing include regions

with high labor costs and moderate to high trade costs (OECD Europe, OECD Asia) and regions

with relatively closed markets (Other Latin America, with the Mercosur countries of Argentina

and Brazil; Other Asia, with India, Africa, and the Middle East).

   Apart from regional patterns, certain industries appear to be good candidates for input

processing. These include machinery, transportation equipment, and electronics, of which the


                                                18
largest sub-industry is computers. Several common features of these industries may make them

amenable to global outsourcing. One is that production tends to involve distinct stages—design,

component production, final assembly—that are physically separable. Firms need not perform

these tasks in the same location, and so can locate different stages in different countries. Another

feature is that these production stages exhibit different factor intensities, with design activities

and component production being more skill-intensive and assembly activities being more labor-

intensive. To the extent that factor costs vary across countries, firms may have an incentive to

locate labor-intensive activities in labor-abundant countries.16

    In Section 1, we pointed out that the BEA does not track links in multinationals’ vertical

production networks other than affiliate imports of inputs for further processing from U.S.

entities. In particular, BEA data do not measure affiliate exports of processed inputs to other

affiliates or to their U.S. parent. Instead, the BEA reports only total affiliate exports. But if

affiliates are exporting mainly processed intermediates, then our examination of affiliate

imported inputs may be augmented by studying affiliate exports as well.

    Table 3 offers some initial evidence on the export patterns of U.S. foreign affiliates.

Constructed analogous to Table 2, each cell of this table reports affiliate exports to the United

States as a share of total revenues. The pattern of export intensity across regions and industries

is very similar to the pattern of imported-input intensity in the previous table. Export intensity is

higher in countries with low trade costs and/or low wages relative to the United States. For our

sample of affiliates, the correlation between affiliate imports of intermediate inputs from the U.S.

as a share of revenue and affiliate exports to the U.S. as a share of revenue is 0.59. Again, Table

3 measures total affiliate exports, not just affiliate exports of processed intermediate inputs, and


16 Note that Table 2 broadly accords with the introductory examples in Section 1 of vertical production networks. For example,
Canadian and Mexican affiliates in transportation products have nearly half of their total sales accounted for imported



                                                             19
so may be a noisy measure of trade flows within U.S. multinationals’ vertical production

networks. Still, the strong patterns of similarity between Tables 2 and 3 suggest that affiliates

that are more oriented towards processing imported inputs are also more oriented towards

production for export, as we would expect for affiliates that were part of such networks.

     In the regression analysis, to which we turn next, we aim to uncover which factors drive the

cross-affiliate variation just documented. The micro-data permit us to control for variation in the

extent to which each parent chooses to operate vertical production networks.



5. Estimation Results
5.1 Main Results for Imported-Input Demand

     Table 4 reports our baseline OLS estimates of equation (7). The dependent variable is

imports for further processing as a share of affiliate revenues. Column 1 excludes additional

controls, column 2 adds in a large number of such controls, and column 3 shows our preferred

specification with a narrow set of controls chosen from the precisely estimated variables in

column 2. All specifications include 777 parent-by-industry dummy variables.

     There are three notable results in Table 4. First is the role of trade costs, which in this table

are defined as in equation (7) as the sum of both ad valorem tariffs and freight rates. Imported

intermediate inputs as a share of affiliate revenues are strongly negatively correlated with trade

costs. Recall from Section 3.2 that trade costs are a potentially important determinant of the

price of imported intermediate inputs that affiliates face. Our estimates suggest that affiliates do

in fact respond to trade-cost-induced changes in imported-input prices. The coefficient estimate

from our preferred specification in column 3 of Table 4 implies (from equation (4)) that the own-

price elasticity of demand for imported inputs is -3.28 (standard error of 0.71): a 1% fall in input


intermediate inputs—in contrast with a share of barely 3% for transportation affiliates in other Latin American countries.


                                                               20
prices due to a reduction in trade costs leads to a 3.3% increase in the quantity of imported

intermediate inputs demanded by an affiliate.17

     This sensitivity of input demand to trade costs appears consistent with Yi’s (2003) model in

which small changes in tariffs produce large changes in production costs and thus input trade.

Again, Yi hypothesizes that actual tariff declines can explain actual trade growth only if their

effects are amplified by trade in intermediate inputs. Our results accord with this theory.

     This evidence also differs from previous empirical work on multinationals (e.g., Carr, et al,

2001), which finds that foreign-affiliate sales are higher the higher are host-country tariffs and

transportation costs.           Our evidence suggests a more-nuanced story, in which at least one

important affiliate activity—processing imported intermediates—is inhibited, not encouraged, by

higher trade barriers. The net impact of trade barriers on total FDI is likely to vary across

affiliates with the scope and size of their different productive activities.

     A second notable finding in Table 4 is the sensitivity of input processing to labor costs.

Imported-input demand is decreasing in host-country wages for less-skilled workers and

increasing in host-country wages for more-skilled workers, with all coefficients precisely

estimated. The estimates from column 3 of Table 4 imply (from equation (5)) that the cross-

price wage elasticities of demand for imported inputs are –0.32 (standard error of 0.09) for less-

skilled labor and 0.36 (standard error of 0.09) for more-skilled labor. A 1% fall in less-skilled

(more-skilled) wages leads to about a 1/3% increase (decrease) in imported intermediate inputs.

     This responsiveness of input processing to wages is at odds with much of the earlier

empirical work on multinationals that uses aggregate data (e.g., Brainard, 1997; Markusen and

Maskus, 1999; Blonigen et al, 2002). Consistent with models of vertical FDI, we find that

foreign affiliates do more processing of imports the lower are low-skilled wages relative to high-


17 Standard errors for elasticities are calculated using the Delta method.


                                                                 21
skilled wages. This accords with our intuition that imports for further processing and less-skilled

labor are complements. That we find stronger evidence of vertical FDI than previous literature

may be due to our use of micro-level data on foreign affiliates. Previous work, in contrast, uses

data that aggregates not just across the activities of a given affiliate but also across all affiliates

in a given industry and country. Our data suggest multinationals vary in the range of activities

they perform and therefore may display both vertical and horizontal production characteristics.

     The third notable result of Table 4 is the important role played by other host-country policies

and characteristics. In our preferred column (3), imported-input demand is significantly (at the

10% level) higher in countries with lower corporate tax rates. This role for tax rates is consistent

with evidence (e.g., Hanson, 2001) that many governments give tax breaks to foreign firms that

engage in export processing within their borders—an activity that involves vertically specialized

affiliates that import large amounts of inputs. Many studies have examined how taxes affect

aggregate FDI (Hines, 2001), but not on how they affect the composition of FDI.18

     Demand for imported intermediate inputs is higher for affiliates in Canada or Mexico,

consistent with these countries enjoying lower trade costs with U.S. firms due to a combination

of geographic proximity and preferential market access. Input demand is also significantly

higher in host countries with EPZs. EPZs typically offer a range of incentives to promote

exports, including tax holidays, expedited transit of goods through customs, and tariff breaks on

imported equipment, which may induce firms to concentrate input processing in affiliates.19

Affiliate reliance on imported intermediate inputs is lower in countries situated in regions with


18 In Section 3.2 we discussed concerns about transfer pricing. If transfer pricing were dominating the variation in our data, then
we would expect to see the opposite correlation between host-country tax rates and imported-input intensity. If multinationals
were simply shifting profits to low-tax countries via input trade, then affiliates in these low-tax locations would be charged a
below-market price for inputs. Holding affiliate output constant, this practice would generate low values for our dependent
variable in low-tax locations, the opposite correlation from that actually revealed in our preferred specifications.




                                                               22
larger market potential.             This is consistent with horizontal theories of FDI, in which

multinationals located in markets with larger local demand are more oriented towards integrated

production (perhaps for local consumers) and less oriented towards operating via vertical

production networks. Affiliate reliance on imported inputs is higher in host countries with

higher levels of economic freedom. One interpretation is that poor governance of the economy is

especially damaging to firms engaged in high levels of input importing and exporting.

    The remaining regressors in Table 4 have generally insignificant coefficient estimates.

Though insignificant, the estimates for NTBs are puzzling: imported intermediates as a share of

affiliate revenues are positively correlated with NTBs. To the extent that NTBs are trade barriers

that raise import prices, the opposite correlation might be expected. Data problems may matter

here. NTBs do not measure whether quantitative restrictions on trade bind, but rather whether

governments have the option of imposing them.



5.2 Additional Results and Robustness Checks for Imported-Input Demand

    Table 5 applies alternative estimators to our preferred specification in Table 4. Column (1)

uses Tobit rather than OLS. In order to obtain consistent coefficient estimates (Wooldridge,

2002), we needed to reduce the number of fixed effects in the specification from a full set of

parent-industry controls to a set of two-digit industry controls. Most coefficient estimates retain

the same sign and pattern of significance—e.g., on trade costs and wages. The coefficient on

capital is still positive but has become significantly so.                      This accords with the presumed

complementarity between input processing and less-skilled labor discussed above, as there is

substantial evidence in labor economics that capital and less-skilled labor are price substitutes.


19 A standard feature of EPZs is tariff breaks on inputs imported from abroad (for inputs used to produce exports). One might
expect, then, that tariffs would have no impact on imported inputs in countries with EPZs. In unreported regressions we
interacted the EPZ variable with trade costs to capture this effect but found the interactions to be insignificant.


                                                            23
The coefficient estimate for output changes both sign and significance. As discussed in Section

2, there are concerns about the sensitivity of Tobit estimates to the included fixed effects.

Nevertheless, the broad patterns appear match those of the OLS estimates.

    The second column of Table 5 re-estimates our preferred specification where we replace our

parent-industry dummy variables with a full set of country dummy variables. The cost of these

country controls is the need to exclude all regressors that vary by country only. The benefit is

that this checks whether estimates for the key trade-cost regressor are driven by unobserved,

country-specific factors. The coefficient on trade costs is somewhat smaller in absolute value

that in other specifications but remains statistically significant. The implied own-price elasticity

from this country fixed-effects estimate is -2.82 (standard error of 0.97).

    The third column of Table 5 uses an instrumental variables (IV) estimator. It is commonly

asserted that multinationals have a large say in trade-policy formulation in host countries (e.g.,

Blonigen and Figlio, 1998)—especially small developing countries. If this were the case, then

our negative correlation between trade costs and imported-input shares might reflect not the

response of firms to exogenously given trade costs but rather the political-economy outcome of

firms with vertical production networks lobbying successfully for low tariffs. To address this

possibility we re-estimate our preferred specification instrumenting for trade costs with tariffs

from 1989, five years before our sample. These earlier-period tariffs are valid instruments if

they are correlated with current trade costs yet are uncorrelated with the disturbance term.

Intuitively, we find it plausible that affiliate operations in 1994 have weak political-economy

links with 1989 tariffs. Our IV estimates are qualitatively unchanged from the OLS estimates,

with the coefficient on trade costs remaining significantly negative.20


20 An ex ante argument for discounting the endogeneity concern may be that actual estimation sample does not contain (due to
data limitations discussed in Section 4.1) many very small countries where political influence of multinationals is likely to be


                                                              24
     Beyond what is reported in Table 4 and 5, we conducted a large number of other robustness

checks. One set of checks involved alternative measures of key regressors and our regressand.

We constructed industry tariffs and transportation costs using simple arithmetic rather than trade-

weighted averages. We replaced statutory corporate tax rates with effective average corporate

tax rates, reported in Grubert (2001) as constructed by the IRS Statistics of Income Division

from tax returns of U.S. multinationals. We measured wages using affiliate data on average

annual salaries for production (less-skilled) and non-production (more-skilled) workers (either

for a given affiliate or for other affiliates in the same industry and country). And we also

measured our regressand using inputs imported from U.S. parents only, excluding imports from

unaffiliated U.S. third parties (see also note 14). Our estimation results were qualitatively

unchanged by these and other measurement choices.

     A second set of robustness checks involved sample restrictions. One was to exclude from

our sample all affiliates in Mexico or Canada, to ensure that our findings were not driven by

intra-NAFTA trade patterns.                 A second was to exclude affiliates facing very high host-

country/industry tariffs. One might worry that the negative correlation between trade costs and

imported-input intensity reflects tax evasion: in the face of high tariffs, firms might under-report

the value of imported inputs to lower tax liabilities. For China-Hong Kong trade, Fisman and

Wei (2001) find evidence of under-invoicing, but only at high tariff rates (i.e., above 35%). We

tried eliminating all observations of tariffs above various cut-offs, down to 20%. Our estimation

results were also qualitatively unchanged by these and other sampling choices.


strongest. The instruments used were three measures of 1989 industry-country tariffs, each of which used a different weighting
scheme for aggregating the raw tariff data (see Data Appendix for details). The correlation between trade costs and our
instruments is quite high: a regression of trade costs on the instruments obtained an R-squared of 0.60. We also note that
instrumenting for trade costs may address measurement-error bias. Our analysis as formalized in equation (7) assumes that an
affiliate classified in industry X based on the composition of its sales imports inputs in that same industry X. In principle, this
assumption need not be true: an industry-X affiliate may import inputs from another industry Y. In practice, the BEA has no




                                                               25
5.3 Export Behavior and the Determinants of Vertical Production Networks

    Consistent with theories of vertical FDI, we saw in Section 4.2 that affiliates with greater

reliance on imported intermediate inputs also tend to be more export-intensive. Given this, we

can gain additional insight on vertical production networks by examining export intensity. In the

presence of vertical production networks, we would expect affiliate imports of inputs and

affiliate exports to respond similarly to trade costs, factor prices, and other variables. To see

                                                      m
whether this is the case, we replace the regressand s aipc in equation (7) with the share of affiliate

exports to the United States in affiliate revenues. Table 6 reports these final estimation results.

The five specifications are our baseline and preferred OLS specifications from Table 4, and the

Tobit, country fixed-effect, and IV specifications from Table 5.

    Comparing columns 1 and 2 of Table 6 with columns 1 and 3 of Table 4, we see that every

coefficient estimate except that on capital costs retains the same sign and often the same pattern

of statistical significance.           Like imported-input intensity, affiliate U.S.-export intensity is

negatively correlated with host-country trade costs, less-skilled wages, and corporate taxes (in

column 2), and positively correlated with high-skilled wages and the existence of EPZs.

Comparing columns 3, 4, and 5 of Table 6 with columns 1, 2, and 3 of Table 5, we again see

similar sign patterns and mostly similar patterns of statistical significance. In particular, trade

costs are statistically significant for two of these three alternative specifications.

    These results suggest that where affiliates are more specialized in processing inputs imported

from the United States, they also export a higher fraction of their output to the United States.

Lower trade costs, lower wages for less-skilled labor, and lower corporate tax rates are all


information on the industry composition of imported inputs for further processing. Note that because equation (7) conditions our
analysis on affiliate output, we do not face measurement error due to using nominal rather than effective rates of protection.


                                                              26
associated with stronger export orientation, just as they are associated with stronger import

intensity. While the data do not permit us to say explicitly that the exports affiliates send to the

United States are processed inputs imported from the United States, the results are consistent

with this interpretation and with the general conclusion that vertical production networks shape

trade patterns between U.S. parents and their foreign affiliates.



6. Conclusion

   Distinguishing features of the most recent wave of globalization have been the rise of

multinational firms and of trade in intermediate inputs. In this paper, we have examined the

forces behind both these new developments by analyzing imports of inputs for further processing

from U.S. multinational parents by their affiliates in foreign countries. These shipments of

intermediate inputs provide a direct measure of vertical production networks in multinationals.

Theory suggests that affiliate input processing depends on influences such as trade costs and

factor prices. Our results support this prediction.

   Among our main findings are that affiliate demand for imported inputs is higher is host

countries with lower trade costs, lower wages for less-skilled labor (in absolute terms and

relative to wages for more skilled labor), and lower corporate income tax rates. Demand for

inputs is also affected by other host-country policies and characteristics, including the presence

of export-processing zones and the size of the host-country market. Exports by affiliates exhibit

similar patterns of correlation with trade costs, wages, and other variables.

   Our finding of a high elasticity for trade costs is consistent with Yi (2003), who shows how

trade in inputs allows small changes in tariffs to produce large changes in trade flows. Our

findings contrast with much earlier empirical work on multinationals, which tended to find that

the scale of activities by foreign affiliates of U.S. parent firms is larger in countries with higher


                                                 27
wages and higher trade costs vis a vis the United States. Our results suggest that multinationals

tailor their foreign operations to local market conditions. They appear to focus affiliates on

processing imported inputs in countries where wages and trade costs are lower and markets are

smaller; and they appear to focus affiliates on production for local consumers in countries where

wages and trade costs are higher and markets are larger.

   Our results also indicate that other host-country policies shape vertical production networks,

sometimes in unexpected ways. Lower tax rates on corporate income are associated with greater

affiliate input processing.    While both theory and empirical work have shown that lower

corporate taxes in a country are generally associated with greater FDI inflows, there has been

little work on whether taxes affect how multinationals organize their foreign operations.

   One final point is to re-emphasize what our analysis does and does not reveal about vertical

production networks in multinational firms. We have focused on the decisions of these firms

conditional on having a particular network of foreign affiliates. It would be interesting to extend

this focus to the intertemporal decision of establishing and/or closing foreign affiliates, but that is

beyond the scope of this paper.       It would also be interesting to study vertical production

networks in inter-firm arm’s-length transactions. As we discussed, by construction the BEA data

do not track such activities. But to the extent that these inter-firm dimensions of networks

respond to the same incentives we have identified, our findings may apply more broadly.




                                                  28
                                                       Data Appendix

BEA Data

The BEA data come from legally mandated confidential surveys it conducts. A U.S.
multinational consists of one U.S. parent plus one or more foreign affiliates. A parent is a U.S.
legal entity, such as a corporation, that generally controls a business enterprise located in the
United States and that has at least one foreign affiliate. A foreign affiliate is a foreign business
enterprise (incorporated or unincorporated) in which there is U.S. direct investment; that is, it is a
foreign business enterprise in which the U.S. parent has at least a 10-percent equity stake.21
Firms responding to BEA surveys are instructed to denominate revenues and costs in U.S. dollars
that are, for the most part, valued in the prices and exchange rates of the year covered by the
data.

Industry of Affiliate: Each affiliate is classified in a single industry of primary business based on
the distribution of sales across industries that it is required to report. For our 1994 data, the BEA
uses an internal industry definition, the BEA International Surveys Industry (ISI) codes, which
are closely related to the 1987 3-digit U.S. Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) codes. A
foreign affiliate generally represents the consolidation of the U.S. direct investor’s business
operations in a host country in a single three-digit industry.22

Imported Intermediate Inputs for Further Processing: Our measure of imported inputs for
further processing capture imports both from parent and non-parent U.S. entities. Approximately
90-95% of these imports are from parent firms. Even where affiliate imports come from an
entity other than the parent, the parent may still have arranged the transaction. With this in mind,
the measure of affiliate imports we use is all U.S. imports, including imports from parent and
non-parent entities. Estimation results using just imports from parents are nearly identical to
those we report. For affiliates belonging to small U.S. parents, the BEA imputes imports for
further processing using data on total affiliate imports. Our results are robust to alternative
imputation methods and to dropping affiliates with imputed data from the sample.

Wages: Manufacturing affiliates are required by the BEA to report wage bills and employment
separately for non-production and production workers, a breakdown that tends to separate more-
skilled from less-skilled workers. For each affiliate we construct wage unit values for non-
production and production workers. In unreported results, we use these own-affiliate wage
measures and also construct “outside” wage measures defined for each affiliate as the average
wage paid by all other affiliates in the same country and industry. These outside wages may
address the potential problem of endogeneity in affiliate-level wages, in that variation in affiliate
wages may reflect variation both in true prices for given labor quality and in labor quality itself.




21 In this paper, we use the term affiliate or foreign affiliate to refer to this class of enterprises. Note that in the BEA data each
affiliate is a business enterprise–different from other micro data sets on establishments, e.g., the U.S. Longitudinal Research
Database. Enterprises may operate any number of establishments, information that the BEA does not track.
22 The only exception to this rule is that foreign affiliates in the same host country, but in different three-digit industries, may be
consolidated if they are integral parts of the same business operation.


                                                                 29
Rental Price of Capital: The rental rate of capital is defined as an affiliate's return to capital
(value added less employee compensation) over its fixed capital stock (net property, plant, and
equipment) averaged over the 1985-1994 period (or, for affiliates established after 1985, from
the affiliate’s birth to 1994). Rental rates for a single year are highly volatile, and averaging
over time helps smooth this series. In unreported regressions, endogeneity concerns lead us to
try as an alternative measure the rental return to capital calculated for other affiliates in the same
country and industry. Results for this measure are very similar to those that we report.

Non-BEA Data

Wages: Using data from the UNIDO Industry Database for 1994, we measure the unskilled
wage as the average annual salary per worker in that country’s apparel sector, which in most
countries is the lowest-wage manufacturing industry. We measure the skilled wage as the
average annual salary per worker in a country’s chemical, electronics, and electrical machinery
industries, which in most countries are the highest-wage, most skill-intensive industries.

Trade Barriers: Tariffs are from the United Nations’ TRAINS (Trade Analysis and Information
System) CD-ROM. The original source data are classified by country and by 6-digit
Harmonized System product codes.23 Aggregation of the data from a 4-digit SIC basis to an ISI
basis was obtained by weighting the disaggregated data by the value of U.S. exports to the
country. Data on NTBs also come from TRAINS. The original source data for these were at the
4-digit SIC level, which we then concorded to BEA industries as just described. This
information is categorical, indicating presence or absence of NTBs tracked by TRAINS.

The transportation-cost data were generated from data files in Feenstra (1996). For each
observation we constructed transportation costs as charges for insurance and freight as a share of
the customs value of imports. The original source data are classified on a 4-digit 1987 SIC basis;
they were aggregated to an ISI basis by weighting the disaggregated data by the value of total
U.S. exports to the host country. (We use exports and not imports to weight 4-digit transport
costs since the freight rates we require are those that apply to inputs that the U.S. parent exports
to its affiliates in a given country. Results using U.S. imports as weights to construct transport
costs are very similar to those that we report.)

Other Variables: From PriceWaterhouseCoopers, we use an indicator for the presence of export-
processing zones (EPZs) that captures a range of host-country export incentives. Using data
from Shambaugh (2002), we also construct an indicator for whether the host country fixes the
value of its currency to the U.S. dollar. Recent research (e.g., Frankel and Rose, 2002) finds that
bilateral trade is stimulated by currency unions; we generalize from this evidence to examine
whether host-country exchange-rate policy matters along the more-general fixed-versus-float
margin. A final policy regressor is a collection of “economic freedom” measures collected by
the Heritage Foundation and The Wall Street Journal. We average country index scores for
respect for property rights, extent of government regulation, and prevalence of black-market
activities, with higher scores indicating less economic freedom.



23 These data, plus a translation of them to a 1987 4-digit U.S. SIC basis were obtained from Jon Haveman.



                                                              30
                                           References

Adelman, Morris A. 1955. “Concept and Statistical Measurement of Vertical Integration,” in Business
Concentration and Price Policy. Princeton: Princeton University Press and NBER.

Barba Navaretti, Giorgio, Jan I. Haaland, and Anthony Venables. 2002. “Multinational Corporations and
Global Production Networks: The Implications for Trade Policy.” CEPR Report prepared for the
European Commission Directorate General for Trade.

Blonigen, Bruce A., and David N. Figlio. 1998. “Voting for Protection: Does Direct Foreign Investment
Influence Legislator Behavior?” American Economic Review, 88(4), September, pp. 1002-1014.

Blonigen, Bruce A., Ronald B. Davies, and Keith Head. 2002. “Estimating the Knowledge Capital
Model of the Multinational Enterprise: Comment.” NBER Working Paper No. 8929.

Bordo, Michael, Barry Eichengreen, and Douglas Irwin. 1999. “Is Globalization Today Really Different
from Globalization a Hundred Years Ago?” in Dani Rodrik and Susan Collins (eds.) Brookings Trade
Forum 1999, pp. 1-50.

Borga, Maria and William Zeile. 2002. "Foreign Outsourcing and the Intrafirm Trade of U.S.
Multinational Companies." Mimeo, U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.

Brainard, Lael. 1997. “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration Tradeoff between
Multinational Sales and Trade.” American Economic Review 87: 520-544.

Campa, Jose, and Linda Goldberg. 1997. “The Evolving External Orientation of Manufacturing: a Profile
of Four Countries.” Federal Reserve Bank of New York Economic Policy Review, July, pp. 53–81.

Carr, David L., James R. Markusen, and Keith E. Maskus. 2001. “Estimating the Knowledge-Capital
Model of the Multinational Enterprise.” American Economic Review, 91, pp. 693-708.

Clausing, Kimberly A. 2001. “The Impact of Transfer Pricing on Intrafirm Trade.” In James R. Hines
(ed.) International Taxation and Multinational Activity. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.

Council on Foreign Relations. 2002. America—Still Unprepared, Still in Danger. New York: Council
on Foreign Relations.

Diewert, W. Erwin. 1974. “Applications of Duality Theory,” in M. Intriligator and D. Kendrick (eds.)
Frontiers of Quantitative Economics Volume II, Amsterdam: North-Holland, pp. 106-171.

Ekholm, Karolina, Rikard Forslid, and James R. Markusen. 2003. “Export-Platform Foreign Direct
Investment.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9517.

Feenstra, Robert C. 1996. “U.S. Imports: Data and Concordances.” National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Paper #5515, plus data CD-ROM (http://www.nber.org).

Feenstra, Robert C. 1998. “The Integration of Trade and the Disintegration of Production.” Journal of
Economic Perspectives, Vol.12 (4), Fall, pp. 31-50.




                                                 31
Feenstra, Robert C., and Gordon H. Hanson. 2002. “Global Production Sharing and Rising Inequality:
A Survey of Trade and Wages.” In James Harrigan, ed., Handbook of International Trade, Basil
Blackwell, forthcoming.

Feinberg, Susan E., and Michael P. Keane. 2001. “U.S.-Canada Trade Liberalization and MNC
Production Location.” Review of Economics and Statistics, 83(1), February, pp. 118-132.

Fisman, Raymond, and Shang-Jin Wei. 2001. “Tax Rates and Tax Evasion: Evidence from ‘Missing
Imports’ in China. National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8551.

Frankel, Jeffrey, and Andrew Rose. 2002. “An Estimate of the Effect of Common Currencies on Trade
and Income.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117, pp. 437-466.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. 2002a. “Outsourcing in a Global Economy.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8728.

Grossman, Gene and Elhanan Helpman. 2002b. “Managerial Incentives and the International
Organization of Production.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9403.

Grubert, Harry. 2001. “Tax Planning by Companies and Tax Competition by Governments: Is There
Evidence of Changes in Behavior?” In James R. Hines, Jr. (ed.) International Taxation and Multinational
Activity, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, forthcoming.

Grubert, Harry, and J. Mutti. 1991. “Taxes, Tariffs, and Transfer Pricing in Multinational Corporation
Decision Making.” Review of Economics and Statistics 17, pp. 285-293.

Hanson, Gordon H. 2001. “Should Foreign Countries Promote Foreign Direct Investment?” G-24
Discussion Paper Series, No. 9.

Hanson, Gordon H., Raymond J. Mataloni, Jr., and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2001. “Expansion Strategies
of U.S. Multinational Firms,” in D. Rodrik and S. Collins (eds.) Brookings Trade Forum, pp. 245-294.

Hanson, Gordon H. and Chong Xiang. 2002. “The Home-Market Effect and Bilateral Trade Patterns.”
NBER Working Paper No. 9076.

Haskel, Jonathan E., Sonia Pereira, and Matthew J. Slaughter. 2002. “Does Inward Foreign Direct
Investment Boost the Productivity of Domestic Firms?” NBER Working Paper No.8724.

Helpman, Elhanan. 1984. “A Simple Theory of Trade with Multinational Corporations.” Journal of
Political Economy, 92, pp. 451-471.

Helpman, Elhanan, and Paul R. Krugman. 1985. Market Structure and Foreign Trade. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Helpman, Elhanan, Marc Melitz, and Stephen R. Yeaple. 2003. “Exports versus FDI.” National Bureau
of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9439.

Hines, James R. (ed.). 2001. International Taxation and Multinational Activity. Chicago: University of
Chicago Press.




                                                  32
Hummels, David, Jun Ishii, and Kei-Mu Yi. 2001. “The Nature and Growth of Vertical Specialization in
World Trade.” Journal of International Economics, Vol. 54, pp. 75-96.

Kohli, Ulrich R. 1978. “A Gross National Product Function and the Derived Demand for Imports and
Supply of Exports.” Canadian Journal of Economics, 11, pp. 167-82.

Kohli, Ulrich R. 1991. Technology, Duality and Foreign Trade, London: Harvester Whetsheaf.

Kumar, Nagesh. 1994. “Determinants of Export Orientation of Foreign Production by U.S.
Multinationals: An Inter-Country Analysis.” Journal of International Business Studies (1), pp. 141-156.

Markusen, James R. 2002. Multinational Firms and the Theory of International Trade. Cambridge, MA:
MIT Press.

Markusen, James R. and Keith Maskus. 1999. “Discriminating among Alternative Theories of the
Multinational Enterprise.” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 7164.

Markusen, James R. and Keith Maskus. 2001. “Multinational Firms: Reconciling Theory and
Evidence.” In Magnus Blomstrom and Linda Goldberg (eds.) Topics in International Economics: A
Festschrift in Honor of Robert E. Lipsey. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, pp. 71-95.

Markusen, James R., and Anthony Venables. 2000. “The Theory of Endowment, Intra-Industry and
Multinational Trade.” Journal of International Economics, 52, pp. 209-234.

Sansing, Richard. 1999. “Relationship-Specific Investments and the Transfer Pricing Paradox.” Review
of Accounting Studies, 4, pp. 119-134.

Shambaugh, Jay C. 2002. “The Effects of Fixed Exchange Rates on Monetary Policy.” Mimeo.

Shatz, Howard J. 2000. “U.S. Multinational Exports From Developing Countries.” Chapter 3 in The
Location of U.S. Multinational Affiliates. Harvard University Ph.D. Dissertation.

Slaughter, Matthew J. 2000. “Production Transfer Within Multinational Enterprises and American
Wages,” Journal of International Economics, 50, April, pp. 449-472.

U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis. 2002. U.S. Direct Investment Abroad: Preliminary Results From the
1999 Benchmark Survey. Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office.

Wooldridge, Jeffrey M. 2002. Econometric Analysis of Cross Section and Panel Data. Cambridge:
MIT Press.

Yeaple, Stephen R. 2001. “The Determinants of U.S. Outward Foreign Direct Investment: Market
Access versus Comparative Advantage.” Mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Yeats, Alexander J. 2001. “Just How Big is Global Production Sharing?” in Sven W. Arndt and Henryk
Kierzkowski (eds.), Fragmentation: New Production Patterns in the World Economy, Oxford: Oxford
University Press.

Yi, Kei-Mu. 2003. “Can Vertical Specialization Explain the Growth of World Trade?” Journal of
Political Economy, 111(1), pp. 52-102.



                                                  33
                                      Table 1: Summary Statistics
                                          Variable                          Mean (s.d.)
                                 Imported-Input Share                           0.110
                                                                               (0.176)

                                  More-Skilled Wages                           28.631
                                    ($, Thousands)                            (17.089)

                                   Less-Skilled Wages                          14.811
                                     ($, Thousands)                            (7.897)

                                        Tariff Rate                             0.054
                                       (ad valorem)                            (0.051)

                                  Transportation Costs                          0.045
                                     (ad valorem)                              (0.038)

                                       Trade Costs                              0.099
                                       (ad valorem)                            (0.071)

                                   Corporate Tax Rate                           0.344
                                                                               (0.056)

                               Adjacent to United States                        0.176
                                                                               (0.380)

                                    English Speaking                            0.317
                                                                               (0.465)

                                    No. Observations                            4,102

Notes: Each cell reports the variable mean and, in parentheses, its standard deviation. These statistics are for the
sample used in the baseline estimates reported in Table 4; the year of these data is 1994. See text for details on variable
definitions and construction.

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis and other sources.




                                                           34
                     Table 2: Affiliate Imported Intermediate Inputs, by Industry and Region, 1994

          Region          Canada         Mexico        Other         OECD           OECD            East         Other         Africa       Middle         World
  Industry                                            Lat.Am.        Europe          Asia           Asia         Asia                        East

      Chemicals             18.92         12.35          9.44          4.90            9.87        15.51          8.57            --            --          7.62

        Metals              19.23         23.13            --            --            7.88        13.79            --         15.51          4.14          8.24

     Machinery              37.19         44.24          9.95          8.20            7.42         8.62          6.06          4.79         10.98          10.98

     Electronics            20.16         40.82         21.14          9.83          17.89         26.98          1.49         13.34          4.39          17.44

   Transportation           50.36         45.67          3.36          2.33            5.11         6.21            --            --            --          21.39

     Other Mfg              18.15         13.29            --            --          11.82          7.27            --          2.33          8.89          8.89

         Total              38.66         36.70          8.45          5.64          10.41         15.24          4.46         11.79          4.48          13.59

Notes: This table shows means by two-digit industry and geographic region of the share of imported inputs for further processing in total revenues for foreign
affiliates of U.S. multinational enterprises. Means are weighted by affiliate total revenue. The “Other Europe” region is excluded from the table due to disclosure
restrictions (there are few affiliates per industry in the region). The same applies to entries that read, “--.” The sample is 4,285 majority-owned foreign affiliates
of U.S. multinationals that belong to a parent that has as least two foreign affiliates. The year is 1994.

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.




                                                                                  35
Table 3: Affiliate Exports to the United States, by Industry and Region, 1994

         Region         Canada        Mexico         Other        OECD          OECD            East        World
 Industry                                           Lat.Am.       Europe         Asia           Asia

    Chemicals            18.96          2.05          2.71          3.64          2.76          0.77          4.82

      Metals             40.86         11.76          5.71          3.44          2.73          6.19         10.29

    Machinery               --         29.32         17.60          7.63            --         52.72         20.19

   Electronics           24.04         53.76            --          6.14          5.52         26.55         16.16

 Transportation          61.40         54.80          2.33          4.10          1.73          6.80         26.45

    Other Mfg            26.96         13.64          5.24          4.01          3.02          4.36          6.95

       Total             47.91         40.84          6.18          4.90          6.62         32.85         16.05

Notes: This table shows means by two-digit industry and geographic region of the share of exports to the United States
in total revenues for foreign affiliates of U.S. multinational enterprises. Means are weighted by affiliate total sales.
Four regions are excluded from the table due to disclosure restrictions (there are few affiliates per industry in the
region): Other Europe, Other Asia, Africa, and the Middle East. The same applies to entries that read, “--.” The
sample is 4,285 majority-owned foreign affiliates of U.S. multinationals that belong to a parent that has as least two
foreign affiliates. The year is 1994.

Source: Authors’ calculations using data from the U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis.




                                                          36
    Table 4: Baseline Estimation Results for Imported Intermediate Inputs
               Regressor                                (1)         (2)         (3)
        More-Skilled Wages                             0.007       0.027       0.028
                                                      (0.011)    (0.010)**   (0.010)**
         Less-Skilled Wages                         -0.046         -0.046      -0.045
                                                  (0.010)**      (0.011)**   (0.009)**
         Capital Rental Rate                           0.003       0.001       0.001
                                                      (0.006)     (0.005)     (0.005)
          (1 + Trade Costs)                         -0.640         -0.333      -0.262
                                                  (0.080)**      (0.089)**   (0.078)**
     (1 – Corporate Tax Rate)                          0.009       0.028       0.044
                                                      (0.031)     (0.029)     (0.028)
                 Output                                -0.008     -0.007      -0.007
                                                      (0.004)*    (0.004)     (0.004)
     Adjacent to United States                                     0.126       0.126
                                                                 (0.014)**   (0.013)**
      Export-Processing Zone                                       0.043       0.048
                                                                 (0.015)**   (0.015)**
         Non-Tariff Barriers                                       0.020       0.021
                                                                  (0.012)     (0.012)
          Host-Market Size                                         -0.043      -0.045
                                                                 (0.010)**   (0.008)**
         Economic Freedom                                          -0.037      -0.040
                                                                 (0.009)**   (0.006)**

Notes: See continuation of this table on next page.




                                                          37
                     Table 4: Baseline Estimation Results (Continued)
                Regressor                              (1)                       (2)                      (3)
          English Speaking                                                    -0.006
                                                                              (0.009)
   (1 – Value-Added Tax Rate)                                                  0.029
                                                                              (0.046)
  Fixed Exchange Rate w/ U.S.                                                  0.021
                                                                              (0.015)
             FDI Openness                                                      -0.001
                                                                              (0.006)
  U.S. Materials Share of Sales                                                0.075
                                                                              (0.051)
              Controls                         Parent-Industry          Parent-Industry           Parent-Industry
          No. Observations                         4,102                    4,102                     4,102
         Adjusted R-Squared                         0.40                     0.48                      0.48

Notes: Each column of this table estimates a specification of equation (7) using the regressors of that column. The
dependent variable is imported intermediate inputs for further processing from the United States as a share of affiliate
total revenues (plus inventory changes). Cell entries are OLS parameter estimates (and standard errors that allow for
both arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and correlations in disturbances within parent-industry groups). * indicates
that a parameter estimate is different from zero at the 5% significance level; ** at the 1% level. All specifications also
include 777 parent-by-industry dummy variables. All regressors in column (1), as well as Host-Market Size, (1- Value-
Added Tax Rate), and U.S. Materials Share of Sales, are in logarithms. See text for equation (7) and details on variable
definitions and construction.




                                                           38
                   Table 5: Estimation Results, Alternative Estimators
                Regressor                              (1)                       (2)                      (3)
        More-Skilled Wages                           0.068                                              0.033
                                                   (0.013)**                                          (0.009)**
         Less-Skilled Wages                          -0.097                                             -0.050
                                                   (0.013)**                                          (0.009)**
         Capital Rental Rate                          0.010                    0.001                    0.002
                                                    (0.005)*                  (0.005)                  (0.004)
          (1 + Trade Costs)                          -0.359                   -0.211                   -0.360
                                                   (0.089)**                 (0.107)*                 (0.182)*
     (1 – Corporate Tax Rate)                        0.032                                              0.076
                                                    (0.051)                                           (0.036)*
                  Output                             0.008                    -0.007                    -0.007
                                                   (0.003)**                  (0.004)                 (0.002)**
     Adjacent to United States                       0.133                                              0.123
                                                   (0.012)**                                          (0.014)**
      Export-Processing Zone                         0.089                                              0.049
                                                   (0.015)**                                          (0.014)**
         Non-Tariff Barriers                         0.020                     0.025                    0.023
                                                    (0.011)                   (0.014)                 (0.008)**
          Host-Market Size                           -0.086                                             -0.044
                                                   (0.010)**                                          (0.007)**
         Economic Freedom                            -0.079                                             -0.038
                                                   (0.008)**                                          (0.007)**
              Estimator                              Tobit                    OLS                       IV
              Controls                              Industry                 Country              Parent-Industry
         No. of Observations                         4,102                    4,102                   3,977
         Adjusted R-Squared                                                   0.49

Notes: Each column of this table estimates our preferred specification of equation (7) using the estimator and controls
indicated. The dependent variable is imported intermediate inputs for further processing from the United States as a
share of affiliate total revenues (plus inventory changes). Cell entries are parameter estimates (and standard errors that
allow for both arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and correlations in disturbances within parent-industry groups). *
indicates that a parameter estimate is different from zero at the 5% significance level; ** at the 1% level. See text for
equation (7) and details on variable definitions and construction.




                                                           39
                     Table 6: Estimation Results, Export-Intensity Regressand
                     Regressor                    (1)            (2)             (3)             (4)            (5)

               More-Skilled Wages               0.003           0.014          0.038                           0.015
                                               (0.010)         (0.010)        (0.019)*                        (0.010)

                Less-Skilled Wages              -0.042         -0.020          -0.087                         -0.023
                                              (0.010)**       (0.009)*       (0.020)**                       (0.011)*

                Capital Rental Rate             -0.019         -0.020          -0.056          -0.021         -0.021
                                              (0.005)**      (0.005)**       (0.008)**       (0.005)**       (0.004)**

                 (1 + Trade Costs)              -0.583         -0.222          -0.719          -0.222         -0.307
                                              (0.113)**        (0.123)       (0.140)**        (0.152)        (0.116)**

             (1 – Corporate Tax Rate)           -0.006          0.093          0.201                           0.092
                                               (0.035)       (0.034)**       (0.075)**                       (0.042)**

                       Output                   -0.003         -0.001          0.047           -0.001         -0.001
                                               (0.005)         (0.004)       (0.004)**        (0.005)         (0.003)

            Adjacent to United States                           0.143          0.217                           0.138
                                                             (0.015)**       (0.017)**                       (0.012)**

             Export-Processing Zone                             0.057          0.139                           0.059
                                                              (0.023)*       (0.023)**                       (0.014)**

                Non-Tariff Barriers                             0.016          0.011           0.021           0.013
                                                               (0.018)        (0.018)         (0.021)         (0.010)

                 Host-Market Size                              -0.015          0.004                          -0.016
                                                               (0.008)        (0.016)                        (0.008)*

                Economic Freedom                               -0.011          -0.045                         -0.009
                                                               (0.007)       (0.013)**                        (0.007)

                     Estimator                   OLS            OLS             Tobit           OLS             IV
                      Controls               Parent-Ind.     Parent-Ind.      Industry        Country       Parent-Ind.
               No. of Observations              4,102           4,102          4,102           4,085           4,102
               Adjusted R-Squared                0.48           0.54                            0.55


Notes: Each column of this table estimates a specification of equation (7) replacing equation (7)’s regressand with the share of
affiliate sales accounted for by exports to the United States. Each specification uses the estimator and controls indicated. Cell
entries are parameter estimates (and standard errors that allow for both arbitrary forms of heteroskedasticity and correlations in
disturbances within parent-industry groups). * indicates that a parameter estimate is different from zero at the 5% significance
level; ** at the 1% level. See text for equation (7) and details on variable definitions and construction.




                                                                40
