NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

IDENTIFICATION AND ESTIMATION
OF DYNAMIC GAMES
Martin Pesendorfer
Philipp Schmidt-Dengler
Working Paper 9726
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9726
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003

We are grateful to Nicholas Marchitto for his excellent research assistance, and we are particularly grateful
to the Chamber of Business of Lower Austria for providing us with their membership data. An earlier version
of the paper was circulated under the title "Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Entry Games." We thank
Richard Blundell, Tilman Borgers, Hide Ichimura, Mireia Jofre-Bonet and seminar participants at UCL for
helpful comments. Martin Pesendorfer thanks the NSF under grant SES 0214222 for financial support. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Martin Pesendorfer and Philipp Schmidt-Dengler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Identification and Estimation of Dynamic Games
Martin Pesendorfer and Philipp Schmidt-Dengler
NBER Working Paper No. 9726
May 2003
JEL No. L1, D43, D99
ABSTRACT
This paper studies the identification problem in infinite horizon Markovian games and proposes a
generally applicable estimation method. Every period firms simultaneously select an action from a
finite set. We characterize the set of Markov equilibria. Period profits are a linear function of
equilibrium choice probabilities. The question of identification of these values is then reduced to the
existence of a solution to this linear equation system. We characterize the identification conditions.
We propose a simple estimation procedure which follows the steps in the identification argument.
The estimator is consistent, asymptotic normally distributed, and efficient.
We have collected quarterly time series data on pubs, restaurants, coffeehouses, bakeries and
carpenters for two Austrian towns between 1982 and 2002. A dynamic entry game is estimated in
which firms simultaneously decide whether to enter, remain active, or exit the industry. The period
profit estimates are used to simulate the equilibrium behavior under a policy experiment in which
a unit tax is imposed on firms deciding to enter the industry.

Martin Pesendorfer
Department of Economics
London School of Economics
London WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
CEPR and NBER
m.pesendorfer@lse.ac.uk

Philipp Schmidt-Dengler
Department of Economics
Yale University
New Haven, CT 06520
philipp.schmidt-dengler@yale.edu

1

Introduction

After the seminal papers by Bresnahan and Reiss (1987, 1990, 1991), equilibrium conditions of static
games with binary actions have become a basic estimation tool in empirical industrial organization.
The technique makes possible the inference of profit values and entry costs based on the number of
active firms in the industry. Static entry models have been analyzed in a number of recent papers
including Berry (1992), Davis (1999), Mazzeo (2002), Seim (2001) and Tamer (2003). See Reiss
(1996) and Berry and Reiss (2002) for surveys of the literature. A shortcoming of this literature is
that dynamic considerations are left aside and a static view of the world is adopted.
This paper studies the identification problem of infinite horizon Markovian games and proposes
a generally applicable estimation method for dynamic games. Every period each firm privately
observes a profitability shock drawn from a known distribution function. Firms simultaneously
choose an action from a finite set. In our application, the firms decide whether to enter, to remain
active, or to exit the industry. The dynamic game permits decisions to be a function of observable
state variables. Firms make forward looking decisions taking into account the eﬀect of future entry
and demand on future profits. The dynamic formulation has at least three advantages over the static
model commonly used in the literature: (i) it allows distinct period payoﬀs as a function of state
variables; (ii) contemporaneous demand and state variables determine whether entry takes place;
and (iii) explicit information in the timing of actions is exploited. The increased richness of our
model permits us to infer a larger set of parameters.
The main contribution of the paper is twofold: First, we show new identification results for
dynamic games. We characterize conditions under which the period payoﬀs can be identified. The
identification arguments are based on a suﬃciently rich time-series data on observed choices.
Second, we propose a computationally simple estimation method generally applicable for dynamic
games. The estimation method is similar to Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (2002) but considers finite
action games instead of continuous choice games. The choice probabilities are estimated using
maximum likelihood. The period payoﬀs are inferred by using the equilibrium conditions of the
dynamic game. The estimator is consistent, asymptotic normally distributed, and eﬃcient.
The main idea behind this paper stems from the following observation: In finite action games
with private information, there exists a type that is exactly indiﬀerent between two alternative
actions. For this type, the continuation value of one action must equal the continuation value of
the alternative action. The indiﬀerent type condition is satisfied at every state vector yielding
an equation system with as many equations as there are states. The equation system stemming
from the indiﬀerence conditions permits us to adopt a similar estimation technique as to that in

2

continuous choice dynamic games. The indiﬀerent type is not observed but can be inferred from the
observed choices. Further, for each state variable, the indiﬀerence condition is a linear equation in
period profits. This follows from the fact that the value function is linear in period payoﬀs. The
linearity substantially simplifies the identification and estimation problem. Based on the linearity,
we can express the parameters of the model as an explicit function of the choice probabilities. The
identification question is then reduced to the existence of a unique solution to the linear equation
system. In addition, the set of indiﬀerence conditions enables us to numerically calculate Markov
equilibria of finite action games in a simple way.
We apply the proposed method to data consisting of quarterly time series observations regarding
the identity of active firms in a number of industries for two Austrian cities between 1982 and 2002.
In addition, we use gross domestic product time series data. The estimation proceeds as follows:
First, a probit model is estimated. The dependent variable is an indicator variable whether the
firm is active in a period. The explanatory variables are the state variables including an indicator
of whether the firm was active in the preceding period, the number of other active firms in the
preceding period, the level of gross domestic product, and interaction terms between these variables.
We assume that gross domestic product evolves deterministically. We then construct the transition
probability matrix of state variables using the probit estimates.
We infer the period profit values based on the equilibrium condition for the indiﬀerent type. We
illustrate the simplicity of the estimation approach, discuss the goodness of fit of our estimates, and
assess properties of the equilibrium. Finally, we conduct a policy experiment in which a unit tax is
imposed on firms deciding to enter the industry.
There is a small empirical literature on dynamic games including Aguirregabiria and Mira (2002),
Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (2000, 2002) and Pakes and Berry (2002). Aguirregabiria and Mira
(2002) consider a two-stage estimation approach for dynamic games with finite actions. They show
that, after substituting the first stage choice probabilities and obtaining an expression for the value
function, the optimality conditions of the discrete game can be written as inequalities in the parameters of the model. In the second stage, Aguirregabiria and Mira propose a pseudo maximum
likelihood estimator in which the likelihood defined by those inequalities is maximized. Simulation is
used in the second stage to reduce the computational complexity of the estimator. Pakes and Berry
(2002) propose two estimators for dynamic entry games: A nested fixed point estimator similar to
Rust (1994), and a two stage estimator in which a pseudo likelihood is estimated in the second
stage, similarly to Aguirregabiria and Mira (2002). In contrast to these approaches, the estimator
proposed in this paper dispenses entirely with the second stage maximum likelihood estimation, or
nested fixed point estimation. Instead, an eﬃcient and computationally simple estimator is proposed
3

by expressing the parameters of the model as an explicit function of the choice probabilities.
Our model formulation and estimation approach is most closely related to Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (2000, 2002). Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer consider an infinite horizon Markovian bidding
game with idiosyncratic cost shocks under the presence of capacity constraints. Estimation proceeds
in two stages: In the first stage, the choice probabilities are estimated using the observed bid data.
In the second stage, the costs are inferred based on the first order condition of optimally chosen
bids. Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (2000, 2002) show that the first order condition of the dynamic
game is a linear equation in unknown costs.
The paper is organized as follows: Section 2 describes the dynamic game with a finite action
space. Section 3 characterizes properties of the equilibrium. Section 4 presents the identification
results. Section 5 proposes the estimator. Section 6 describes the data and gives some descriptive
statistics. Section 7 reports the estimation results. Section 8 ilustrates the long run payoﬀs and
assesses a policy experiment in which a unit tax is imposed on firms deciding to enter. Section 9
concludes.

2

Model

This section describes the elements of the model. We describe the sequencing of events, the period
game, the transition function, the payoﬀs, the strategies and the equilibrium concept.
We consider a dynamic game with discrete time, t = 1, 2 . . . , ∞. The set of firms is denoted by
N = {1, . . . , N } and a typical firm is denoted by i ∈ N. The number of firms is fixed and does not
change over time. Every period the following events take place:
A state vector is publicly observed. Each firm is endowed with a state variable sti ∈ Si =

{1, . . . , L}. The vector of all firms’ state variables is denoted by st = (st1 , . . . , stN ) ∈ S = ×N
j=1 Sj .
¡
¢
Sometimes we use the notation st−i = st1 , . . . , sti−1 , sti+1 , . . . , stN ∈ S−i to denote the vector of

states by firms other than firm i. The cardinality of the state space S equals ms = LN .
¡
¢
tK
Each firm i privately observes a K dimensional real valued profitability shock εti = εt1
∈
i , . . . , εi

<K . The shock is not observed by other firms. The shock εtk
i is drawn independently from the strict

monotone and continuous distribution function F . Independence of εti from the state variables is

an important assumption, since it allows us to adopt the Markov dynamic decision framework. For
a discussion of the independence assumption in Markovian decision problems see Rust (1994). We
£
¤
tk
assume that E εtk
i |εi ≥ ε exists for all ε, to ensure that the expected period return exists.

Actions: Each firm decides which action to take, ati ∈ Ai = {0, 1, . . . , K}. All N firms, including

firms not active in the last period, make their decisions simultaneously. The actions are taken after

4

firms observe the state and their idiosyncratic productivity shock. An action profile at denotes the
vector of joint actions in period t, at = (at1 , . . . , atN ) ∈ A = ×N
j=1 Aj . The cardinality of the action
N

space A equals ma = (K + 1) .
The transition of the state variables is described by a probability density function g : A×S ×S −→
¡
¢
[0, 1] where a typical element g at , st , st+1 equals the probability that state st+1 is reached when
P
the current action profile and state are given by (at , st ). We require s0 ∈S g (a, s, s0 ) = 1 for all
(a, s) ∈ A × S. We frequently use the symbol G to denote the (ma · ms ) × ms dimensional transition
h
i
0
0
matrix in which column s ∈ S consists of the vector of probabilities g(a, s, s )a∈A,s∈S .
The period payoﬀ of firm i is collected at the end of the period after all actions are observed.

The period payoﬀ of firm i consists of the profit realization and the profitability shock realization.
We can write period payoﬀs as a real valued function defined on A × S × <K and given by:
K
¡
¢ X
εtk
π i at , st +
i · 1{ati =k}
k=1

where 1a equals one if event a occurs and zero otherwise; the profit π depends on the action profile
of firms and the state vector. We assume that profits are bounded, |πi (.) | < ∞ for all i. We
sometimes use the symbol Πi to denote the (ma · ms ) × 1 dimensional period profit vector defined
h
i
by Πi = π i (a, s)a∈A,s∈S . The profitability shock aﬀects actions k > 0 only. The assumption
that action 0 is not aﬀected by the profitability shock is not restrictive as only the payoﬀ diﬀerence

between alternative actions matters.
Firms discount future payoﬀs with the common discount factor β < 1. The game payoﬀ of firm
i equals the sum of discounted period payoﬀs.
Following Maskin and Tirole (1994, 2001), we consider sequential equilibria in Markovian strategies ai (εti ; st ). A strategy for firm i is a function of the firm specific profitability shock and the
state variables. The assumption that the profitability shock is independently distributed allows us
to write the probability of observing action profile at as Pr(at |st ) = Pr(at1 |st ) · · · Pr(atN |st ). The
Markovian assumption allows us to abstract from calendar time and subsequently we omit the time
superscript.
Symmetry: We are sometimes interested in symmetric payoﬀs and strategies. Symmetry requires
identical payoﬀ vectors, Πi = Π for all i, and identical strategies for all i. Asymmetries between firms
are then captured in the state variables only. The symmetry assumption reduces the dimensionality
of the problem, which can simplify calculations.
The discounted sum of future payoﬀs for firm i consists of two elements: The period profit and

5

the profitability shock. In value function notation, the discounted sum is given by:
Wi (s, εi ) =

max

ai ∈Ai

X

a−i ∈A−i

+βEε

X

[

Pr(a−i |s) π i (a−i , ai , s) +
0

0

g (a, s, s ) Wi (s , .)

]

K
X

k=1

εki · 1{ai =k}
(1)

0

s ∈S

where Pr(a−i |s) denotes the conditional probability that firms −i choose an action profile a−i conditional on state s, and Eε denotes the expectation operator with respect to the firm specific productivity shock. The finiteness of the action and the state spaces guarantees the existence of the
value function Wi , see Rust (1994).
Ex ante value function: We use the ex-ante value function, which is defined as the value function
in expression (1) before firm-specific shocks are observed and actions are taken, Vi (s) = Eε Wi (s, ε).
Taking the expectation with respect to ε inside the sum yields:
Vi (s) =

X

[

Pr(a|s) πi (a, s) + β

a∈A

X

0

0

g(a, s, s )Vi (s )

]

+

s0 ∈S

K
X

k=1

¤
£
Eε εki |ai = k · Pr (ai = k|s)

(2)

Equation (2) is satisfied at every state vector s ∈ S. Since the state space is finite, we can express
it as a matrix equation:
Vi = P Πi + Di + βP GVi ,
where P is the ms × (ma · ms ) dimensional matrix consisting of choice probability Pr(a|s) in row
0

0

s column (a, s), and zeros in row s column (a, s ) with s 6= s; Di = [Di (s)]s∈S is the ms × 1
¤
£ k
PK
dimensional vector of expected profitability shocks with element Di (s) =
k=1 Eε εi |ai = k ·

Pr (ai = k|s); Vi = [Vi (s)]s∈S is the ms × 1 dimensional vector of expected discounted sum of future
payoﬀs; and G denotes the (ma · ms ) × ms dimensional transition matrix defined above. Notice
that this matrix equation is a recursive equation in Vi . Let Is denote the ms dimensional identity
matrix. By the dominant diagonal property, the matrix [Is − βP G] is invertible. We can rewrite
the recursive equation to obtain an explicit expression for Vi :
−1

Vi = [Is − βP G]

[P Πi + Di ] .

(3)

Equation (3) provides an expression for the equilibrium ex ante value function. The terms on the
right hand side are the discount factor, the equilibrium choice probability matrix, the state transition
matrix, the period return function, and the equilibrium expected profitability shocks.
Notice, that the value function is a linear function in the period payoﬀs. The linearity property
will help us examine the properties of the equilibrium choices in the next section.
6

3

Equilibrium Characterization

This section characterizes properties of the dynamic equilibrium. It studies properties of the equilibrium decision rule, the equilibrium discounted sum of payoﬀs and the equilibrium choice probabilities. We show that the equilibrium decision rule is characterized by an ms · K equation system.
We conclude the section with remarks on the existence and multiplicity of equilibria.
We begin the analysis with a characterization of the equilibrium decision rule. The following
Proposition states a property of equilibrium strategies:
Proposition 1 In any Markov equilibrium for any s ∈ S and for all i ∈ N there exists an εi (s) =
¡ 1
¢0
εi (s) , . . . , εK
such that
i (s)

0
0
 k if εk > εk (s) and for all k0 6= k: εk − εk > εk (s) − εk (s) ;
i
i
i
i
i
i
ai (εi , s) =
(4)
 0
if εk < εk (s) for all k.
i

i

All proofs are given in the appendix. Proposition 1 establishes that the equilibrium decision on

whether to adopt action k or not is monotone in the profitability shock εki .
The statement in the Proposition is readily illustrated for an action pair (k, 0) for a typical firm
i. It says that, for any state vector, there exists a type εk that is indiﬀerent between actions k and
0. The monotonicity property follows from the assumption that the payoﬀ function is additive in
the private profitability shock εk . If there exists a point εk such that a firm of type εk is indiﬀerent
between actions k and 0, then any type with a smaller profitability shock, εk < εk , will prefer action
0. On the other hand, any type with a higher profitability shock, εk > εk , will prefer action k. The
reason is that the current period payoﬀ for an active firm is additive in εk , while the future payoﬀs
and the current period payoﬀ for a firm choosing action 0 are unaﬀected by εk . The point εk exists,
since the support of εk is unbounded, while the period return Π, and the value function are bounded.
Indiﬀerence equation: The indiﬀerent type εki receives the same expected discounted sum of
payoﬀs under action k as under action 0. This leads to the indiﬀerence equation:


X
X
0
0
Pr(a−i |s) · π i (a−i , k, s) + β
g(a−i , k, s, s )Vi (s ) + εki (s)
a−i ∈A−i

=

X

a−i ∈A−i

s0 ∈S



Pr(a−i |s) · π i (a−i , 0, s) + β

X
0

s ∈S

0

0



g(a−i , k, s, s )Vi (s )

(5)

Equation (5) is a necessary equilibrium condition that must be satisfied at every state s ∈ S and
for every action k = 1, . . . , K yielding a total of ms · K equations with ms · K indiﬀerent types,
one for each possible state and action. We may compactly write equation (5) in matrix form. Let

7

£
¤
εi = εki (s) s∈S,k=1,...K be the (ms · K) × 1 dimensional vector of indiﬀerent types; let P−i be

the ms × ((K + 1)N−1 · ms ) dimensional matrix consisting of choice probability Pr(a−i |s) in row s
0

0

column (a−i , s), and zeros in row s column (a−i , s ) with s 6= s; and define the (ms · K) × (ma · ms )
dimensional matrix Pi (ε) as:
ai =
z


0 1

−P−i


 −P−i
Pi (ε) = 
..


.

−P−i

P−i
0

2
...
}|

K

0

...

0

P−i

0

P−i

0

0

...
..
.

0

0

...

0

{








We can re-state equation (5) as:
Pi (ε) Πi + βPi (ε) GVi + εi = 0

(6)

Substituting equation (3) into equation (6), leads us to the following result:
Proposition 2 In any Markov equilibrium for all i ∈ N there exists εi such that:

h
i
−1
−1
Pi (ε) + βPi (ε) G [Is − βP (ε) G] P (ε) Πi + βPi (ε) G [Is − βP (ε) G] Di (ε) + εi = 0.

(7)

Conversely, any ε = (ε1 , . . . , εN ) that satisfies equation (7) can be extended to a Markov equilibrium.
The above Proposition characterizes the set of equilibria. It provides a necessary and suﬃcient condition for any Markov equilibrium. It gives a system of ms · K · N indiﬀerence equations
characterizing the ms · K · N equilibrium indiﬀerence points ε. The necessity part stems from the
indiﬀerence condition which says that, for the indiﬀerent type, the continuation value when taking
action k is exactly equal to the continuation value when taking action 0. The suﬃciency part in
the Proposition is established by showing that any ε that satisfies equation (7) can be extended to
construct a decision rule that constitutes a Markov equilibrium.
Equation (7) in Proposition 2 is a linear equation in the parameter Πi . The linearity property
will play a central role in the identification and estimation section.
Next, we provide a few remarks on the existence, computation and multiplicity of equilibria. The
following theorem establishes that an equilibrium exists.
Theorem 1 A Markov equilibrium exists.
8

The theorem follows from Brouwer’s fixed point theorem. Equation (7) gives us a continuous
function from a bounded subset of <ms ·K·N onto itself. By Brouwer’s theorem it has a fixed point
ε.
Proposition 2 and Theorem 1 enable us to calculate equilibria numerically. They show that the
equilibrium calculation is reduced to a fixed point problem in <ms ·K·N , which is solvable even for
non-trivial ms , K and N . Backwards solving algorithms, which calculate a new optimal policy and
value function at each step of the iteration, are computationally complex, as is shown in Pakes
and McGuire (2001). Proposition 2 shows that the space of indiﬀerent types gives an equivalent
representation of equilibria which facilitates the computation considerably. Hence, it is not needed
to determine the optimal decision rule and value function at every step of the iteration.
A remaining issue is whether the equilibrium is unique or not. The following example illustrates
that more than one equilibrium can exist.
Multiplicity of Equilibria: Suppose the industry consists of two firms. States and actions are
binary. Period profits do not depend on state variables. Monopoly profits equal

3
2

and duopoly profits

equal − 32 . The profitability shock is drawn from a standard normal distribution function. Firms
decide whether to be active or inactive. Then, there exist multiple equilibria. We describe three
symmetric equilibria. Two equilibria have the following feature along the equilibrium path: Only
one firm is active in any period with high probability. This arises due to the positive monopoly and
negative duopoly payoﬀs. In the first equilibrium the identity of the active firm changes every period.
The active firm becomes inactive and the inactive firm becomes active. In the second equilibrium, the
active firm remains active and the inactive firm remains inactive. The third equilibrium diﬀers. On
its path, each firm has a fifty percent chance of being active.1 The equilibria are robust to parameter
perturbations. Profit values with distinct values for diﬀerent states - but small diﬀerences in the
state dimension - and a positive but small discount factor yield equilibria with the same qualitative
equilibrium behavior.
Symmetry: We conclude the section with a discussion of the symmetry assumption which is
assumed in the empirical section. Symmetry requires identical payoﬀ vectors Πi = Π and identical decision rules. It can be verified that the above arguments remain valid under the symmetry
restriction which leads us to the following Corollary:
1 The

equilibrium strategies are the following: (i) a (1, 1, ε) = a (0, 0, ε) = 1 if and only if ε > 0, a (1, 0, ε) = 1 if

and only if ε > 1.08, and a (0, 1, ε) = 1 if and only if ε > −1.08
(ii) a (1, 1, ε) = a (0, 0, ε) = 1 if and only if ε > 0, a (1, 0, ε) = 1 if and only if ε > −1.08, and a (0, 1, ε) = 1 if and
only if ε > 1.08
(iii) a (1, 1, ε) = a (0, 0, ε) = 1 if and only if ε > 0, a (1, 0, ε) = 1 if and only if ε > 0, and a (0, 1, ε) = 1 if and only
if ε > 0.

9

Corollary 1 Suppose Πi = Π.
(i) A symmetric Markov equilibrium exists.
(ii) For any symmetric Markov equilibrium there exists an ε1 such that ε = (ε1 , . . . , ε1 ) satisfies
h
i
−1
−1
P1 (ε) + βP1 (ε) G [Is − βP (ε) G] P (ε) Π + βP1 (ε) G [Is − βP (ε) G] D (ε1 ) + ε1 = 0.

(8)

Conversely, any ε = (ε1 , . . . , ε1 ) that satisfies equation (8) can be extended to a symmetric Markov
equilibrium.
The symmetry assumption reduces the number of equations in (7). The reduction in dimension
reduces the complexity of the problem which may facilitate the numerical calculation of equilibria.
Additionally, symmetry places a number of restrictions on the payoﬀ vector Π which can be useful
in the empirical analysis.
So far we have characterized several qualitative features of the equilibrium. In addition, we
provided a simple characterization of the equilibrium choice probabilities in form of an equation
system that can be solved numerically. Finally, we illustrated that the analysis remains valid under
the symmetry restriction. Next, we use the necessary and suﬃcient equilibrium condition (7) which
is a linear equation in period payoﬀs to address the question of identification.

4

Identification

This section studies identification conditions of the underlying model parameters which are the
distribution of profitability shocks F , the discount factor β, and the period profit vector Π. We
provide conditions that allow us to find a unique set of parameters that rationalizes the observed
choices. We conclude the section with a discussion of the identifying conditions in symmetric entry
models. These conditions are imposed in our empirical application.
We assume that a time-series sample of choices and states is available. The sample is suﬃciently
large to characterize the equilibrium choice probabilities.
T

Assumption 1: We observe data (at , st )t=1 which permit us to characterize the choice proba0

0

bilities Pr (a|s) and the transition probabilities g(a, s, s ) for any s, s ∈ S, a ∈ A.
Notice that we consider a time-series data set from one industry at a time. Hence, the choice
probabilities characterize a single equilibrium.2
The potential number of firms may not be known in some applications. This may arise if firms
are not observed when inactive. Yet, if there is at least one action in which the firm is observed,
2 Identification

of static entry models based on a cross-section data set is considered in Tamer (2003).

10

then the potential number of firms is identified. To see this, notice that every period every firm has
a positive probability of selecting any action. This probability is bounded away from zero. Thus,
eventually, all potential firms are observed. The potential number of firms equals the maximum
number of observed firms.
The vector of indiﬀerent types ε is not known. Proposition 1 gives a relationship between the
vector of indiﬀerent types and the equilibrium actions. If the distribution F is known, then the
relationship in Proposition 1 gives an equation characterizing choice probabilities in terms of the
vector of indiﬀerent types. The following Lemma states that the equation has a unique solution.
The Lemma is due to Hotz and Miller (1993).
Lemma 1 Suppose F is known. Suppose there exists a δ > 0 such that Pr(ai = k|s) > δ for all
i ∈ N, k ∈ Ai , s ∈ S. Then for all i ∈ N , s ∈ S there exists a unique vector εi (s) that solves the
following K equations, one for every action k = 1, . . . , K, given by:
³
´
0
0
0
Pr(ai = k|s) = Pr εki > εki (s) and for all k 6= k: εki − εki > εki (s) − εki (s)

(9)

The Lemma states that the indiﬀerent types can be uniquely recovered from the choice probabilities provided F is known. The Lemma is easily illustrated for binary action spaces. With binary
actions equation (9)can be re-written to obtain a unique and explicit expression for the indiﬀerent
type given by:
ε1i (s) = F −1 (Pr(ai = 0|s)).
With the indiﬀerent types recovered, we can infer the vector of ex ante expected profitability shocks
by using Proposition 1, as:
Di (s) =

K Z
X

k=1

∞

εk
i (s)

εk

Y

k0 ≥1,k0 6=k

0

F (εk + εk − εk )f (εk )dεk .

With the choice probabilities, the transition probabilities and indiﬀerent types at hand, all the coefficients entering equation (7) are known. Since equation (7) is a necessary and suﬃcient equilibrium
condition, it can be used to infer period payoﬀs. Next, we discuss in some detail what conditions
are required to make this inference possible.
The following Proposition provides a negative identification result.
Proposition 3 (i) The parameters (F, β, Π1 , . . . , ΠN ) are not identified.
(ii) For given F , the parameters (β, Π1 , . . . , ΠN ) are not identified.
(iii) For given (F, β), the parameters (Π1 , . . . , ΠN ) are not identified.
11

The Proposition says that the model is not identified. The non-identification result is similar in
spirit to results obtained in the single agent dynamics literature, see Rust (1994) and Magnac and
Thesmar (2002). Part (i) says that in the absence of the knowledge of the distribution function F ,
the vector ε is not determined. Hence, none of the elements in equation (7) are known and the model
is clearly not identified. The non-identification of the distribution function F is closely related to
the assumption of a finite action space. When the action space is an interval and the profit function
is known, then F can be identified, as is shown in Jofre-Bonet and Pesendorfer (2002). A parametric
assumption on the distribution function F is not enough, as can be seen from equation (7). Assuming
that profitability shocks are normally distributed with mean zero and standard deviation σ amounts
to re-scaling the matrix Π by the standard deviation σ. Hence, the standard deviation σ is not
identified.
Parts (ii) and (iii) take the distribution function F as given. They show that the model’s
remaining parameters are not identified. The reason is that equation (7) has K · LN · N equations
N

while the parameter vector has (K + 1) · LN · N + 1 elements. Hence, even if in addition to F the
parameter β is fixed, the remaining parameters are not identified.
Proposition 3 establishes the need to impose identifying restrictions. We proceed by fixing the
distribution function F and the discount parameter β and discussing the identifying restrictions on
the profit vector. In our application, we assume F is the standard normal distribution function.

Recall that equation (7) is linear in the profit parameter vector Πi . With a known distribution
function F and a given discount parameter β, the question of identification of Πi is then reduced
to the question of the existence of a unique solution to the linear equation system. In economic
applications it can be verified whether the restrictions of the model yield a unique solution. We next
discuss some restrictions for the single agent and multi agent case that guarantee identification.
In the single agent case, for a fixed discount parameter β, the rank of the matrix premultiplying
the profit parameter vector in equation (7) is at most K · L as there are K · L equations. At least
L restrictions on profits are required as the profit parameter vector has (K + 1) · L parameters. In
economic applications it is assumed that the profit value for one action, say action zero, is fixed
exogenously for every state, see Magnac and Thesmar (2002).
In the multi agent case, for a fixed discount parameter β and for every firm i, the rank of the
matrix premultiplying the profit parameter vector Πi in equation (7) is at most K · LN as there
N

are K · LN equations. The profit parameter vector Πi has (K + 1) · LN parameters. Hence, at
³
´
least (K + 1)N − K · LN restrictions on profits are required for every firm. We next state two
restrictions for the multi agent case. We impose these restrictions in the estimation.

12

Restriction (R1 ) says that period profits do not depend on the state variables of other firms:
πi (ai , a−i , si , s−i ) = π i (ai , a−i , si ) for all a ∈ A, s ∈ S

(R1)

for some ((K + 1)N ·L)×1 dimensional vector Πi = [π i (ai , a−i , si )](ai ,a−i ,si )∈Ai ×A−i ×Si . Restriction
(R1) fixes (K + 1)

N

· (LN − L) profit parameters. Restriction (R1) is satisfied in games with

adjustment costs such as entry or investment games.
Restriction (R2 ) says that period profits under action ai = 0 are fixed exogenously for every
state si and action profile a−i :
π i (0, a−i , si ) = bi (a−i , si ) for all a−i ∈ A−i , si ∈ Si

(R2)

for some ((K + 1)N −1 · L) × 1 dimensional exogenous vector bi . Restriction (R2) fixes (K + 1)N −1 · L
profit parameters. Restriction (R2) is satisfied in games in which one action, say action inactivity,
implies zero profits.
Restrictions (R1) and (R2) can be imposed in equation (7). Let X i denote the restricted matrix
of dimension (K·LN )×(K·(K + 1)

N−1
−1

matrix Xi = Pi + βPi G [Is − βP G]

·L) which is obtained by summing columns in the unrestricted
P in equation (7) which are associated with identical profit

values π i (ai , a−i , si ) for ai > 0. Using this notation, the restricted equation (7) can be stated as:
X i · Πi + Zi = 0.

(10)

where , Zi = βPi G [Is − βP G]−1 Di + Xib · bi + εi and Xib denotes a matrix of dimension (K · LN ) ×
((K + 1)N−1 · L) which is obtained by summing columns in the unrestricted matrix Xi which are

associated with profit values bi (a−i , si ) for ai = 0. The following Proposition states the identification
result.
Proposition 4 Suppose F and β are given, and restrictions (R1) and (R2) are satisfied.
¡
¢
(i) If L < K + 1, then the parameters Π1 , . . . , ΠN are not identified.

(ii) If L ≥ K + 1, and if the restricted matrix X i has full column rank, then the parameter vector

Πi is identified.
The Proposition states that the identification of the profit parameters depends on the dimensionality of the state and action spaces. Part (i) says that if there are fewer states than actions,
then the model is not identified. Part (ii) says that provided the number of states equals at least the
number of actions, and the restricted matrix X i has full column rank, then the profit parameters
are identified.

13

Observe that restriction (R2) in Proposition 4 is required. The intuitive reasons is that the
indiﬀerence analysis determines payoﬀs relative to the payoﬀ under action ai = 0 at every state
only. The formal reasons is that the matrix Xi consists of a product of matrices, Xi = Pi · [Ims ·ma +
´
¡
¢ ³
−1
N
βG [Is − βP G] P ] in which the first element in the product is the K · LN × (K + 1) · L

dimensional matrix Pi given by:

ai =
z


0 1

−P−i


 −P−i
Pi = 
..


.

−P−i

P−i
0

2
...
}|

K

0

...

0

P−i

0

P−i

0

0

...
..
.

0

0

...

0

{








The first column in the matrix Pi , which is associated with action ai = 0, is collinear with the
remaining columns in the matrix Pi requiring that payoﬀs associated with one action for every state
are exogenously fixed.
N −1

Part (ii) in Proposition 4 requires that the matrix X i has full column rank K · (K + 1)

· L.

This condition is required as the rank condition may fail. Recall our earlier example illustrating the
multiplicity of equilibria. In the first two equilibria the rank of the matrix X i equals 4 while in the
third equilibrium the rank equals 2 only.
Next, we briefly discuss symmetric games with binary actions (and states). We describe the
assumptions and the set of identifying restrictions in this case in more detail, as we will take this
specification to our data.
Identification in Symmetric Entry Games
This section describes a set of identifying assumptions for symmetric entry models. We impose
these assumptions in the empirical analysis.
The action space of firm i is binary, K = 1. Action 1 denotes a firm that remains active, or
enters the market. Action 0 represents an exiting firm, or a firm that remains inactive.
The state space of firm i consists of two elements: A binary variable si that indicates whether
firm i was active in the preceding period, si = 2, or inactive, si = 1, and a demand variable s0
∈ {1, . . . Ld }.
Symmetry implies that the number of other active firms is a suﬃcient statistic for the vector
of other firms’ actions a−i . We denote the number of other active firms by δ. It ranges from 0 to
N − 1. Similarly, the number of other firms with an active state is a suﬃcient statistic for s−i . We
14

denote the number of other firms with an active state by θ. The dimensionality of the binary state
space under symmetry equals ms = 2 · N · Ld . Similarly, the dimensionality of the binary action
space reduces to ma = 2 · N . Period profits can be written as π (ai , δ, si , θ, s0 ).
Restriction (R1) can be imposed in the symmetric entry model by omitting the dependence on
θ in the profit vector. To satisfy restriction (R2), we fix the exit value of an active firm at 10,
b(a−i , 1) = 10, and assume zero profits for inactive firms that are inactive in the preceding period,
b(a−i , 0) = 0. We assume an annual discount factor β = 0.9 and assume F is the standard normal
distribution function. By Proposition 4, if the associated restricted matrix X has rank (2 · N · Ld ),
then the restricted profit vector Π is identified. In our application the rank condition is satisfied and
the restricted profit parameters are indeed identified.
So far, we have described properties of the dynamic equilibrium and established conditions that
permit identification of the parameters of the model. We illustrated the identification conditions for
symmetric entry games in more detail. The next section addresses how to estimate the parameters.

5

Estimation Approach

This section proposes our estimator. Our estimation strategy follows the steps in the identification
argument. First, we estimate the choice probabilities. Second, we infer the period profit parameters
by using the linear equation (10). We characterize the properties of the estimator. We conclude the
section with a discussion of the estimator for symmetric entry games and the restrictions imposed
on the estimator by our data.
The potential number of firms may not be observed. By assumption, the probability that all
potential firms are observed (are active) in a given period is positive and bounded away from zero.
b for the potential number of firms is then the maximum number of firms observed in
An estimator N

b = maxt Nt . It can be verified that the estimator N
b is consistent and supereﬃcient, as
any period, N
√
b implies that the asymptotic
it converges a rate faster than T . The fast rate of convergence of N
properties of the choice probabilities estimator and profit parameters estimator will not be aﬀected
b . We can proceed as if N is known.
by N

The choices and states are multinomially distributed. This follows from the assumption that

the set of feasible actions and states is finite. Let p(k, i, s) denote the probability that firm i
P
selects action k in state s. Define the observed choice frequency by nkis = t 1{at =k,st =s} for all
i
P
i ∈ N,k ∈ Ai , s ∈ S and observed state frequency by nass0 = t 1{at =a,st =s,st+1 =s0 } . We may write

15

the log likelihood of the multinomial model as:
`=

X XX

nkis log p(k, i, s) +

P

k∈Ai

0

nass0 log g(a, s, s )

a∈A s∈S s0 ∈S

i∈N k∈Ai s∈S

where

XX X

p(k, i, s) = 1 for all i ∈ N,s ∈ S and

P

s0 ∈S

0

g(a, s, s ) = 1 for all a ∈ A,s ∈ S. We

assume that the vector of state variables at time t = 0, s0 , is exogenous. An examination of the first
order conditions yields that the maximum likelihood estimator equals the sample frequency:
nkis
,
l∈Ai nlis

pb(k, i, s) = P

0

nass0
.
00
s00 ∈S nass

gb(a, s, s ) = P

Moreover, the solution to the first order condition is unique.
0

0

Let θ = (p(k, i, s), g(a, s, s ), i ∈ N,k ∈ {1, . . . , K} , s ∈ S, a ∈ A, s ∈ S\sms ) denote the parameter vector which already incorporates the restriction that probabilities sum to one. Let Dθ ` denote
0

the gradient of the log likelihood function. Let Iθ = E (Dθ `) · (Dθ `) denote the Fischer information
matrix. Billingsley (1961) establishes the asymptotic properties of maximum likelihood estimators
for Markov processes, as the number of periods T goes to infinity. The Markovian structure of the
observed controlled process (st ) follows directly from the assumption that the profitability shock
realizations are conditionally independently distributed, the decision rules are Markovian, and the
distribution of profitability shocks is exogenous. The maximum likelihood estimator b
θT is consistent

and asymptotically eﬃcient with a normal limiting distribution given by:
´
√ ³
T b
θT − θ Ã N (0, Iθ−1 ).

Let Π = ψ(θ) denote the identified profit vector. We propose to estimate the profit vector
by evaluating the function ψ at the value of the maximum likelihood estimator of the choice and
b = ψ(b
transition probabilities, Π
θ). The properties of the estimator can be deduced by using the

delta method. An examination of equation (10) reveals that ψ is continuously diﬀerentiable. Let
Dθ ψ denote the gradient of the function ψ. By application of the delta method, see Theorem 3.1 in
Van Der Vaart (1998), the limiting distribution of ψ(b
θ) is normal and given by:
´
³
´
√ ³
0
T ψ(b
θT ) − ψ(θ) Ã N 0, (Dθ ψ)Iθ−1 (Dθ ψ) .

Moroever, Lemma 8.14 in Van Der Vaart (1998) implies that the estimator ψ(b
θT ) is asymptotically

eﬃcient.

The estimator is computationally very simple. Before proceeding with the application, we discuss
the restrictions that our data impose on the estimator in more detail.
Estimation of Symmetric Entry Games
16

We assume a deterministic state transition rule and do not estimate g. The assumption is satisfied
if agents have perfect foresight concerning the evolution of the exogenous demand process measured
by the gross domestic product. Actions are binary, K = 1, yielding a binomial choice model.
We do not observe actions for a number of states because these states did not occur in our sample
period. These data limitations lead us to adopt a parametric framework for the choice probabilities.
We parameterize the choice probability in the following way:
p(1, i, s) = Φ(α · s)
where Φ denotes the standard normal distribution and α · s denotes a linear function of the state
variables. The linear function is given by:
α · s = α0 + α1 1{sti =2} + α2 δ t + α3 1{sti =2} · δ t + α4 st0

(11)

where 1{sti =2} denotes an indicator function that equals one if firm i is active in the preceding period
P
and zero otherwise, δ t = j6=i 1{stj =2} denotes the Number of Other Active Firms, and st0 denotes

the log gross domestic product.

Profit Value Estimates: With the estimator α
b in hand, we infer ε, calculate the probability ma-

trices Pi , P, G and the vector Di . We assume an annual discount factor β = 0.9. All the coeﬃcients
in the linear equation (10) are available and we infer the restricted period profit parameters. As
explained above, the standard errors for the period profit parameters are calculated using the delta
method.
The next section introduces our data for pubs, restaurants, coﬀeehouses, carpenters, and bakeries
for two Lower Austrian cities.

6

Data

This section introduces our data set and gives descriptive statistics.
We have collected quarterly time series information on the identity of active pubs, restaurants,
coﬀeehouses, carpenters and bakeries in two Austrian cities between 1982 and 2002. The data were
obtained from Lower Austrian Chamber of Business. The data list all active pubs, restaurants,
coﬀeehouses, carpenters, and bakeries in two small sized Austrian cities, Amstetten and Baden.
Baden has about 24, 000 inhabitants. Amstetten is of similar size with a population of about 23, 000.
We supplemented the information with quarterly gross domestic product information for Austria.
(Table I about here)

17

Table I provides summary statistics. The first five columns consider Baden and the next five
columns consider Amstetten. The first column in the table shows that on average there are 17.01
pubs active in Baden. The number of active pubs ranges between 12 and 22 with a standard deviation
of 2.07. There is a substantial pub turnover in Baden. A total of 49 pubs were opened, while a total
of 53 pubs were closed. Not adjusting for truncation at the beginning and the end of the sample
period, the average active spell of a pub equals about 21.3 quarters.
Column two considers restaurants in Baden. On average a total of 13.26 restaurants are active
in Baden. The number of active restaurants ranges between 6 and 25 with a standard deviation of
4.69. There is some turnover. A total of 38 restaurants were opened, while a total of 20 restaurants
were closed. The average active spell of a restaurants equals about 25.32 quarters.
Column three considers coﬀeehouses in Baden. On average a total of 13.81 coﬀeehouses are active
in Baden with the number of active coﬀeehouses ranging between 9 and 18. There is turnover. A
total of 44 coﬀeehouses were opened, while a total of 40 coﬀeehouses were closed. The average active
spell of a coﬀeehouse equals about 21.89 quarters.
Column four considers carpenters in Baden. On average a total of 11.29 carpenters are active
in Baden. The number of active carpenters ranges between 9 and 15 with a standard deviation of
1.63. There is less turnover than for pubs, restaurants, or coﬀeehouses. A total of 16 carpenters
were opened, while a total of 12 carpenters were closed. The average active spell of a carpenters
equals about 37.92 quarters.
Column five considers bakeries in Baden. On average a total of 9 bakers are active in Baden
ranging between 7 and 11 at any point in time. Turnover is not very pronounced with 8 bakery
openings and 9 bakery closings during the sample period. The average active spell of bakery is about
44.47 quarters.
Columns six to ten report summary statistics for pubs, restaurants, coﬀeehouses, carpenters and
bakeries in Amstetten, respectively. The average number of businesses is similar to the numbers in
Baden. On average there are about 21.52 pubs, 8.33 restaurants, 14.37 coﬀeehouses, 13.6 carpenters
and 8.88 bakeries in Amstetten. The number of newly opened businesses equals 14 and 15 for bakeries
and carpenters, and 48 and 50 for pubs and coﬀeehouses, respectively. There are 14 closings for
bakeries and carpenters and 45 and 30 closings for pubs and coﬀeehouses, respectively. The average
active spell of a business in Amstetten ranges between 21.95 for coﬀeehouses and 42.30 for carpenters.
In summary, the data provide us with time series information on the identity of active pubs,
restaurants, coﬀeehouses, carpenters and bakeries in two selected Austrian towns, Baden and Amstetten, over a time period of more than 20 years. There is persistence in the active spell of businesses.
Bakeries and carpenters remain open for about ten years while pubs, coﬀeehouses and restaurants
18

remain open for about 5 to 6 years. There is considerable turnover in these professions. In Baden
a new pub is opened on average every half year, and a pub is closed at the same rate. Similarly a
restaurant and coﬀeehouse opens every half year. For bakeries there is less turnover. In Baden a
new bakery opens every 2 to 3 years and a bakery closes with the same frequency.

7

Estimation Results

This section reports our estimates. We begin with a description of the choice probability estimates.
Then, we assess the goodness of fit of the empirical model by sampling from the distribution of choice
probability estimates and comparing the resulting distribution of pseudo samples to the observed
data. Finally, we describe the period profit parameter estimates.
Table II reports the maximum likelihood estimates of the probability of being active. We assume
symmetric behavior and pool the decisions of all firms within a profession and city. The total number
of firms ranges between 11 and 29 across professions and cities. The number is tabulated in Table
I. Explanatory variables include Lagged Active which is a dummy variable that equals one if the
firm was active in the preceding period, the Number of Other Active Firms equals the number of
other firms that were active in the preceding period, an interaction term between Lagged Active and
the Number of Other Active Firms, and Log GDP which measures the logarithm of the Austrian
gross domestic product. In all specifications, we can reject the null that the coeﬃcients are jointly
insignificant.
(Table II about here)
We interpret the estimates in Table II by evaluating the probability of being active at the sample
mean of Log GDP and the sample median of the Number of Other Active Firms: For all professions
in both cities, Lagged Active has a significant positive eﬀect on the decision to be active. For pubs
in Baden, Lagged Active increases the probability of being active in the next period by 84%. In
other professions the number ranges between 83% and 94%. The evidence in Amstetten is somewhat
stronger. Lagged Active increases the probability of being active in the next period by 90% for pubs.
In other professions the number ranges between 89% and 96%.
Number of Other Active Firms has a significant eﬀect in three professions in Baden and in all
professions in Amstetten. In both cities and all professions, increasing the Number of Other Active
Firms by one has a negative eﬀect on being active. The magnitude of the eﬀect of increasing the
Number of Other Active Firms by one is small, ranging between −0.2% and −1.3% in Baden. In
Amstetten the eﬀect ranges between −0.4% and −1.1%.
19

Log GDP has a positive eﬀect in two of five professions in Baden. Increasing Log GDP by 1%
increases the probability of being active by 5.8% for restaurants, by 8.2% for carpenters. For pubs,
coﬀeehouses and bakeries the eﬀect diﬀers. There a 1% increase in Log GDP lowers the probability
of being active by 6.9%, 3.1% and 1.9%, respectively. In Amstetten, Log GDP has a positive eﬀect
on being active in all professions. The Log GDP eﬀect ranges between 0.1% and 7.6%.
Higher order terms for the Number of Other Active Firms can be included in the specification of
the choice probabilities. It turns out that higher order terms are not significant for most professions.
We conducted likelihood ratio tests of the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcients of second order terms
for Number of Other Active Firms are equal to zero. In Baden, the null cannot be rejected at the
ten percent level in four of five professions. In Amstetten, the null cannot be rejected at the ten
percent level in three of five professions. The exceptions are restaurants in Baden, and pubs and
coﬀeehouses in Amstetten.
Symmetry is imposed in the specification of Table II. With a suﬃciently rich data set, asymmetry
could be accounted for in the estimation. Asymmetry, which is sometimes referred to as unobserved
heterogeneity in the empirical literature, can be accounted for in the estimation. For example,
choice probabilities can be estimated for each firm individually by using a full set of state variables
as explanatory variables. The coeﬃcients would then account for possible asymmetric eﬀects of
opponents’ state variables. Unfortunately, the number of parameters for a full asymmetric model
exceeds what is feasible for the limited information available in our data. None the less, we consider
a simplified specification that permits some asymmetries between firms.
The presence of unobserved heterogeneity is tested in the following way: We re-estimate the
probit model by including a set of firm specific dummy variables, in addition to the variables listed
in Table II. We conduct two tests: First, we test the null hypothesis of jointly not significant eﬀects
of the dummy variables. The test statistic is distributed as a chi-squared random variable. We
find that at the one percent level the null of no significant eﬀects cannot be rejected in four of five
professions in Baden and in all professions in Amstetten. At the five and ten percent level, the null
cannot be rejected in three of five professions in Baden and in two of five professions in Amstetten.
Our second test considers the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcients for the four explanatory variables
in Table II are equal between two specifications: with and without firm dummies. The Wald test
statistic is distributed as a chi-squared random variable with four degrees of freedom. We find that
the null cannot be rejected for all professions in Baden and Amstetten at the ten percent level. We
can conclude that asymmetries do not appear an important concern in our data.
As a measure of goodness of fit of the choice probability estimates in Table II we conduct the
following experiment. We draw a random sample from the distribution of choice parameter estimates.
20

We then simulate one path of the firms’ choices by randomly drawing from the distribution associated
with the choice parameter estimates. We repeat the exercise 100 times and compare the simulated
paths to the observed path. Summary statistics for the observed path are given in Table I. Both, in
Baden and Amstetten, the simulated average number of firms is somewhat lower than the observed
number for all professions but the diﬀerence is small in magnitude. We cannot reject the null of
no diﬀerences for all five professions in both cities. Comparing the number of entrants, exits and
activity spells between the simulated and observed data reveals the following: In both, Baden and
Amstetten, there are no significant diﬀerences between the observed and the simulated number of
entrants, exits and activity spells in all five professions. The choice probability estimates explain
turnovers accurately.
Estimates of period profit parameters in Baden and Amstetten are reported in Tables III and IV,
respectively. As described above, we fix the annual discount parameter β at 0.9, assume that F is
the standard normal distribution function, assume zero profit for inactive firms that remain inactive,
and fix the exit value at 10. We assume a deterministic transition rule for GDP. For out of sample
future time periods, we assume that the GDP level is constant and equal to the GDP value achieved
in 2002. Under these assumptions, for all five professions in both cities, the restricted matrix X
appearing in equation (10) has rank (2 · N · Ld ). By Proposition 4, the restricted profit vector is
identified. Tables III and IV report period profit estimates of an active firm for the Number of Other
Active Firms ranging from zero to N − 1, and for two selected GDP levels. The high GDP level
amounts to 12.80 in logs, achieved in the second quarter in 1992, and the low GDP level amounts to
12.53 in logs, achieved in the first quarter in 1982. Both values are at least 10 years prior to the time
period where the GDP level becomes constant. Additionally, we report entry cost estimates which
are defined as the profit diﬀerence between active and inactive states, π (1, δ, 2, s0 ) − π (1, δ, 1, s0 ).
We report entry cost estimates at the low GDP level only, as there is a negligibly small eﬀect of
GDP on entry costs.
(Table III about here)
The interpretation of the coeﬃcient estimates in Table III is the following: Baden’s entry cost
estimates are significantly negative in all professions for all state variables. The entry cost estimates
range between 11.35 and 16.06. For four of five professions the entry cost decreases monotonically
with an increase in the Number of Other Active Firms suggesting that entry becomes less costly
when more firms are active. The exception is bakeries. For bakeries, the entry cost increases with
an increase in the Number of Other Active Firms.
Period profit estimates of a pub that was active in the preceding period in Baden are given in
21

columns 2 and 4. They range between 0.16 and 0.42. The profit estimates are highest with few
active firms and fall as the Number of Other Active Firms increases. For other professions a number
of profit estimates are positive and significantly diﬀerent from zero. Period profit estimates typically
fall as the Number of Other Active Firms increases. An exception are coﬀeehouse profit estimates
which increase initially and, then, decrease, as the Number of Other Active Firms increases. Bakery
profit estimates are imprecisely estimated when the Number of Other Active Firms is small leading
to large point estimates. The eﬀect of GDP on period profits varies across professions. Carpenter
and restaurant profit estimates increase with an increase in GDP. The profit estimates for other
professions fall with an increase in GDP.
(Table IV about here)
The estimates in Amstetten are qualitatively similar to Baden. An examination of Table IV
reveals that the entry cost estimates are significant negative in all professions for all state variables
in Amstettten. The entry cost estimates range between 12.08 and 21.66. For all professions the entry
cost decreases monotonically with an increase in the Number of Other Active Firms suggesting that
entry becomes less costly when more firms are active.
Period profit estimates of a firm that was active in the preceding period in Amstetten are mostly
positive. A number of profit estimates are significantly diﬀerent from zero. An increase in the Number of Other Active Firms decreases period profits on most occasions in accordance with economic
intuition. For restaurants, coﬀeehouses and carpenters the eﬀect of an increase in the Number of
Other Active Firms is positive on occasions. For instance, as the Number of Other Active Firms
increases coﬀeehouse profit estimates evaluated at the high GDP level fall, then increase, and then
fall again, while coﬀeehouse profit estimates evaluated at the low GDP level fall for all of the range.
The eﬀect of GDP on period profits is positive but small in magnitude on most occasions.
The profit parameter estimates in Tables III and IV illustrate substantial payoﬀ diﬀerences
between newly entered and already active firms consistent with dynamic entry models. The entry
cost estimates are of much larger magnitude than the profit estimates implying that it takes a number
of periods to recover the entry cost. We constructed a Chi-Squared test of the null hypothesis that
the Number of Other Active Firms has no eﬀect on profit estimates. We can reject the null of no
eﬀect in all professions and both cities. An increase in the Number of Other Active Firms decreases
the profit estimates in most professions and GDP levels.
The estimates in Tables III and IV rely on two identifying assumptions. These assumptions are
an annual discount factor β fixed at 0.9, and the exit value fixed at 10. The eﬀect of the identifying
assumptions on the parameter estimates is readily illustrated. An increase in the discount factor β,
22

decreases the profit estimates at all state variables. The entry cost estimates remain unaﬀected by a
change in the discount factor as they are defined as the profit diﬀerence between active and inactive
states, π (1, δ, 2, s0 ) − π (1, δ, 1, s0 ). An increase in the exit value lowers the entry cost by exactly
the same amount. In the extreme scenario in which the exit value is zero, most entry cost estimates
in Tables III and IV remain negative and significantly diﬀerent from zero. An increase in the exit
value magnifies the profit estimates for active firms.
With the profit estimates at hand, we can numerically calculate equilibria by using equation
(8). From section 3 we know that the numerical calculation need not yield the equilibrium outcome
that is observed because the model can exhibit multiple equilibria. However, in our case, repeated
numerical calculations yield choice probabilities almost identical to the choice probability estimates
in Table II. A possible reason is that the zeros of equation (8) are locally unique. With starting values
that are not too far away from the choice probability estimates in Table II, numerical algorithms
tend to converge to the same solution.
In sum, the estimates of choice probabilities fit the time series data for pubs, restaurants, coffeehouses, carpenters and bakeries in Baden and Amstetten well. Our goodness of fit test indicates
that the model explains the data accurately. The profit parameter estimates confirm substantial
payoﬀ diﬀerences between newly entered and already active firms consistent with dynamic entry
models. Additionally, we can reject the null that the Number of Other Active Firms has no eﬀect
in all professions confirming the importance of strategic eﬀects. The eﬀect of the Number of Other
Active Firms on period profit estimates has the expected sign in most professions. With all the
profit estimates at hand, we can illustrate firms’ decisions and assess policy questions. This is done
in the next section.

8

Value Function Estimates and Entry Tax

This section considers two applications of our estimates. Subsection 8.1. depicts the long run
expected discounted sum of payoﬀs to active and inactive firms. Subsection 8.2. conducts the policy
experiments in which the regulator imposes a unit tax on firms wishing to enter.

8.1

Value Function Estimates

This section illustrates our estimates for the discounted sum of firms’ payoﬀs for carpenters in Baden.
We select carpenters in Baden to illustrate interesting payoﬀ diﬀerences between active and inactive
firms. Additionally, we illustrate diﬀerences between short and long run payoﬀs. Estimates for other

23

professions yield qualitatively similar results. The discounted sum of payoﬀs is calculated from the
period profit estimates by using the formula given in equation (3) in section 2.
(Figures 1 - 4 about here)
Figures 1 to 4 depict the ex ante value function estimates as a function of the Number of Other
Active Firms. The ex ante value function is defined as the expected discounted sum of payoﬀs
before the profitability shock is observed and before the action is taken. The ex ante value function
is plotted as a solid line. The remaining state variables, active or inactive and the GDP level, are
fixed at four distinct values. These values include inactive firms at a high GDP level, active firms
at a high GDP level, inactive firms at a low GDP level, and active firms at a low GDP level. The
dotted lines in Figures 1 to 4 depict 90% confidence intervals.
Figure 1 shows that the ex ante value function of an inactive firm at the high GDP level ranges
between 1.74 and 1.95, and does not change significantly as the Number of Other Active Firms
increases. Figure 2 shows that the ex ante value of an active firm at the high GDP level is substantially higher than that of an inactive firm. It ranges between 13.19 and 16.79. The level diﬀerence
is attributable to the entry cost. The ex ante value function of an active firm declines significantly
as the Number of Other Active Firms increases. The reason is that an additional firm lowers the
expected period payoﬀ to an active firm. In total, the ex ante value function declines by about 27%
as the Number of Other Active Firms increases from 0 to 14.
The value function estimates at the low GDP level, which are depicted in Figures 3 and 4, are
qualitatively similar to those in Figures 1 and 2. The eﬀect of a reduction in the GDP level is to
decrease the value function estimates. The value function of an inactive firm is again almost constant
in the Number of Other Active Firms at about 1.0, while the value function of an active firm falls
with an increase in the Number of Other Active Firms. It falls from 15.40 to 11.93. The ex ante
value function estimate declines by about 29% as the Number of Other Active Firms increases from
0 to 14.
Comparing the long run value function estimates with the short run profit estimates in Table
III reveals that GDP and the Number of Other Active Firms have a stronger eﬀect in the short run
than in the long run.

8.2

Entry Tax

This section reports a policy experiment of a tax on entry. We select carpenters in Baden and assess
the eﬀect of the tax on the equilibrium outcome.

24

The experiment is as follows: We draw a random sample from the distribution of profit estimates
for carpenters described in Table III. We increase the entry cost estimate by one unit at all state
variables. We then numerically calculate the new equilibrium based on the modified period payoﬀs
by using equation (8). The equilibrium choice probabilities are then used to simulate one path of
firms’ choices by randomly drawing from the distribution associated with the equilibrium choice
parameters. We repeat the exercise 60 times and compare the simulated after tax equilibrium paths
to the observed path. Summary statistics for the observed path are given in Table I.
Somewhat surprisingly, the tax does not aﬀect the distribution of the number of active firms
significantly. The after tax simulated average number of active firms equals 11.14 with a standard
deviation of 0.64. The number is not significantly diﬀerent from the mean number of active firms in
Table I which equals 11.29. The minimum and maximum number of active firms on average across
simulations equal 13.7 and 8.83, respectively, which are again not significantly diﬀerent from the
before tax counterpart in Table I.
The tax alters the number of turnovers. Turnovers become less frequent. The number of entrants
falls by more than 50%, from 16 to 6.93 on average across simulations. The number of exiting firms
falls by about 80%, from 12 to 2.6 on average. The reduction in the number of turnovers is significant
with standard deviations across simulations of 2.02 and 1.83 for the number of entrants and exiting
firms, respectively. The duration of the mean active spell increases by about 60% to 59.44. The
increase in the mean active spell is significant.
The reduction in turnovers as a result of the tax can be explained by using the indiﬀerent type
analysis described in section 3. The range of profitability shocks in which an inactive firm decides
to enter is reduced as a larger profitability shock is required to oﬀset the increased entry cost. On
the other hand, the range of profitability shocks in which an active firm decides to remain active
is increased as the continuation value when exiting is reduced due to the tax. Hence, the ex ante
expected profitability shock when active is reduced.
An examination of the average value functions across simulations reveals the following: The
expected discounted sum of payoﬀs for an inactive firm is substantially reduced due to the tax. The
reduction is significant. The value function of an inactive firm, evaluated at the high or low GDP
level which is depicted in Figures 1 and 3, falls by 56% to 63% across the range of the Number of
Other Active Firms. The decrease in value ranges between 1.05 and 1.10 in absolute value at the
high GDP level and between 0.57 and 0.59 in absolute value at the low GDP level.
For most of the range of state variables, active firms take a small percentage fall in expected
discounted sum of payoﬀs. The change ranges between −7% and +2% across the range of all state
variables, but is not significant at any point. The change in absolute value at the high GDP level
25

ranges between −0.21 and −0.97. The change in absolute value at the low GDP level ranges between
−0.48 and +0.25.
We calculate the tax eﬀect on all firms as the diﬀerence in the sum of pre and post value functions
of all firms combined. The net tax eﬀect on firms is negative. The total loss ranges between -2.92
and -8.77 across the range of the number of active firms. Some of the firms’ losses will be oﬀset
by the revenues generated by the tax. We find that the expected sum of discounted tax revenues
ranges between +2.37 and +7.55 over the range of the number of active firms. Adding the net tax
eﬀect on firms and the tax revenues implies a total tax eﬀect ranging between -4.78 and +0.45 over
the range of the number of firms. As the number of active firms increases, the total eﬀect increases
initially, peaking between 6 and 7 firms, and then decreases. The total tax eﬀect is not significantly
diﬀerent from zero for any number of firms.
Increasing the tax to three units yields results qualitatively similar to the unit tax case: The
distribution of the number of active firms remains not significantly diﬀerent from the before tax
distribution. The number of turnovers and the expected discounted sum of payoﬀs for an inactive
firm are reduced due to the tax and more so than with a unit tax. The average value function
of an active firm becomes steeper with the three-unit tax. It is higher with a small Number of
Other Active Firms and lower with a large Number of Other Active Firms relative to the before
tax value function. The diﬀerence is marginally significant at some values of the Number of Other
Active Firms. The total tax eﬀect, calculated as the sum of the net tax eﬀect on firms plus the tax
revenues, is not significantly diﬀerent from zero for most of the range of the number of firms. It is
marginally significant positive with seven to nine firms and marginally significant negative with 15
firms.
In sum, the tax does not aﬀect the long-run number of active firms. Instead, it reduces the
frequency of turnovers as it makes entry more costly. The tax adversely aﬀects inactive firms as the
cost of entry is increased. Already active firms are not significantly aﬀected by the tax for most of
the range of the number of firms. Taking the tax revenues into account, the total eﬀect on the sum
of future discounted payoﬀs is on occasions positive but not significant for most of the range of the
number of firms.

9

Conclusion

This paper proposes a new estimation method for Markovian games with finite actions. The basis of
our analysis is a necessary and suﬃcient equilibrium condition for dynamic games. The equilibrium
condition permits us to characterize the identification conditions of the underlying model parameters.

26

We propose an estimation method following the steps in the identification argument. The estimator
is eﬃcient and computationally easy to implement. We apply the proposed estimator to time series
data on entry and exit decisions for a number of professions in two Austrian cities. The model fits
the data well. Dynamic eﬀects are important as active firms are very likely to remain active in
the next period. We calculate the eﬀect of an entry tax on the equilibrium outcome. Somewhat
surprisingly, the distribution of active firms does not change significantly as a result of the tax but
the number of turnovers is reduced significantly. While the characterization of the identification
conditions is reasonably complete, the estimator is computationally simple, and policy experiments
can be conducted, there are at least two shortcomings in our analysis:
First, not all the primitives of the model are identifiable as the discount factor and the distribution of unobserved profitability shocks are not identified. It may be possible to alleviate the
non-identification concern by adopting a formulation that omits the profitability shock. In the
absence of a profitability shock, firms will not necessarily adopt pure strategies. Instead, firms
may randomize between alternative actions. The resulting mixed strategy equilibrium will generate
endogenously a distribution over diﬀerent outcomes which may form the basis for an alternative
estimation approach.
Second, the assumption of Markovian strategies is restrictive as it does not permit full history
dependent behavior. An increase in the state space would permit strategies to be richer functions
of past actions. However, full history dependent behavior, which plays a prominent role in the
development of the theory of strategic dynamic games, cannot be captured.

10

Appendix

Proof of Proposition 1. Consider a typical firm i deciding between action k and action 0 at any
state s. By assumption, the payoﬀ function is linear in the private profitability shock εk . If there
exists a point εk such that a firm of type εk is indiﬀerent between actions k and 0, then any type
with a smaller profitability shock, εk < εk , will prefer action 0 to action k. On the other hand, any
type with a higher profitability shock, εk > εk , will prefer action k to action 0. The reason is that
the profitability shock εk aﬀects the current period payoﬀ under action k only. Future payoﬀs and
0

current period payoﬀs under action k 6= k are unaﬀected by εk .
0

0

Next, consider a type (εk , εk ) for any k, k 6= 0. By transitivity, if the type is indiﬀerent between
0

actions k and 0, and indiﬀerent between actions 0 and k , then the type is also indiﬀerent between
0

0

0

0

action k and k . Furthermore, transitivity implies that if εk − εk > εk − εk , then type (εk , εk )
0

0

0

0

prefers action k to actions k and 0, while if εk − εk < εk − εk , then type (εk , εk ) prefers action k
27

0

to actions k and 0.
Finally, we need to show that the indiﬀerent points ε = (ε1 , . . . , εK ) exist. The indiﬀerent εk
type receives the same expected discounted sum of payoﬀs under action k as under action 0, which
leads to the indiﬀerence equation:
X

a−i ∈A−i

X

=

a−i ∈A−i



Pr(a−i |s) · π i (a−i , k, s) + β


Pr(a−i |s) · π i (a−i , 0, s) + β

X
0

s ∈S

X
0

s ∈S

0

0



0

0



g(a−i , k, s, s )Vi (s ) + εk
g(a−i , k, s, s )Vi (s )

(12)

By assumption, the period return Πi and the ex ante expected profitability shock are bounded. The
discount factor β is less than 1 and, hence, the value function is bounded. In turn this implies
that the first expression on the left hand side and the expression on the right hand side in equation
(12) are bounded. Hence, the indiﬀerent point εk , which equals the diﬀerence between those two
expressions, is contained in a bounded interval, and there exists a finite positive number E such that
εk ∈ [−E, E]. Hence, the indiﬀerent points ε = (ε1 , . . . , εK ) must exist, since, by assumption, the
support of εk is unbounded. This establishes the result.

Proof of Proposition 2. First, we show that equation (7) must be satisfied in any equilibrium.
It is an immediate consequence from Proposition 1, that for every i the indiﬀerent εki type receives
the same expected discounted sum of payoﬀs under action k as under action 0, which leads to the
indiﬀerence equation:
X

a−i ∈A−i

=

X

a−i ∈A−i



Pr(a−i |s) · π i (a−i , k, s) + β


Pr(a−i |s) · π i (a−i , 0, s) + β

X

s0 ∈S

X
0

s ∈S

0

0



0

0



g(a−i , k, s, s )Vi (s ) + εki (s)
g(a−i , k, s, s )Vi (s )

(13)

Equation (13) is a necessary equilibrium condition that must be satisfied at every state s ∈ S and
for every action k = 1, . . . , K yielding a total of ms · K equations with ms · k indiﬀerent types,
one for each possible state and action. We may compactly write equation (13) in matrix form.
Let εi = [εi (s)]s∈S be the (ms · K) × 1 dimensional vector of indiﬀerent types; let P−i be the
ms × ms · (K + 1)

N−1

dimensional matrix consisting of choice probability Pr(a−i |s) in row s column
0

0

(a−i , s), and zero entries in row s column (a−i , s ) with s 6= s; and define the (ms · K) × (ma · ms )

28

dimensional matrix Pi (ε) as:
ai =
z


0 1
−P−i



 −P−i
Pi (ε) = 
..


.

−P−i

P−i
0

2
...
}|

K

0

...

0

P−i

0

P−i

0

0

...
..
.

0

0

...

0

We can re-state equation (13) as:

{








Pi (ε) Πi + βPi (ε) GVi + εi = 0

(14)

Next, we substitute equation (3) into equation (14) to obtain an equation that characterizes the
equilibrium indiﬀerence points εi . To do so, notice that the vector of ex ante expected profitability
shocks can be restated using the indiﬀerence points:


K Z ∞
X
Y
0
εk
F (εk + εk − εk )f (εk )dεk 
Di (s) = 
k=1

εk
i (s)

k0 ≥1,k0 6=k

s∈S

which leads us to the characterization stated in the Proposition. This establishes the first part.
Next, we take for every firm i a vector εi that satisfies equation (7). We need to construct a
Markovian strategy, beliefs and a continuation value and show that they constitute an equilibrium.
For a given εi , we define the Markovian strategy as in Proposition 1, as:

0
0
 k if εk > εk (s) and for all k0 6= k: εk − εk > εk (s) − εk (s) ;
i
i
i
i
i
ai (εi , s) =
 0
if εk < εk (s) for all k.
i

i

The above decision rule yields beliefs which we denote with the choice probability matrix P (ε). The
decision rule also implies expected profitability shocks which we denote as Di (ε). As in equation
(3), the value function is then given by:
Vi = [Is − βP (ε) G]−1 [P (ε) Πi + Di (ε)] .
By construction, the decision rule is optimal for the above continuation value and beliefs. Further,
the beliefs are consistent. This establishes the desired result.
Proof of Theorem 1. We need to show that equation (7) has a solution. We can re-write the
equation to define the function h = (h1 , . . . , hN ) with component hi given by:
εi

= hi (ε)
= −Pi (ε) Πi − βPi (ε) G [Is − βP (ε) G]−1 [P (ε) Πi + Di (ε)]
29

A fixed point of the function h will be a zero of equation (7). By assumption, the expected period
payoﬀ is bounded and, hence, the ex ante value function is bounded. As is shown in the proof of
Proposition 1, we can deduce that the set of indiﬀerence points εi is contained in some bounded
ms ·K

interval [−E, E]

for some E. In turn, this implies that h has domain and range [−E, E]

ms ·K·N

.

The elements entering the function h are continuous, as the decision rule, characterized in Proposition 1, and the resulting choice probability matrix are continuous in ε. Brouwer’s fixed point
theorem implies that there exists a fixed point ε of the function h. By Proposition 2, the fixed point
corresponds to an equilibrium.
Proof of Corollary 1. The arguments in the proofs of Proposition 1, Proposition 2 and Theorem 1 do not rely on asymmetry. The same arguments remain valid with the symmetry assumption
in place.
Proof of Lemma 1. Pick any state s ∈ S and firm i ∈ N . Denote with φk (ε) the probability
that action k is chosen. Elementary calculus shows that the probability equals:
0

0

0

6 k: εki − εki > εk − εk )
φk (ε) = Pr(εki > εk and for all k =
Z ∞ Y
0
=
F (εk + εk − εk )f (εk )dεk
εk

Let φ0 (ε) = 1 −

PK

l=1

k0 ≥1,k0 6=k

φl (ε) denote the probability of action 0. It equals

Q

k0 ≥1

F (εk ). Let P k

denote the observed probability that firm i selects action k, and define the function ψ : <K → <K
³
´
where ψ (ε) = φ1 (ε) − P 1 , . . . , φK (ε) − P K . A zero of the function ψ corresponds to a solution

in equation (9). By assumption, the function F is diﬀerentiable and, hence, φ is diﬀerentiable.
k

k

Taking the derivative shows that φ satisfies the gross substitute property: ∂φ
< 0 and ∂φk0 > 0
∂εk
∂ε
0
P
0
K
for k 6= k. Let Dψ denote the gradient of ψ. Since, by construction, l=0 φl (ε) = 1, and ∂φ
> 0,
∂εk
k
k
P
K
it follows that Dψ has a negative and dominant diagonal, − ∂φ
> k0 =1,k0 6=k ∂φk0 . Hence, Dψ is
∂εk
∂ε

non-singular.

We show that there exists a ε such that ψ l (ε) < 0 for all l ≥ 1. By assumption the probability

P k is bounded away from zero, P k ≥ δ > 0 for all k. Pick ε1 = F −1 (1 − δ) + 1. Consider the
following inequalities:
¡
¢
φl ε1 , . . . , ε1 =
≤

Z

∞

ε1
Z ∞

F (εk )K−1 f (εk )dεk
f (εk )dεk

ε1

< δ.

The first inequality uses that F (εk )K−1 ≤ 1. The second inequality uses that by construction,
R∞
F (ε1 − 1) = 1 − δ and, thus, ε1 f (ε)dε < δ. Since P l ≥ δ, it follows that ψ l (ε1 , . . . , ε1 ) < 0 for all
30

l ≥ 1.

Next, we show that there exists a ε such that ψ l (ε) > 0 for all l ≥ 1. Clearly, there exists a ε
PK
0
such that l=1 ψ l (ε) > 0. To see this, fix εk = ε1 for all k ≥ 1 and observe that by construction:
K
X
l=1

K
¡
¢ X
ψ l (ε1 , . . . , ε1 ) = 1 − φ0 ε1 , . . . , ε1 −
Pl
l=1

= 1 − F (ε1 )K −
Since
PK

PK

l=1

l

0

K
X

P l.

l=1

0

P = 1 − P with P bounded away from zero, we can pick ε1 suﬃciently low, and have

ψ l (ε) > 0. Now, by the implicit function theorem and the gross substitute property, we can
0
0
0
P
0
l
k
increase εk for k with ψ k (ε) > 0 while holding K
l=1 ψ (ε) constant. Since, eventually, ψ (ε)
l=1

approaches zero, there must exist a ε such that ψ l (ε) > 0 for all l ≥ 1.

Since there exist ε, ε such that ψ l (ε) > 0, ψ l (ε) < 0 for all l ≥ 1, by continuity of ψ there exists

a ε such that ψ l (ε) = 0 for all l ≥ 1.

0

It remains to show that the zero is unique. Suppose there are two zeros. That is there are ε, ε
³ 0´
with the property ψ l (ε) = 0, ψ l ε = 0 for all l ≥ 1. By the mean value theorem there exists a
00

point ε such that

∂ψ l (ε)
|ε=ε00
∂εk

00

= 0 for all l ≥ 1. The gradient Dψ evaluated at ε must be singular,

contradicting the non-singularity of Dψ. Hence, the zero is unique.
Proof of Proposition 3.

Part (iii): Pick any strict monotone and continuous distribution

function F defined on < and pick any β. By Lemma 1, there is a unique ε(F ) and D(F ). For any

firm i, condition (7) consists of K · LN equations of the form Aj Πi + Bj = 0 in which the numbers
in Aj and Bj are given. The unknown parameter vector Πi has a total of (K + 1)N · LN parameters.

Clearly, the number of parameters exceeds the number of equations, and elementary properties of
linear equations establish that the parameter vector Πi is not identified.
Parts (i) and (ii) follow immediately from part (iii).
Proof of Proposition 4. By definition, the matrix Xi is of dimension (K · LN ) × ((K + 1)N ·

LN ), and the profit vector Πi of dimension ((K + 1)N · LN ) × 1. Restriction (R1) fixes (K + 1)N ·
N

(LN − L) profit parameters, leaving a total of (K + 1) · L profit parameters unknown. Restriction
(R2) fixes additionally (K + 1)

N −1

· L profit parameters. Imposing restrictions (R1) and (R2)
´
¡
¢ ³
N −1
together yields the restricted matrix X i of dimension K · LN × K · (K + 1)
· L . It is obtained

by summing columns in the unrestricted matrix Xi which are associated with identical profit values.
³
´
The restricted profit parameter vector Πi has dimension K · (K + 1)N−1 · L × 1.
By elementary properties of linear equations, the parameter vector Πi is identified provided the

matrix X i has full column rank. Full column rank is achieved if the rank equals K · (K + 1)N −1 ·

L. Now, the number of rows in X i equals K · LN , while the number of columns in X i equals
31

K · (K + 1)N−1 · L. Clearly, if L ≥ K + 1, then the matrix X i can have full column rank. This
establishes part (ii) in the Proposition. On the other hand, if L < K + 1, then the rank of the matrix
X i is strictly less than K · (K + 1)

N−1

· L. Hence, the matrix X i does not have full column rank.

This establishes part (i) in the Proposition.

References
[1] Aguirregabiria, V. and Mira P. (2002), Sequential Simulated-Based Estimation of Dynamic
Discrete Games, technical report, Boston University.
[2] Berry, S. (1992), Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry, Econometrica, 60,
889-917.
[3] Billingsley, P. (1968), Convergence of Probability Measures, John Wiley, New York.
[4] Bresnahan, T.F. and Reiss P.C. (1987), Do Entry Conditions vary across markets, Brookings
Papers in Economic Activities: Microeconomic Annual, 1, 833-882.
[5] Bresnahan, T.F. and Reiss P.C. (1990), Entry in Monopoly Markets, Review of Economic
Studies, 57, 531-544.
[6] Bresnahan, T.F. and Reiss P.C. (1991), Entry and Competition in Concentrated Markets, Journal of Political Economy, 99(5), 977-1009.
[7] Davis, P. (1999), Spatial Competition in Retail Markets: Motion Theaters, technical report,
MIT.
[8] Hotz, J. and Miller R.A. (1993), Conditional Choice Probabilities and the Estimation of Dynamic Models, Review of Economic Studies, 60, 497-529.
[9] Jofre-Bonet M. and Pesendorfer M. (2000), Bidding Behavior in a Repeated Procurement Auction: A Summary, European Economic Review, 44, 1006-1020.
[10] Jofre-Bonet M. and Pesendorfer M. (2002), Estimation of a Dynamic Auction Game, forthcoming in Econometrica.
[11] Magnac T. and Thesmar D. (2002), Identifying Dynamic Discrete Decision Processes, Econometrica, 70, 801-816.
[12] Maskin, E. and Tirole, J. (1994), Markov Perfect Equilibrium, technical report, Harvard University.
32

[13] Maskin, E. and Tirole, J. (2001), Markov Perfect Equilibrium I: Observable Actions, Journal
of Economic Theory, 100, 191-219.
[14] Mazzeo, J.M. (2002), Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure, RAND Journal of Economics, 33, 221-242.
[15] Pakes, A. and Berry S. (2002), Two Estimators for the Parameters of Discrete Dynamic Games
(with Entry/Exit Examples), technical report, Harvard University.
[16] Pakes, A. and P. McGuire (2001), Stochastic Algorithms, Symmetric Markov Perfect Equilibrium, and the ’Curse’ of Dimensionality, Econometrica, 69, 1261-1282.
[17] Rust. J. (1994), Structural Estimation of Markov Decision Processes, in Handbook of Econometrics, Vol 4, Engle, R.F. and McFadden D.L. eds, Elsevier, North-Holland, 3081-3143.
[18] Seim, K. (2002), Spatial Diﬀerentiation and Market Structure: The Video Retail Industry, PhD
Dissertation, Yale University.
[19] Tamer, E (2003), Empirical Strategies for Estimating Discrete Games with Multiple Equilibria,
Review of Economic Studies, 70.
[20] Van Der Vaart, A.W. (1998), Asymptotic Statistics, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
U.K.

33

Table I: Descriptive Statistics

*

Baden
Pub
No of Firms
Mean
Minimum
Maximum
No of Entrants
No of Exiting Firms
Mean Active Spell

17.01
(2.07)
12
22
49
53
21.33
(21.23)

Restaurant Coffeehouse Carpenter
13.26
(4.69)
6
25
38
20
25.32
(24.52)

13.81
(1.65)
9
18
44
40
21.89
(20.59)

11.29
(1.63)
9
15
16
12
37.92
(30.38)

Bakery
9
(0.93)
7
11
8
9
44.47
(28.92)

Amstetten
Pub
No of Firms
Mean
Minimum
Maximum
No of Entrants
No of Exiting Firms
Mean Active Spell

21.52
(2.56)
17
29
48
45
26.99
(24.24)

* Standard deviations are displayed in parenthesis.

Restaurant Coffeehouse Carpenter
8.33
(2.12)
4
12
23
16
25.93
(26.14)

14.37
(6.84)
5
28
50
30
21.95
(22.27)

13.60
(1.21)
12
17
15
14
42.30
(27.74)

Bakery
8.88
(1.52)
7
14
14
14
32.43
(27.31)

Table II: Probit Estimates of the Decision to be Active
Baden
Pub
Log Likelihood
No of Observations
Constant
Lagged Active
Number of Other Active Firms
(Lagged Active)*(No of Other Active Firms)
Log GDP

Restaurant Coffeehouse

Carpenter

Bakery

-372.73
1826

-250.81
2075

-302.70
1494

-123.02
1245

-79.11
913

9.61
(5.68)
4.40
(0.88)
0.03
(0.05)
-0.09
(0.05)
-0.87
(0.42)

-18.05
(14.03)
4.79
(0.39)
0.04
(0.04)
-0.08
(0.03)
1.23
(1.13)

3.54
(4.81)
4.78
(0.96)
0.05
(0.06)
-0.14
(0.07)
-0.42
(0.38)

-26.85
(12.73)
6.08
(1.21)
-0.03
(0.12)
-0.22
(0.11)
1.99
(1.06)

9.40
(11.23)
2.18
(2.33)
-0.31
(0.23)
0.20
(0.28)
-0.66
(0.80)

Carpenter

Bakery

Amstetten
Pub
Log Likelihood
No of Observations
Constant
Lagged Active
Number of Other Active Firms
(Lagged Active)*(No of Other Active Firms)
Log GDP

Restaurant Coffeehouse

-361.23
2407

-150.76
996

-296.41
2324

-125.36
1411

-126.42
1162

-19.91
(8.33)
7.98
(0.89)
0.09
(0.05)
-0.22
(0.04)
1.30
(0.71)

-15.41
(11.33)
5.51
(0.72)
0.10
(0.08)
-0.27
(0.09)
1.03
(0.92)

-16.41
(19.30)
5.94
(0.36)
0.08
(0.03)
-0.15
(0.02)
1.05
(1.53)

-6.64
(8.96)
11.66
(2.07)
0.35
(0.14)
-0.59
(0.15)
0.03
(0.75)

-7.74
(7.19)
6.74
(1.04)
0.20
(0.10)
-0.33
(0.12)
0.33
(0.56)

* The dependent variable equals 1 if the firm is active and zero otherwise. Standard errors are displayed in parenthesis.

Table III: Profit and Entry Cost Estimates in Baden *

Number of Other
Active Firms
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21

Pub

Restaurant

Coffeehouse

Carpenter

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry
Cost

14.41
(0.88)
14.32
(0.83)
14.23
(0.78)
14.14
(0.72)
14.05
(0.67)
13.96
(0.62)
13.87
(0.57)
13.78
(0.51)
13.69
(0.46)
13.60
(0.41)
13.51
(0.36)
13.42
(0.31)
13.33
(0.26)
13.24
(0.21)
13.15
(0.17)
13.06
(0.13)
12.96
(0.11)
12.87
(0.11)
12.78
(0.14)
12.69
(0.18)
12.60
(0.23)
12.50
(0.28)

14.79
(0.39)
14.71
(0.37)
14.64
(0.34)
14.56
(0.31)
14.48
(0.29)
14.40
(0.26)
14.33
(0.24)
14.25
(0.22)
14.17
(0.19)
14.09
(0.17)
14.02
(0.15)
13.94
(0.14)
13.86
(0.13)
13.78
(0.12)
13.71
(0.12)
13.63
(0.13)
13.55
(0.14)
13.47
(0.15)
13.40
(0.17)
13.32
(0.19)
13.24
(0.22)
13.16
(0.24)
13.08
(0.27)
13.01
(0.29)
12.93
(0.32)

14.78
(0.96)
14.65
(0.89)
14.51
(0.82)
14.37
(0.75)
14.24
(0.68)
14.10
(0.61)
13.96
(0.54)
13.82
(0.47)
13.69
(0.40)
13.55
(0.33)
13.41
(0.27)
13.27
(0.20)
13.13
(0.15)
12.99
(0.12)
12.85
(0.12)
12.71
(0.17)
12.57
(0.24)
12.42
(0.31)

16.06
(1.32)
15.85
(1.19)
15.63
(1.07)
15.42
(0.95)
15.21
(0.83)
14.99
(0.72)
14.78
(0.60)
14.57
(0.49)
14.35
(0.39)
14.14
(0.29)
13.92
(0.21)
13.69
(0.18)
13.45
(0.23)
13.19
(0.36)
12.88
(0.60)

11.35 323520.90 3852868.80
(2.64) (7474945) (101652130)
11.75
1906.56
13183.76
(2.53) (27348.29) (221337.01)
12.16
46.37
194.96
(2.24)
(434.04)
(2230.42)
12.53
3.88
9.48
(1.81)
(18.56)
(62.49)
12.85
1.08
1.66
(1.39)
(1.99)
(4.52)
13.12
0.60
0.75
(1.02)
(0.43)
(0.76)
13.36
0.43
0.50
(0.71)
(0.13)
(0.21)
13.59
0.36
0.40
(0.43)
(0.04)
(0.07)
13.80
0.32
0.35
(0.23)
(0.01)
(0.03)
14.01
0.30
0.32
(0.29)
(0.03)
(0.03)
14.22
0.28
0.30
(0.52)
(0.05)
(0.05)

0.42
(0.18)
0.42
(0.17)
0.42
(0.17)
0.41
(0.16)
0.41
(0.15)
0.41
(0.14)
0.41
(0.13)
0.41
(0.12)
0.41
(0.11)
0.40
(0.10)
0.40
(0.09)
0.39
(0.08)
0.39
(0.07)
0.38
(0.06)
0.37
(0.04)
0.35
(0.03)
0.34
(0.02)
0.32
(0.03)
0.29
(0.05)
0.26
(0.09)
0.22
(0.14)
0.16
(0.23)

0.48
(0.29)
0.49
(0.28)
0.49
(0.27)
0.49
(0.26)
0.49
(0.25)
0.49
(0.23)
0.49
(0.22)
0.48
(0.21)
0.48
(0.19)
0.48
(0.18)
0.48
(0.16)
0.47
(0.15)
0.47
(0.13)
0.46
(0.12)
0.45
(0.10)
0.44
(0.09)
0.43
(0.07)
0.41
(0.06)
0.39
(0.05)
0.37
(0.05)
0.34
(0.07)
0.30
(0.11)

22
23
24
* Standard deviations are displayed in parenthesis.

0.33
(0.05)
0.33
(0.05)
0.33
(0.05)
0.33
(0.05)
0.33
(0.05)
0.33
(0.05)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.03)
0.33
(0.03)
0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.02)
0.32
(0.03)
0.31
(0.04)
0.31
(0.05)
0.31
(0.07)
0.30
(0.09)
0.29
(0.11)
0.28
(0.14)
0.27
(0.17)

0.30
(0.02)
0.30
(0.01)
0.30
(0.01)
0.30
(0.01)
0.30
(0.01)
0.29
(0.01)
0.29
(0.01)
0.29
(0.02)
0.29
(0.02)
0.28
(0.03)
0.28
(0.03)
0.28
(0.04)
0.27
(0.05)
0.27
(0.06)
0.27
(0.07)
0.26
(0.09)
0.25
(0.11)
0.25
(0.13)
0.24
(0.15)
0.23
(0.18)
0.22
(0.21)
0.21
(0.25)
0.19
(0.30)
0.17
(0.35)
0.15
(0.42)

0.39
(0.12)
0.39
(0.12)
0.39
(0.12)
0.40
(0.11)
0.40
(0.11)
0.40
(0.10)
0.40
(0.10)
0.40
(0.09)
0.40
(0.08)
0.39
(0.07)
0.39
(0.06)
0.38
(0.05)
0.37
(0.04)
0.36
(0.03)
0.33
(0.03)
0.30
(0.06)
0.25
(0.11)
0.16
(0.23)

0.41
(0.15)
0.41
(0.15)
0.42
(0.14)
0.42
(0.14)
0.42
(0.13)
0.43
(0.12)
0.43
(0.12)
0.43
(0.11)
0.43
(0.10)
0.43
(0.09)
0.43
(0.08)
0.42
(0.06)
0.41
(0.06)
0.40
(0.05)
0.38
(0.05)
0.35
(0.07)
0.31
(0.10)
0.24
(0.19)

0.92
(1.76)
0.84
(1.38)
0.77
(1.07)
0.71
(0.81)
0.65
(0.61)
0.60
(0.45)
0.55
(0.32)
0.51
(0.22)
0.47
(0.15)
0.43
(0.09)
0.39
(0.05)
0.33
(0.03)
0.25
(0.09)
0.10
(0.27)
-0.27
(0.95)

Bakery

0.51
(0.46)
0.48
(0.36)
0.46
(0.27)
0.43
(0.20)
0.41
(0.15)
0.39
(0.10)
0.37
(0.07)
0.35
(0.05)
0.32
(0.04)
0.28
(0.05)
0.22
(0.11)
0.09
(0.28)
-0.18
(0.80)
-0.98
(3.11)
-4.88
(20.97)

High GDP
Profit

Low GDP
Profit

Table IV: Profit and Entry Cost Estimates in Amstetten*
Pub
Number of Other
Active Firms
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
28

Entry
Cost
17.98
(0.89)
17.77
(0.84)
17.55
(0.80)
17.33
(0.76)
17.11
(0.72)
16.89
(0.68)
16.67
(0.64)
16.45
(0.60)
16.23
(0.56)
16.02
(0.52)
15.80
(0.48)
15.58
(0.44)
15.36
(0.40)
15.14
(0.36)
14.92
(0.32)
14.70
(0.29)
14.48
(0.25)
14.26
(0.21)
14.04
(0.18)
13.82
(0.15)
13.60
(0.12)
13.38
(0.11)
13.15
(0.11)
12.91
(0.13)
12.67
(0.17)
12.42
(0.23)
12.13
(0.35)
11.77
(0.57)
11.11
(1.55)

High GDP Low GDP
Profit
Profit
0.37
(0.03)
0.37
(0.03)
0.37
(0.03)
0.36
(0.03)
0.36
(0.04)
0.36
(0.04)
0.36
(0.04)
0.36
(0.05)
0.36
(0.05)
0.36
(0.06)
0.36
(0.06)
0.36
(0.07)
0.37
(0.07)
0.37
(0.07)
0.37
(0.07)
0.38
(0.07)
0.38
(0.07)
0.38
(0.07)
0.38
(0.06)
0.38
(0.05)
0.38
(0.04)
0.37
(0.03)
0.34
(0.03)
0.31
(0.09)
0.16
(0.35)
0.31
(1.01)
-1.45
(5.65)
4.05
(20.92)
-39.00
(147.37)

0.36
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
0.34
(0.02)
0.34
(0.02)
0.34
(0.02)
0.34
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.32
(0.02)
0.32
(0.02)
0.32
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.30
(0.03)
0.28
(0.04)
0.26
(0.06)
0.22
(0.11)
0.16
(0.19)
0.05
(0.35)
12.85
(0.20)
12.58
(0.31)
12.26
(0.52)
11.84
(1.02)
11.23
(2.02)
9.56
(6.41)

* Standard deviations are displayed in parenthesis.

Restaurant

Coffeehouse

Carpenter

Bakery

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

Entry High GDP Low GDP
Cost
Profit
Profit

15.52
(0.72)
15.25
(0.64)
14.98
(0.56)
14.71
(0.48)
14.43
(0.40)
14.16
(0.32)
13.89
(0.25)
13.62
(0.19)
13.34
(0.16)
13.06
(0.18)
12.77
(0.24)
12.47
(0.34)

15.94
(0.36)
15.79
(0.34)
15.64
(0.33)
15.49
(0.31)
15.33
(0.29)
15.18
(0.27)
15.03
(0.26)
14.88
(0.24)
14.73
(0.22)
14.58
(0.21)
14.42
(0.19)
14.27
(0.18)
14.12
(0.16)
13.97
(0.15)
13.82
(0.14)
13.66
(0.13)
13.51
(0.12)
13.36
(0.12)
13.20
(0.12)
13.05
(0.12)
12.90
(0.12)
12.74
(0.13)
12.59
(0.14)
12.43
(0.16)
12.27
(0.17)
12.11
(0.19)
11.95
(0.22)
11.77
(0.26)

21.66
(2.27)
21.07
(1.91)
20.49
(1.77)
19.90
(1.62)
19.32
(1.47)
18.73
(1.32)
18.14
(1.17)
17.56
(1.02)
16.97
(0.86)
16.39
(0.72)
15.81
(0.57)
15.22
(0.43)
14.64
(0.30)
14.06
(0.20)
13.46
(0.19)
12.86
(0.25)
12.08
(0.61)

16.74
(1.04)
16.41
(0.93)
16.08
(0.81)
15.75
(0.70)
15.43
(0.58)
15.10
(0.47)
14.77
(0.37)
14.44
(0.27)
14.12
(0.19)
13.79
(0.16)
13.46
(0.21)
13.12
(0.30)
12.78
(0.41)
12.43
(0.56)

0.37
(0.09)
0.37
(0.09)
0.38
(0.09)
0.38
(0.09)
0.38
(0.08)
0.39
(0.08)
0.38
(0.06)
0.38
(0.05)
0.37
(0.03)
0.33
(0.04)
0.27
(0.11)
0.12
(0.30)

0.34
(0.04)
0.34
(0.04)
0.34
(0.04)
0.34
(0.03)
0.34
(0.03)
0.33
(0.03)
0.32
(0.04)
0.30
(0.06)
0.27
(0.10)
0.21
(0.19)
0.10
(0.37)
-0.18
(0.93)

0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.02)
0.33
(0.03)
0.33
(0.03)
0.32
(0.03)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.04)
0.33
(0.05)
0.34
(0.05)
0.34
(0.04)
0.34
(0.04)
0.35
(0.04)
0.35
(0.03)
0.36
(0.03)
0.36
(0.02)
0.36
(0.02)
0.36
(0.04)
0.36
(0.06)
0.36
(0.09)
0.35
(0.13)
0.33
(0.19)
0.30
(0.27)
0.21
(0.47)
0.16
(0.57)
-0.69
(3.13)

0.32
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.31
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.30
(0.02)
0.30
(0.03)
0.30
(0.03)
0.30
(0.04)
0.30
(0.06)
0.29
(0.07)
0.29
(0.09)
0.29
(0.11)
0.28
(0.14)
0.27
(0.18)
0.26
(0.22)
0.24
(0.28)
0.22
(0.36)
0.20
(0.46)
0.16
(0.61)
0.09
(0.85)
0.00
(1.22)
-0.26
(2.45)
-0.44
(3.07)
-5.22
(39.26)

0.38
(0.03)
0.38
(0.03)
0.37
(0.02)
0.37
(0.02)
0.36
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
0.34
(0.01)
0.34
(0.01)
0.33
(0.01)
0.33
(0.01)
0.32
(0.02)
0.32
(0.04)
0.34
(0.04)
0.33
(0.03)
0.41
(0.22)
-0.14
(0.84)

0.38
(0.03)
0.38
(0.02)
0.37
(0.02)
0.37
(0.02)
0.36
(0.02)
0.35
(0.02)
0.35
(0.01)
0.34
(0.01)
0.34
(0.01)
0.33
(0.01)
0.33
(0.01)
0.32
(0.02)
0.32
(0.03)
0.34
(0.04)
0.33
(0.08)
0.40
(0.28)
-0.16
(1.16)

0.33
(0.01)
0.33
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.31
(0.03)
0.30
(0.06)
0.27
(0.12)
0.16
(0.28)

0.33
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.32
(0.01)
0.31
(0.01)
0.31
(0.02)
0.31
(0.02)
0.30
(0.02)
0.30
(0.02)
0.29
(0.04)
0.28
(0.06)
0.26
(0.10)
0.22
(0.19)
0.08
(0.42)

