                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       INCENTIVES AND INVENTION IN UNIVERSITIES

                                              Saul Lach
                                           Mark Schankerman

                                           Working Paper 9727
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9727


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




We are grateful to Adam Ja.e, Boyan Jovanovic, Jenny Lanjouw, Julia Shvets, Manuel Trajtenberg, Len
Waverman, and Arvids Ziedonis for constructive comments on an earlier draft of this paper, and to Don
Siegel for generous help with the AUTM data and other issues throughout the project. Alejandro Goren, Haim
Mizrahi, and Anna Yosifun provided excellent research assistance. We would also like to thank Arnon
Bentur, Director of the Samuel Neaman Institute for Advanced Studies in Science and Technology Policy
at the Technion (Israel) for encouragement and financial support in this research project. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Saul Lach and Mark Schankerman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.
Incentives and Invention in Universities
Saul Lach and Mark Schankerman
NBER Working Paper No. 9727
May 2003
JEL No.O31, O34, L3, L0

                                           ABSTRACT

We show that economic incentives affect the number and commercial value of inventions generated
in universities. Using panel data for 102 U.S. universities during the period 1991-1999, we find that
universities which give higher royalty shares to academic scientists generate more inventions and

higher license income, controlling for other factors including university size, quality, research
funding and technology licensing inputs. The incentive effects are much larger in private universities

than in public ones. For private institutions there is a Laffer curve effect: raising the inventor's
royalty share increases the license income retained by the university. The incentive effect appears
to work both through the level of effort and sorting of academic scientists.


Saul Lach                                      Mark Schankerman
Deparment of Economics                         Department of Economics, R.516
The Hebrew University                          London School of Economics
Jerusalem, Israel                              Houghton Street
and NBER                                       London WC2A 2AE, England
Saul.Lach@huji.ac.il                           m.schankerman@lse.ac.uk
1       Introduction

Universities are an important source of technical change. By the end of the 1990’s, they
accounted for about 50 percent of basic research and almost Þve percent of domestic patent
grants in the U.S. (National Science Board, 2000). Academic research has had real eﬀects on
the economy by increasing the productivity of private sector R&D and the growth in total factor
productivity (Jaﬀe, 1989; Adams, 1990). These beneÞts work through knowledge spillovers from

academia to the rest of the economy, and through the licensing of university-owned inventions
to private Þrms.1 This licensing activity facilitates the transfer of new scientiÞc knowledge and
the commercial development of these inventions by the private sector. Technology licensing
activity has grown dramatically in the past two decades.2 The number of U.S. patents awards
to university inventors rose from 500 in 1982 to more than 3,100 in 1998. The number of
licenses executed on university inventions grew more than three-fold during the last decade,
from 1,278 to 4,362, and gross licensing revenues increased nearly seven-fold, from $186 million
to nearly $1.3 billion.
        Given the importance of university research for long term growth and productivity, it is
critical to understand what drives academic research and technology licensing activity. Is it a
purely intellectual pursuit, as many commentators claim, or do economic incentives inßuence
how academic scientists structure their research activities? In one of the Þrst papers to analyse
theoretically the incentive eﬀects of various award schemes to basic research at universities (e.g.,

NSF awards) and their economic eﬃciency, Lazear (1997) points out that “even research with
direct marketability will not be undertaken at the appropriate rate unless the inventor is entitled
to the full rents from the resulting advance”.

    1
    There is substantial evidence of R&D spillovers (e.g., Jaﬀe, 1989; Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 2002; Adams,
1990, 2002). University research spillovers tend to be geographically localized as might be expected if direct
knowledge transfers are important (Jaﬀe, Trajtenberg and Henderson, 1993; Audretsch and Stephan, 1996).
There is also a growing empirical literature on university patenting and technology transfer (e.g., Henderson,
Jaﬀe and Trajtenberg, 1998; Thursby and Kemp, 2002; Siegel, Waldman and Link, 2003) and university research
productivity (Adams and Griliches, 1998).
    2
    Part of this rapid growth in university innovation and licensing activity is due to the passage of the Bayh-
Dole Act of 1980 (Patent and Trademarks Amendments Act, PL 965-17) which gave universities the right to
patent and a mandate to license discoveries made with federally sponsored research to the private sector. By the
year 2000, nearly all American research universities had established, or expanded, technology licensing oﬃces
and introduced explicit intellectual property policies and royalty sharing arrangements for academic scientists.




                                                       1
      In this paper we take a Þrst step in examining this issue by presenting econometric evi-
dence on the role of economic incentives in shaping university research and licensing outcomes.
SpeciÞcally, we examine how the cash ßow rights from university inventions (the share of license

royalties received by academic inventors) aﬀect the licensing value of inventions generated by
universities. In the United States, university intellectual property policies typically grant the
university exclusive control rights over inventions. However, in all U.S. research universities
the royalty income derived from licensing inventions is shared between the inventor and various
parts of the university according to speciÞed royalty sharing schedules. We show that there
is substantial variation in these royalty sharing arrangements across U.S. research universities,
and use this cross-sectional variation to estimate the eﬀect of royalty sharing arrangements on
license income.
      We develop a simple model in which scientists allocate eﬀort to produce more research
projects, to improve the quality of each project, and to other responsibilities (e.g., teaching).
Scientists attach private value to royalty income, publications and teaching, and face shadow
prices of diﬀerent types of eﬀort set by the university. The model predicts that a rise in the
inventor’s share of royalties increases total revenues from licensed inventions. We test this
prediction with university-level data from the Association of University Technology Managers,
combined with information on the distribution of royalty shares, which we collected from the
university websites.
      This paper makes two main empirical contributions. First, we show that academic re-
search and inventive activity respond to monetary incentives. This Þnding is important because
it means that the design of intellectual property rights, and other forms of incentives, in acad-
emic institutions can have real eﬀects on economic growth and productivity. Second, we show

that the response to incentives is much stronger (and more signiÞcant) in private universities
than in public ones. Controlling for a variety of other determinants, including university size,
quality, R&D funding and local demand conditions, private universities with higher royalty

shares generate higher levels of license income. In private universities, the incentive eﬀect is
strong enough to produce a Laﬀer eﬀect, where raising the inventor’s royalty share would in-
crease the license revenue actually retained by the university. We also show that technology
licensing oﬃces are more productive in private universities, suggesting that private institutions

                                               2
have more eﬀective, commercially-oriented technology transfer activity.
      We argue that this diﬀerence in TLO eﬀectiveness (in terms of generating license income)
can help explain the greater faculty responsiveness to royalty incentives in private universities.

Because control rights over inventions reside with the university, the TLO eﬀectively has exclu-
sive rights to commercialise inventions disclosed by the faculty (unless expressly waived). As
the “gatekeeper”, the TLO’s eﬀectiveness at Þnding licensees, negotiating license agreements
and other aspects of commercialising inventions, directly aﬀects the monetary returns to the
faculty scientist. Raising the royalty share should have a smaller eﬀect on incentives if the fac-
ulty scientist anticipates that the TLO will be ineﬀective at commercialising her inventions. To
examine this explanation we need to identify how public and private TLO’s diﬀer in ways that
inßuence their eﬀectiveness. For this purpose we developed a survey questionnaire for directors
of TLO’s in public and private universities. The survey indicates that TLO’s in private univer-
sities are signiÞcantly more likely to use performance-based pay, to be much less constrained
in their freedom of operation by state laws and regulations, and more likely to be focused on
generating license income as compared to more “social” objectives such as promoting local
and regional development. These Þndings provide reasons for the diﬀerence in eﬀectiveness in
public and private TLO’s, and thereby a possible explanation for the private-public diﬀerential
response to royalty sharing incentives.
      The theoretical model serves to organize the empirical work, but it is very stylized. For
example, we do not model the academic labor market and thus the equilibrium allocation of
scientists across universities. As a consequence, the key empirical Þnding in this paper — that
royalty incentives matter — may be due both to the eﬀect of such incentives on research eﬀort of
individual scientists and to sorting behavior whereby universities oﬀer higher royalty share to

attract more productive scientists. Going beyond the model, in the empirical work we provide
some evidence that both mechanisms may be at work, i.e., that the incentive eﬀects work
partly by inducing sorting of scientists across universities as well as by increasing scientists’

eﬀort levels.
      We emphasise that this paper does not provide a normative analysis of technology licens-
ing activity in universities. The trend toward greater commercialisation of university inventions
may have both beneÞts and costs. What we do here is to show that the beneÞts to universities,

                                                3
in the form of license income, are strongly aﬀected by how incentives are set. Of course, there
may also be costs associated with greater emphasis on invention and licensing: for example,
less “open science” in universities, a shift away from more basic towards more applied research,

and so on. The public debate has focused heavily on such potential costs, but there is very
little systematic evidence of these aspects to date. We do not address these costs in this paper.
        The paper is organized as follows. Section 2 provides a detailed description of the data.
Section 3 presents the analytical framework that underlies the empirical work. In Section 4 we
present nonparametric evidence on the relationship between license income and inventor royalty
shares. Section 5 presents the basic econometric results and their implications, including a test
of whether incentives work both through eﬀort and sorting of faculty. We also examine whether
the incentive eﬀect works mainly on the quantity or quality of inventions. Section 6 provides
robustness checks. Brief concluding remarks follow.


2       Data Description

The data assembled for this project came from three main sources: 1) the Annual Licensing
Surveys for the years 1991-1999 published by the Association of University Technology Man-
agers (AUTM), 2) the 1993 National Survey of Graduate Faculty conducted by the National
Research Council (NRC), and 3) royalty sharing arrangements downloaded from technology
licensing oﬃces’ websites. DeÞnitions of the main variables and a description of the sample
selection process are provided in a data Appendix.
        The AUTM surveys provide information on licensing income, number of licenses, number
of inventions reported to the TLO (invention disclosures), characteristics of the technology

licensing oﬃce (TLO), and R&D funding from external sources in universities, medical research
institutes and patent management Þrms.
        In the empirical analysis we need to control for diﬀerences across universities in faculty

size and scholarly quality. Data on the size and quality of university doctoral programs were
obtained from the 1993 NRC survey. For each university we used data on doctoral programs
in twenty-three diﬀerent Þelds of science.3 We measure university size as the total number of

    3
    See the Appendix for a list of these Þelds. Further details on the classiÞcation can be found in Appendices
K, L and N in Goldberger et al. (1995).


                                                      4
faculty members in the doctoral programs in these twenty-three Þelds. We use three measures of
university quality: the number of citations per faculty, the number of publications per faculty,
and a scholarly quality rating score between zero (“not suﬃcient for doctoral education”) and

Þve (“distinguished”). The NRC survey reports these variables at the program level but we
aggregated them to the university level using faculty size weights. The size and quality variables
do not vary over time.
      Table 1 reports descriptive statistics for the 102 universities in our sample. The univer-
sities in our sample account for 56.1 percent of the total license income reported by AUTM in
1995, and 68.1 percent of the total in 1999. The sample universities generate 3.4 million dollars
of licensing income per year, on average. Not surprisingly, this income is unevenly distributed
across universities: the median licensing income is just $620,000, but, the top universities earn
over $40 million per year while others have zero licensing income. Normalizing by the number
of active licenses (row 2) does not eliminate this variation. Half of the universities have licenses
generating less than $17,000 on average, while the top 5 percent of the universities have licenses
generating over $111,000. The same uneven pattern is observed in the number of invention dis-
closures, although some of the variance in disclosures is related to faculty size (rows 3 and
4). In sum, the distributions of licensing value and the number of invention disclosures are
very right-skewed: only a few universities produce large numbers of inventions, and only a few
inventions are very valuable.
      The three measures for university quality are reported in rows 6-8. Citations per faculty
captures both the quantity and quality of publications and exhibits the highest dispersion across
universities. Technology licensing oﬃces at most universities are quite small, with a mean of
about three full-time professionals. The average age of TLO’s in 1999 was 16, reßecting the

stimulus to commercialize university inventions given by the 1980 Bayh-Dole Act.
      Our third source of data was information on the distribution of licensing income between
faculty scientists and the university, i.e., on the arrangements for sharing the royalties generated

by the licensed inventions. This information was downloaded from the websites of individual
technology licensing oﬃces during the summer of 2001 and it constitutes the novel aspect of
our data.
      The intellectual property policies of the universities usually state that a percentage of

                                                 5
the net income received by the university from licensing an invention is retained by the inventor
and the rest is allocated to the inventor’s lab, department, college and to the university. The
criterion we used for identifying the inventor share is that the inventor must gain either cash

ßow rights or direct control rights over the income. Thus, when the university IP policy states
that the share accruing to the lab was under the control of the inventor, we added it to the
inventor’s share, but otherwise we did not. We call this the inventor’s royalty share.
       The observed royalty shares were those in eﬀect (and posted) in 2001. Because we will
examine the eﬀect of these royalty shares on inventive outcomes, we were concerned by our
inability to identify any changes that might have occurred in these shares during the 1991-1999
period (when outcomes measures are available). We sent a question by e-mail about this to the
TLO’s in the sample and found that 70 percent of the universities did not change their royalty
distribution during 1991-1999. Thus, for most universities the royalty sharing rates remained
unchanged during the sample period. In fact, in many cases the arrangements were set in the
early 1980s and never changed.4
       In 58 universities the inventor royalty share is a Þxed percentage of the license income
generated by an invention (we call these linear royalty schedules). Interestingly, in the other 44
universities these royalty shares vary with the level of license income generated by an invention
(we call these non-linear royalty schedules). Because the income intervals diﬀer across univer-
sities, we divided the license income into seven intervals based on the most frequently observed

structure (in US$): 0-10,000, 10,000-50,000, 50,000-100,000, 100,000-300,000, 300,000-0.5 mil-
lion, 0.5-1.0 million, and over 1 million.5
       Table 2 presents the main features of the royalty share data. The mean inventor’s share
is 41 percent among the 58 universities using linear royalty schedules, but there is substantial

cross-sectional variation. About 25 percent of these universities have royalty shares lower than
a third, while the top 25 percent have royalty shares larger than 50 percent. The royalty shares

   4
    In total, 53 universities responded to this query. Of the 16 that reported a change in royalty shares during
1991-99, only 11 reported the pre- and post-change royalty sharing agreements. In these cases, we updated the
data according to the information received. In the remaining 5 universities, we used the shares reported in 2001.
   5
    In the many cases where our selected interval did not correspond to the interval chosen by the university, we
recomputed royalty shares with the correct weights. For example, if a university reports a 50 percent share for
income less than 5,000 and 40 percent share for income above 5,000, this would appear as an 45 percent share
in the Þrst interval (0-10,000) and an 40 percent share in all the remaining intervals.


                                                       6
in the 44 universities with non-linear schedules display even larger cross-sectional variability
within each license income interval. For these universities we compute an expected royalty
share by weighting the average share in each income interval by the probability of observing

license income in that interval. These probabilities were estimated non-parametrically from
the distribution of license incomes over all years in the AUTM sample. Let vit denote license
income per invention disclosure in university i in year t. There are 723 diﬀerent values for v in
the sample. We Þrst estimated the density f (vit ) by kernel methods at these values. We then
                                                                          _
computed an average royalty share for each value of v, s(v), using the royalty schedule for each
university, taking into account the varying marginal royalty rates.6 The expected royalty share

is then
                                                             _
                                                      s ≡ Σv s(v)fb(v)

Of course, when the royalty schedule is linear, the expected royalty rate is simply the reported
(constant) share.7
          The estimated density function of v shows the extreme dispersion and skewness of license
income per invention disclosure (see Figure 1).8 Nearly all of the weight is on the Þrst two
income intervals—50.2 percent in the 0-$10,000 interval and 46.1 in the $10,000-$50,000 bracket.
This feature shows that taking a simple average of all sharing rates in a nonlinear schedule would

be inappropriate. In fact, for practical purposes a good approximation is simply to average the
Þrst two sharing rates.
          Using the estimated f (v)0 s, the expected royalty share averages to 51 percent across
universities, higher than the average royalty share in the universities having linear schedules

(Table 2). The expected inventor’s share also exhibits a large variability ranging from 20 to

   6
       For example, with three marginal rates the average share is
                   s1 v                  s1 v1 + s2 (v − v1 )                   s1 v1 + s2 v2 + s3 (v − v2 )I(v > v2 )
          s(v) =        I(0 ≤ v ≤ v1 ) +                      I(v1 < v ≤ v2 ) +
                    v                             v                                                v
where I(·) is an indicator function.
   7
    Two other points should be noted. First, we also used yearly license income divided by the cumulative
number of active licenses as a measure of v and obtained essentially the same estimates of s. The two estimates
diﬀer by at most 1.7 percentage points, and the average diﬀerence is 0.7 percentage points. We normalized by
disclosures because data on cumulative licenses is available only since 1995 resulting in a smaller number of
observations. Second, one might want to estimate separate density functions for sub-categories of the pooled
data—e.g., for diﬀerent technology Þelds—but we do not have enough data to do this successfully.
   8
       Such skewness is typical of distributions of the returns to innovation (Schankerman, 1998).


                                                               7
97 percent. This remarkable variability across universities is clearly seen in Figure 2, where
the histogram and a nonparametric estimate of the density of the expected royalty share are
displayed.

       Another striking feature of Table 2 is that inventor royalty shares are either constant or
decline in the level of license income per invention— royalty retention is regressive (equivalently,
the university ‘tax’ on inventors is progressive). On average, they start at 53 percent in the
lowest interval and decline to 30 percent for inventions generating over $1 million. This fea-
ture holds in every quartile of the cross-sectional distribution and, in fact, it holds for every
university in our sample with non-linear royalty schedules.9

       In a Þrst attempt to understand the determinants of the variation in royalty shares across
universities, we split the sample into four quartiles deÞned by university characteristics (e.g.,
faculty size) and computed the mean royalty share in each quartile. Table 3 summarises the
results. Royalty shares are not related to faculty size, the number of citations per faculty, or the
size of the TLO oﬃce (measured by the number of TLO professionals per faculty). In fact, the
hypothesis that the mean royalty rate is the same across the four quartiles of the distribution of
each characteristic cannot be rejected (last row). Apparently there is no signiÞcant correlation
between royalty shares and a variety of university characteristics, taken individually.
       These simple bivariate comparisons also hold in a regression context. Table 4 presents the
results from regressing the royalty shares on the above characteristics and additional controls,

using the time-averages of the variables (the between-university regression). In the Þrst column
the royalty share is regressed on faculty size, and the three proxies for university quality. None
of these regressors is signiÞcant, nor is the regression as a whole (p-value = 0.25). Adding
the scientiÞc composition of the faculty—the shares of total faculty in each of six main science

   9
     Regressive royalty schedules give inventors an incentive to discover many small-valued inventions rather than
a single valuable one, which seems odd if universities prefer quality to quantity of inventions. However, it may
be possible to rationalise such schedules by appealing to optimal taxation theory. That literature can generate
progressive tax schedules when there is uncertainty to eﬀort. The intuition is that, when high income ex post
is largely due to a favorable resolution of uncertainty, the incentive cost of higher marginal taxation is lower
(Tuomala, 1990). This argument may also apply to research eﬀort, if the quality of the project is unknown ex
ante to the scientist. However, if the inventor can distinguish between low and high quality projects in making
eﬀort decisions, then optimal incentives should involve a progressive inventor royalty to compensate for the
higher marginal cost of producing high-valued inventions. Of course, ‘fairness’ considerations may also play a
role in how universities share royalties.




                                                        8
Þelds10 —does not have a signiÞcant eﬀect on inventor’s shares (column 2). This is interesting,
since academic scientists usually sit on the governance committees that set these rates.
          In column 3 we add two features of the TLO: size, measured by the number of full time

professionals, and experience, measured by its (average) age. There is some evidence that
royalty shares are negatively related to the age of the TLO. Whatever the explanation for this,
we should not put too much emphasis on this Þnding because the quantitative eﬀect is very
small. A one-year increase in TLO age is associated with a decline in royalty share of a third
of a percentage point.
          Adding controls for the level of R&D funding for and the average salary at the univer-
sity level do not alter these results (column 4). Interestingly, the average salary is negatively
correlated with the expected royalty share: the point estimate implies that an additional thou-
sand dollars reduces the share by a quarter of a percentage point. This suggests a trade-oﬀ
between high-powered incentives and salaries. The average salary coeﬃcient, however, is not
signiÞcantly diﬀerent from zero.11
          The private university dummy is also not signiÞcant. The average inventor royalty shares
for public and private universities are almost the same: 46 and 44 percent, respectively, and
not statistically diﬀerent (p-value = 0.48). Moreover, there are no signiÞcant diﬀerences in the
empirical distribution of royalty share in private and public universities.
          To summarize, the two salient features of observed royalty shares are their variability

across universities and their regressiveness in the level of license income. Moreover, we have
shown that inventors’ expected royalty shares are only weakly related to observed university
characteristics. This raises the question of whether existing royalty distribution schemes have
been set in any systematic or strategic way. Putting this aside, one may be tempted to conclude
that these shares do not matter for academic innovation and technology licensing performance.
Is royalty sharing a purely distributive matter, or does it aﬀect the “size of the pie”, i.e.,
innovative performance? In this paper we take the royalty shares as given and exploit their

  10
       See the Appendix for deÞnitions.
  11
    This estimate is likely to be biased towards zero due to measurement error in the average salary. We use a
university-based average of salaries, but we would really like to have the average salary of faculty in hard science
departments.



                                                         9
cross-sectional variation to identify whether they have an eﬀect on inventive activity.


3         Analytical Framework

There are two basic channels through which royalty incentives to faculty can aﬀect inventive
outcomes in universities. First, a higher royalty share can induce faculty to devote greater
eﬀort to more commercially-oriented research than to other types of research, teaching or
administrative activities. We call this the eﬀort channel. Second, a higher royalty share can
attract more productive and commercially-oriented researchers in a world where faculty diﬀers
in their research productivities. This results in a reallocation or sorting of more productive
faculty into universities with stronger royalty incentives. We call this the sorting channel. Of
course, both mechanisms may be operating at the same time.
            Here we develop the eﬀort model in some detail in order to organize the empirical work.
With the available university-level data, both the eﬀort and sorting mechanisms generate the
same prediction and thus may appear to be observationally equivalent: higher royalty shares
lead to higher inventive output (e.g., licensing income) in both models. To diﬀerentiate properly
between the two models, we would need data on the ßows of faculty and their quality across
universities, which to the best of our knowledge are not available in a systematic form. Nev-
ertheless, in Section 5.5 we develop one simple implication of the sorting model which can be
tested with our data. A more complete assessment of the eﬀort and sorting eﬀects is important
because their policy implications are very diﬀerent. The eﬀort model implies that strengthen-
ing royalty incentives would increase aggregate inventive output, whereas a pure sorting model
would imply that this would only redistribute inventive output across universities.12

            We assume that academic scientists use a Þxed amount of eﬀort (work time) T to perform
three tasks: starting new research projects, improving their quality, and teaching/administrative
activities. The number of inventions n generated by a researcher depends on the scientist’s ef-

fort, z, devoted to starting new projects, given by n = n(z). This invention function satisÞes
the usual properties n0 (z) ≥ 0, n00 (z) ≤ 0 and n(0) > 0. Each invention has the same initial
quality v0 . By investing research eﬀort q into a (single) project, the researcher can transform

    12
         Unless there are large externalities (spillovers) from concentrating more productive faculty in one location.



                                                            10
it into an invention potentially worth

                                                v(q) = v0 ψ(q)ε

where ψ(q) > 1 is increasing and concave and ε is a multiplicative shock independent of q, with
mean value normalized to one and distribution function G. The shock ε is observed after the
two types of eﬀort are invested. As there are no ex-ante diﬀerences among the n inventions,

the inventor invests the same level of eﬀort q in each of them.13
       We assume that the eﬀort constraint is binding so that the remaining eﬀort, T −z −n(z)q,
is spent in teaching and administrative activities. The research activities generate n inventions
with average commercial potential v, as well as academic publications. Academic publications
depend on the number of projects n and their quality v, so expected publications depend
ultimately on z and q, p(z, q). However, the partial eﬀects of quantity and quality eﬀort on
publications do not need to be positive if there is a conßict between commercially-oriented and
academic research.
       We assume that all inventions are disclosed to the TLO and that the TLO then chooses
whether or not to license the invention depending on the observed value of the idea. The TLO
licenses an invention if expected license income covers the Þxed cost of licensing, which includes
Þnding suitable licensees, negotiating terms, and enforcing contracts. We model the selection
rule as follows: license the invention if v > v. This implies that, given eﬀort q, an invention is
                                               ³        ´
                   v                               v
licensed if ε > v0 ψ(q) , so a proportion 1 − G v0 ψ(q)   of all inventions is licensed.14
       The TLO is in charge of compiling a list of all inventions made by faculty and licensing
them to private Þrms. If the TLO licenses the invention, it earns revenue θv, where 0 < θ ≤
1 reßects the eﬀectiveness of the TLO’s licensing activities. The amount v is the maximal

potential income derived from licensing the invention, which should reßect the most favorable

  13
     An equivalent formulation would be to allow the initial value of the idea to be random and unknown to
the researcher when the decision on eﬀort q is made. We need to have some form of uncertainty in the model
because otherwise the scientist would either set q = 0 or set q at a level to ensure that any developed idea would
pass the TLO selection rule (see below in the text). But this is not consistent with the data: the ratio of licenses
executed to invention disclosures in a given year is about 30 percent, on average.
  14
    This way of speciÞying the TLO licensing decision is consistent with new survey data we gathered from
TLOs, described brießy in Section 5.3. This was the licensing criterion most frequently cited by respondents.
On the theoretical level, Macho-Stadler, Perez-Castillo and Veugelers (2004) develop a model in which the T LO
has an incentive to shelve some projects, i.e., not commercialize them, because of reputation eﬀects.


                                                        11
license fee and royalties schedule among all the potential licensees. The actual license income
depends on how good the TLO is at identifying the best match and negotiating the best
agreement.15 If the invention is not licensed, it earns zero revenue.

          The expected license revenues generated by inputs (z, q) are
                                                        Z ∞
                                 r(z, q) = θn(z)v0 ψ(q)     εdG(ε)                                          (1)
                                                                   v
                                                                v0 ψ(q)


          When n0 (z) > 0 we have that       ∂r
                                             ∂z   > 0, and when ψ 0 (q) > 0, we have      ∂r
                                                                                          ∂q   > 0. Notice that
quality eﬀort has two eﬀects: it raises the value of the idea and it increases the probability that
it will be licensed by the TLO.
          The academic scientist derives utility from research and from time spent in teaching. The
utility from research is composed of the expected monetary beneÞt accruing to the scientist’s
inventions (royalty income, sr) and from publications,

                                U (z, q) = V (sr(z, q), p(z, q), T − z − n(z)q)                             (2)

where p denotes expected publications.16
          We assume that U (z, q) is concave. Of course, we require that U be increasing in some
region of (z, q) but it is quite possible that, because of diminishing returns, at some point
investing more eﬀort in research decreases U because of the disutilities attached to less teaching
and possibly fewer academic publications.
          We assume that the costs associated with research eﬀort, C(z, q), are convex. The
marginal costs Cz and Cq represent the opportunity cost of a unit of eﬀort invested in starting

more projects to the inventor (resp. investment in quality per project). These parameters
reßect the university’s valuation of the two types of research eﬀort and teaching time. The
university control these shadow prices by setting promotion criteria and other rewards.17 The

faculty scientist’s objective is to choose (z, q) to maximize

  15
       Jensen and Thursby (2001) analyse optimal contract design for university technology transfer.
  16
       In what follows we assume that s does not depend on v since this is not central to the argument.
  17
     We view this speciÞcation as a reduced form of some underlying model of the academic labour market.
The shadow prices imposed by the university presumably reßect the marginal products of research eﬀorts (z, q)
in terms of the university’s objectives. These may diﬀer from the utility value attached by the scientist if
their objectives are not well aligned. Conßict of interest provisions, which are commonly found in university
intellectual property policies, suggest that problems of alignment do exist.


                                                        12
                                          π(z, q) ≡ U(z, q) − C(z, q)

The Þrst order conditions at an interior solution are

                                       ∂r      ∂p
                                 sVr      + Vp    − Vt (1 + n0 (z)q) = Cz
                                       ∂z      ∂z
                                              ∂r       ∂p
                                          sVr     + Vp    − Vt n(z) = Cq
                                              ∂q       ∂q

where Vj (j = r, p, t) is the marginal utility from license income, publications and teaching,
respectively.
       At the optimum, the scientist balances the marginal utility associated with more research
— which itself depends on the various positive and negative contributions of the diﬀerent ac-
tivities — with its marginal cost. To ensure that optimal research eﬀort levels are positive, we

require that π(z, q) is increasing at (0, 0).
       The important point is that, provided the scientist cares about the monetary returns
from inventions, Vr > 0, the royalty share aﬀects eﬀort because it determines the scientist’s
expected income. We have:

Proposition 1 Provided that Vr > 0 and π zq is not too negative, optimal research eﬀort levels
are rising in the inventor’s royalty share s.18

       The scientist’s expected income is also determined by the eﬀectiveness of the TLO in
exploiting the potential value of the invention v. For this reason, TLO eﬀectiveness should
also inßuence research eﬀort. In our modelling approach, the index of TLO’s eﬃciency at

performing this task, θ, enters the problem in the same way s does. Incentives can be increased
either by distributing a larger share of the invention value to faculty or by realizing a higher
fraction of the full potential of these inventions. Thus, θ aﬀects research eﬀorts (z, q) in the

same way as s.
       In short, the model implies that, under certain conditions, research eﬀort z and q depend
positively on (s, θ). This is the implication we would like to to test empirically. Unfortunately,

                                              π   π   −π   π            π   π   −π   π
  18
    Standard comparative statics give dz  ds =
                                                 qs zq
                                                       A
                                                         zs qq
                                                               and dq
                                                                   ds =
                                                                          zs zq
                                                                                A
                                                                                  qs zz
                                                                                        , where πij denotes a cross
                               2                                                      ∂r
partial and A = πzz πqq − π zq > 0 by the second order conditions. But π zs = Vr ∂z       > 0 and πqs = Vr ∂r
                                                                                                           ∂q
                                                                                                               > 0.
A rise in s raises the marginal utility of z and q due to the multiplicative speciÞcation “sr(z, q)”. Thus dz
                                                                                                            ds
                                                                                                               >0
and dq
     ds
        > 0  provided  π zq is not “too negative”.


                                                           13
data on research eﬀorts are not available. However, we observe license income which, according
to the model, reßects these eﬀorts. In fact, since revenue per faculty, r(z, q), increases with z
and q the model implies that r(z, q) also rises with s.

          Expected licensing revenues at the university equals (1) multiplied by the number of
university faculty, F :
                                                                  Z    ∞
                          R = rF = θv0 ψ(q(s, θ))n(z(s, θ))F                         εdG(ε)                      (3)
                                                                           v
                                                                      v0 ψ(q(z,θ))


Because s increases both z and q, and thus r, total university expected license income also
increases with s. This is the implication we set out to test with the data.
          To obtain our estimating equation, we transform (3) into logs and approximate the
                                          e log θ. This yields
nonlinear terms involving s and θ by δs + β


                                                      Ã                              Z                       !
                                                                                          ∞
            log R = log θ + log v0 + log F + log ψ(q(s, θ))n(z(s, θ))                                   εdG(ε)
                                                                                              v
                                                                                         v0 ψ(q(z,θ))

                                                                                                                 (4)

                           e log θ + log v0 + log F + terms involving G, v and v0
                    ≈ δs + β

          We do not observe θ directly. We use a set of observed variables x to proxy for log θ:
e log θ = βπ + η, E(η|x) = 0, and collapse all the other factors aﬀecting license revenues into
β

a vector ω. This results in the estimating equation

                                         log R = δs + xβ + ωγ + u                                                (5)

where u captures the deviation of logR from its expected value, as well as functional form
approximation and proxying errors.19
          The vector ω includes variables that account for diﬀerences in license revenues across
universities, other than through diﬀerences in s and x, including: (log) faculty size, for which
we expect an elasticity of about unity, and the number of citations per faculty to account
for initial quality (v0 ), which should also have a positive eﬀect because inventions are more
valuable and are more likely to be licensed the higher is v0 . Diﬀerences in the distribution of

  19
       We now abuse notation by denoting observed license revenues by R.


                                                      14
quality shocks, G, across universities are captured by diﬀerences in their research orientation,
measured by the shares of faculty employed in each of six science Þelds (see Appendix), and by
the amount of R&D funding available to the university. These variables are also part of ω.

       We emphasize that the estimating equation (5) is not an invention production function.
The latter cannot be estimated because we do not observe the inputs z and q. Rather, equation
(5) is interpreted as a reduced form equation specifying the (exogenous) drivers of licensing
income. These drivers, s and θ, operate through the unobserved research eﬀort levels and the
TLO licensing behavior. This last point is important. The observed data are not a random
sample of all inventions generated by the university faculty. The scientist selects which inven-
tions are worth reporting and the TLO selects which inventions are worth marketing. We have
taken only the TLO selection into account in the modelling framework, i.e., we conditioned
on disclosed inventions. As equation (3) makes clear, the estimated incentives eﬀects include
these TLO selection eﬀects.20

       We assume that the royalty share is exogenous in equation (5) and estimate its para-
meters by ordinary least squares. We discuss the validity of this assumption in Section 5.2.
The data used to estimate equation (5) consist of an unbalanced panel of 102 universities over
9 years, 1991-1999 (see the Appendix for details). However, panel data estimation methods
that allow for a correlation between the royalty share and unobserved, time-invariant deter-
minants of license revenues — such as Þxed eﬀects or Þrst diﬀerences — are of limited use here
because the royalty share does not vary over time in 90 percent of the observations. We rely on
cross-sectional variation to identify the incentive eﬀect on license income. We use a consistent
estimator of the covariance matrix that allows for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and serial corre-
lation within universities, but we assume that disturbances are uncorrelated across universities;

i.e., standard errors are clustered at the university level.21

  20
     The estimated incentive eﬀect will also include any eﬀect of royalty shares on the willingness of faculty to
report inventions to the TLO. Such nonreporting bias can easily be incorporated into the model, but since we
cannot identify the separate selection eﬀects we refrain from doing so.
  21
     There is one estimation issue that arises from the computation of the expected royalty share for universities
with nonlinear royalty schedules. The density estimates used to compute the expected royalty share are based
on the observed unconditional distribution of license income per disclosure. The model, however, says that the
distribution of license income per disclosure depends on the control variables s, x and ω. In order to account for
this, we used an iterative procedure whereby the residuals from an initial license income per disclosure (i.e., v)
regression are used to recompute the kernel density estimates and the expected royalty shares. We found that


                                                       15
4        Nonparametric Evidence

Because we showed that royalty shares, s, are mostly unrelated to other university observables,
we are arguably justiÞed in examining the expectation of license revenue conditional on s and
interpreting this relationship as causal. The advantage of abstracting from other determinants
of license income is that we can easily estimate this conditional expectation non-parametrically,
i.e., we can let the data determine the shape of the conditional expectation function, rather

than imposing a linear or log-linear form (as in (5)). We estimate the expectation of license
income per faculty conditional on s, using a Fan (1992) locally weighted regression smoother.
                                    ¡    ¢
Figure 3 plots three estimates of E FR |s : for the 102 universities taken together and for the

68 and 34 public and private universities, separately.
        ¡    ¢
      E FR |s is clearly increasing in s and somewhat non-linear: although income is not very
responsive to economic incentives at the low range of the royalty shares this is strikingly reversed
at shares above 35-40 percent. From Table 2 we know that at least half the universities have

expected royalty shares above 40 percent. Also notice the diﬀerential response to incentives
between private and public universities. These results suggest that university ownership type
is an important determinant of how responsive license income is to royalty incentives. To verify
these preliminary results and to get some quantitative assessment of the estimated relationships
and their precision, we proceed to a regression analysis of the data.


5        Regression Analysis

Table 5 presents estimates for equation (5). There are 102 universities in the sample but,
because of zero license revenues and other missing data, the regressions in columns (1) and (2)

are based on 98 and 97 universities, respectively.22 We begin by controlling for faculty size,

after one iteration the average diﬀerence in the computed royalty shares for the nonlinear schedules was only 1.3
percentage points, or about 2.8 percent of the mean royalty share. Moreover, using the royalty shares computed
after one iteration gave estimated coeﬃcients very close to those obtained using the expected royalty shares
based on the unconditional distribution of v. The parameter estimates we report are based on the unconditional
distribution.
    22
     There are 749 observations with non-missing license income data. 18 observations have zero license income,
reducing the sample to 731. Using zeros for the observations with zero license revenues does not change the results
(if anything, it makes the royalty eﬀect stronger and more signiÞcant). Another 14 observations have missing
data on other regressors (TLO size, TLO age, R&D funding) further reducing the sample to 717 observations.
See the Appendix for details.


                                                        16
citations per faculty and year dummies. As implied by equation (3), and expected from the
non-parametric analysis, the royalty share coeﬃcient is indeed positive but it is also moderately
signiÞcant (p-value = 0.091). The income elasticity of faculty size is above one, but the null

hypothesis that it is unity cannot be rejected at the 0.10 signiÞcance level. Also, as implied by
equation (3), higher quality universities have signiÞcantly higher license income.
          The sign and magnitude of the estimates is preserved when we add the other controls
in equation (5). In column (2), which we treat as the baseline speciÞcation, we add the
determinants of θ — T LO size and age — and the other variables in ω : R&D funding and
the shares of total faculty in each of the main science Þelds.23 The important point to notice is

that the estimated incentive eﬀect of royalty shares remains essentially the same as in column
(1), but it is more precisely estimated (p-value=0.049). The regression results point to strong
and signiÞcant eﬀects of incentives on license revenues. Increasing the inventor’s royalty share
by 10 percentage points results in a 19 percent increases in revenues. This sizeable eﬀect is

one of the main empirical Þndings of this paper. It conÞrms the basic economic intuition
that monetary incentives do matter for university inventive activity. In view of all the other
determinants of license income for which we control, it is striking that we can still pin down

an empirical relationship between license income and royalty shares.
          The eﬀect of faculty size in column (2) is sharply reduced when adding size-related
variables such as R&D and TLO size (the size coeﬃcient estimate is 0.63 = 1.35 − 0.24 − 0.48).
Nevertheless, the null that the size elasticity is unity cannot be rejected at a 0.10 signiÞcance
level.
          Because T LO size and age (i.e., experience) presumably make the TLO more eﬀective
in realizing the full potential value of the inventions, we expect positive coeﬃcients for these

two variables. We Þnd that license revenue is positively related both to the size and age of
the TLO. Increasing the size of the TLO by 10 percent (the average TLO size is 3.1 full-time
professionals) would raise license income by 2.4 percent but this eﬀect is not quite signiÞcant.

We also Þnd returns to experience in TLO activity. An additional year of experience translates
into a 2.4 percent increase in license income.

  23
       For ease of interpretation, TLO size and R&D funding are entered in the regression on a per faculty basis.



                                                        17
       The R&D variable includes funding from industry, government and non-proÞt sources.
R&D funding is associated with higher license revenue with an elasticity of 0.48. Diminishing
returns to R&D set in because we are increasing R&D funding, holding faculty Þxed. If we

increase both R&D and faculty size proportionally, we get close to constant returns to scale — a
10 percent increase in both variables yields a 11.1 (s.e. 0.19) percent increase in license revenue
(1.11 = 1.35 − 0.24). Finally, as controls for diﬀerences in research orientation, we use the
fraction of the faculty in each of six technology Þelds (physical sciences is the reference group).
We do Þnd signiÞcant technology Þeld diﬀerences (p-value = 0.41), once we have controlled for
R&D and other characteristics.

5.1    Public vs Private Universities

A number of previous studies have examined the relative performance of public and private
universities, which is of considerable policy interest. This earlier research has shown that private
universities have higher levels of “productivity”, measured in terms of scientiÞc publications

(Adams and Griliches, 1998) and various outcomes of technology transfer activity (Thursby
and Kemp, 2002; Siegel, Waldman and Link, 2003). We ask a diﬀerent question: does license
income respond to monetary incentives diﬀerently in public and private universities? Figure 3
suggests that it does: public universities have a milder response to royalty shares than private
institutions. In columns (3)-(6) of Table 5 we examine this issue in detail by splitting the
sample into public and private universities.24
       We focus on speciÞcations (4) and (6) based on 66 public and 31 public and private
universities, respectively. We observe that royalty shares have a positive incentive eﬀect on
license revenue both for private and public universities. The estimated δ is strongly signiÞcant
in private universities, but not signiÞcantly diﬀerent from zero for public universities. In this

paper we use cluster standard errors which allows for arbitrary heteroskedasticity and serial
correlation structure. If we are slightly less demanding and use an AR(1) speciÞcation, we
Þnd that the coeﬃcient on royalty share for public universities is also typically signiÞcant at

the 0.05 level, or very close to it. However, the striking Þnding is that the incentive eﬀect

  24
     Pooling is rejected: the test of the null hypothesis that the 19 coeﬃcients, including year dummies, in
speciÞcation (2) are the same for public and private universities has p-value = 0.01.



                                                    18
is more than three times larger in private institutions than in public universities. The point
estimate implies that a ten percentage point increase in royalty share would increase license
income by 58 percent in private institutions. These results conÞrm the non-parametric Þndings

and show, for the Þrst time, that the degree of faculty responsiveness to royalty incentives
depends on university ownership. Since we have controlled for a number of relevant university
characteristics, the importance of university ownership type is not driven by these diﬀerences.
          The other striking Þnding concerns the eﬀectiveness of the TLO. The estimated elasticity
of TLO size on license income is much larger in private universities than in public ones. A 10
percent increase in the number of TLO professionals (equivalent to one-third of a full time
employee, at the sample mean of the data) raises license income in private universities by
almost 8 percent increases but has no signiÞcant eﬀect in public universities. We also allowed
the returns to experience to vary by adding a quadratic term in age. The estimated coeﬃcient
on the quadratic is insigniÞcant for public universities but signiÞcantly negative for private
institutions (results not shown). For private universities, an additional year of experience
increases revenues by 9.4 percent when TLO age is 8 and 6.4 percent at age 16. For public
universities, the estimate is only 2.6 percent. This again suggests important diﬀerences in the
way TLOs operate: in private institutions experience gains are much larger and are realized
earlier than in public universities. Because the addition of age squared to the regression leaves
the incentive eﬀects and other parameters essentially unchanged we use the more parsimonious
linear speciÞcation.25 Taken together, these Þndings on TLO size and age suggest that private
institutions have more eﬀective, commercially-oriented technology transfer activity. We discuss
why this might be so in Section 5.3.26

  25
       The estimates of δ are 1.62 (s.e. = 1.33) and 5.18 (s.e. = 2.15) in public and private universities, respectively.
  26
    It is worth emphasising at this point that public and private universities in the sample do not diﬀer signiÞ-
cantly in any of the observable characteristics that we measure, except quality (private universities are higher).
There are no signiÞcant diﬀerences in faculty size (380 and 320, p-value =0.35), TLO size (3.1 and 3.2, p-
value=0.89) and age (11.9 and 12.5, p-value=0.78), R&D funding (149 million and 164 million, p-value=0.70),
and the technological mix of the faculty (details omitted). The diﬀerence in quality between public and private
universities is captured by signiÞcant diﬀerences in our three measures of quality: the number of citations per
faculty, the number of publications per faculty and the NRC quality score. For public universities, the mean
of these indicators are 11.7, 6.8 and 2.8, respectively. For private universities, the means are 31.9, 8.6 and 3.4,
respectively. These diﬀerences are statistically signiÞcant (p-values < 0.01).
   The same conclusions are reached if we compare diﬀerent quartiles, or the whole distribution as conÞrmed by
univariate Kolmogorov-Smirnov tests.



                                                            19
5.2      Potential Endogeneity of Royalty Shares

There are two potential sources of endogeneity bias in the OLS estimator of δ. The Þrst is
simultaneity bias. One might think that universities that perform poorly in terms of generating
license income may set higher inventor royalty shares to improve performance. But this would
make our estimates of the incentive eﬀect downward biased. An alternative possibility is that
when license income is high the university decides to make good to its faculty by increasing
their share of the royalties. This would generate an upward bias in the estimated incentive
eﬀect. There is no compelling logic to this type of compensation, in particular when license

income is driven by just a few inventions whereas a change in the distribution scheme applies
to all inventors. In any case, we expect the simultaneity bias to be relatively small mainly
for two reasons: 1) most royalty distribution schemes for universities in our sample were set

before the start of the sample period (1991) and, in many cases, they were never changed since
the foundation of the TLO and, 2) our Þnding that royalty shares are weakly related to key
observable university characteristics (Table 4) limits the scope to which they can be related to
other unobservables features.

         The second source of bias is nonreporting bias. A researcher has a choice between
reporting (disclosing) the invention and sharing the license revenues with the university, or not
reporting it and commercializing it outside (e.g., by forming a private start-up company). If

this nonreporting error is uncorrelated with the royalty share, there is no bias in the estimated
incentive eﬀect. But suppose the rate of misreporting decreases as the royalty share increases,
a reasonable assumption. Then when s increases, part of the observed rise in license revenue

would reßect inventors now reporting previously unreported inventions, and the estimator of
δ would be upward biased, i.e., it would overstate the incentive eﬀect of royalty sharing on
license income.27
         Interestingly, this type of bias could potentially explain part of the public-private diﬀer-

ence in δ if misreporting is a more serious problem at private universities. However, we are
not aware of any systematic evidence on this issue nor have any good reasons to believe this is
actually the case. If anything, our Þnding that TLOs at public universities are less successful

 27
      The bias is magniÞed if the non-reported inventions are more likely to be high valued.



                                                        20
in generating and capturing innovation rents than their counterparts at private universities
suggests that misreporting may be more pervasive at public universities.
       With the available data we cannot identify the magnitude of this misreporting eﬀect

but, because university faculty have a contractual obligation to report invention disclosures to
the TLO, it is unlikely that this bias is large enough to undo the estimated positive eﬀect of
direct monetary incentives on license income. Of course, from the Þnancial perspective of the
university, both the incentive eﬀect and the reporting eﬀect of royalty shares are relevant, since
they jointly determine how much license income the university actually earns.
       In sum, the two likely sources of bias in our estimator of δ work in opposite directions
and, although they do not have to cancel each other, we have good reasons to believe that they
cannot undo the strong positive estimates of the incentive eﬀects.28

5.3    Public vs Private Response: the Gatekeeper Eﬀect

What accounts for the diﬀerential response to royalty incentives in private and public universi-
ties? One possible, and simple, explanation for the private-public diﬀerential response is that
royalty incentives depend to a large extent on the TLO’s capability in commercialising faculty
inventions. Recall that control rights over inventions always reside with the university so that

the TLO eﬀectively has exclusive rights (unless expressly waived) to commercialize the inven-
tions. Because the TLO is the “gatekeeper” (monopsonist over the inventions, as it were), its
eﬀectiveness at Þnding licensees, negotiating agreements and other aspects of commercialising
inventions, directly aﬀects the monetary returns to the faculty scientist. Raising the royalty
share should have a smaller eﬀect on incentives if faculty scientists anticipate that the TLO
will be ineﬀective at commercialising their inventions.
       In this section we explore the issue further. In the model, the scientist’s eﬀort can

be increased by raising the royalty rate, s, or by increasing the eﬀectiveness of the TLO at
commercialising the inventions they produce, θ. In fact, under fairly general conditions, the

  28
     We performed a Hausman test for endogeneity of s by comparing the GLS estimator to the Þxed-eﬀect (FE)
estimator of δ. The GLS estimator is very similar to the one reported in Table 5. The FE estimator is feasible
because in 11 universities we recorded a change in s over time but, of course, this is precisely what limits our
use of the FE estimator. In any case, the GLS and FE are similar to each other, particularly in the private
universities, and their diﬀerence is not statistically diﬀerent from zero. The t-value for the diﬀerence between
FE and GLS is -0.87 in public universities and -0.29 in private universities.



                                                      21
monetary incentives depend on the interaction between these two parameters.29 In the extreme
case where θ = 0, the share apportioned to faculty will not matter at all. This gatekeeper eﬀect
does not appear in the empirical speciÞcation — equation (5) — because we log-linearized the

revenue function.
         This explanation for the private-public diﬀerence in responsiveness to royalty incentives
is consistent with the Þnding in Table 5 that the elasticity of license revenues with respect to
TLO size is much larger at private universities. But this proxy for θ is crude. The challenge
is to identify characteristics in TLO’s that are systematically diﬀerent in public and private
universities and which would help explain why the latter are more eﬀective in generating license
income. For this we developed a new survey questionnaire and sent it to directors of TLO’s in
both public and private universities.30 We received 101 responses, of which only 57 were in the
regression sample. Table 6 summarizes key results of this survey. First, we Þnd that faculty are
well aware of monetary incentives associated with commercialising their inventions, and there

is no diﬀerence between public and private universities in this regard (row 1). Second, we asked
whether the university faculty reward structures (salaries and promotion) gave any signiÞcant
weight to any measures of technology transfer output. Nearly all report that technology transfer
output is not formally rewarded, and again there is no signiÞcant diﬀerence between university
types.
         However, we Þnd sharp diﬀerences in three key dimensions: use of incentive pay, con-

  29
   Formally, diﬀerentiating (3)gives
                               ·                                                            ¸
                  ∂R                             ∂q                  ∂n                  ∂H
                       = θF v0 n(s, θ)H(s, θ)ψ 0    + ψ(s, θ)H(s, θ)    + ψ(s, θ)n(s, θ)
                   ∂s                            ∂s                  ∂s                  ∂s
                R∞
where H(s, θ) ≡      v     εdG(ε). The “gatekeeper eﬀect” operates if s and θ are complementary in generating
                   v0 ψ(q(s,θ))
license revenue:
                                                       ∂2R
                                                             >0
                                                       ∂θ∂s
  If the TLO licensed all inventions (H(s, θ) = 1), it is easy to show that this property holds as long as diminishing
returns in the production function n(z) and ψ(q) are not too strong (i.e., n00 and ψ 00 are suﬃciently small). The
conditions are more complicated when invention quality also aﬀects the probability of being licensed. In this
case we also a condition on the distribution of invention values G(v) which requires that the density function
g(v) be declining (or not increasing “too much”) in v. Details are available on request.
  30
    We sent the questionnaire to TLO directors in 198 public and private universities. These cover nearly all
universities in the U.S. and Canada that are members of the AUTM, and they include both those used in the
regression analysis as well as others. After several email and telephone follow-ups, we received a total of 101
responses, of which 57 were in the regression sample. The results of this survey will be analysed more fully in
another paper.



                                                         22
straints, and objectives. First, fewer than half of the TLOs in public universities use any form
of performance-based pay (either merit pay or bonuses) in the TLO itself, as compared to 79
percent in private universities (row 3 in Table 6). This diﬀerence is strongly signiÞcant. The

second dimension is the extent to which state government constrains the eﬀectiveness of TLO
activity.31 The responses were coded on a Likert scale of 1-4 (1=very important, 2=moderately
important, 3=relatively unimportant and 4=unimportant). Here we group the responses into
two categories — important (1 or 2) and unimportant (3 or 4). The percentage reporting that
such constraints were important is very diﬀerent for public and private universities, for each
of the six types of constraints examined. In every case, we Þnd that public universities report

that they are more constrained, and the diﬀerences are strongly signiÞcant (rows 4.1-4.6).
       The third dimension examined is the importance of various objectives of the TLO, mea-
sured on the 1-4 Likert scale (again, we grouped responses into two categories for this test). As
rows 5.1-5.3 in Table 6 show, there is no diﬀerence in terms of the importance of the number
of licenses or license income, as objectives. However, public universities are much more likely
to rank “promoting local or regional economic development” as an important objective, as
compared to private universities, and the diﬀerence is signiÞcant.
       These survey Þndings suggest that the TLO eﬀectiveness in generating license income,
θ, is likely to be higher in private universities. In principle, this can help explain our Þnding
that license revenue is more responsive to royalty incentives in private universities. Ideally, we
would want to integrate the survey data into the regression analysis, but for this we would need
more survey responses from universities included in the regression sample.

5.4    Is There a Laﬀer Curve Eﬀect?

The parameter estimates from Table 5 imply that raising the inventor’s royalty share would
increase total license income. The point estimate of the semi-elasticity of license revenue with
respect to royalty share, δ, implies that raising the inventor royalty share by ten percentage
points, say from the sample mean of about 45 to 55 percent, would increase license income by

  31
    The survey question is: “Does the state government impose any signiÞcant constraints that the limit the
eﬀectiveness of [your] TLO activity...either explicit forms - such as statutes, regulations, covenants of the uni-
versity charter - or implicit forms such as pressure from political representatives or agencies.” Six speciÞc types
of constraints were listed.



                                                        23
16 and 58 percent in public and private institutions, respectively.
       Raising the royalty share may even increase license income accruing directly to the univer-
                                                                      d log(1−s)R          1
sity, (1 − s) R. The semi-elasticity for university’s income is            ds       =δ−   1−s .   When δ > 1

there can be a Laﬀer eﬀect for universities with suﬃciently low royalty rates: i.e., raising the
inventor’s royalty share would increase the university’s license income when s < s∗ ≡ 1 − δ −1 .
We Þnd such a Laﬀer eﬀect for all private universities in the sample (s∗ = 0.83), but only for

about a quarter of the public universities, those having s < s∗ = 0.38. The incentive eﬀect
in these universities is large enough that raising the inventor’s royalty share actually increases
license income both for the inventor and the university.

       Of course, even without a Laﬀer eﬀect, it may be desirable for a university to raise
the royalty share if it attaches weight to the license income for its faculty inventors (e.g., the
university could reduce salaries in return for higher royalty shares). To illustrate, suppose the
university’s objective function W is a linear function of license income plus other variables
y : W = (1 − s)R(s) + λsR(s) + y, where λ < 1 is the weight the university attaches to the
                                   ∂W                    δ
faculty’s license income. Then      ∂s   > 0 if λ > 1 − 1+sδ . Using δ = 1.62 and the mean of s = .46
for public universities, we conclude that raising the royalty share would increase university
welfare if λ > 0.07. A rigorous analysis of this issue would require a model of university
objectives, policy instruments and the academic labour market, which is beyond the scope of
this paper.

5.5    Incentive Eﬀects: Eﬀort or Sorting?

Despite our controls for university quality, there is likely to be unobserved heterogeneity in re-
search productivity (or commercial orientation) of faculty. Universities might attempt to attract
more productive faculty by oﬀering higher royalty shares, even if compensated by salary reduc-

tions to keep the total compensation across faculty constant. If more productive researchers
have higher eﬀort elasticities, they will be more responsive to incentives at the margin. If sort-
ing occurs, universities with higher royalty shares have more productive faculty who are more

responsive to monetary incentives, which is consistent with the results reported in Tables 5.32

  32                                                                        ∂r
    The responsiveness of license income to s depends on the magnitudes of ∂z  and ∂r
                                                                                   ∂q
                                                                                      . For the sorting story
                     ∂r       ∂r
to work we need that ∂z and ∂q be higher for more productive faculty, at the same (z, q). If more productive



                                                     24
       As we indicated in Section 3, monetary incentives are likely to work through their im-
pact on the eﬀort levels of individual researchers and through the sorting of scientists across
universities. Assessing the relative importance of the eﬀort and sorting channels is important

because they have very diﬀerent policy implications. However, without productivity data for
individual inventors, it is diﬃcult to distinguish eﬀort from sorting eﬀects.33 Here we develop
an indirect test for the presence of a sorting channel based on aggregate data.
       The intuition for the test is as follows. Let si denote the royalty share of university i and
sic be the mean share for the set of universities competing with university i. Under sorting, the
type of faculty a university attracts should depend on how high its royalty share is relative to
the set of competing universities. This carries two implications. First, the presence of sorting
implies that the eﬀect of sic on the license revenues of university i should be negative. Second,
pure sorting, i.e., when eﬀort (z, q) is not aﬀected by s, implies that licensing revenue should
be homogeneous of degree zero in si and sic . If university i and its competitors were all to

increase their inventor’s royalty shares by the same amount then the allocation of scientists
across universities will not change and, because s does not aﬀect research eﬀorts by hypothesis,
license revenues should not change.
       To test these predictions, we expand the license income regression to include sic :

                                  log Ri = δ 1 si + δ 2 sic + xβ + ωγ + u                                   (6)

Under pure sorting, we expect that δ 2 < 0 and δ 1 + δ 2 = 0. Under a pure eﬀort model, we
should Þnd δ 2 = 0. In both cases, we should have δ 1 > 0. When there are both sorting and
eﬀort eﬀects, raising the royalty shares for all universities in the same reference group should
lead to an increase in innovation and licensing due to the increased eﬀort incentives. Thus, the

mixed sorting-eﬀort hypothesis implies δ 1 > 0, δ 2 < 0 and δ 1 + δ 2 > 0.
       We assume that a scientist chooses from among “competing” universities. We rank the
universities according to a relevant index and deÞne the set of competing universities as those

faculty were not more responsive to changes in revenues, then the sorting mechanism will just aﬀect the revenue
level (the constant of the regression) but the not the slope of the r − s relationship.
  33
     For a recent study of the eﬀects of performance-based pay on eﬀort and sorting, see Lazear (2000). He
analyzed the eﬀect on workers’ productivity in a large auto glass company as it switched from hour to piece-rate
pay, and found that individual productivity increased substantially and the Þrm attracted a more able workforce.


                                                      25
close to university i in this ranking. Closeness is determined by a window of size 2k around
the ranking of university i. This means that we averaged the royalty shares of the universities
ranked up to (and including) k positions lower and higher than university i, 2k universities

altogether. In deÞning the competing universities, we pool public and private universities,
although we estimate the model separately for the two types. We experimented with two
diﬀerent window sizes, k = 2, 3.
       For this test we use two alternative criteria to deÞne competing universities: the level of
total R&D funding per faculty and the number of citations per faculty. In the new survey of
TLO directors we conducted, we asked whether “staying in line with competing universities”
was an important consideration in setting royalty sharing rates and, if so, how they would
deÞne that group. R&D funding and academic quality were the two most frequently listed
criteria.
       Table 7 summarises the estimates of δ 1 and δ 2 (other parameters are omitted for brevity)

Using R&D funding per faculty (Panel A), we Þnd clear evidence that sorting operates for pri-
vate universities. For each window size, the coeﬃcient on the royalty share for the competitor’s
group, δ 2 , is negative and statistically signiÞcant. Because of the large standard errors of b
                                                                                               δ 2 the
point estimate of δ 1 + δ 2 is actually quite close to zero, and we cannot formally reject the zero
homogeneity hypothesis, δ 1 + δ 2 = 0. Given the associated standard error, we also would not
reject the hypothesis that δ 1 + δ 2 is positive. For public universities, we Þnd no evidence of any

sorting eﬀect, but nor do we Þnd any direct incentive eﬀect either. When we use citations per
faculty to identify competing universities (Panel B), the point estimates again indicate sorting
behaviour for private universities, but the parameter estimates are not statistically signiÞcant.
       In short, the evidence indicates that the eﬀect of royalty shares on licensing revenues in

private universities works both through eﬀort and sorting channels, but we cannot pin down
their relative importance of these channels with the available university-level data.

5.6    Incentive Eﬀects on Invention Quantity and Quality

License revenue per faculty depends both on the number of inventions and their value. It
is natural to ask wether one can distinguish between the quantity (n) and the quality (v)
components of the royalty share eﬀect on license revenue. It turns out that the available


                                                 26
aggregate data allow us to address this question.
     Let L be the the number of licenses obtained from nF invention disclosures. That is,
                R∞
L = n(z(s, θ))F    v   εdG(ε). Substituting into the revenues equation (3) gives
                    v0 ψ(q(z,θ))




                                             R = θv0 ψ(q(s, θ))L                                             (7)

       If the royalty share s has an eﬀect on the quality of inventions, then this equation says

that s should have an eﬀect on license revenues even after we control for the number of licenses.
If we do not observe this, then we can conclude that the incentive eﬀects of royalty sharing
work only through the quantity of inventions, but not their quality. The elasticity of revenues

with respect to licenses should be one.
       Table 8 presents results of estimating equation (7) using a log approximation and the
cumulative number of active licenses. Data on the latter are available only since 1995, so for
purposes of comparison, the baseline regressions are shown in columns (1) and (5) for the same
period 1995-99. Notice that these estimates are very similar to those in Table 5 using the full
sample. We Þnd that controlling for L reduces the estimated eﬀect of royalty shares on revenues
but it does not eliminate it completely.34 This is particularly true in private universities, but

less so in public ones where the incentive eﬀect was not signiÞcantly diﬀerent from zero even
when L was not controlled for. The estimates imply that increasing the royalty share at private
universities by 10 percentage points will generate 38 percent more license revenue, given the
same number of licenses. Because the total eﬀect of such a change in royalty shares on license
revenues is much higher — about 58 percent (Table 5) — it follows that the number of inventions
is also aﬀected by the royalty share.
       Actually, we can gauge the eﬀect of s on the quantity of inventions directly by regressing

the available proxies for the number of inventions on s and the other controls. We use two
imperfect measures of inventions: the number of licenses executed and the number of invention
disclosures, both of them ßow measures. These quantity regressions are presented in columns

  34
    As expected, the coeﬃcient on log L is not signiÞcantly diﬀerent from one. Also notice that faculty size does
not appear in equation (7) once L is included. Adding F to the regressions in columns (2) and (6) does not
aﬀect the results at all. For example, adding log F to column (2) reduces the license coeﬃcient from 0.77 to
0.64 (0.19) and increases the coeﬃcient on royalty share from 1.20 to 1.51 (1.55). Adding log F to column (6)
reduces the license coeﬃcient from 0.77 to 0.76 (0.31) and increases the coeﬃcient on royalty share from 3.83 to
3.94 (1.89).


                                                       27
(3)—(4) and (7)—(8).35 There is no real evidence that royalty incentives have any eﬀect on
the number of inventions in public universities. The other controls have the expected signs.
Notice, in particular, the signiÞcant positive eﬀect of the TLO. In private universities, we Þnd

a positive and signiÞcant eﬀect of s on the number of licenses executed but no eﬀect on the
number of disclosures. Increasing the royalty share at private universities by 10 percentage
points will generate 26 percent more licenses. Added to the 38 percent increase in the mean
value of licensed inventions (column (6)), this gives a predicted eﬀect on license income of
64 percent, which is very close to the 58 percent eﬀect found in Table 5, even though the
regressions are based on diﬀerent cuts of the data. The main implication of this analysis is
that the quality channel is more important than the quantity channel in private universities.
In public universities, however, s has a an overall very weak eﬀect because neither quantity nor
quality seems to be aﬀected by royalty incentives.
         The use of quantity measures in these regression may introduce measurement error be-
cause of the possibility that faculty do not report all their inventions to the TLO. We now show
that this is likely to bias the eﬀect of royalty shares upward in the quantity regression, and
downward in the revenue regression. Let N ∗ be the true number of disclosures at the university

and let N be the observed number (nF in the model). Assume

                                          N = N ∗ (1 − ρ)         0≤ρ≤1

where ρ is the rate of misreporting. When ρ = 0 faculty reports all inventions to the TLO.
Similarly, the true and observed number of licenses are

                                              L∗ = N ∗ H(s)

                                              L = N H(s) = L∗ (1 − ρ)
                   R∞
where H(s) ≡              v         εdG(ε).
                     v0 ψ(q(z,θ))

         In the license income regression, when logL is used instead of log L∗ as a regressor in
columns (2) and (6), it adds − log(1 − ρ) to the error in the regression. If ρ and s are not
correlated then there is no bias. However, if Cov(ρ, s) < 0, i.e., misreporting decreases as the
inventor’s royalty share increases, then s and -log(1 − ρ) are negatively correlated and we get a

 35
      Disclosure data are available for all years, but the number of licenses executed are available only for 1991-96.


                                                          28
downward bias in the estimated coeﬃcient of s in the regressions in columns (2) and (6). The
coeﬃcient of log L would also be biased downward.
      In the quantity regressions, using logN or logL as dependent variable instead of log N ∗

or logL∗ adds log(1 − ρ) to the error in the regression. If Cov(ρ, s) < 0, then s and log(1 − ρ)
are positively correlated and there is an upward bias in the estimated coeﬃcient of s in the
quantity equation. That is, part of the observed rise in the number of inventions, associated

with an increase in s, is due to the reporting of previously unreported invention rather than to
new inventions. Thus the point estimate of the incentive eﬀect on the quantity of inventions in
private universities may overstate its true eﬀect.
      The direction of the possible biases in both the income and the number of licenses regres-
sions reinforce our conclusion that the incentive eﬀect of royalty sharing works predominantly
through the quality channel.


6    Robustness Checks

In this section we discuss a variety of extensions to the baseline speciÞcation in Table 5, es-
timated separately for public and private universities. We focus on the robustness of the
estimated incentive eﬀect of inventor royalty shares, but there is also independent interest in

some of the speciÞcations we examine.
      First, we check robustness of the parameter estimates to "outliers." As pointed out in
Section 2, the distribution of license income is highly skewed across universities. This raises
a concern that our empirical results may be driven by a few outliers in the sample in terms

of the dependent variable. We address this issue in two diﬀerent ways: (1) we re-estimate the
model dropping the top license income earners, and (2) we estimate the model using median
regression (this procedure minimizes the sum of absolute deviations and thus gives less weight to

outliers). Table 9 presents the results. For the Þrst experiment, we drop three universities from
the sample: the University of California System in the public university sample, and Stanford
and Columbia Universities in the private sample. These were the top earners over the sample
period and their license income was an order of magnitude higher than other universities. For

private universities, the estimated coeﬃcients on the royalty share are slightly lower than the
least squares estimates in Table 5, but still very large and signiÞcant. Dropping California

                                               29
does not aﬀect the estimated δ in public universities, but using the median regression cuts the
estimate in half. The elasticity of TLO size in public universities is also increased considerably
when median regression is used. Overall, the Þnding of a strong incentive eﬀect in private

universities and of a much weaker eﬀect in public universities is not aﬀected by the presence
or absence of the top license earners.36
       Second, we introduced dummy variables to capture the Carnegie Foundation research

classiÞcation of universities (doctoral/research universities, master’s colleges and universities,
etc.). The coeﬃcients are not signiÞcantly diﬀerent from zero and do not aﬀect the estimated
incentive eﬀects or other coeﬃcients (results not reported). The estimated δ is 1.53 (1.36) and

5.78 (2.15) in public and private universities, respectively. The same conclusions hold when we
introduce a dummy for the presence of a medical school at the university.37
       Third, we re-estimate the model using alternative measures of quality: the number of
publications per faculty, the NRC scholarly quality score and the average faculty salary at the
university (Table 10). All the alternative measures aﬀect revenues in a positive way at private
universities. Also, the point estimates of the incentive eﬀect, although marginally lower than
in the baseline speciÞcation, where citations per faculty are used (Table 5), remain quite high.

None of the quality measures aﬀects license revenues in public universities either individually
or jointly. Nor is the estimated eﬀect of royalty shares aﬀected by the use of a particular quality
proxy. The remaining parameters estimates are also robust to the choice of quality proxy, both

for public and private universities.
       Fourth, we allow for the possibility that the incentive eﬀect of royalty shares varies with
two characteristics of the university: quality and the percentage of faculty which is tenured.
Turning Þrst to quality, it is commonly argued that faculty at more prestigious institutions
are likely to be motivated mainly by scientiÞc recognition and status rather than by monetary
rewards. In the model this takes the form of a lower marginal utility of license revenue in

  36
    The standard errors of the median regression are not robust standard errors. We also estimated quantile
regressions for the Þrst and third quartiles. In public universities, the estimated δ 0 s are 0.15 (.11) and 1.20
(0.75), respectively. In private universities, the estimates are 3.9 (1.4) and 5.3 (1.9), respectively.
  37
    The medical dummy is not signiÞcant in public universities and marginally signiÞcant in private ones with
a positive coeﬃcient equal to 1.4 (0.78). The estimated δ is 1.62 (1.32) and 6.69 (2.11) in public and private
universities, respectively. The same conclusions holds if we use the medical school dummy instead of the
technology Þelds shares.


                                                       30
higher quality universities. To test this, we include interactions terms between the inventor
royalty share and dummy variables for the lowest and highest quartile of the citations per
faculty distribution (Columns 1 and 3, Table 11). In support of the popular view, we Þnd that

the incentive eﬀects of royalty shares declines with university quality. In public universities the
estimated coeﬃcient declines from 3.4 (s.e.=1.8) in the Þrst quartile of the quality distribution
to 1.6 (s.e.=1.02) in the fourth quartile. In private universities, we Þnd the same pattern: b
                                                                                             δ is
6.6 (s.e.=1.63) in the Þrst quartile and declines to 4.8 (s.e.=2.25) in the fourth quartile.
       Turning to faculty tenure, if doing research that produces commercially usable inventions
comes at the cost of doing less (quality-adjusted) academic publications, then one would expect
untenured faculty members to be less responsive to royalty shares than tenured members. To
test this, we include interactions terms between the inventor royalty share and dummy variables
for the lowest and highest quartile of the tenure distribution (the percentage of tenured faculty
at each university). As columns 2 and 4 (Table 11) show, the hypothesis is conÞrmed for
public universities. The incentive eﬀect of royalty shares is signiÞcant and positive in the top
quartile of the tenure distribution, but not in the lower three quartiles. This is particularly
interesting, since the baseline estimate of the incentive eﬀect for public universities was not
signiÞcantly diﬀerent from zero (Table 5). For private universities, there is no support for the
hypothesis, but the estimated incentive eﬀects are again much larger than for public universities
and statistically signiÞcant.
       In Table 12 we allow industry and publicly-funded R&D to have diﬀerent eﬀects on
licensing income. Publicly-funded R&D has a positive eﬀect on license revenue, but it is
signiÞcant only in public universities. The point estimates of the elasticities imply that raising
public R&D by 10 percent would increase license revenue by about 4 percent.38 By contrast,

we Þnd that industry-Þnanced R&D has no signiÞcant eﬀect on license income. This is what
one would expect if the bulk of such funding is contract R&D with free licensing provisions
(i.e., ex ante R&D funds are given in place of ex post licensing income). One could even argue

that industry-Þnanced R&D may reduce the average license income received by the university

  38
    Payne and Siow (2003) analyze the eﬀect of federal funding on university research. Using a sample of 68
research universities, they conclude that increasing federal research funding results in more, but not necessarily
higher quality, research output.



                                                       31
because the Þrms are likely to get more favorable licensing arrangements. Importantly, the
estimated coeﬃcients on the royalty shares, and on the other regressors, are nearly identical to
the baseline case.

          Finally, we added a variable to control for diﬀerences in the potential demand for licenses
by private Þrms. If demand for licensing is localized, because of information or other factors,
universities located in more dense high-tech areas should license more inventions from a given
pool of invention disclosures and obtain more revenue. Moreover, faculty response to incentives
may depend on local demand factors. A more developed local high-tech market may increase
faculty awareness of the potential rewards to university inventions. On the other hand, it
may also increase the demand for faculty consultants, advisors, and other type of scientiÞc
endeavours that compete with university research time making university monetary incentives
less relevant.
          To address this issue, we use the 1995 Milken index of high-tech activity for the area
where the university is located (Friedman and Silberman, 2003).39 The index is a continuous
variables ranging from zero to a maximum of 23.7 (for Stanford University) but we discretized
it by grouping universities into three groups: universities in the Þrst quartile of the Milken
index distribution, universities in the second and third quartiles and universities in the fourth
quartile. Royalty shares do not vary much with the Milken index of high-tech activity: the
average s at universities in the three groups is 42, 47 and 43 percent, respectively. This suggests
that royalty shares are not set in response to the value of outside options available locally to
university scientists. Table 13 shows the results of the baseline models with dummies for the
Þrst and fourth quartile and their interaction with s.
          The local demand argument implies that the coeﬃcients of the dummies representing

each of the three groups should be increasing as we move from the Þrst to the fourth quartile.
We Þnd a strong local, high-tech demand eﬀect for private universities but not public ones.
License revenues in private universities located in the most dense high-tech areas are over

300 percent higher than comparable universities in less high-tech surroundings (we reject that
the coeﬃcients on the dummies are jointly zero, p-value < 0.01). But license revenues in

  39
       Nine observations are dropped because the index is not available.



                                                        32
public universities do not vary with the index of local demand (the coeﬃcients on the two
dummies are not diﬀerent from zero, p-value = 0.86). This Þnding again suggests that private
universities are more eﬀective than public ones to exploit the potential of being located in high-

tech areas. But the fact that local demand conditions matter at all indicates the importance of
structuring technology transfer institutions so that they can more eﬀectively exploit demand
for inventions in non-local areas. For this purpose, specialization of TLO’s by university (the
current arrangement) may be inferior to alternatives such as having TLO’s that specialize by
technology area and serve multiple universities.
      The responsiveness to monetary incentives again diﬀers by ownership type. In public
universities, the royalty eﬀect does not vary much with the index of local demand (we cannot
reject the hypothesis that the interaction terms are zero, p-value = 0.88). In private universities,
however, the responsiveness to the inventor’s royalty share exhibits a clear pattern: b
                                                                                      δ decreases
sharply from about 12 at universities located in low high-tech areas to about 4 at universities
in the fourth quartile (the p-value for the test that the interaction coeﬃcients are zero is
0.08). Though speculative, this Þnding is consistent with the argument that a concentration of
high-tech Þrms may lure faculty away into consultancy jobs and lower their responsiveness to
university incentives.


7    Concluding Remarks

In this paper we exploit cross-university variation in the share of licensing royalties received by
academic scientists in order to estimate the eﬀect of monetary incentives on inventive output,

as measured by the license income generated by the inventions.
      We report two main results. First, we show that academic research and inventive activ-
ity in universities respond to variations in inventors’ royalty shares. Controlling for a variety
of other determinants, including university size, quality, R&D funding and local demand con-
ditions, we Þnd that universities with higher royalty shares generate higher levels of license
income. This Þnding is important because it implies that the design of intellectual property
rights, and other forms of incentives, in academic institutions can have real eﬀects. We also

explore whether the incentive eﬀects of royalty sharing work by inducing greater eﬀort by sci-
entists or through sorting of scientists across universities. We Þnd evidence of sorting eﬀects,

                                                33
but we cannot pin down the relative contribution of eﬀort and sorting with the available data.
We also show that these incentive eﬀects work primarily by increasing the quality, rather than
the quantity, of inventions.

      Second, we show that the response to incentives, and the eﬀectiveness of technology
licensing oﬃces, are much larger and more signiÞcant in private universities than in public ones.
In order to rationalise this sharp diﬀerence, we argue that there is a "gatekeeper eﬀect": because
TLOs in public universities are less eﬀective at commercialising inventions, the incentive eﬀect
of higher royalty shares is muted. We provide survey evidence that the use of incentives, the
constraints and the objectives of TLOs in public and private universities diﬀer in ways that are
consistent with this claim. Finally, in private universities the incentive eﬀect is strong enough
to produce a Laﬀer eﬀect, where raising the inventor’s royalty share would increase the license
revenue actually retained by the university.
      There are three main directions for further research. The Þrst is to combine the data in
this paper with information on the objectives, internal incentives and organisational structure
of technology licensing oﬃces, in order to understand why private universities perform so much
better than public ones in technology transfer. The second avenue is to examine university-
level data (and other public research organisations) for other OECD countries in which there
is variation both in cash ßow and control rights. The third, and most ambitious, avenue is to
model university behavior and the academic labour market, incorporating pecuniary incentives
(salaries and royalties), multi-tasking and career concerns. To do this will require a suitable
speciÞcation of the objectives and decision-making rules of the university. Such a model could
be used as the basis for more detailed studies of incentives and university research using micro-
data on academic scientists.




                                               34
.003




.002




.001




  0
       0 5000          25000                50000                      95000
                               license income per disclosure


        Figure 1. Estimated Density of License Income per Disclosure




                                      35
      .06
      .04
density
      .02
      0




            20              40              60              80             100
                             Inventor's Expected Royalty Share



            Figure 2: Distribution of Expected Inventor’s Royalty Shares




                                         36
                                          all                                           public
                                          private

                             20000
License Income per Faculty




                             15000




                             10000




                             5000

                                     .2             .3              .4               .5          .6   .7
                                                                 Inventor's Royalty Share

                                                                                ¡R ¢
                                                         Figure 3: Plots of E    F |s




                                                                    37
                               Table 1. Descriptive Statistics1

Variable                                         N      Mean     Std. Dev.    25%      50%     75%

1. Licensing income (’000s) 2                   102    3,351.6     8,103.8    162.3    620.1   2,942
2. Licensing income (’000s) per license 2,3     96      48.2        162.8      9.5     17.3    39.4
3. No. of invention disclosures                 102     66.9        81.0      19.5     44.7    81.1
4. No. of invention disclosures per faculty     102     0.22        0.19      0.11     0.17    0.26
5. Faculty Size                                 102      360         369       136      288     494
6. Citations per faculty 4                      102     18.5        22.7       5.1      11.7   21.2
7. Publications per faculty 4                   102      7.4         3.0       5.2      7.1     9.7
8. Scholarly quality (0-5)                      102      3.0         0.8       2.5      3.1     3.6
9. Average size of TLO 5                        102      3.1         5.2       1.0      2.0     3.3
10. Age of TLO in 1999 (years)                  99      16.0        12.6       8.0      13.0   17.0

Notes:
1 Statistics computed on the time-averaged data for each of the N universities.
2 Income data in nominal dollars.
3 Licensing income in year t divided by the cumulative number of active licenses through year t.
4 During 1988-92.
5 Number of full time professionals employed by the TLO.




                                                38
            Table 2. Distribution of Inventor Royalty Shares (percent)1

                                                      Mean    25%     50%     75%     Min    Max

Linear Schedules (No. universities=58)                 41      33     40       50      21       65

Nonlinear Schedules: Expected Royalty Share 2          51      42      49      49      20       97
(No. universities=44)

Income Interval:
  0-10,000                                             53      43     50       50      20      100
  10,000-50,000                                        45      40     50       50      20       93
  50,000-100,000                                       42      33     44       50      20       85
  100,000-300,000                                      35      29     33       40      20       85
  300,000-500,000                                      33      25     30       40      20       85
  500,000-1 million                                    32      25     30       35      20       85
  Over 1 million                                       30      25     30       34      15       85

Notes:
1 Using time-averaged royalty shares for the 11 universities that changed their shares during 1991-99.
2 See text for details.




                                                 39
                Table 3. Inventor Royalty Shares (percent)
                      by University Characteristics1

                 Faculty Size   Citations per Faculty   TLO Size per Faculty
1 st quartile        50                  48                     44
2 nd quartile        43                  43                     48
3 rd quartile        44                  46                     46
4 th quartile        43                  44                     43

F-test               1.67                0.74                   0.55
(p-value)           (0.18)              (0.53)                 (0.65)

Notes:
1 Using time-averaged data for the 102 universities.




                                       40
  Table 4. Determinants of Expected Royalty Shares

     dependent variable: expected royalty share (s × 100)

Constant                   46.1∗∗      54.7∗∗   56.1∗∗    60.1∗∗
                            (7.28)     (13.3)   (15.2)    (18.2)
Faculty size               -0.006      -0.005   -0.022∗   -0.021
                            (.009)     (.009)   (.012)    (.014)
Citations/faculty           -0.15      -0.15    -0.24∗∗   -0.19
                            (.10)      (0.10)    (.10)     (.13)
Publications/faculty        0.58       0.96      -1.16     0.87
                            (1.00)     (1.11)   (1.13)    (1.25)
Quality index               -0.11      -2.79     -0.11     2.02
                            (4.82)     (4.48)   (4.65)    (5.30)
Biomedical                    —        -0.03     -6.11     -2.39
                                       (11.6)   (13.7)    (15.6)
Other Biological              —        -6.63     -9.98     -8.15
                                       (11.5)   (13.3)    (14.9)
Computer Science              —        53.0      35.3      39.8
                                       (54.0)   (50.8)    (58.4)
Chemical Science              —        -18.2     -22.8     -19.4
                                       (15.7)   (14.8)    (15.6)
Engineering                   —        -14.1     -13.7     -9.50
                                       (15.8)   (17.5)    (21.3)
TLO size                      —          —       1.56      1.45
                                                (1.09)    (1.14)
TLO age                       —          —      -0.38∗∗   -0.41∗∗
                                                (0.13)    (0.13)
R&D (millions)                —          —        —       0.004
                                                          (.030)
Private University            —          —        —       -1.92
                                                          (3.15)
Average Salary (’000s)                                    -0.25
                                                           (.32)
R2                          0.05       0.12      0.24      0.26
Test for zero coeﬃcients
p-value                     0.251      0.314    0.010     0.003
No. obs.                     102        102       99        97

Notes:
Using time-averaged data for the 102 universities, when available.
In parenthesis, heteroskedasticty-robust standard errors using
the HC3 Þnite-sample correction (Davidson and MacKinnon, p. 554).
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level
∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                  41
         Table 5. Parameter Estimates for Licensing Revenues [eq.(5)]


                       All Universities        Private Universities       Public Universities
                         (1)      (2)            (3)        (4)            (5)        (6)

Royalty share            1.85     1.91∗∗       4.09∗∗       5.82∗∗         0.80         1.62
                        (1.09)     (.96)        (1.04)      (2.11)         (1.35)      (1.34)
Log faculty size        1.22∗∗    1.35∗∗       0.91∗∗       1.59∗∗        1.36∗∗       1.41∗∗
                        (.144)     (.142)       (.261)      (.277)         (.140)      (.166)
Citations/faculty      0.023∗∗    0.015∗∗      0.025∗∗     0.018∗∗         0.018       0.007
                        (.005)     (.004)       (.006)      (.005)         (.013)      (.014)
Log (R&D/faculty)         —       0.480∗∗           —        0.36            —         0.48∗∗
                                   (.225)                   (.329)                     (.203)
Log (TLO/faculty)         —        0.243            —      0.774∗∗           —         -0.009
                                   (.162)                   (.317)                     (.159)
Age TLO                   —       0.024∗∗           —       0.010            —        0.026∗∗
                                   (.009)                   (.016)                     (.010)
Biomedical                —        0.82             —        0.55            —          1.17
                                   (1.14)                   (2.33)                     (1.41)
Other Biological          —        0.06             —        1.60            —         -0.89
                                   (1.09)                   (2.53)                     (1.36)
Computer Science          —        2.88             —       -4.00            —          2.85
                                   (2.85)                   (8.06)                     (2.57)
Chemical Science          —        0.39             —        4.10            —          0.66
                                   (1.35)                   (6.45)                     (1.54)
Engineering               —        1.53             —        3.47            —          0.97
                                   (1.28)                   (2.50)                     (1.52)
R2                       0.50      0.60          0.50        0.69          0.52         0.61
No. obs.                 731       717           250         246           481          471
No. Universities          98        97            32          31            66           66

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses. Year dummies included in all regressions.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                               42
  Table 6. Incentives, Constraints and Objectives in Public and Private TLO’s1

                                                    Public        Private         P-value of Equality
                                                  Universities    Universities    of Means Test
1. Faculty Awareness of Incentives
  % responding YES                                     91.7            96.4                0.41

2. University Rewards Technology Transfer
  % responding YES                                     9.4             15.4                0.42

3. Incentive-pay
  % using incentive pay 2                               49              79                0.007

4. Government constraints on:
  % reporting important
  4.1. Choice of license partners                       23              0                 <.001
  4.2. Setting license contract terms                   19              0                 <.001
  4.3.License conÞdentiality                            27              0                 <.001
  4.4 Use of equity stakes                              23             3.5                0.024
  4.5 University liability/indemniÞcation               75             18                 5.02
  4.6. Dispute resolution mechanisms                    49             3.6                 3.80

5. Objectives
  % reporting important
  5.1 Number of licenses                                97             100                0.38
  5 2. License income                                   88             93                 0.44
  5.3 Promoting local/regional development              88             57                 0.001

Notes:
1 Based on survey data. Numbers of public and private universities are 73 and 28, respectively.
2 Merit pay and/or bonuses




                                                43
                   Table 7. Tests of Eﬀort and Sorting [eq.(6)]

                                    Public Universities   Private Universities
                                     k=2 k=3            k=2    k=3
Panel A
Own royalty share (δ 1 )             1.87     1.65       5.47∗∗    5.10∗∗
                                     (1.28)   (1.34)     (2.05)    (2.04)
Competitors’ royalty share (δ 2 )    2.25     0.38       -4.55∗∗   -5.67∗∗
                                     (3.20)   (4.0)      (1.70)    (2.36)
δ 1 +δ 2                             4.11     2.04       0.92      -0.57
                                     (3.27)   (4.36)     (2.18)    (3.25)
R2                                   0.61     0.61       0.71      0.71
No. obs                              471      471        246       246
No. Universities                     66       66         31        31

Panel B
Own royalty share (δ 1 )             1.59     1.39       5.96∗∗    5.84∗∗
                                     (1.39)   (1.43)     (2.09)    (2.14)
Competitors’ royalty share (δ 2 )    -0.58    -2.27      -3.46     -0.96
                                     (2.24)   (2.94)     (4.61)    (3.15)
δ 1 +δ 2                             1.01     -0.88      2.51      4.88
                                     (2.98)   (3.64)     (4.20)    (3.18)
R2                                   0.61     0.61       0.70      0.69
No. obs                              471      471        246       246
No. Universities                     66       66         31        31

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses. All other control variables appearing
in Table 5 included in all regressions but are not reported.
In Panel A competing universities identiÞed by R&D funding per faculty.
In Panel B competing universities identiÞed by citations per faculty.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                              44
                     Table 8. Incentive Eﬀect on Invention: Quantity vs Quality [eq.(7)]

                                     Public Universities                            Private Universities

Dep. variable 1              Revenues        Licenses       Disclosures      Revenues        Licenses   Disclosures
                            (1)      (2)       (3)              (4)         (5)      (6)       (7)          (8)

Log (licenses)               —      0.77∗∗      —                —          —       0.77∗∗      —            —
                                    (.20)                                           (.32)
Royalty share               1.65    1.20       0.08            -0.32      5.91∗∗    3.83∗∗    2.60∗∗       0.52
                           (1.53)   (1.55)     (.39)           (.24)      (2.22)    (1.73)     (.96)       (1.06)
Log faculty size           1.36∗∗     —       0.90∗∗          0.94∗∗      1.68∗∗      —        1.20        0.85∗
                            (.19)             (.096)          (.046)       (.26)               (.21)       (.16)
Citations/faculty          0.001    -0.008    0.002           0.008∗∗     0.013∗∗   0.007    0.007∗∗       0.006
                           (.017)   (.015)    (.006)          (.004)      (.006)    (.006)    (.003)       (.004)
      ³              ´2
           R&D
Log       f aculty         0.53∗∗   0.58∗∗    0.31∗∗          0.38∗∗       0.34     0.11      0.31∗∗       0.48∗∗
                            (.24)   (.19)     (.096)          (.069)       (.42)    (.30)      (.11)       (.12)
      ³              ´2
            TLO
Log       f aculty         -0.003   -0.11     0.19∗∗          0.26∗∗      1.11∗∗    0.68∗∗    0.65∗∗       0.23∗
                            (.19)   (.20)     (.094)          (.047)       (.31)    (.29)      (.14)       (.12)
Age TLO                   0.024∗∗   0.006    0.012∗∗          0.006∗∗     0.008     0.004     0.002        0.004
                           (.011)   (.011)    (.005)          (.003)      (.017)    (.012)    (.008)       (.007)

R2                          0.59    0.61       0.67            0.84        0.69     0.74       0.73        0.73
No. obs                     270     270        305             480         137      137        165         250
No. Universities             65      65         65              67          30       30         31          32
Notes:
1 Dependent variables always in logs.
2 In columns (2) and (6), regressor is not normalized by faculty size

Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses.
Technological Þelds and year dummies included in all regressions but are not reported.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                                       45
                    Table 9. Controlling for Outliers, [eq.(5)]

                            Private Universities                  Public Universities
                       w/o Columbia &       Median            w/o California    Median
                           Stanford       Regression                          Regression

                                (1)                 (2)              (3)              (4)
Royalty share                 4.72∗∗              5.03∗∗            1.61             0.83
                              (1.92)              (.81)             (1.35)          (0.48)
Log faculty size              1.40∗∗              1.50∗∗           1.39∗∗           1.49∗∗
                               (.24)              (.11)             (.19)           (.083)
Citations/faculty            0.015∗∗           0.018∗∗              0.008           0.025∗∗
                              (.006)              (.003)            (.014)          (.007)
Log (R&D/faculty)              0.46               0.127            0.48∗∗           0.42∗∗
                               (.33)              (.13)             (.20)            (.12)
Log (TLO/faculty)             0.56∗            0.831∗∗             -0.020           0.153∗
                               (.30)              (.11)             (.17)           (.091)
Age TLO                       0.017               0.007            0.025∗∗          0.026∗∗
                              (.013)              (.008)            (.010)          (.005)

R2                             0.65               0.48              0.56             0.40
No. obs.                       228                246               462              471
No. Universities                29                 31                65               66

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses in the OLS regressions (1) and (3).
 Non-robust standard errors in the median regressions (2) and (4).
Technological Þelds and year dummies included in all regressions but are not reported.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                             46
                        Table 10. Alternative Quality Measures [eq.(5)]

                                      Private Universities                      Public Universities

                               (1)        (2)      (3)         (4)      (5)        (6)       (7)        (8)
Royalty share                4.69∗∗      3.76    3.84∗∗      4.68∗∗    1.67       1.67      1.75       1.65
                             (2.10)     (2.10)   (1.93)      (2.24)   (1.33)      (1.33)   (1.34)     (1.37)
Log faculty size             1.19∗∗     0.99∗∗   1.03∗∗      1.07∗    1.40∗∗     1.45∗∗    1.37∗∗     1.52∗∗
                              (.36)     (.42)     (.37)      (.56)     (.18)      (.23)     (.17)      (.27)
Publications/faculty         0.19∗∗       —        —         -0.032   0.006         —        —        -0.037
                             (.069)                          (.12)    (.068)                           (.11)
NRC quality score               —       1.05∗∗     —         0.57       —        -0.068      —        -0.174
                                        (.41)                (.66)                (.35)                (.45)
Log (Average Salary)            —         —      4.95∗∗      1.91       —           —       0.55       0.51
                                                 (1.75)      (2.28)                        (1.33)     (1.33)
Citations per faculty           —         —        —         0.011      —           —        —        0.016
                                                           (0.010)                                    (.022)
Log (R&D/faculty)             0.32       0.49     0.14       0.13     0.51∗∗     0.54∗∗    0.49∗∗     0.53∗∗
                              (.35)     (.33)     (.27)      (.24)     (.20)      (.25)     (.20)      (.27)
Log (TLO/faculty)            0.89∗∗     0.82∗∗   0.83∗∗      0.77∗∗   -0.010     -0.007    -0.027     -0.015
                              (.32)     (.34)     (.33)      (.32)     (.16)      (.16)     (.16)      (.16)
Age TLO                       0.014     0.002    0.019       0.007    0.026∗∗    0.026∗∗   0.026∗∗    0.026∗∗
                             (.019)     (.019)   (0.021)     (.018)   (.010)      (.010)   (.010)     (.010)

F- test for quality eﬀects
p-value                                                    <0.001                                      0.91

R2                            0.68       0.69     0.69       0.72      0.61       0.61      0.61       0.61
No. obs.                      246        246      245        245       471        471       471        471
No. Universities               31         31       30         30        66         66        66         66

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses. Missing wage data for one private university
appearing in one year only. Technological Þelds and year dummies included in all regressions but are not
reported. ∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                                 47
Table 11. Quality and Tenure Interactions with Incentive Eﬀects [eq.(5)]

                          Public Universities                    Private Universities

                                          Royalty share interacted with:
                           Quality     Tenure                Quality          Tenure
                          quartiles    quartiles            quartiles         quartiles

Royalty share               1.30         1.08                   3.46           4.46∗∗
(2 nd & 3 rd quartiles)    (1.03)       (1.21)                 (2.05)          (1.68)

Royalty share ×             2.10∗        0.60                  3.17∗∗          1.78∗∗
1st quartile dummy         (1.10)       (.91)                  (1.28)           (.76)

Royalty share ×             0.30        1.46∗∗                  1.31           -0.517
4st quartile dummy          (.89)       (.75)                   (.86)          (1.05)

Log faculty size           1.53∗∗       1.44∗∗                 1.74∗∗          1.51∗∗
                            (.17)       (.18)                   (.27)           (.22)
Citations/faculty          0.028        0.003                 0.018∗∗         0.017∗∗
                           (.024)       (.015)                 (.005)          (.007)
Log (R&D/faculty)           0.38∗       0.55∗∗                  0.19            0.27
                            (.21)       (.20)                   (.33)           (.37)
Log (TLO/faculty)          0.006        0.007                    .50           0.54∗∗
                            (.16)       (.16)                   (.32)           (.26)
Age TLO                   0.028∗∗      0.025∗∗                 0.014           0.018
                           (.010)       (.009)                 (.020)          (.017)

R2                          0.63         0.63                   0.73            0.73
No. obs                     471          471                    246             246
No. Universities             66           66                     31              31

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses.
Technological Þelds and year dummies included in all regressions but are not reported.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                            48
    Table 12. R&D by Source: Industry and Government [eq.(5)]

                                 Public Universities        Private Universities
Royalty share                           1.65                       5.83∗∗
                                        (1.32)                      (2.16)
Log faculty size                        1.40∗∗                      1.57∗∗
                                         (.17)                       (.28)
Citations/faculty                       0.010                      0.018∗∗
                                        (.014)                      (.005)
Log (public R&D/faculty)                0.45∗∗                       0.38
                                         (.21)                       (.32)
Log (private R&D/faculty)               -0.052                      -0.046
                                         (.14)                       (.19)
Log (TLO/faculty)                       -0.009                      .789∗∗
                                         (.16)                       (.31)
Age TLO                                0.022∗∗                      0.011
                                        (.010)                      (.017)

F-test for equal R&D eﬀects
p-value                                 0.094                       0.325

R2                                       0.61                        0.70
No. obs                                  461                         246
No. Universities                          66                          31

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses.
Technological Þelds and year dummies included in all regressions but are not reported.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                         49
            Table 13. Demand Control: High-Tech Activity [eq.(5)]

                                         Public Universities          Private Universities

1st quartile dummy                                0.50                        -0.085
                                                 (1.32)                       (1.96)
4st   quartile dummy                             -0.089                       3.11∗∗
                                                 (1.20)                       (1.06)
Royalty share (in 2nd & 3rd quartiles)            2.10                       10.32∗∗
                                                 (2.31)                       (1.76)
Royalty share×1st quartile dummy                 -0.096                        1.63
                                                 (2.93)                       (3.81)
Royalty share×4st quartile dummy                  0.78                       -6.57∗∗
                                                 (2.28)                       (2.92)
Log faculty size                                 1.37∗∗                       1.82∗∗
                                                  (.19)                        (.31)
Citations/faculty                                0.009                       0.016∗∗
                                                 (.014)                       (.005)
Log (R&D/faculty)                                0.55∗∗                        0.46
                                                  (.24)                        (.29)
Log (TLO/faculty)                                -0.061                       .85∗∗
                                                  (.16)                        (.29)
Age TLO                                          0.028∗∗                      0.003
                                                 (.011)                       (.019)

R2                                                0.62                         0.72
No. obs                                           462                          246
No. Universities                                   65                           31

Notes:
Standard errors clustered by university in parentheses.
Technological Þelds and year dummies included in all regressions but are not reported.
∗ SigniÞcant at the 5 % level, ∗∗ SigniÞcant at the 1 % level




                                            50
References

 [1] Adams, James (1990), “Fundamental Stocks of Knowledge and Productivity Growth,”
    Journal of Political Economy, 98(4), 673-702.

 [2] Adams, James (2002), “Comparative Localization of Academic and Industrial Spillovers”,

    Journal of Economic Geography, vol. 2, 253-278.

 [3] Adams, James and Zvi Griliches (1998), “Research Productivity in a System of Universi-
    ties,” Annales D’Economie et de Statistique, No. 49/50.

 [4] Association of University Technology Managers (2000), AUTM Licensing Survey

 [5] Audretsch, David and Paula Stephan (1996), “Company-Scientist Locational Links: The
    Case of Biotechnology,” American Economic Review, 86(3), 641-652.

 [6] Davidson Russell, and James G. MacKinnon (1993) Estimation and Inference in Econo-
    metrics (Oxford: Oxford University Press)

 [7] Friedman, Joseph and Jonathan Silberman (2003), “University Technology Transfer: Do
    Incentives, Management and Location Matter?” Journal of Technology Transfer, 28 (1),

    17-30.

 [8] Goldberger, Marvin, Brendan A. Maher, and Pamela Ebert Flattau, eds., Research-
    Doctorate Programs in the United States: Continuity and Change, National Academy
    Press, Washington DC, 1995.

 [9] Henderson, Rachel, Adam Jaﬀe and Manuel Trajtenberg (1998), “Universities as a Source
    of Commercial Technology: A Detailed Analysis of University Patenting, 1965-1988,” Re-
    view of Economics and Statistics, 119-127.

[10] Jaﬀe, Adam (1989), “Real Eﬀects of Academic Research,” American Economic Review,
    79(5), 957-970

[11] Jaﬀe, Adam and Manuel Trajtenberg (2002), Patents, Citations & Innovations: A Window
    on the Knowledge Economy (Cambridge: MIT Press)


                                            51
[12] Jaﬀe, Adam, Manuel Trajtenberg and Rebecca Henderson (1993), “Geographic Localiza-
    tion of Knowledge Spillovers as Evidenced by Patent Citations,” Quarterly Journal of
    Economics, 108(3), 577-598.

[13] Jensen, Richard and Marie Thursby (2001), “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licens-

    ing of University Inventions,” American Economic Review, 91(1), 240-259.

[14] Lazear, Edward (2000), “Performance Pay and Productivity,” American Economic Review,

    90(5), 1346-1361

[15] Lazear, Edward P. “Incentives in Basic Research”, Journal of Labor Economics,1997,

    vol.15, no.1, pt.2, 167-196.

[16] Macho-Stadler, Ines, David Perez-Castrillo and Reinhilde Veugelers “Licensing of Univer-

    sity Innovations: The Role of a Technology Transfer Oﬃce”, mimeo 2004.

[17] National Science Board (2000), Science and Engineering Indicators (Washington D.C.:
    National Science Foundation).

[18] Payne, A. Abigail and Aloysius Siow (2003), “Does Federal Research Funding Increase
    University Research Output?”, Advances in Economic Analysis & Policy, Volume 3, Issue
    1.

[19] Schankerman, Mark (1998), “How Valuable is Patent Protection? Estimates by Technology
    Field,” RAND Journal of Economics, 29(1), 77-107.

[20] Siegel, Donald, David Waldman and Albert Link (2003), “Assessing the Impact of Organi-
    zational Practices on the Relative Productivity of University Technology Transfer Oﬃces:
    An Exploratory Study”, Research Policy, 32(1), 27-48.

[21] Thursby, Jerry and S. Kemp (2002), “Growth and Productive Eﬃciency of University
    Intellectual Property Licensing,” Research Policy, 31(1), 109-124.

[22] Tuomala, Matti (1990), Optimal Income Tax and Redistribution (Clarendon Press: Ox-
    ford).



                                             52
                                           Appendix


A      Description of the Data
A.1     Variable DeÞnitions

Data from AUTM Licensing Surveys 1991-99.

    1. Licensing income includes license issue fees, payments under options, annual minimums,
      running royalties, termination payments, the amount of equity received when cashed-in,
      and software and biological material end-user license fees equal to $1,000 or more. License

      income includes net transfers of license income from other institutions.

    2. TLO Size is the number of person(s) employed in the T LO whose duties are speciÞcally
      involved with the licensing and patenting processes in either full or fractional allocation.
      Licensing examples include licensee solicitation, technology valuation, marketing of tech-
      nology, license agreement drafting and negotiation, and start-up activity eﬀorts. Because
      this information is not available for 1991, we used the data for 1992 to measure size in
      1991. The change in the point estimates is minimal but their precision increases due to
      the larger number of observations.

    3. TLO Age is measured using the year when then TLO was established as reported by

      the AUTM surveys. When the foundation year was on 1991 or later we recoded the
      foundation year to be the Þrst year when the TLO size was larger than 0.5—one half
      full-time equivalent professional employed.

    4. R&D funding includes the total amount of research support committed to the university
      (even if the funds are to be spent over several years) that was related to license/options
      agreements.

       Data from the 1993 National Survey of Graduate Faculty
       The Survey provides data on doctoral programs that participated in the 1993 National

Research Council (NRC) National Survey of Graduate Faculty (appendix K on engineering
programs, appendix L on life science programs, and appendix N on biological sciences).

                                               53
1. Science Fields: 23 doctoral programs were aggregated into 6 science Þelds. We used
  the shares of faculty employed in each Þeld to proxy for the research orientation of the
  university. The Þelds are:


   (a) Biomedical and Genetics - biochemical/molecular biology, cell and development bi-
        ology, biomedical engineering and molecular and general genetics

   (b) Other Biological Sciences - neurosciences, pharmacology, physiology and ecology/evolution
        and behavior

    (c) Computer Science includes only the department of computer sciences

   (d) Chemical Science - chemistry and chemical engineering

    (e) Engineering - aerospace, civil engineering, electrical engineering, industrial engineer-

        ing, material science, and mechanical engineering

    (f) Physical Sciences - astrophysics/astronomy, geosciences, mathematics, oceanogra-
        phy, physics, and statistics/biomedical statistics.


2. Faculty Size is the total number of faculty in the 23 doctoral programs as reported in the
  Survey.

3. Quality measures:


   (a) Citations per faculty: ratio of total number of program citations in the period 1988-
        92 to the number of program faculty. Aggregated to the university level using faculty

        weights.

   (b) Publications per faculty: ratio of total number of program publications in the period

        1988-92 to the number of program faculty. Aggregated to the university level using
        faculty weights.

    (c) Scholarly quality index of program faculty is the trimmed mean of the responses
        received in the Survey for each doctoral program. Scores were converted to a scale
        of 0 to 5, with 0 denoting “Not suﬃcient for doctoral education” and 5 denoting Þve
        “Distinguished”. Aggregated to the university level using faculty weights.



                                             54
      In some instances, a university appears more than once in the NRC Þle because the
NRC has information on two or even three units of the same department, e.g., statistics and
biostatistics or meteorology and geology (in geosciences). In these instances we averaged their

quality measures weighting each unit by its share in the total faculty number of both units
combined. In other instances, a university appears more than once in the NRC Þle because
the NRC has information on two or more campuses (e.g., California, Rutgers, etc.). In these
instances we averaged their quality measures weighting each campus by its share in the total
faculty number of all campuses combined.
      Data from TLO’s Websites


  1. Inventor’s royalty share: This information was downloaded from the websites of each
     university technology licensing oﬃces during the summer of 2001. The net income received
     by the university from licensing an invention is distributed between the inventor and the

     university. The university allocates its share to various units such as the inventor’s
     laboratory, department or college. The criterion we use for identifying the inventor share
     is that the inventor must gain either cash ßow rights or direct control rights over the

     income. Thus, when the university IP policy states that the share accruing to the lab
     was under the control of the inventor, we added it to the inventor’s share, but otherwise
     we did not. Royalty shares were computed out of net license income after deducting
     direct licensing expenses from gross income. We also made an adjustment for the TLO’s
     overhead rate, when it was reported.


      Other Data


  1. Average Salary at the university level, i.e., not just hard science departments. Source:
     NSF WebCASPAR Database System.(http://caspar.nsf.gov/webcaspar).

  2. Percentage of Tenured Faculty at the university level, i.e., not just hard science depart-
     ments. Source: NSF WebCASPAR Database System.(http://caspar.nsf.gov/webcaspar).

  3. Milken Institute Tech-Pole composite index




                                              55
A.2    Data Selection Process

  1. Starting with the nine Þles containing the Association of University Technology Managers’
      (AUTM) Annual Licensing Surveys for 1991-99 we compiled a list of 209 institutions
      with licensing income and disclosure data for all or part of the 1991-99 period. These
      institutions include American and Canadian universities, medical research institutes and
      patent management Þrms.

  2. The size and quality measures from the 1993 National Survey of Graduate Faculty con-
      ducted by the National Research Council (NRC) are available for universities with doc-
      toral programs only. This reduces the sample of institutions with AUTM and NRC data
      to 146.

  3. Merging with the royalty share distribution data further reduced the number of insti-
      tutions with AUTM, NRC and royalty share data to 102. Most teaching hospitals and
      patent management Þrms do not post royalty distribution information on the internet.

      Since all but one (Albert Einstein Healthwork Network) of these institutions are univer-
      sities, we refer to the observations as universities.

A.3    Structure of the Data

We have an panel data on 102 universities with non-missing license income data ranging from
T = 1 to T = 9 years. The distribution of universities with T = t is given in the second column
of the Table below,




                                                 56
                              Distribution of Panel Time Length
                                              Overall  Baseline Regression
                               T             Frequency     Frequency
                               1                 3              1
                               2                 2              2
                               3                 3              5
                               4                 7              3
                               5                 5              6
                               6                 11            12
                               7                 10            11
                               8                 5              7
                               9                 56            51

                 Total                          102                97
                 Number of Observations         749               717

      This gives a total of 749 university-year observations with non-missing license income
data. Tables 1—4 rely on the full sample of 102 universities but the sample used in Tables
5-13 is smaller because of missing variables and observations with zero license income (we use
the log of license income). There are 18 observations with zero license income. Eight of these
observations, belong to four universities not having any non-zero license data. Thus, they are

excluded from the baseline sample used in the regressions. The remaining 10 observations
belong to 4 institutions having other non-zero license data so they remain in the baseline
regression sample. In particualr, the “short” speciÞcations in columns (1), (3) and (5) of Table
5 are based on 98 universities (102 - 4 universities with all their license data equal to zero).
Assigning a zero value to the dependent variable of the universities with zero license revenue,
and including them in the regression, did not change the parameter estimates.
      Other control variables are also missing. Three universities have missing information on

the TLO foundation year so that the TLO age cannot be computed. Because two of these also
have zero license income data, we only have to drop 4 observations (and one university) on
account of missing TLO age from the baseline regression sample. In addition nine observations,

corresponding to 5 universities, have missing TLO size data and one observation has missing
data on R&D funding. These 10 observations, but not the universities, are dropped from the
baseline regression sample.
      To summarise, a total of 32 observations and 5 universities are dropped from the base-

line regression sample because of zero licence income or other missing data. This leaves 717


                                              57
observations in 97 universities used in the “long” speciÞcations in Table 5, columns (2), (4)
and (6). The distribution of universities with diﬀerent numbers of observations in the baseline
regression samples is given in the third column of the table.




                                              58
