THE DISCLOSURE AND LICENSING
OF UNIVERSITY INVENTIONS
Richard Jensen
Jerry G. Thursby
Marie C. Thursby
Working Paper 9734

NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DISCLOSURE AND LICENSING
OF UNIVERSITY INVENTIONS
Richard Jensen
Jerry G. Thursby
Marie C. Thursby
Working Paper 9734
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9734
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003

We thank John Scott, two anonymous referees, and participants of the Workshop on the Economics of
Intellectual Property at Universities sponsored by the University of North Carolina at Greensboro and
Rensselaer Polytechnic Institute for comments. We gratefully acknowledge support from the Sloan
Foundation and the National Bureau of Economic Research under the NBER Project on Industrial
Technology and Productivity. J. and M. Thursby thank the Alan and Mildred Peterson Foundation for support
through the Purdue Technology Transfer Initiative and the National Science Foundation (SES- 0094573).
M.Thursby acknowledges support from NSF-IGERT 022160. Special thanks go to members of the
Association of University Technology Managers who talked to us in the process of designing the survey. The
views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.
©2003 by Richard Jensen, Jerry Thursby, and Marie Thursby. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

The Disclosure and Licensing of University Inventions
Richard Jensen, Jerry Thursby, and Marie Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 9734
May 2003
JEL No. O31, O32, L31
ABSTRACT
We examine the interplay of the three major university actors in technology transfer from
universities to industry: the faculty, the technology transfer office (TTO), and the central
administration. We model the faculty as an agent of the administration, and the TTO as an agent of
both the faculty and the administration. Empirical tests of the theory are based on evidence from our
survey of 62 US research universities. We find that the TTOs reported licensing objectives are
influenced by their views of faculty and administration, which supports the assumption that the TTO
is a dual agent. The theory yields predictions for whether or not faculty disclose inventions and if
so, at what stage, which in turn affects license contract terms. We also examine how the portion of
inventions disclosed at different stages varies with faculty quality. Quality is found to be inversely
related to the share of license income allotted to faculty.

Richard A. Jensen
University of Notre Dame
rjensen1@nd.edu

Jerry G. Thursby
Emory University
jthursb@emory.edu

Marie C. Thursby
DuPree College of Management
Georgia Institute of Technology
755 Ferst Drive
Atlanta, GA 30332-0520
and NBER
marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu

1

Introduction

In the more than two decades since the Bayh-Dole Act gave universities
the right to own and license inventions from federally funded research, the
number of technology transfer o±ces (TTOs) in U.S. universities has grown
from 25 to well over 200. These are the o±ces with primary responsibility
for implementation of the Bayh-Dole Act. While TTO objectives and organization vary across universities (see Bercovitz et al. (2001), Siegel et al.
(1999), and Thursby et al. (2001)), all TTOs are charged with facilitating
and managing the disclosure and licensing of inventions with commercial potential. In carrying out this mission, the TTO must balance the objectives
of the university, which owns the inventions, and the faculty, who create
them.1
In this paper, we present and test a model that allows us to examine
this balancing act and its e®ect on a critical element in the transfer process{
that is, whether or not inventions are disclosed by faculty, and if so, when.
In our recent survey of the TTOs of 62 U.S. universities, TTO directors
reported that educating and convincing faculty to disclose inventions is one
of their major problems.2 Many directors believe that substantially less than
half of the inventions with commercial potential are disclosed to their o±ce.
Faculty may not disclose for a variety of reasons ranging from not being able
to realize an invention has commercial potential to not wanting to take time
away from their research. Many faculty may not want to get involved in
licensing because, as reported in the survey, faculty involvement in further
development (even after a license is executed) is necessary for commercial
success for 71% of the inventions licensed.
Not surprisingly, the directors we talked with believe that some of the
best inventions may not be disclosed because the most productive faculty are
less likely to want to take the time to disclose inventions, much less work on
further development. Paradoxically, the directors we talked with also believe
that many of the inventions disclosed to them are of questionable value.
Indeed, the director of a major university TTO described the TTO's job as
\the best we can do with the s**t we get to work with." This suggests that
the nature of inventions disclosed in U.S. universities is related to faculty
quality, and perhaps, in ways that are unexpected. While one might expect
higher quality faculty to produce higher quality inventions, and on average
1

Thursby et al. (2001) report that, even for industry funded inventions, less than 5%
of the universities in the survey allow faculty ownership of inventions.
2
As noted in Appendix A, questionnaires were sent to 135 universities for a 46 percent
response rate.

2

they very likely do, it may well be the case that a signi¯cant fraction of these
inventions are not disclosed to the TTO. Indeed, if high quality faculty
can obtain research funding without producing research with commercial
potential, or are simply more interested in publication of their research, then
one can argue that the fraction of inventions disclosed would be decreasing
in the quality of faculty inventors.
Given the importance of disclosure to the university technology transfer
process, we construct and analyze a game-theoretic model of this process
in which the central administration is the principal and both the TTO and
faculty are agents, but the need for disclosure implies the TTO is also an
agent for the faculty. The administration a®ects TTO and faculty incentives by setting the shares of license income and sponsored research they
each receive. The inventor's choice is whether to disclose, and if so, whether
to disclose the invention as soon as it is a proof of concept or to wait until it is a lab-scale prototype. For inventions disclosed, the TTO chooses
whether or not to search for a licensee and determines the royalty income
and sponsored research in licenses executed. The administration, TTO, and
inventor are all expected utility maximizers, and we allow their utility to
depend on whether a license is executed, as well as license income and sponsored research. Quality enters the model through its positive e®ect on the
probability that an invention is commercially successful.
The analysis yields predictions for contract terms as well as the stage
of development of inventions disclosed. In equilibrium, license income and
sponsored research are a function of quality, the licensee's cost of commercialization, pro¯t from successful commercialization, and the share of returns
that accrue to the TTO. Because of the e®ect of quality on the probability
of success, the TTO may include sponsored research in a license even if she
receives a zero share of these funds. In equilibrium, whether the inventor
discloses, and at what stage, is a function of the equilibrium license income
and sponsored research, the inventor's rate of time preference, and quality.
While, in general, comparative static results are ambiguous, we present plausible conditions under which higher quality faculty would disclose a higher
fraction of inventions at the proof of concept stage.
Empirical tests of the model provide support for the dual agency view
that TTOs measure their own success based on their perceptions of both
faculty and central administration objectives. Moreover, the more important the TTO thinks an objective is to the two principals, the more she
pays attention to that objective as a measure of success. For example, our
survey results show that the TTO does not place as much weight on sponsored research as a license outcome as do faculty inventors or the central
3

administration. Only 34 percent of TTOs thought it was extremely important, while 48 percent of central administrations and 75 percent of inventors
did. Nevertheless, our econometric results show that faculty and central
administration are a signi¯cant determinant of a TTO's view of sponsored
research, and that the TTO is more responsive to the faculty's view of sponsored research. Furthermore, 71 percent of TTOs and 69 percent of central
administrations thought royalties were extremely important, but only 41
percent of inventors did. In this case our econometric results suggest that
the TTO pays more attention to the administration's view.
With respect to the stage of development, we ¯nd that universities with
higher academic rankings for their faculty have a higher proportion of disclosures licensed in the proof of concept stage. In the context of our theory,
this supports the view that the marginal impact of quality on the probability of success is highest at the proof of concept stage. We also ¯nd that
universities with higher fractions of inventions from medicine and nursing
or from engineering have a higher proportion of disclosures licensed in the
proof of concept stage. Although this might appear to be counterintuitive
for engineering, an applied science, this might simply be an indication of a
di®erence in attitudes towards commercialization. That is, engineering faculty may be more willing to participate in licensing, and thus more willing
to disclose early.3 In addition, it may well be the case that early stage inventions in engineering have, in general, more obvious commercial potential
because the research in engineering, as in medicine and nursing, tends to
be more applied. Interestingly, we also ¯nd that universities with greater
net income have a smaller proportion of disclosures licensed in the proof of
concept stage. We believe this follows from \wealthier" TTOs discouraging
early stage inventions. However, as expected, more successful TTOs with
greater income per license encourage disclosure at the proof of concept stage.
Finally, consistent with our assumption that administrations maximize
expected utility subject to participation constraints for the TTOs and inventors, we ¯nd that the share of royalty income allotted to inventors is
lower for universities with higher quality faculty.
These results contribute to the burgeoning literature on university-industry
technology transfer, which has tended to abstract from examining the role of
the TTO in the process. Notable exceptions include Bercovitz et al. (2001)
and Siegel et al. (1999), who take an organizational perspective, and Hoppe
and Ozdenoren (2001), who focus on the TTO as an intermediary signal3

See Louis et al (2001) and Owen-Smith and Powell (2001) for discussions of di®erent
perceptions across ¯elds regarding technology transfer.

4

ing the quality of inventions to potential licensees. Thursby et al. (2001),
Thursby and Thursby (2001), and Jensen and Thursby (2001) discuss the
role of TTOs in structuring license contracts to induce inventor cooperation
in further development after license execution. While they acknowledge the
balancing act played by the TTO, they abstract from the critical issue of
inducing faculty to disclose inventions. Finally, little work has been done
of the role of faculty quality in the process. In this regard, notable exceptions are Thursby, Jensen, and Thursby (2001), Thursby and Kemp (2002),
DeGregorio and Shane (2000), and Lach and Shankerman (2002).

2

A Theoretical Model of Disclosure and Licensing

We choose to model the university licensing process as a game in which the
central administration of the university, A, is the principal, and both the
technology transfer o±ce (TTO), T , and the faculty inventor, I, are agents.
Essentially, the administration selects contract terms for both the TTO and
inventor, who then play a sequential move game of disclosure and licensing.
The basic unit of observation is a particular research project by the inventor
that yields a potential invention at the \proof of concept" stage of development. As shown in Figure 1, at this stage the inventor has three choices.
He can: disclose this potential invention to the TTO; continue research to
develop the potential invention to the \lab-scale prototype" stage; or switch
to another project.4 If he discloses, then the TTO can either search for
a potential partner/licensee or shelve the disclosure (i.e., return it to the
inventor). If he continues research, then when the potential invention is developed to the lab-scale prototype stage his choices are to disclose it to the
TTO or switch to another project. If he discloses, the TTO's choices are
to search for a partner or return the disclosure to the inventor. Note that,
although the additional research required to further develop the potential
invention involves a time cost and an e®ort cost, it also increases the probability of commercial success, and thus the probability the TTO can ¯nd a
partner and sell a license. Finally, when the inventor switches to another
4

We abstract from a fourth possibility{that the inventor could attempt to commercialize the invention herself rather than disclose it. Because universities are quite willing to
protect their property rights to faculty inventions, this choice would only be relevant if she
is willing to risk the inevitable legal consequences, as might be the case if the invention
has a high enough market value, or if she preceives the likelihood that the university can
successfully enforce its property rights is very low.

5

project, he earns the (reservation) utility associated with it.

2.1

The TTO's Problem

To solve this by backward induction, ¯rst consider the subgames between the
TTO and the potential licensee. We consider contracts of the form (R; S),
where R is the present discounted value of the stream of license revenue paid
by the ¯rm, and S denotes funds provided to the university for sponsored
research. Sponsored research is paid at the time the license agreement is
signed, while royalties, which represent the bulk of license revenue, are not
paid unless and until the invention is successfully commercialized.5 The ¯rm
undoubtedly also bears some costs associated with adopting and/or marketing the invention, which we denote by K: Let ¦ be the present discounted
value of the stream of pro¯ts resulting from the invention if it is a commercial success. If p is the probability of success at the time the TTO searches
for a partner, then she can sell a license only if p (¦ ¡ R) ¡ S ¸ K. With
this formulation, we ignore all up-front license payments except those for
sponsored research, and we abstract from any output e®ects of royalties,
focusing instead on the critical role of the probability of success.6 Note that
the TTO cannot even give a license away, R = S = 0, unless the probability
of commercial success is high enough, p ¸ K
¦.
There are two probability of success functions, depending on the stage
of development at the time of disclosure. If the invention is disclosed as
a proof of concept, then the probability of success is pC (S; Q), where Q is
an index of faculty quality. Several studies show the importance of faculty
involvement in further development if university inventions are to be successful commercially (Agrawal and Henderson 2002, Jensen and Thursby 2001,
Thursby and Thursby 2002). Here we assume that sponsored research and
faculty quality both improve the probability that this e®ort will be successful, so that pC (S; Q) is increasing at a decreasing rate in both arguments,
and is strictly concave. Similarly, if the invention is disclosed as a lab-scale
prototype, then the probability of success is pL(S; Q), which we also assume
is increasing at a decreasing rate in both arguments and is strictly concave.
We further assume that 0 < pC (S; Q) < p L(S; Q) < 1, so there is some positive probability of success, even without further development, but success is
never a sure thing, and the probability of success, ceteris paribus, is always
5
See Jensen and Thursby (2001) and Thursby, Jensen, and Thursby (2000) for the
prevalence of royalty contracts.
6
See Jensen and Thursby (2001) for an analysis of the ine±ciency of royalty as compared to equity contracts.

6

greater for an invention at the lab-scale prototype stage than at the proof
of concept stage.
We assume that the TTO director maximizes expected utility. Her utility
is UT (yT ; f T ; `), where yT is her license income, fT is her sponsored research
funds, and ` is an indicator variable with ` = 1 if a license is executed and
` = 0 if not. As is standard among TTOs in the U.S., sponsored research
associated with a license is not considered as license income. Funds for
sponsored research are typically explicitly linked to continued development
by the inventor, and she may or may not be entitled to a share of those
funds. Moreover, as noted earlier, these funds are paid up-front, at the time
of licensing, while the bulk of license income comes from royalties which are
paid only if the invention succeeds. Naturally we assume positive but diminishing marginal utility from license income and sponsored research, and
positive marginal utility from execution of a license. Without loss of generality, we assume UT (0; 0; 0) = 0. We also assume that her share of license
income, ®R, need not be the same as her share of sponsored research funds,
®S (indeed, for many respondents, ®S = 0). Because the Bayh-Dole Act
speci¯cally encourages universities to collaborate with commercial concerns
to promote the utilization of inventions arising from federal funding, and
TTOs are charged with this mission, she gets utility simply from executing
a license, UT (0; 0; 1) > 0. Finally, her utility cost of searching for a licensee
is VT ` > 0, so that searching is not optimal at any stage unless it generates,
in expectation, su±cient additional utility (otherwise she shelves the potential invention). Her expected utility from executing a license contract (R; S)
at stage j = C; L is thus
EUT j (®RR; ®S S) = pj (S; Q)UT (®RR; ®S S; 1) +
[1 ¡ pj (S; Q)]UT (0; ®S S; 1) ¡ VT `.

(1)

Consider the contracting problem at stage j = C; L, assuming that the
TTO director has decided to search for a licensee. A ¯rm accepts a contract
(R; S) only if its expected pro¯t under that contract is nonnegative, where
its expected pro¯t at stage j = C; L is
E¦j (R; S) = p j(S; Q) (¦ ¡ R) ¡ S ¡ K.

(2)

The TTO director's problem at stage j is to choose a contract (R; S) that
maximizes her expected utility subject to the licensee's participation (nonnegative expected pro¯t) constraint,
max

R¸0;S¸0

EUT j (®RR; ®S S) s:t: E¦j (R; S) ¸ 0.
7

(3)

We denote the solution values for this problem by (R¤j ; Sj¤). The solution is
(Rj¤, Sj¤) = (0; 0) when expected pro¯t is negative even if the license is given
to the ¯rm at no cost, or E¦j(R; S) < 0 for all R ¸ 0 and S ¸ 0. However,
note that pj (0; Q) > K
¦ is a su±cient to guarantee E¦j (R; S) > 0 for some
R > 0 and S > 0, and thus that the solution to (3) has R¤j > 0, Sj¤ > 0, or
both.
Because the TTO director gets utility from simply executing a license
contract, it is possible that she would search for a licensee even if it resulted in no license income or sponsored research funds for her, EUT j (0; 0) =
UT (0; 0; 1) ¡VT ` > 0. However, in general, she does not search for a licensee
unless her expected utility from her share of the contract is nonnegative,
EUT j (®RR¤j ; ®S Sj¤) ¸ 0.

(4)

The solution to this licensing problem and the comparative statics results
for an interior solution are of interest.
¤
¤
Theorem 1 If pj (0; Q) > K
¦ , then at the solution (Rj ; Sj ) to (3), a li¤ ¤
censee's participation constraint is binding, E¦j (Rj ; Sj ) = 0, and either
R¤j > 0, Sj¤ > 0, or both. The participation constraint is also negatively
sloped at the maximum, whether it is interior or not. If, in addition,
the TTO director's participation constraint (4) holds at (Rj¤; Sj¤), then she
searches for a licensee and executes the contract. If the solution is interior,
then:
(i) An increase in either share ®R or ®S must either increase R¤j and decrease Sj¤, decrease Rj¤ and increase Sj¤; or leave them unchanged.
(ii) An increase in quality Q or pro¯t from a success ¦ and a decrease in
the cost of commercialization K must increase either R¤j or Sj¤, or both.

These results follow directly from the participation constraints of the ¯rm
and TTO director. If p j(0; Q) > K
¦ , then expected pro¯t at (R; S) = (0; 0) is
strictly positive, so a licensee can be found and a contract (Rj¤; Sj¤) with R¤j >
0, Sj¤ > 0, or both can be executed. She will incur the disutility of searching
for the licensee to execute the license contract if EUT j (®R R¤j ; ®S Sj¤) ¸ 0.
Moreover, because EUT j (®RR; ®S S) is increasing in R and S, but E¦j (R; S)
is decreasing in R and S, the optimal contract must have the licensee's
participation constraint binding at the maximum, E¦j (R¤j ; Sj¤) = 0. And
because her indi®erence curves (in expected utility) are negatively sloped,
this constraint must be downward sloping at the maximum, whether it is
interior or at either corner. Thus, parametric changes such as changes in Q,
¦; and K that increase E¦j (R; S) result in an outward shift of the constraint
8

from the point (R¤j ; Sj¤), so either Rj¤,or Sj¤ , or both, must increase at the
new maximum on the new constraint. While changes in her shares a®ect the
TTO director's expected utility, they do not shift the ¯rm's participation
constraint, so that either R¤j and Sj¤ remain unchanged, or one must decrease
if the other increases. Which of these occurs depends on the e®ect of the
shares on the TTO director's marginal rate of substitution of royalties for
sponsored research funds. For example, as we show in the appendix, if TTO
utility is additively separable, then an increase in her share of license revenue
increases Sj¤ and decreases R¤j , while increase in her share of sponsored
research funds increases R¤j and decreases Sj¤.
Theorem 2 Assume the TTO director does not receive a share of sponsored
@pj (0;Q)
1
0
research funds, ®S = 0. If pj (0; Q) > K
¸ ¦¡R
0 , where Rj is
¦ and
@S
j

de¯ned by E¦j (R0j ; 0) = 0, then the solution to (3) necessarily has Sj¤ > 0.

Again suppose pj (0; Q) > K
¦ , so a licensee can be found if the TTO
searches. The contract (R0j ; 0) is the one that chooses the maximum license
revenue consistent with non-negative expected pro¯t. This contract cannot
be optimal if the marginal impact of the ¯rst dollar in sponsored research
(0;Q)
funds received on the probability of success is large enough, @pC@S
¸
1
. Thus, the TTO may execute a contract that contains sponsored
(¦¡R0)
j

research, even if she receives none of these funds. The reason is that she
recognizes that these funds can assist the inventor in the continued e®ort
to develop the invention for commercialization in a way that substantially
enhances the probability of success, and hence her expected utility from
license revenue.

2.2

The Inventor's Problem

We assume that the inventor is an expected utility maximizer with utility
function from disclosing an invention UI (yI ; fI ; `), where yI is his license
income, fI is his sponsored research funds. Again, we treat license income
di®erently from sponsored research funds, and we also assume that the inventor's share of license income, ¯ R , need not be the same as his share of
sponsored research funds, ¯ S . The inventor's utility cost of disclosure is
VId > 0, so his expected utility from disclosing an invention at the lab-scale
prototype stage for which the TTO can ¯nd a licensee at the contract (R; S)
is
EUIL(¯ RR; ¯ S S) = p L(S; Q)UI (¯ RR; ¯ S S; 1) +
[1 ¡ p L(S; Q)]UI (0; ¯ S S; 1) ¡ VId .
9

(5)

If the inventor does not disclose, he receives the utility from his next best
alternative research project, UIa > 0. Thus, he discloses this stage only if
EUIL(¯ RR¤L; ¯ S S¤L) ¸ UIa,

(6)

and otherwise he automatically turns to the next best research project.
At the proof of concept stage, his decision is more complex. If he discloses
at that stage, his expected utility is
EUIC (¯ RR; ¯ S S) = p C (S; Q)UI (¯ RR; ¯ S S; 1)
[1 ¡ p C (S; Q)]UI (0; ¯ S S; 1) ¡ VId.

(7)

If he continues to the prototype stage, his expected utility discounted back
to the proof of concept stage is ± maxfEUIL (¯ R R¤L; ¯ S SL¤ ); UIag, where ± 2
(0; 1) is his discount factor. Thus, he discloses at the proof of concept stage
only if
EUIC (¯ RR¤C ; ¯ S SC¤ ) ¸ maxf±[EUIL(¯ RR¤L ; ¯ S SL¤ )]; UIa g.

(8)

This plus the results in Theorem 1 immediately lead to the following.
Theorem 3 The subgame perfect equilibria of the game between the inventor and TTO director can be characterized as follows:
¤
¤
¤
¤
(i) If p C (0; Q) > K
¦ , EUT C (®RRC ; ®S SC ) ¸ 0, and EUIC (¯ RRC ; ¯ S SC ) ¸
¤
¤
maxf±[EUIL (¯ R RL; ¯ S SL )]; UIag, then the inventor discloses at the proof of
concept stage and the TTO director searches for a licensee and executes a
license contract.
¤
¤
¤
¤
(ii) If p L(0; Q) > K
¦ , EUT L(®R RL; ®S SL) ¸ 0, and ±EUIL (¯ R RL; ¯ S SL ) ¸
maxfEUIC (¯ R R¤C ; ¯ S SC¤ ); UIa g, then the inventor discloses at the lab-scale
prototype stage and the TTO director searches for a licensee and executes a
license contract.
(iii) Otherwise, the inventor immediately switches to his best alternative
research project and does not disclose the invention.
The higher is the inventor's utility from alternative research or his discount rate (i.e., the lower is ±), the more likely it is that he will disclose an
invention at the proof of concept stage, if at all. However, higher faculty
quality, license income, or sponsored research increase expected utility in
both stages, and so have ambiguous e®ects on the stage of disclosure. No¤
¤
tice that even if p j(0; Q) > K
¦ and EUT j(®R Rj ; ®S Sj ) ¸ 0 for j = C; L,
so that the inventor knows the TTO is willing and able to execute a license, he may not disclose. He will not disclose at all if the utility from
10

his next best alternative, which includes the value of immediate publication
of the results, outweighs the expected utility of disclosure at either stage,
UIa > maxf±[EUIL(¯ RR¤L; ¯ S SL¤ )]; EUIC (¯ RR¤C ; ¯ S SC¤ )g.
An important implication of this result is that, while the inventor and
TTO are both agents of the administration, in the subgame between the
inventor and TTO, the TTO is an agent of the inventor. Given the inventor's
rate of time preference and the shares set by the administration, his expected
utility in each stage is determined by the terms of the contract executed by
the TTO. Unless the TTO executes a license that is su±ciently attractive to
the inventor, he will never disclose an invention to her, but instead simply
publish his research and move on to his next research project, in which
case the TTO has nothing to license. Our model therefore implies that the
TTO is a \dual" agent whose actions are in°uenced by the decisions of the
administration and the inventors, a relationship that we test in Section 3.

2.3

The Administration's Problem

The administration selects the contract terms for both the TTO and inventor, which in this model is represented by the shares of license income and
sponsored research that the TTO and inventor receive. From our survey,
it is clear that these shares are set as a part of overall university policy
on intellectual property and are rarely changed.7 We shall therefore take
them as given and abstract from the details of the administration's problem.
However, we do assume that the administration's utility also depends on license income, sponsored research funds, and whether a license is executed.
We also assume it maximizes expected utility, subject to the participation
constraints of the TTO and inventor. Therefore, because it receives license
revenue (1 ¡ ®R ¡ ¯ R)R¤j and sponsored research funds (1 ¡ ®R ¡ ¯ R)Sj¤
from a successful license executed at stage j, its expected utility is strictly
decreasing in the shares of license revenue and sponsored research funds paid
to the TTO and inventor.
Because the shares do not vary by stage of development or invention,
either the TTO or the inventor, or both, are likely to earn rents on some
inventions. For example, if R and S are \normal" goods with respect to
TTO's expected utility, then license revenue and sponsored research funds
should both be greater if the contract is executed at the lab-scale prototype
7
For many universities in the sample, income shares were set by their Board of Trustees
as early as the 1970s. Notable exceptions include the University of California system,
which altered the shares in the 1990s when the system was changed from one centralized
o±ce to a combination of a central o±ce and campus o±ces.

11

stage, where the probability of success is higher, or R¤L > R¤C and SL¤ > SC¤ :
Thus, if the administration sets the shares so that the TTO's participation
binds for inventions disclosed at the lab-scale prototype stage, then she has
no incentive to try to license an invention disclosed at the proof of concept
stage, and so the inventor would not disclose an invention at that stage.
Alternatively, if the administration sets the shares so that her participation
constraint binds for inventions disclosed at the proof of concept stage, then
she earns rents on inventions disclosed at the lab-scale prototype stage.
Finally, it is interesting to note that we can obtain some testable implications about the administration's choice of the inventor's shares simply
by examining his participation constraint. Recall that an increase in quality increases a licensee's expected pro¯t, and thus the license revenue and
sponsored research funds in a contract executed at either stage, R¤j and Sj¤.
An increase in quality therefore increases the inventor's expected utility for
given shares ¯ R or ¯ S , and thus relaxes both of his participation constraints.
Because the license revenue and sponsored research funds contracted by the
TTO do not depend on the inventor's shares, an increase in quality allows
the administration to reduce the inventor's shares (and thereby increase its
own shares) without violating his participation constraints. An increase
in the value of a successful invention ¦ similarly allows an increase in the
administration's shares at the expense of the inventor.

3

Empirical Tests of the Dual Agency Model

We have modeled university disclosure and licensing as a dual agency problem in which the TTO is an agent for both the administration and inventor.
This modeling choice seemed appropriate for several reasons. One is the obvious point that while the university owns all intellectual property resulting
from patentable research, it is the TTOs that are central to the operation of
university-industry technology transfer. The more subtle point comes from
our conversations with TTO directors in the process of designing our survey.
These directors uniformly expressed the view that their job was to do the
best they could in terms of implementing Bayh-Dole, given the constraints
placed on them by their administration and the nature of inventions disclosed by their faculty (i.e., \the best we can do with the s**t we get to
work with"). The model presented in Section 2 formalizes this relationship,
allowing us to examine the implications for TTO behavior in terms of license
objectives, licenses executed, the stage of development at which inventions
are disclosed, as well as the e®ects of faculty quality on the process.
12

In this section, we test the model's implication that a TTO's objectives
in executing a license must take into account the interests of their two principals, the administration and faculty. To test this hypothesis, we exploit
survey evidence on TTO views of the importance of di®erent contract terms
and outcomes, from their own perspective, as well as their perceptions of the
importance of contract terms to their administration and faculty. We asked
respondents to indicate the importance to them of a set of objectives by
answering the question, \How important to you are the following measures
of success?". In our model, we focused on the three measures of success
or \objectives" that were the most important to respondents, that is: (1)
royalties/license fees generated, (2) sponsored research funds, and (3) number of licenses/options signed. For each measure, the TTO could indicate
\Not very important," \Moderately important" or \Extremely important."
Respondents were also given an opportunity to indicate that an outcome
was \Not applicable."8 We also asked respondents about their perceptions
of the importance the faculty and administration attach to these objectives.
We asked \In your experience, how important do the following measures of
success seem to be to the faculty you have worked with?," and \In your
experience, how important do each of the following seem to be to your administration?" Each question was followed by the objectives noted above.
It is important to note that in asking these questions, our goal was not to
determine the actual importance that the administration and faculty attach
to these objectives, but rather to characterize TTO perceptions of their importance.9 This allows us to examine empirically the probability that the
TTO will consider an objective important as a function of the perceived
importance to her administration and faculty. In Section 3.1 we present an
econometric model that allows us to make such inferences.

3.1

Econometric Model

We consider the importance the TTO of university i (i = 1; :::; n) assigns to
objective j (j = 1; :::3), IMPORTij , to be determined by a set of observable
characteristics and a random, unobservable disturbance. We do not observe
IMPORTij , instead we observe the categorical values the TTO is willing
to assign to the importance of each objective. For ease of estimation, and
without loss of generality, we assign the numerical scores TT Oji = 1, 2
8

\Not applicable" responses are dropped from the econometric analysis.
Hence our purpose is quite di®erent from the industrial psychology literature which
examines agreement among workers and supervisors concerning perceptions of each other's
performance (see, for example, Atwater et al. (1998)).
9

13

and 3 to the categories \Not very important," \Moderately important" and
\Extremely important," respectively. The method of estimation is ordered
probit for all objectives except for royalties. Only one TTO responded that
royalties were not very important hence inclusion of that valuation as a
separate class would not be statistically meaningful. For royalties we use
a bivariate probit model to di®erentiate \extremely important" from other
valuations.
The determinants of IMP ORTij are measures of the TTO's perceptions
of the importance their faculty and administration attach to objective j, the
types of inventions produced by the faculty, characteristics of the university
and the experience and orientation of the TTO.
F ACij and ADMINij are the ordinal valuations the TTO at university
i believes their faculty and administration have for objective j. For each
j
j
of FACi and ADMINi we assign the same values 1, 2 or 3 as we did for
the TTO.10 Positive coe±cients on FACij and ADMINij would support our
view that the disclosure and licensing problem is one of dual agency, with
negative or insigni¯cant coe±cients rejecting the model.
We expect the importance the TTO assigns to di®erent measures of success to also be a function of the nature of inventions disclosed to her. For
example, it is di±cult to specify royalty income based on sales (i.e., running royalties) for very early stage technologies since the nature of the ¯nal
product is often unknown, and it is di±cult to de¯ne a royalty schedule for
a good whose ¯nal nature is di®use. If a large proportion of the disclosures
to the TTO are early stage inventions, it is conceivable that she will, all
else equal, consider royalties as less important in determining her success
than will a TTO with primarily late stage disclosures. Ideally, we would
include as measures of the nature of inventions the stage of development of
disclosures to the TTO. Unfortunately, we do not have information on stage
of development for all disclosures. In our survey we asked the percentage of
licensed disclosures that were in various stages of development at the time a
license was negotiated: \What percentage of the invention disclosures which
have been licensed in the last ¯ve years were in the following stages of development at the time the license was negotiated?" As regressors, we use the
percentage of licenses that were only \Proof of concept but no prototype"
(P ROOFi ) and the percentage where there was a \Prototype available but
only lab scale (further development needed)" (PT Y PEi). An invention in
10

An alternative would be to form a set of indicator variables. However, since the
dependent variable consists of the same set of ordinal measures ("not very important,"
etc.) we feel it more appropriate to measure faculty and central administration importance
via the ordinal rankings.

14

either state PROOFi or P TY PEi is considered to be in an early stage of
development and P ROOFi is earlier than PTY PEi We experimented with
using the sum of these two measures rather than introducing them separately, but the results were not as revealing.
We include a measure of faculty quality, QU ALi,because as we assume
in our theoretical model, we expect quality to a®ect the probability that
inventions will be commercially successful, and hence the stage at which inventions are disclosed and the equilibrium contract terms. For our measure
of quality we use the 1993 National Research Council's (NRC 1995) survey
results regarding the academic quality of Ph.D. granting departments. This
measure is °awed since it considers only the quality of Ph.D. granting departments. However, apart from medical schools, it is plausible that substantial
research programs have di±culty existing in the sciences and engineering
without Ph.D. students. We use a weighted average of the department quality scores where the weights are faculty size. The quality scores range from
0 to 5 where 5 indicates a distinguished department.
Thursby and Kemp (2002) and Thursby and Thursby (2002) present evidence that university licensing outcomes and e±ciencies are in°uenced by
the presence of a medical school. Whether this presence in°uences outcomes
via di®erent preferences of medical school faculty versus other faculty or via
generally di®erent characteristics of medical school inventions versus other
inventions is not clear. In addition, our measure of quality does not include
medical school faculty except in those cases where a faculty member has an
appointment in a Ph.D. granting department. Hence we also include an indicator variable for the presence or absence of a medical school (MEDSCH Li
= 1 if there is a medical school, 0 otherwise) .
We also include the ratio of industry research support to federal research
support (INDF EDi ). Greater industry support relative to federal support
can suggest a greater applied rather than basic research orientation of the
faculty. Further, the Bayh-Dole Act of 1980, which grants to universities
rights of ownership of innovations developed with federal research support,
requires that commercializable inventions be disclosed to the university's
TTO and that universities retain ownership of those innovations. Universities with large federal research support are expected to consider compliance
with Bayh-Dole as an important measure of their success. We use the averages of industry and federal support over 1992-97.
We consider a single measure of general university characteristics. We
include whether a university is public or private (PU BLICi = 1 if university i is public, 0 otherwise) since public universities tend to be more
restricted than are the private universities in certain of their licensing activ15

ities. We asked respondents \Are there corporate or legal nuances speci¯c
to your TTO (e.g. state laws, charters, federal grant or loan covenants,
state or university mandates, etc.) which a®ect the way in which you try to
commercialize university inventions?" More than 47 percent of the public
universities indicated that this was true whereas only 30.4 percent of private
universities answered yes. To the extent that there are di®erent restrictions
on the TTO, this may manifest itself in di®erent objectives of the TTO.
Finally, we consider that the background and experience of personnel
in the TTO can in°uence the importance they attach to objectives. The
measure we choose is the number of years of industry experience of the
TTO director (IN DEXPi ).
Summary statistics are found in Table 1.
Unfortunately, as will be discussed in the ¯nal section, we have limited
and incomplete direct measures of the return to the TTO for good performance in obtaining objectives (that is, measures of ®S and ®R).

3.2

Results

Coe±cient estimates and their levels of signi¯cance are in Table 2. The coe±cients of primary interest are those for FACij and ADMINij , the TTO's
perceptions of the importance the faculty and central administration place
on objective j as a measure of success. In each regression these coe±cients
are positive and all are signi¯cantly di®erent from zero except for F ACij
in the equation for licenses executed. This lends support for our view that
TTOs measure her own success based on her perceptions of both faculty and
administration objectives. Moreover, the more important the TTO thinks
an objective is to the two principals, the more she pays attention to the
objective as a measure of success.
We can further characterize the TTO response to faculty and administration objectives, as well as to the Bayh-Dole charge, by a series of experiments. We begin by calculating the probability that the TTO will report
her own measure of valuation as not very important, moderately important
or extremely important (TT Oji = 1; 2; 3, respectively) conditional on the
faculty and administration agreeing on the importance of the the objective as a measure of success. That is, we estimate Pr(TT Oji = kjF ACij =
ADMINij = l) for k and l = 1; 2; 3. This is done for each university and
the average estimated probability is reported in the top section of Table 3.
We then assume that the faculty and administration disagree; that is, we
estimate Pr(TT Oji = kjF ACij = l 6= ADMINij = m) for k = 1; 2; 3 and l
and m equal to 1 or 3. Results are in the second section of Table 3.
16

Consider ¯rst sponsored research. When FACij = ADMINij = 1, the
TTO is almost certain to agree, however when the F ACij = ADMINij = 2
or 3, there is a high probability that the TTO will disagree and value sponsored research lower than does the faculty or central administration. When
FACij 6= ADMINij the TTO will, with low probability, value sponsored research as extremely important, but she will be more in°uenced by the faculty
views than by those of the administration. This supports the result stated
in Proposition 2. Many of the TTOs in our sample receive a zero share of
sponsored research, yet one third of the licenses executed include sponsored
research. In the context of our model, this should occur when the TTO
realizes that sponsored research for the inventor improves the probability
the invention will be successfully commercialized.
When faculty and administration agree that royalties are either extremely or not very important, there is a very high probability that the
TTO will agree. When these groups agree but value royalties only moderately important, there is still a high probability that the TTO will value
royalties as extremely important. When the TTO believes the faculty and
administration disagree, she is closer to the administration, though there is
still a substantial probability that she will agree with the faculty.
In discussions with TTO professionals it is clear that many consider
the signing of a license agreement as a compliance measure for the BayhDole Act. This is manifested, we believe, in the estimated probabilities
when faculty and administration agree and do not agree on the importance
of licenses executed. When there is agreement that licenses executed are
not very or moderately important, there is a greater probability that the
TTO will value licenses more highly. When the faculty and administration
agree that licenses executed are extremely important, the TTO will almost
certainly agree. When there is disagreement, there is a very low probability
that the TTO will value licenses executed as not very important.

4

Quality and Stage of Development

In our survey we asked respondents to indicate the fraction of licensed inventions that were in di®erent stages of development. The majority of inventions were in early stages of development; on average 47% of licensed
inventions were no more than a proof of concept (P ROOFi ) and 37% have
only a prototype available (PT Y P Ei ). Of greater interest for our purposes
is the variability we observe across universities. For example, 17 of 52 universities report more than 60% of licensed inventions are in the proof stage
17

and 15 report more than 60% are in the prototype stage. On the other hand
9 report that 10% or fewer are in the proof stage and 11 report that for the
prototype stage. Are these di®erences merely chance outcomes of research?
Is this simply the result of di®erent sciences with di®erent commercial potential and the \black box" probability of success? Our theory suggests that
the answer is no. Recall that a necessary condition for an invention to be
licensed at stage j is pj (0; Q) > K
¦ for j = C; L: Faculty quality a®ects the
stage at which an invention can be licensed and therefore the stage at which
it might be disclosed. Thus, while comparative static results on quality are
ambiguous in general, we expect that if higher quality faculty disclose at all,
they will be more likely to disclose at the proof of concept stage than the
lab-scale prototype stage. This is surely the case if the marginal e®ect of an
increase in quality is higher at the proof of concept stage than the lab-scale
prototype stage.
In this section we propose and estimate an econometric model that relates the stage of development when a license is executed to observable
characteristics of universities. We concentrate on the stages of development, PROOFi and PT Y PEi, and relate these to the sources of inventions,
the academic quality of the institution, and measures of success of the TTO.
Again, as we noted above, we have information on stage of development only
for disclosures that are licensed rather than for all disclosures. However, the
two should be highly correlated.
To measure the sources of inventions we include the fraction of licenses
executed that come from engineering, ENGFRACi, medicine and nursing,
MEDF RACi , and science, SCIFRACi. As a further measure of focus
of research at the institution we also include the ratio of industry research
support to federal research support, INDFEDi. As federal research support
tends to be more basic, we expect a smaller ratio to be associated with earlier
stage inventions. Our measure of quality of the institution, QU ALi, is the
one used above in modeling the importance of di®erent measures of success.
We include several measures of the success of the TTO in executing
licenses that generate income. The ¯rst is the net royalty income received
by the o±ce in the year of our survey (1997), N ET INCi. This measure of
the \wealth" of the o±ce can in°uence stage of development by a®ecting the
TTO's marginal utility for another license generating income, and thus less
desire to license early. Richer o±ces, therefore, might discourage disclosures
in early stages of development. The second measure of success is the ratio
of net income to the number of licenses generating royalties, INCLICi .
Faculty are expected to be more willing to disclose, which might also a®ect
the timing of disclosure, if they believe the TTO is likely to be successful in
18

generating royalty income.
Results are in Table 4. In both equations the coe±cient of QUALi is signi¯cantly di®erent from zero at the 5% level. Further, higher quality faculty
are more likely to disclose in the earliest stage PROOFi rather than in the
later (though still early) stage PTY P Ei . In the context of our theory, this
supports the view that the marginal impact of quality on the probability of
success is highest at the proof of concept stage. Although we did not include
quality as an argument in the utility from the inventor's next best alternative or rate of time preference, natural assumptions in this regard would
lead one to expect a positive relationship between quality and disclosure at
proof of concept stage.11
ENGFRACi and MEDFRACi are each signi¯cant and positive in the
PROOFi equation and signi¯cant and negative in the PT Y P Ei equation.
This would appear to be counterintuitive for ENGF RACi , as engineering
tends to be an applied science. One reason for earlier stages of disclosure
and license for engineering might be di®erences in attitudes towards commercialization. If engineering faculty are more willing to be a participant
in licensing, then they may well be more willing to disclose early. In addition, as engineering is more applied, it may well be the case that early
stage inventions in engineering have, in general, more obvious commercial
potential.
N ET INCi is signi¯cant and negative in the P ROOFi equation and insigni¯cant in the PT Y P Ei equation. As noted above, we believe this follows
from \wealthier" o±ces discouraging early stage inventions. As predicted
IN CLICi a®ects stage of invention disclosure and license; more successful
o±ces encourage earlier stages.

5

Inventor Share

Finally, recall our model predicts an inverse relation between inventor quality
and the shares of license income and sponsored research that the administration will set for the inventor. In our survey we asked for the percentage of
royalty income accruing to the TTO and the faculty. Unfortunately, shares
of income are not completely revealing of the incentive structure at a university. For example, it is the case that salary increases for both the TTO
11

For example, one would expect higher quality inventors to place more utility on their
next best alternative higher and on publishing sooner, which would imply a higher rate of
time preference as well. Their disclosure cost also might be higher. Each of these tends
to imply earlier disclosure, if it occurs at all.

19

and the faculty can be in°uenced by disclosure and licensing success. It
is certainly the case that there are additional incentives beyond shares of
royalty income for at least the TTO as almost 70% report that they receive
no share of royalty income. In all cases faculty shares, while variable, are
greater than zero. We test the above implication of our model using reported faculty shares of royalty income with the caveat that such shares are
an imperfect measure of the incentives provided to faculty by the administration. We regress the faculty share on our measure of faculty quality,
QU ALi, as well as measures of the sources of inventions, ENGFRACi ,
MEDF RACi , and SCIF RACi and our measure of the universities focus of
research, IN DF EDi . Results are in Table 5. As predicted by our model,
faculty shares are negatively related to quality.

6

Conclusion

TTOs have primary responsibility for the university licensing function, and,
in particular, implementing provisions of the Bayh-Dole Act. These o±ces
are responsible for facilitating faculty disclosure of inventions, evaluating
those inventions disclosed, as well as ¯nding licensees and executing contracts on behalf of the central administration for the university (which owns
the inventions). Despite their importance, little research has focused on the
balancing act played by the TTO and how it a®ects the nature of inventions
disclosed and the outcomes of the process. In this paper, we address this issue directly by modeling the technology transfer process as a game in which
the central administration is the principal and both the TTO and faculty
are agents, but the TTO is also an agent for the faculty.
Our modeling choice re°ects conversations with numerous directors of
TTOs. These discussions revealed a major frustration of their job is inducing high quality disclosures (hence the subtitle of our paper). The directors
we talked with believe that some of the best inventions may not be disclosed
because the most productive faculty are less likely to want to take the time
to disclose inventions, much less work on further development. They also believe that many of the inventions disclosed to them are of questionable value.
This suggests that the nature of inventions disclosed in U.S. universities is
related to faculty quality, but perhaps in unanticipated ways. The analysis
also yields predictions for contract terms as well as the stage of development
of inventions disclosed. In equilibrium, because of the e®ect of quality on
the probability of success, the TTO may include sponsored research in a
license even if she receives a zero share of these funds. Whether the inventor
20

discloses, and at what stage, is a function of the equilibrium license income
and sponsored research, the inventor's rate of time preference, and quality.
Empirical tests of the theory provide support for the dual agency view
that TTOs measure their own success based on their perceptions of both
faculty and central administration objectives. Moreover, the more important
the TTO thinks an objective is to the two principals, the more she pays
attention to the objective as a measure of success. With respect to the stage
of development, we ¯nd that universities with higher quality faculty have
a higher proportion of disclosures licensed in the proof of concept stage,
as do universities with higher fractions of inventions from medicine and
nursing or from engineering. We also ¯nd that universities with greater
net income have a smaller proportion of disclosures licensed in the proof
of concept stage, although more successful TTOs with greater income per
license encourage disclosure at the proof of concept stage. Finally, the share
of royalty income allotted to inventors is lower for universities with higher
quality faculty.
We think it is worth noting that the theoretical results presented here
are also consistent with the empirical results presented in an earlier paper
(Thursby et al., 2001), wherein we ¯nd a positive relationship between faculty quality and royalty payments and a negative relationship between the
frequency of sponsored research agreements in a license and faculty quality.
Although we have found substantial support for our assertion that university TTOs act as an agent for both the administration and the faculty,
we acknowledge that there are still many unanswered questions about the
process of technology transfer from the academy to industry. For example,
the total compensation packages for both inventors and TTO directors include more than just their shares of royalties and sponsored research funds.
A more complete modeling of these compensation packages and their choices
would be interesting. For example, the inverse relationship between faculty
quality and their share of license income is, one supposes, closely linked to
the (expected) direct relationship between faculty quality and their salary.
Similarly, many universities in our survey noted that faculty had substantial discretion in determining the allocation of the sponsored research funds
associated with their licenses. Clearly universities have at their disposal,
and frequently employ, a variety of compensation schemes for inventors and
TTO directors. Unfortunately, lack of data prevents us from examining the
empirical relationship between the \total" compensation packages and the
nature of license contracts or the stage of development at which disclosure
occurs.
Even in the context of this model, the university administration's prob21

lem is also quite interesting from another perspective. For a given invention,
it is straightforward to solve this problem. One simply determines the smallest shares for the TTO and inventor that induce them to disclose and license
this invention at the concept stage (assuming this is feasible), and then the
smallest shares that induce them to disclose and license this invention at
the prototype stage. The administration then simply compares its expected
utility at the concept stage with its discounted expected utility at the prototype stage, and chooses the shares to induce disclosure and licensing at
the appropriate stage. However, the solution is less evident when taking
into account the fact that shares cannot be chosen for each individual invention, but instead must be chosen for all inventions disclosed over some
period of time. The solution to this problem is well beyond the scope of this
paper, but is clearly an important topic for future research because it has a
substantial impact on the university-industry technology transfer process.

7

References

Agrawal, A. and R. Henderson, 2002, Putting patents in context, Management Science 48, 44-60.
Atwater, L., Ostro®, C., Yammarino, F.J., and Fleenor, J.W., 1998, Selfother agreement: Does it really matter?' Personnel Psyhology 51, 577-598.
Bercovitz, Janet, Maryann Feldman, Irwin Feller, and Richard Burton,
2001, Organizational structure as a determinant of academic patent and licensing behavior: An exploratory study of Duke, Johns Hopkins, and Pennsylvania State Universities, Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 21-35.
Di Gregoriao, D. and S. Shane, 2000, Why do some universities generate
more start-ups than others?," Mimeo, University of Maryland.
Hoppe, Heidrun C., and Emre Ozdenoren, 2001, Intermediation in innovation: The role of technology transfer o±ces," Mimeo, Universitat Hamburg.
Jensen, R., and M. Thursby, 2001, Proofs and prototypes for sale: The
licensing of university inventions," American Economic Review 91, 240-259.
Krosnick, Jon A. and Fabrigar, Leandre R., 1997, Designing rating scales
for e®ective measurement in surveys." in Lyberg, Bieer, Collins, de Leeuw,
Dippo, Schwarz, and Trewin, Survey Measurement and Process Quality
(New York: Wiley and Sons).
Lach, S. and M. Shankerman, 2002, Incentives and inventive activity in
universities," Mimeo, Hebrew University and London School of Economics.
Lewis, K.S., L.M. Jones, M.S. Anderson, D. Blumenthal, and E.G. Camp22

bell, 2001, Entrepreneurship, secrecy, and productivity: A comparison of
clinical and nonclinical faculty, Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 233-245.
Owen-Smith, J. and W.W. Powell, 2001, To patent or not: Faculty decisions and institutional success at technology transfer, Journal of Technology
Transfer, 26, 99-114.
Siegel, D., D. Waldman, and A. Link, 1999, Assessing the impact of
organizational practices on the productivity of university technology transfer
o±ces: An exploratory study," NBER Working Paper 7256.
Thursby, J., R. Jensen, and M.C. Thursby, 2001, Objectives, characteristics and outcomes of university licensing: A survey of major U.S. universities, Journal of Technology Transfer 26, 59-72.
Thursby, J. and S. Kemp, 2002. Growth and productive e±ciency of
university intellectual property licensing," Research Policy 31, 109-124.
Thursby, J., and M.C. Thursby, 2002, Who is selling the ivory tower?
Sources of growth in university licensing," Management Science 48, 90-104.

8

Appendix A: Survey Design

Questionnaires were sent to the top 135 universities in terms of licensing
revenue according to the 1996 AUTM Survey, and responses were received
from 62 universities. In examining the characteristics of non-respondents
compared to respondents, we ¯nd that they di®er primarily in their volume
of licensing activity, with non-respondents being less active than respondents. While this suggests that our sample is not fully representative of the
population of universities, it is important to note that the original intent
was not to obtain a random sample, but rather to characterize the bulk of
licensing activity at U.S. universities. In selecting the 135 universities to
sample, we therefore choose the top 135 in terms of licensing activity, and
having respondents skewed toward more active o±ces ¯ts with the original
design.
For more detail on survey design see Jensen and Thursby (2001) and
Thursby et al. (2002). For the survey questions relevant for this paper
there are two important, potential problems. First, TTOs do not maintain
¯les on the fraction of inventions in di®erent stages of development. As such,
in answering our question about stage of development answers are based on
the respondents perceptions, thus it is expected that there is a lot of noise
in the data. However, there is no reason to suspect that answers are biased
given that our stage of development terminology is standard across TTOs.
Second, our objectives questions are based on a semantic scale and respon23

dents may perceive the same environment but use the scale di®erently. To
minimize error of this type, we based our scale on research results from the
literature on optimal rating scales. As discussed by Krosnick and Fabrigar
(1997), research on the reliability of rating scales suggests people can distinguish among and have consistent interpretations of the four point scale,
\extremely important," \moderately important," \not very important," and
\not applicable."

9

Appendix B

9.1

Proof of Theorem 1

If p j(0; Q) >

K
¦,

then E¦j (0; 0) > 0. Because
@EUT j
@UT (®RR; ®S S; 1)
= pj
®R > 0
@R
@y T

and
@EUT j
@S

=

@p j
[UT (®R R; ®S S; 1) ¡ UT (0; ®S S; 1)] +
·@S
¸
@U (® R; ®S S; 1)
@U (0; ®S S; 1)
pj T R
+ (1 ¡ pj ) T
®S > 0
@f T
@fT

for all R ¸ 0 and S ¸ 0, it follows that the solution to (5) must have
the licensee's participation constraint binding E¦j (R¤j ; Sj¤) = 0, and either
R¤j > 0, S¤j > 0, or both. The condition E¦j (R; S) = 0 implicitly de¯nes R
@E ¦j

as a function of S, say R = Áj (S), where Á0j (S) = ¡ @E@S¦j and R¤j = Áj (Sj¤).
Note that, because

but

@R

@E¦j (R¤j ; Sj¤)
= ¡pj < 0,
@R
@E¦j (R¤j ; Sj¤ ) @p j ¡
¢
=
¦ ¡ R¤j ¡ 1
@S
@S

@E¦j (R¤ ;S¤ )

j j
is ambiguous in general, Á0j(S) has the sign of ¡
.
@S
Let Fj (R; S; ¸) = EUT j (R; S) + ¸E¦j (R; S) where ¸ is a Lagrange multiplier. If an interior solution with R¤j > 0 and S¤j > 0 exists, then the ¯rst
order necessary conditions are

@Fj (Rj¤; Sj¤)
@EUT j (R¤j ; Sj¤)
@E¦j (R¤j ; Sj¤)
=
+ ¸¤j
= 0;
@R
@R
@R
24

@Fj (Rj¤; Sj¤)
@EUT j (R¤j ; Sj¤)
@E¦j (R¤j ; Sj¤)
=
+ ¸¤j
= 0;
@S
@S
@S
and
@Fj (R¤j ; Sj¤)
= E¦j (Rj¤; Sj¤) = 0.
@¸
¤
@E UT j (R ¤
j ;Sj )

Hence, ¸¤ = ¡ @E¦ T @R
¤ ¤ > 0, whence
j (R ;S )
j

Á0j (Sj¤)

j

@E¦j (R¤j ;Sj¤ )
@S

@R

=

@pj
@S

³

´
¦ ¡ R¤j ¡1 < 0

and
< 0.
Using the standard Kuhn-Tucker approach, the ¯rst order necessary conditions for a maximum at (R0j ; 0) are
@Fj(R0j ; 0)
@EUT j (R0j ; 0)
@E¦T j (Rj0; 0)
R
=
+¸
= 0,
@R
@R
@R
@Fj(R0j ; 0)
@EUT j (R0j ; 0)
@E¦T j (Rj0; 0)
=
+ ¸R
· 0,
@S
@S
@S
and

@Fj (R0j ; 0)
= E¦T j (R0j ; 0) = 0,
@¸
where the last condition implies R0j is de¯ned by pj (0; Q)(¦ ¡R0j ) = K, and
R

@E UT j (R0
j ;0)

the ¯rst condition implies ¸ = ¡ @E¦ @R(R0 ;0) > 0 because
@E¦j
@R

< 0. Therefore, because
@E¦T j (R0j ;0)
@S

Tj j
@R
@EUT j (R0j ;0)

@EUT j
@R

> 0 and

> 0, the second condition cannot

@S

hold unless
< 0, whence Á0j (0) < 0.
Similarly, the standard Kuhn-Tucker necessary conditions for a maximum at (0; S0j ) are
@Fj (0; Sj0 ) @EUT j (0; Sj0)
@E¦T j(0; Sj0)
=
+ ¸S
· 0,
@R
@R
@R
@Fj (0; Sj0 ) @EUT j (0; Sj0)
@E¦T j(0; Sj0)
=
+ ¸S
= 0,
@S
@S
@S
and

@Fj (0; S0j )
= E¦T j (0; Sj0) = 0,
@¸
where the last condition implies S0j is de¯ned by p j(Sj0; Q)¦ = K, and
S

@EU T j (0;Sj0)

the ¯rst condition implies ¸ = ¡ @E¦ @R(0;S 0) ¸ 0 because
Tj
@R

25

j

@EUT j
@R

> 0 and

@E¦j
@R

@EUT j (0;S0j )
> 0, the
@S
whence Á0j (S0j ) < 0.

< 0. Therefore, because
@E¦T j (0;S0j )
@S

second condition cannot

hold unless
< 0,
The second order su±cient condition for a maximum is negative de¯niteness of the bordered Hessian matrix Hj for all R ¸ 0 and S ¸ 0, or det Hj >
0, which we assume. Assuming an interior solution, R¤j > 0 and Sj¤ > 0,
standard comparative statics analysis implies that, for x = Q,¦,®R,®S ,
@R¤j
det Hj (R; x)
=
@x
det H j
and

@Sj¤
det Hj (S; x)
=
@x
det Hj
h 2
i 2 h 2
i
2
2
@ F
@ F @ F
@ 2Fj @2 Fj
@ Fj @ Fj @ 2Fj
@2 Fj @ 2Fj
where det Hj (R; x) = @¸@Sj @R@xj @S@¸j ¡ @R@¸
+
¡
2
@S@x
h 2
i 2 @¸@x
h @R@¸ @S 2 @R@S2 @S@¸
i
@2 Fj
@ Fj @2 Fj
@2 Fj @ 2 Fj
@ Fj @2 Fj @2 Fj
@ Fj @ Fj
and det Hj (S; x) = @¸@R @S@x @R@¸ ¡ @S@¸ @R@x + @¸@x @R2 @S@¸ ¡ @R@¸ @R@S .
@ 2F

First consider the sponsored research share. Notice @R@®jS = p j @

2U

T (®R R;®S S;1)
@yT @f T

@2 F
@p
@UT (0;® S S;1)
@2 UT (® R R;® S S;1)
S S;1)
and @S@®jS = @Sj [ @UT (®R@fR;®
¡
]S
+
[p
+ (1 ¡
j
@f
@fT2
T
T
2
@ 2U (0;® S;1)
@ F
@ 2F
pj ) T @f 2 S
]®S S are both ambiguous, and @¸@®jS = 0. Because @¸@Sj =
T
@E¦j
@2 Fj
@2 Fj @ 2 Fj @ 2F j
j
< 0 and @¸@R
= @E¦
< 0; det Hj (R; ®S ) = @¸@S
[ @R@® S @S@¸ ¡
@S
@R
@ 2F j @ 2Fj
@ 2Fj @ 2Fj @2 Fj
@ 2Fj @ 2Fj
@R@¸ @S@® S ] > 0 and det Hj (S; ®S ) = @¸@R [ @S@® S @R@¸ ¡ @S@¸ @R@®S ] < 0
@2 F
@ 2F
if @R@®jS ¸ 0 and @S@®jS · 0: In general, these conditions need not hold,

®R S

but they do for certain classes of utility functions. For example, they hold
@R¤
@S ¤
if TTO utility is additively separable, in which case @® Sj > 0 > @®jS because
det Hj > 0 by second order conditions.
@2 F
@p
S S;1)
Next consider the license revenue share. Note that @S@®jR = @Sj @UT (® R@yR;®
R+
T
@2 Fj
@ 2UT (®R R;®S S;1)
® RR
@R@®R = pj
@yT2
@2 Fj @ 2Fj @ 2F j
@2 Fj @ 2Fj
< 0 and
= 0. Now det Hj (R; ®R) = @¸@S [ @R@® R @S@¸ ¡ @R@¸ @S@®R ]
@ 2 Fj @2 Fj @ 2Fj
@ 2 Fj @2 Fj
and det Hj (S; ®R) = @¸@R
[ @S@®R @R@¸ ¡ @S@¸
@R@®R ] are ambiguous, in gen@R¤j
@Sj¤
eral, and so are @®R and @®R . However, det Hj (R; ®R) < 0 and det Hj (S; ®R ) >
@S ¤
0 whenever TTO utility is additively separable, in which case @®Rj > 0 >
@R¤j
@®R .
@2 Fj
j @UT (®R R;®S S;1)
Third, consider faculty quality. Note that @R@Q
= @p
®R¡
@Q
@yT
@pj
@2 Fj
@2 pj
@pj @UT (® R R;® S S;1)
¸ @Q and @S@Q = @S@Q [UT (®R R; ®S S; 1)¡UT (0; ®S S; 1)]+ @Q [
¡
@f T

pj @

2 U (® R;® S;1)
T
R
S
@fT @yT
@ 2 Fj
@¸@®R

®S R is ambiguous, while

26

@UT (0;® S S;1)
@2 pj
]®S +¸ @S@Q
(¦ ¡ R) are both ambiguous,
@fT
@R¤j
@Sj¤
0 Thus, @Q and @Q are ambiguous, in general.

though

@ 2Fj
@¸@Q

=

@pj
@Q

(¦ ¡ R) >

@ 2Fj
@ 2Fj
@R@¦ = 0, @S@¦ =
@p
@2 Fj
@2 F
@2 Fj @2 Fj
¸ @Sj > 0, and @¸@¦
= pj > 0. Thus, again det Hj (R; ¦) = @¸@Sj [ @R@¦
@S@¸ ¡
@ 2F j @ 2Fj
@ 2F j @2 Fj @ 2F j
@2 Fj @ 2Fj
@2 Fj @ 2 Fj @ 2F j
@R@¸ @S@¦ ]+ @¸@¦ [ @R@¸ @S 2 ¡ @R@S @S@¸ ] and det Hj (S; ¦) = @¸@R [ @S@¦ @R@¸ ¡
@2 Fj @2 Fj
@2 Fj @ 2F j @ 2F j
@ 2Fj @ 2Fj
@S@¸ @R@¦ ] + @¸@¦ [ @R2 @S@¸ ¡ @R@¸ @R@S ] are ambiguous, in general.
@ 2Fj
Finally, consider the cost of commercialization. Note that @R@K
=
@2 Fj
@ 2F j
@2 Fj @ 2Fj
@S@K = 0 and @¸@K = ¡1 > 0. Thus, again det Hj (R; K) = ¡[ @R@S @S@¸ ¡
@ 2F j @2 Fj
@2 Fj @2 Fj
@ 2Fj @ 2Fj
@R@¸ @S2 ] and det Hj (S; K) = ¡[ @R2 @S@¸ ¡ @R@¸ @R@S ] are ambiguous, in
@ 2F j
general. However, if @R@S
¸ 0, then det Hj (R; K) > 0 > det Hj (S; K), so
@R¤j
@Sj¤
@K > 0 > @K .

Fourth, consider the pro¯t from a success. Note that

However, recall that the ¯rm's participation constraint must bind and
@E¦j (R¤j ;Sj¤ )
@E¦j (R¤j ;S¤j )
that
< 0 and
< 0 at the maximum. Hence, any
@R
@S
parametric change that increases E¦j(R; S) in general implies that now
E¦j (R¤j ; S¤j ) > 0. Therefore, either R¤j , or S¤j , or both, must increase to
restore equality in the constraint. That is, if
@R¤j
@x

@Sj¤
@x

@E¦j (R;S)
@x

> 0, then either

> 0,
> 0, or both. Graphically, the constraint E¦j (R; S) = 0
implicitly de¯nes R as a function of S, say R = Áj (S), where Á0j (S) =
@E ¦j

¡ @E@S¦j < 0 because E¦j (R; S) is assumed to be decreasing in R and S
@R

at the maximum. Thus, any parametric change that increases E¦j (R; S)
results in an outward shift of the constraint from the point (R¤j ; Sj¤), so
either R¤j ,or S¤j , or both, must increase at the new maximum on the new
constraint.
The statement
of the theorem then¤ follows
from the fact that
@E¦j (R¤j ;Sj¤ )
@pj (Sj¤ ;Q)
@E¦j (Rj ;S¤j )
¤
¤
=
(¦
¡
R
)
>
0,
=
p
j(Sj ; Q) > 0, and
j
@Q
@Q
@¦
@E¦j (R¤j ;Sj¤ )
@K

9.2

= ¡1 < 0.

Proof of Theorem 2

As noted in the proof of Theorem 1, the ¯rst order necessary conditions
0
@F (R0 ;0)
@EUT j (R0j ;0)
R @E¦T j (Rj ;0) = 0,
for a maximum at (R0j ; 0) are j@Rj =
+
¸
@R
@R
@Fj (R0j ;0)
@S

=

@EUT j (R0j ;0)
@S

+ ¸R

@E¦T j (R0j ;0)
@S

0, where the ¯rst implies ¸0j = ¡

· 0, and

@E U T j (R0
j ;0)
@R
@E ¦T j (R0 ;0)
j
@R

27

@Fj (R0j ;0)
@¸

= E¦T j (R0j ; 0) =

> 0. Because

@EUT j (R;S)
@S

>0

@E¦j (R0j ;0)
(0;Q)
j (R;S)
= @pj@S
(¦ ¡ R0j ) ¡ 1, we have @EUT@S
@S
1
. In this case the corner solution (R0j ; 0) on the
¦¡R0j

in general, and
if

@pj (0;Q)
@S

>

>0
zero

expected pro¯t constraint cannot be a maximum, which with pj (0; Q) >
implies the optimal contract must have Sj¤ > 0.

28

K
¦

Table 1. Summary Statistics
Variable

# Obs.

Mean

Std. Dev.

62
62
60
62
52
52
54
61
57
61
58
58
58

0.63
0.60
3.14
38.51
44.16
37.19
11.22
0.14
0.10
4.21
21.90
28.69
33.08

0.83
12.69
28.14
27.66
9.68
0.09
0.19
8.57
18.37
22.82
33.69

Royalties
Sponsored research
Licenses executed

61
61
62

2.69
2.38
2.66

0.50
0.55
0.54

Royalties
Sponsored research
Licenses executed

61
61
61

2.18
2.72
2.31

0.70
0.52
0.76

Royalties
Sponsored research
Licenses executed

61
57
61

2.43
1.75
2.03

0.62
0.66
0.68

Fraction public universities
Fraction with medical school
Faculty quality
Faculty income shares
Fraction proof of concept
Fraction prototype available
Industry to federal expenditures
Industrial experience
Income per license (millions of dollars)
Net income (millions of dollars)
Fraction of licenses from School of Science
Fraction of licenses from School of Engineering
Fraction of licenses from Medical Schools

PUBLIC
MEDSCHUL
QUAL
PROOF
PTYPE
INDEXP
INDFED
INCLIC
NETINC
SCIFRAC
ENGFRAC
MEDFRAC

TTO importance

Faculty importance

Administration importance

Table 2. Ordered Probit Results on TTO Measures of Success
SPONSORED
RESEARCH
FAC -- Spon.Research
ADMIN -- Spon. Research
FAC -- Royalties
ADMIN -- Royalties
FAC
-- Licenses
ADMIN -- Licenses
PROOF
PTYPE
MEDSCHL
QUAL
INDFED
PUBLIC
INDEXP
Psuedo R-Square
Number of observations
Chi-square statistic for overall fit

ROYALTIES +

LICENSES
EXECUTED

1.650 ***
0.957 ***
3.899 **
7.002 **

-0.027 ***
-0.023 **
-0.003
0.068
-0.766
0.151
-0.008
0.313
42
27.26 ***

*** Significant at 1% level
** Significant at 5% level
* Significant at 10% level
+ Bivariate probit model as explained in text.

-0.198
-0.081
5.468
2.579
76.499
-0.311
0.014
0.726
42
17.88

**
*
**
*
*

**

0.538
1.158 ***
0.005
0.008
-0.155
0.606 *
-1.666
0.668
-0.016
0.257
38
19.92 **

Table 3. Estimated Conditional Probabilities
Sponsored Research

Royalties

Licenses Executed

TTO=1 TTO=2 TTO=3 TTO=1 TTO=2 TTO=3

TTO=1 TTO=2 TTO=3

When Faculty and Central Administration AGREE
FAC=ADMIN=1
FAC=ADMIN=2
FAC=ADMIN=3

0.984
0.503
0.009

0.016
0.468
0.380

0.000
0.029
0.611

NA
NA
NA

0.961
0.666
0.045

0.039
0.334
0.955

0.282
0.021
0.000

0.591
0.341
0.034

0.127
0.638
0.965

0.379
0.821

0.621
0.179

0.005
0.066

0.181
0.508

0.813
0.426

When Faculty and Central Administration DISAGREE
FAC=1, ADMIN=3
FAC=3, ADMIN=1

0.720
0.271

0.265
0.640

NA: Bivariate probit model is used.

0.007
0.089

NA
NA

Table 4. Regression Results for Stage of Development
Proof
ENGFRAC
SCIFRAC
MEDFRAC
QUAL
INDFED
INCLIC
NETINC
CONSTANT
R-Square
Number of observations
F-statistic for overall fit
*** Significant at 1% level
** Significant at 5% level
* Significant at 10% level

Prototype
0.469
-0.171
0.305
12.651
16.478
36.788
-0.594
-20.903
0.211
47
3.04

**
*
**
*
**

**

-0.440
-0.061
-0.490
-9.006
-68.974
-49.898
-0.184
113.708
0.273
46
3.49

*
**
*
**
***

*

Table 5. Faculty Shares
ENGFRAC
SCIFRAC
MEDFRAC
QUAL
INDFED
CONSTANT
R-Square
Number of observations
F statistic for overall fit
*** Significant at 1% level
** Significant at 5% level
* Significant at 10% level

-0.173
-0.201
-0.048
-3.262
-8.463
60.295
0.226
55
4.83

*
**
**
***

***

