                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 APPROPRIABILITY AND THE TIMING OF INNOVATION:
                        EVIDENCE FROM MIT INVENTIONS

                                        Emmanuel Dechenaux
                                          Brent Goldfarb
                                          Scott A. Shane
                                         Marie C. Thursby

                                         Working Paper 9735
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9735


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      May 2003




We thank Fritz Foley, Yan Meuniere, Scott Stern, Jerry Thursby, and participants of seminars at Carnegie
Mellon, Emory, and Stanford Universities, the NBER Summer Institute and the International Industrial
Organization Conference at Northwestern University for useful comments. We are particularly grateful
to Lita Nelson of the MIT Technology Licensing Office for providing access to the data and for answering
many questions. Thursby gratefully acknowledges the Kauffman Foundation and the National Science
Foundation (Awards SES-0094573 and NSF-IGERT 0221600). Both Thursby and Dechenaux thank
the Alan and Mildred Peterson Foundation for research support. The views expressed herein are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

© 2003 by Emmanuel Dechenaux, Brent Goldfarb, Scott A. Shane, and Marie C. Thursby. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit, including © notice, is given to the source.
Appropriability and the timing of innovation: Evidence from MIT inventions
Emmanuel Dechenaux, Brent Goldfarb, Scott A. Shane, and Marie C. Thursby
NBER Working Paper No. 9735
May 2003, Revised July 2007
JEL No. O31,O32

                                                 ABSTRACT

At least since Arrow (1962), the effects of appropriability on invention have been well studied, but
there has been little analysis of the effect of appropriability on the commercialization of existing inventions.
Exploiting a database of 805 attempts by private firms to commercialize inventions licensed from
MIT between 1980 and 1996, we explore the influence of several appropriability mechanisms on the
commercialization and termination of projects to develop products based on university inventions.
Our central hypothesis is that the relationship between a licensee's decision to either terminate or commercialize
the invention is driven by the current market value of the invention, as well as the option value of delaying
its commercialization. We use a competing risks framework that allows for non- parametric heterogeneity
and correlated risks. We find that better appropriability in the sense of more effective patent strength
and secrecy has a strong negative effect on the hazard of license termination. The effectiveness of
learning has a strong positive effect on the hazard of technology commercialization, while lead time
has a negative effect.

Emmanuel Dechenaux                                      Scott A. Shane
Kent State University                                   Dept. of Economics
Department of Economics                                 Case Western Reserve University
Kent, OH 44242-0001                                     10900 Euclid Ave.
edechena@kent.edu                                       Cleveland, OH 44106
                                                        sas46@po.cwru.edu
Brent Goldfarb
Robert H. Smith School of Business                      Marie C. Thursby
University of Maryland                                  College of Management
4548 Van Munching Hall                                  Georgia Institute of Technology
College Park, MD 20742                                  800 West Peachtree street, NW
bgoldfarb@rhsmith.umd.edu                               Atlanta, GA 30332-0520
                                                        and NBER
                                                        marie.thursby@mgt.gatech.edu
1    Introduction
Do strong intellectual property rights enhance the commercialization of new technology?
Surprisingly, we do not know the answer to this question (Gallini 2002). Although the
role of property rights in innovation has been studied extensively since Arrow (1962) ar-
gued that firms under invest in R&D because they cannot fully appropriate the returns,
much of this work focuses on the effect of intellectual property rights, particularly those
associated with patents, on inventive activity. Moreover, while there is a rich literature
on the determinants of licensing activity (Thursby and Thursby 2007), there has been
little analysis of whether licensed inventions are commercialized, or the effects of ap-
propriability mechanisms on these outcomes (Hahn 2003). As firms increasingly rely on
externally generated inventions, particularly those invented and patented by universities,
this represents an important gap in our understanding (Arora et al. 2001, Santoro and
Chakrabarti 2002, Thursby and Thursby 2003).
     We examine the effect of various appropriability mechanisms on the commercializa-
tion of university inventions by exploring the same population of inventions licensed
from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology (MIT) used in Shane’s (2002) work on
the determinants of licensing. Specifically, we examine the population of 805 attempts
by private firms to commercialize patentable inventions licensed from the MIT between
1980 and 1996. For these inventions, we relate appropriability mechanisms to the timing
of termination and commercialization decisions.
     We view the decision of a licensing firm as an optimal stopping problem under un-
certainty (see Dixit and Pindyck 1994). This uncertainty stems from the embryonic
nature of university technologies and the difficulty in identifying and protecting associ-
ated markets (Thursby and Thursby 2002, Shane 2000). Survey evidence from university
technology licensing offices (TLO) shows that the majority of inventions licensed are no
more than a lab scale prototype at the time of license (Jensen and Thursby 2001 and
Thursby et al. 2001). Thus, for most university inventions, further development is needed
for commercial application. Survey evidence from businesses that license-in university
inventions shows that this development is risky: half of all commercialization efforts fail
and 47% of these failures can be attributed to technical reasons (Thursby and Thursby
2003).
     Market uncertainty is an additional source of risk for nascent university technologies.
Defining market opportunities for early stage inventions is difficult, so much so that
many university inventions end up with applications that are not anticipated at the time


                                             3
of license (Shane 2000, and Thursby and Thursby 2002). Further, exclusive licenses such
as those we consider, do not necessarily prevent competitors from developing substitutes
or inventing around a licensed patent.
    In this context, we consider the fact that at every point in time the licensee can
decide to either commercialize; drop the license; or keep the license but delay commer-
cialization. This gives rise to a real option in commercialization. Moreover, returns may
be appropriated using a variety of mechanisms. While some of these are legal, such as
patents or trade secrets, others, such as learning or a first mover advantage, are con-
sequences of business strategy (Cohen et al. 2000, Kamien and Schwartz 1972, Levin
et al. 1987, and Takalo and Kanniainen 2000). In our theoretical discussion, we argue
that different appropriability mechanisms influence the timing of licensees’ decisions by
affecting either the current market value of commercializing the invention, the option
value of keeping the license without commercialization, or both.
    Estimation of the hazard rates of termination of the license and commercialization of
the invention reveals that legal mechanisms have a strong and negative effect on the haz-
ard of termination. However, with the exception of patent scope, they have only a weak
effect on the hazard of commercialization. The reverse is true for appropriability mecha-
nisms based on business strategy, which primarily affect the hazard of commercialization.
These results are consistent with our theoretical arguments, under the assumption that
most university technologies are embryonic. They are also in line with the observation
that when appropriability mechanisms such as patents and secrecy are effective, firms
may be able to appropriate returns from the license without commercializing a product.
    By showing that several dimensions of appropriability affect the hazards of license
termination and invention commercialization, we contribute to the literature on appro-
priability and innovation. In particular, our results on patent strength contribute to
the extensive literature on patents and innovation (for a survey, see Gallini 2002). By
treating the decision to commercialize an invention as an optimal stopping problem, we
examine patent scope and innovation in a way that incorporates the possibility of ter-
mination, which, though quite relevant to embryonic technologies licensed to firms, has
been ignored in the literature.
    Furthermore, we contribute to the empirical literature on the effectiveness of patents
in appropriating the returns from R&D by directly examining the relationship between
patent characteristics and the development of products based on newly invented tech-
nologies, rather than relying on perceptions of R&D personnel responding to surveys
(Taylor and Silberston 1973, Mansfield 1986, and Mansfield et al. 1981).


                                            4
    Our analysis also extends the literature on product development and management.
For example, Lilien and Yoon (1990) and Bayus et al. (1997) show that it may be optimal
for market pioneers to delay product launch depending on demand characteristics, as well
as market competition. Our results on commercialization contribute to this literature by
relating the hazard of commercialization to appropriability mechanisms. In this regard,
we also contribute to the literature on commercialization strategy. For example, Gans,
Hsu and Stern (2003) examine whether innovative startup firms commercialize their
innovations independently or by partnering with other firms as a function of patent rights,
secrecy, or the litigation environment. Both our theoretical discussion and our empirical
results add to this line of inquiry by considering other measures of appropriability and
the timing of independent commercialization.
    Finally, we contribute to the practice of technology management and strategy by
highlighting the fact that the intuitive tradeoff between current market value and op-
tion value depends strongly on appropriability conditions. An important implication,
validated by the empirical analysis, is that in lines of business where learning is an
effective means of appropriating returns, the current market value tends to dominate
and inventions are brought to market quickly. By contrast, in lines of business where
being a first mover is effective, delays in commercialization may occur because of the
option value associated with further product development. Given the increasing reliance
of firms on externally-generated inventions, particularly those developed in universities,
this information should be useful to managers in technology-intensive industries.
    Section 2 presents our theoretical arguments on the relation of appropriability mecha-
nisms to the timing of a licensee’s decisions and the hazards of termination and commer-
cialization. The competing risk hazard model used in the empirical analysis is described
in Section 3, and details about our data are provided in Section 4. Section 5 presents
the main results, as well as a variety of robustness checks. Section 6 concludes.


2    Appropriability mechanisms, termination and com-
     mercialization
In our analysis, the timing of termination and commercialization is determined by the
licensee’s optimal decisions when faced with market value uncertainty. Hence, it is
natural to consider the conditional probability that either event (commercialization and
termination) occurs in time t given that no event has occurred before, that is, the hazards


                                            5
of commercialization and termination. In the simplest formulation of the problem, given
that the firm has not yet commercialized, the value of the license to the firm will be a
function
                                     Vt (Πt , bt , ct ),

where Πt is the current expected value to the firm of cumulated profits from commercial-
izing the invention (net of licensing fees) or market value, bt is the benefit from holding
the license without commercializing, and ct is the cost of keeping the license for one
additional period without commercializing. This cost may include development costs
and surely includes the sum of license fees owed to the university, with the exception
of royalties based on sales. The market value, Πt , the other benefits, bt , and the value
function Vt depend on the effectiveness of appropriability mechanisms such as patent
strength, scope and other non-patent mechanisms. They also depend on the amount of
time the licensee has been able to spend on development, as well as potentially complex
aspects of the product life cycle. The expected value of Vt may thus be non-monotonic
as a function of time.
    Importantly, we consider that the value of the license Vt may depend on benefits
that are derived from keeping the license, but are unrelated to commercialization (bt ).
Firms may license patented inventions in order to build “fences” around products they
already produce or to increase their bargaining power in obtaining cross licenses, as
well as to earn royalty income (Levin et al. 1987, Cohen et al. 2000, and Arora et
al. 2007). In fact, university TLO personnel often express concerns over these motives
for licensing and report that the contracts they use in exclusive licensing include due
diligence requirements as well as complicated payment terms to discourage firms from
shelving the technologies licensed (Dechenaux et al. 2007). Keeping the license without
commercializing does not necessarily stem from a pure shelving motive. Note that if
property rights are weak (e.g., in electronics or mechanical engineering inventions) the
licensee might keep a license until critical knowledge is transferred, but then terminate the
license and invent around the patent.1 Moreover, this implies that a terminated license
may not indicate either lack of technology transfer or technology failure (Goldfarb and
Henrekson 2003).
    In any period, the licensee will choose not to terminate the license as long as Vt
is greater than zero. Note that V0 > 0 must hold for all licenses in the sample since
the firms voluntarily obtained the license from the university. However, the licensee’s
  1
    Katharine Ku, head of the Stanford Office of Technology Licensing has indicated to the authors
that not only does this happen, but it is considered fair-play and not at all unethical.


                                                6
decision regarding commercialization depends on the difference between expected profits
from immediate commercialization and the option option value of delaying (Takalo and
Kanniainen 2000).
    Our analysis focuses on how changes in appropriability conditions can affect Vt and
the difference between current market value (cash-flow effect) and the option value of
commercialization (option effect). We make a distinction between appropriability mech-
anisms that require commercialization and those for which rents may be appropriated
without commercializing a product. Further, we distinguish between mechanisms that
are legal and those related to business strategy. In the next subsections, we discuss these
effects. (For a more formal treatment, the reader is referred to the Appendix.)


2.1    Patent strength, patent scope, and secrecy
These three appropriability mechanisms pertain to legal means of protecting intellectual
property. Based on Mansfield et al.’s (1981) study of patents and imitation costs, it is
natural to think of both patent strength and patent scope as raising the cost of imitating
the licensed technology. Secrecy should have the same effect. Hence, an increase in the
effectiveness of these mechanisms should result in a higher value for the license, via both
the market value and the option of holding the license.
    Ceteris paribus, we would expect an increase in patent strength, patent scope, or
secrecy to reduce the hazard of termination. This logic should apply whether or not
the licensee intends to commercialize the technology; that is, the legal mechanisms of
appropriating returns may provide as much or more value from preemption or cross
licensing as they do from discouraging imitation of a newly developed product (Arora et
al. 2007, Arora and Ceccagnoli 2007).
    The dependence of the hazard of commercialization on the specific appropriability
mechanism is not as straightforward to characterize. Each legal mechanism increases
imitation costs and therefore decreases the probability of imitation. This increases both
the market and option values since the firm has a longer window to continue devel-
opment without competition (Kamien and Schwartz 1972 and Takalo and Kanniainen
2000). The increase in market value should increase the hazard of commercialization,
while the option effect works against it. We must note that in Matutes et al.’s (1996)
model, greater scope decreases an innovating firm’s incentives to delay the introduc-
tion of applications, while a longer patent leads to increased delays. An earlier result
by Reinganum (1982) shows that perfect patent protection accelerates development and
thus market introduction.

                                            7
    Note further, for firms that have licensed the invention to block rivals, the effect of
the option value is, indeed, the only relevant effect. This effect may also be relatively
more important when secrecy is effective, particularly if the technology is closely related
to existing technology used by the licensee. Indeed, letting a rival firm obtain the license
may lead to disclosure of important information because license agreements often include
the possibility for the licensee to work closely with the inventor (Jensen and Thursby
2001 and Dechenaux et al. 2007).


2.2    Learning
Learning allows the licensee to obtain a significant cost advantage in the product market,
and thus, make imitation less profitable. This advantage is achieved by decreasing the
cost of producing a given level of quality over time and thus, requires early commercial-
ization. For this reason, we argue that when returns are appropriated through learning,
the value of the license derives mainly from the current market value, while the option
value of delaying commercialization is low.
    How the effectiveness of learning affects termination is ambiguous. If greater effec-
tiveness of learning were simply to reduce the option value of holding the license (all
other things being equal) we would expect learning to increase termination. However,
when learning is effective, the licensee likely derives a cost advantage in the product
market, implying a lower probability of successful imitation. The latter effect would
decrease the hazard of termination.
    In contrast, learning is unlikely to affect the hazard of commercialization unless the li-
censee intends to commercialize the technology. Therefore, the expected effect of learning
on the hazard of commercialization is straightforward. In order to benefit from learning
the firm must commercialize, therefore, ceteris paribus, learning is likely to increase the
hazard of commercialization.


2.3    Lead time
The licensee’s lead time, or the amount of time before entry by the first competitor, is
likely to be used to appropriate returns differently across inventions. For instance, lead
time may be used to establish a brand name, or develop and secure beneficial relationships
with large customers. Such efforts would lower the impact of future entry on the first
mover’s profit. If, however, lead time is used to get a head start on competitors, then
its effectiveness depends on the quality of the commercialized product, and thus, the

                                              8
amount of time spent on development. Hence, the relationship between lead time, cash
flow, and option effects is not straightforward to characterize.
     We expect lead time to be important only to those licensees who have licensed the
technology with the goal of commercializing it. If lead time is an effective appropriability
mechanism simply because exploiting first mover advantage decreases the probability
of imitation, then an increase in lead time should reduce the hazard of termination.
However, if lead time is an effective appropriability mechanism only when the licensee
manages to capture a significant share of the market as the first mover, the development
costs could become too high for the licensee to consider it worthwhile to continue.
     The effect of lead time on commercialization is also ambiguous. For an invention
that is ready for commercialization, then, conditional on no rival having entered yet, the
potential first mover advantage should be reflected in the current market value. However,
as Lilian and Yoon (1990) argue, a firm developing a new product will benefit from first
mover advantage (consumer lock-in, strong bargaining position with suppliers, etc.) only
if its product is of sufficiently high quality (see also Bayus et al. 1997 and Benoit 1987).
With this added qualification, the first mover advantage for embryonic inventions will
be reflected in the option value of the license, but not necessarily in the market value.
Thus for such inventions, the greater the importance of lead time, the lower the hazard
of commercialization.


2.4    Summary of predictions
Before turning to the empirical analysis of the hazards, we summarize our predictions in
Table 1 below. The table relates appropriability measures to the cash-flow and option
effects and provides our predictions for the effect of appropriability mechanisms on the
hazards of termination and commercialization.


3     Empirical methodology
Although the cash-flow and option effects taken together have ambiguous effects on
the hazards, the panel nature of our data allows us to explore which effect dominates,
on average, for our data. We observe a set of MIT inventions, their licensees, and
termination and commercialization outcomes. We observe each observation until one of
these events, or until it is right censored by the closing of our observation window. Our
data reflect the two central competing risks about which we theorize, and we need to


                                             9
Table 1: Predictions: Appropriability measures and hazards of termination and com-
mercialization


                                                                    Hazard of
                Cash-flow effect      Option Effect       Termination Commercialization
 Strength              +                   +                  −              +/−∗
 Scope                 +                   +                  −               +/−
 Secrecy               +                   +                  −               +/−
 Learning              +                   −                 −/+               +
 Lead-time∗∗
 Embryonic               −                   +                  +/−                    −
 Late stage              +                   −                  −/+                    +
 ∗
   a/b indicates that the direction of the overall effect is given by a if the
 cash-flow effect dominates the option effect and by b otherwise.
 ∗∗
    Depends on the stage of development.



control for the empirical reality of right-censoring. Thus, we adopt a competing risks
framework. As we discuss below, we might expect a significant amount of heterogeneity
among MIT inventions, which may be difficult to control for. With this in mind, the
framework we adopt allows for non-parametric heterogeneity.
    Let Tf be the duration of a patent that is licensed until first sale and Td be the
duration of a license until it is terminated. Define T = min (Tf , Td ) and let df be an
indicator which equals 1 if a patented technology is commercialized (first sale) and 0
otherwise. Let dd be an indicator which equals 1 if a patented technology is terminated
and 0 otherwise. Only (T, df , dd ) are observed. Because df and dd are observed, exclusion
restrictions are not necessary to uncover the latent survival functions, S (kf , kd |x) so long
as there is sufficient variation in the vector of regressors x (Abbring and van den Berg
2000, Han and Hausman 1990). Since our data are discrete, we employ a grouped data
approach (Han and Hausman 1990). Our model follows McCall (1996).
    The probability of a license being terminated conditional on no events occurring
through period k − 1 is:

                Pr(Td = k|X, T > k − 1) = 1 − exp(−θd exp(αdk + βd0 x)),                   (1)




                                              10
where x is a set of exogenous (possibly) time-varying regressors. Similarly,

               Pr(Tf = k|X, T > k − 1) = 1 − exp(−θf exp(αf k + βf0 x)),                       (2)

is the probability a first sale associated with a patent occurs conditional on no events
occurring through period k − 1. Period subscripts on x are dropped for readability.
Because the theory does not provide us with guidance as to possible exclusion restrictions,
we assume that regressors x are identical in both equations.
    The joint survivor function conditional on x is:
                                                                                       
                                    kf                             kd
                                    X                              X
         S(ks , kd |x) = exp −θf         exp(αf k + βf0 x) − θd         exp(αdk + βd0 x) .   (3)
                                    r=1                            r=1


    In what follows, let Θ = {θf , θd }. αwk are the baseline parameters and can be
interpreted as:                          µZ k         ¶
                             αwk = log        hw (t)dt ,
                                                 k−1

where hw (t) is the underlying baseline hazard function and w ∈ {f, d}. αdk and αf k are
the respective baseline hazards and are assumed to follow a 3rd order polynomial. A
3rd order polynomial is sufficiently flexible to approximate a baseline hazard function of
only five periods. Thus

                           αwk = α0k + α1k k + α2k k 2 + α3k k 3 .                             (4)

   The vectors of parameters βw represent the effects of the exogenous variables. Note
that all covariates are constant except patent age and year. Define

   Pf (k) = S(k − 1, k − 1|Θ) − S(k, k − 1|Θ) − 0.5[S(k − 1, k − 1|Θ) + S(k, k|Θ)
           − S(k − 1, k|Θ) − S(k, k − 1)|Θ],
   Pd (k) = S(k − 1, k − 1|Θ) − S(k − 1, k|Θ) − 0.5[S(k − 1, k − 1|Θ) + S(k, k|Θ)
           − S(k − 1, k|Θ) − S(k, k − 1)|Θ],
   Pc (k) = S(k − 1, k − 1|Θ),

where Pf (k) is the unconditional probability of first sale by the beginning of period k,
Pd (k) is the unconditional probability of a license being terminated by the beginning of
period k, and Pc (k) is the unconditional probability of neither event occurring through

                                                11
the beginning of period k. An adjustment, 0.5[S(k − 1, k − 1|Θ) + S(k, k|Θ) − S(k −
1, k|Θ) − S(k, k − 1|Θ)] is made because durations are measured in discrete time.
    A key problem with competing risks models identified in the literature is that when
the risks are not allowed to correlate, a potential bias may arise. Unobserved determi-
nants of one event (first sale) may be correlated with unobserved determinants of the
complementary event (termination) and duration (decision to do neither). We might
expect unobserved components, such as quality of the patent and uncertainty associated
with success of the technology, to affect both decisions. In our specification, we allow
risks to correlate by permitting a three mass-point distribution of location parameter
pairs θdj , θf j where j = 1, 2, 3. Each pair occurs with probability pj . The six location
parameters and two free probabilities are estimated by the data. Thus,

                                                3
                                                X
                                     ℘w (k) =         pj Pw (k|Θj )                               (5)
                                                j=1


    The log-likelihood is:

                    N X
                    X Kn
          log L =             dnfk log ℘nfk + dndk log ℘ndk + (1 − dnfk )(1 − dndk ) log ℘nck .   (6)
                    n=1 k=1


for each of the Kn periods of each of the N attempts.
    To identify the model, the baseline hazards αf 0 and αd0 are fixed to zero. As there
is no constant in the regression, we use deviations from the means in x.


4     Data
The data used to test the model’s predictions were collected from the MIT TLO. Our
sample includes all patented inventions made by faculty, staff and students at MIT
that were assigned to the Institute between 1980 and 1996 and subsequently licensed
exclusively to at least one private sector firm. Our unit of analysis is the license. There
were 805 exclusive licenses and 2,875 periods in which licenses were at risk. While it
is plausible that licenses are terminated after commercialization, the MIT TLO reports
that this is a rare event, and hence this information was not collected. That is, we only
observe the first event that occurs. The analysis below predicts the likelihood of the first
event.
    Our data set is an unbalanced, right censored panel. We have yearly data for each

                                                  12
attempt from the date of the contractual agreement on the patent until one of three
events occurs: it is right censored (in 1996), it is terminated or it is commercialized. The
data include the date of termination if the license is terminated and the date of first sale
if an invention is commercialized. An observation begins the year that MIT TLO records
indicate that a firm first licensed a patent. We code TERMINATION as zero, except
in the year (if any) that MIT TLO records indicate that the licensing agreement by the
given firm no longer covered the invention or if the patent expired, thereby negating the
license. We code FIRSTSALE as zero, except in the year (if any) that MIT TLO records
indicate that the first dollar of sales from a product or service embodying the invention
was achieved. Our discussions with MIT personnel indicate that record keeping was
quite good, hence we are confident our data is an accurate representation of reality.
    Table 2 reports the summary statistics. In our data, only 49 of the inventions were
commercialized within the first year of the license and the overwhelming majority were
never commercialized. Roughly 40% of the licenses were terminated during the period.2
    Table 3 reports the unconditional survival rates and the extent of right censoring
in the sample. It shows that firms are far more likely to terminate licenses of patents
than to successfully commercialize them (323 terminations vs. 197 successes). The table
also suggests that uncertainty associated with an innovation is generally resolved in the
first 5 years of license because 85% of licenses either lead to commercialization or are
terminated by the end of period 5, and 90% of the observed events occur in the first five
periods.3 The sparseness of this right tail implies that there is little information on which
to estimate a baseline hazard. Therefore, we recoded all observations that survived more
than five periods as right censored after five periods. The majority (257) are censored
during the first four years of the license due to the closing of our observation window in
1996. In addition to the observations that are right-censored after 1996, we censored an
additional 74 observations.


4.1       Measures of appropriability
As measures of importance of the appropriability mechanisms used in a line of business,
we employ four measures from the Yale survey on innovation: patent strength, secrecy,
lead time and learning (Levin et al. 1985, Levin et al. 1987). These measures are survey
line of business averages. They reflect perceptions of 650 high-level R&D managers in
130 lines of business about central tendencies of the effectiveness of different mechanisms
  2
      Note that remaining patent life reflects the mean remaining life of patents at the time of license.
  3
      We observe only 2 events after period 10.


                                                     13
used to appropriate the returns to innovation for process or product R&D in their lines
of business. The managers were asked to rate mechanisms on seven point Likert scales.
    To ensure the reliability and validity of their survey, the scholars who conducted the
Yale survey pretested their survey with managers from diverse businesses. In addition,
to mitigate intra-industry heterogeneity, the respondents were asked to identify major
innovations in their industry, and there was not significant variation in responses to
this question within industries. Because of their reliability and validity, the measures
have been used in several subsequent studies (Cohen and Levinthal 1990, Levin et al.,
1987). However, as Griliches (1987) pointed out, the measures for lead time and learning
are less objective than those for patent characteristics or secrecy (see “Comments and
Discussion” in Levin et al. 1987).
    The items are constructed from responses to the following question posed both for
production processes and products: “In this line of business, how effective is each of
the following means of capturing and protecting the competitive advantages of new or
improved products (production processes)”. Respondents answered on a seven point
Likert scale from “not at all effective” to “very effective”.
    Patent strength is a measure of the effectiveness of patents as a way to capture and
protect competitive advantage in a line of business. It is created from the average re-
sponse for production processes and products for two means of appropriability: “patents
to prevent competitors from duplicating the product (process)” and “patents to secure
royalty income”. Secrecy is a measure of the effectiveness of keeping key information
secret as a way to capture and protect competitive advantage in a line of business. It
is created from the average response for production processes and products to “secrecy”
as a means of capturing and protecting the competitive advantages of new or improved
production processes (products). Lead time is a measure of the effectiveness of being an
early mover as a way to capture and protect competitive advantage in a line of business.
It is created from the average response for production processes and products to “lead
time (being first with a new process [product])”. Learning is a measure of the effec-
tiveness of moving ahead of competitors on the learning curve as a way to capture and
protect the competitive advantages in a line of business. It is created from the average
response for production processes and products to “moving quickly down the learning
curve”.
    Relating our data to the Yale Survey measures of appropriability (described in Section
2) raises an important empirical issue. Because our sample covers the years 1980-1996,
while the survey measures appropriability conditions at a particular point in time, we


                                           14
must assume that the appropriability differences between lines of business are relatively
stable throughout our observation period. There is some evidence that cross-industry
differences in such factors in appropriability do not vary significantly over time, as they
are a function of the underlying technology in a line of business (Cohen and Levin
1989). Although one might argue that the absolute strength of patents increased during
the period, the intellectual property protection afforded by patents for, say, chemical
compounds remains very strong relative to that for electronic devices.
    We also employ Lerner’s (1994) measure of patent scope, which is based upon the
number of international patent classifications found on the patent. Lerner (1994) finds
that this measure is associated with various measures of economic importance: firm
valuation, likelihood of patent litigation, and citations. He argues that it represents
broader scope of the monopoly rights covered by the patents. In contrast to the Yale
measures, this variable is patent specific.


4.2    Control variables
The fact that we do not observe many licenses extending beyond 5 years without a
commercialization or termination event does not imply that uncertainty is resolved within
five years of issuance of a patent. It is common for licenses to be initiated and survive
well into patent life before first sale or termination (Table 4). We measure REMAINING
PATENT LIFE as seventeen minus the number of years since the patent was issued,
conditional on patent issue at time of license. This variation in the remaining life of a
patent at the time of license allows us to separately control for the effects of the age of
the license and the remaining time of formal patent protection on the hazards of first sale
and termination. The former are measured by the baseline hazard estimates, while the
latter are measured by the coefficients on REMAINING PATENT LIFE. Some patents
were licensed prior to patent grant. We code the REMAINING PATENT LIFE as 17 for
these patents until grant - at which time the clock begins. The patent grant clarifies the
property right (Murray and Stern 2007), and might influence decision making. Indeed,
we find that the grant has a significant (negative) effect on termination, though none on
commercialization. Controlling for this does not influence the other coefficients. As this
is tangential to our analysis, it is omitted from these regressions.
    We also include TECHNOLOGY CLASS dummies. Following the Hall, Jaffe, and
Trajtenberg (2001) classification of patents, we break the patents into five categories:
drugs, electronics (including computers and communications), chemicals, mechanical,
and other because we might expect different types of technology to take longer to reach

                                            15
first sale, as is the case for drugs, which need to first obtain FDA approval.
    Reduced form hazard ratios suggest that event patterns in the various categories are
distinct. For example, licenses of drug patents tend to survive longer than other types of
inventions. That said, these technology class controls are relatively crude, and moreover,
the Yale appropriability measures are associated with lines of business, which are, in turn,
mapped to the patents via their primary three-digit US patent classes. Hence, there
is no variation in the Yale appropriability measures within three-digit patent classes.
This leads to concerns that the appropriability measures will proxy for technological
heterogeneity. While we cannot eliminate this possibility entirely, we explore it in detail
in the next section.
    We also include a dummy variable that takes the value 1 if the patent was licensed
to a startup, defined as a firm formed to license the particular technology (33% of the
patents in our sample were licensed to startups). We also include a dummy variable that
indicates whether the research that led to the patented invention was funded by industry.
(16.8% of the patents were the result of industry funded research.) Industry funding does
not, however, imply that the firm that funded the research necessarily was the licensee.
While research sponsors are not generally afforded special licensing rights, in practice
we might expect them to be aware of research results earlier than non-sponsors. We are
unable to identify cases in which sponsors licensed the output of research they funded
because we do not observe the identity of the research sponsors.


5    Empirical results
Our results are reported in Table 5. Our unit of observation is a license. In university
licensing, several patents may be licensed in a single agreement. If there are many such
cases, and they reflect instances in which a single technology is protected through mul-
tiple patents, our regressions would overweight these technologies. If such technologies
are systematically different than those licensed through single patents, then this pattern
would introduce a bias into our analysis. This problem could be mitigated by allowing
the error terms to be correlated within each agreement. Unfortunately, we are not aware
of a method to implement this strategy and simultaneously control for unobserved het-
erogeneity. Because we believe that unobserved heterogeneity is a greater problem than
the overweighting of technologies represented by multiple patents, we choose to control




                                            16
for unobserved heterogeneity in our analyses.4
    We estimate several regressions, and in so doing investigate the general robustness of
our results. In all reported models, we include year dummies to control for technology
vintage. Our results are generally robust to the omission of vintage controls.
    In model 5a, we report results of a model that includes all of the appropriability
measures. We find that PATENT STRENGTH is negatively related to the hazard of
license termination. Although the coefficient on PATENT SCOPE is negative, it is not
significant at conventional levels. Thus, we find some support for our prediction that
appropriability measures directly related to patents will reduce termination hazards. In
contrast, we find that PATENT STRENGTH has no measurable effect on the hazard of
commercialization, but PATENT SCOPE has a strong, highly significant effect on this
hazard. We find no measurable relationship between PATENT STRENGTH and inven-
tion commercialization. Recalling Table 1, either the cash-flow and option effects wash
each other out, or alternatively, there is no relationship. However, the strong positive
relationship between PATENT SCOPE and commercialization hints that the cash-flow
effect is dominant. This conclusion is reinforced by the results regarding SECRECY
and LEARNING. As predicted by our theory, we find that SECRECY is negatively and
significantly related to TERMINATION. We also find that SECRECY is positively and
significantly related to COMMERCIALIZATION, which is consistent with the suggestion
that cash-flow effects are, on average, dominant. While the point estimate for LEARN-
ING is negative in the termination equation, it is not significant at conventional levels.
We precisely measure a positive relationship between LEARNING and the hazard of
commercialization, as predicted by our theory. Note that the theory generated ambigu-
ous predictions for two of the three coefficients that empirically we fail to measure with
precision (PATENT SCOPE and LEARNING in the termination equation and PATENT
STRENGTH in the commercialization equation). We find a positive relationship (at the
10% level) between LEAD TIME and termination and a negative relationship between
this measure and commercialization (at the 5% level). The combined termination and
commercialization results suggest that, for inventions in lines of business in which LEAD
TIME is effective, the current market value is low, most likely because of the need for
   4
    We might also average patent characteristics within a license. However, this would create a problem
as large as the one it was intended to solve. Averaging would leave us unable to accommodate the
cases in which one of the licensed patents was either commercialized or terminated separately from
the rest of the patents under the license agreement, which we observe in a significant number of cases.
Moreover, discussions with the director of the MIT TLO indicates that separate termination is a common
occurrence and is represented by several anecdotes in the “lay” theory of technology transfer officers
about how to think about these data.


                                                  17
further development. As per Table 1, in the case of commercialization, assuming that
inventions are embryonic, both the cash flow and option effects reinforce each other.
    We explore the robustness of these results in models 5b-5f. In model 5b, we introduce
controls for whether the licensee was a startup and whether the research that generated
the patent was funded by industry. A log likelihood test rejects the null hypothesis
that these four coefficients are jointly zero (LR statistic = 11.50). Both STARTUP
and INDUSTRY FUNDED are negatively related to termination (the former result is
consistent with findings of Lowe and Ziedonis 2006). Our results remain unchanged
except that we no longer measure a relationship between LEAD TIME and termination.
Further (unreported) analysis indicates that this is due to the inclusion of the STARTUP
control, which suggests that our measured positive relationship between LEAD TIME
and termination is the result of underlying negative correlation between LEAD TIME
and startups, who tend to license technologies where LEAD TIME is a less important
appropriability mechanism. In model 5c, we include 4 broad technology class dummies.
When these dummies are included, PATENT STRENGTH and PATENT SCOPE are
significantly related to both termination and commercialization. In this model, PATENT
SCOPE becomes significant (and negative) at the 10% level in the termination equation
and PATENT STRENGTH becomes positive and significant in the commercialization
equation.
    It was not possible to estimate a more parsimonious model that simultaneously ex-
cluded class, age, and year controls, included a 3-point mass structure, and a cubic
form for the baseline hazard. We suspect such a model is not properly identified due to
insufficient variation in the data (see Abbring and van den Berg 2000).
    With the exception of PATENT SCOPE, our measures of appropriability vary at the
level of line of business, as opposed to level of the patent. And while our results are
unaffected, or even strengthened by the inclusion of broad technology class dummies,
these dummies are only coarse proxies for technology class. Thus, as mentioned earlier,
our appropriability measures may pick up unobserved heterogeneity across technology
classes and this heterogeneity may drive our results, as opposed to underlying variation
in appropriability mechanisms across individual technologies. While controlling non-
parametrically for unobserved heterogeneity should alleviate some of these concerns, we
conduct three further tests to explore this possibility.
    First, if our measures of appropriability are indeed measuring appropriability, their
effects should weaken as a patent ages. In model 5d we include the interactions of RE-
MAINING PATENT LIFE with both PATENT STRENGTH and PATENT SCOPE.


                                           18
We no longer measure direct relationships between PATENT SCOPE and either ter-
mination and commercialization. However, the interaction of PATENT SCOPE and
REMAINING PATENT LIFE is positive and significant, which suggests that the effect
that we found in models 5a, 5b and 5c - in which scope is positively related to commer-
cialization - is driven by the younger patents. The main PATENT STRENGTH effect
is qualitatively unchanged in both equations. In this model we also find a marginally
significant relationship between the interaction of REMAINING PATENT LIFE and
PATENT STRENGTH, however this result is not robust (see model 5e).
    In model 5e, we include a measure of REMAINING PATENT LIFE as well as that
variable’s interactions with PATENT STRENGTH and PATENT SCOPE. REMAINING
PATENT LIFE, in itself, should have no effect on termination or commercialization
unless the patents are strong. This leads us to expect only the interaction terms to be
significant. However, REMAINING PATENT LIFE is also a proxy for the age of the
technology (as opposed to the age of the license, which is captured by the baseline hazard
rate or vintage of the license, which is captured in by the year dummies). Presumably,
older technologies have more substitutes which could explain the greater likelihood of
termination associated with older patents.
    We find only the main (positive) patent strength - commercialization finding remains
significant. However, we also find that the coefficient on REMAINING PATENT LIFE
interacted with PATENT STRENGTH is negative and significant. This suggests that
the main negative relationship found between strength and termination in models 5a, 5b
and 5c is driven by younger patents. In addition, as in model 5d, we find the coefficient
REMAINING PATENT LIFE interacted with PATENT SCOPE to be significant in the
commercialization equation. Thus, these results are consistent with the premise that the
appropriability measures are indeed measuring differences in appropriability rather then
technological heterogeneity.
    Second, we explore the effect of assuming homogeneity. If the appropriability mea-
sures are simply picking up unobserved heterogeneity, then these measures should have
greater predictive power in a restricted model. In Model 5f, we restrict the risks to be
independent, and do not allow unobserved heterogeneity. We strongly reject the hy-
pothesis that there is no unobserved heterogeneity and independent risks (LR statistic
= 108.52). While the sign of each coefficient is never reversed, we no longer measure any
relationship between PATENT SCOPE or its interaction with REMAINING PATENT
LIFE and either termination of commercialization. Indeed, only LEARNING is a sig-
nificant predictor of commercialization. PATENT STRENGTH, SECRECY, and LEAD


                                           19
TIME remain significant predictors of termination. Thus, the data suggest that unob-
served heterogeneity is an important characteristic of our data. Failing to control for this
obfuscates our central results. To understand the intuition behind this result, consider
that, in Model 5c we found that the hazard of termination decreases if the technology
is licensed to a STARTUP, but the hazard of commercialization does not. By contrast,
in Model 5f, we find no effect. The sensitivity of the result for STARTUP to controlling
for unobserved heterogeneity is what one might expect if start-ups not only differ from
well-established firms, but also license inventions that are different from those licensed
by established firms. For example, if startups license earlier and riskier inventions, but
are more reluctant to terminate the license (because terminating the license agreements
might imply terminating the startups as well), then these two effects would tend to cancel
out. However, after controlling for this heterogeneity, then Model 5c shows that startup
firms are more likely than other licensees to terminate the development projects.
     Third, we estimated a model with class controls at a lower level of aggregation. In
particular, we estimated a variant of Model 5f, using 24 patent classes as controls and
pooling the remainder. The data do not support this specification fully: only for patent
classes in which there are a sufficiently high number of observations, can we include
patent class dummies and 86 of the 108 patent classes that our data span perfectly
predict outcomes because they are represented in the data by one or two licenses. The
results of this regression (available upon request) were almost identical to those that
appear in Model 5f.
     Given the limits of our data, we were unable to estimate a model that simultaneously
accounted for unobserved heterogeneity and included patent class controls. Thus, while
the results associated with the interaction of remaining patent life and patent strength
and scope support the general thrust of our arguments, we do not have sufficient within-
technology-class variation to conclusively rule out the alternative hypothesis that our
appropriability measures are picking up other sources of technological heterogeneity,
which would reflect an association between appropriability conditions in line of business
and termination and commercialization hazards. To the extent that such a correlation
might be associated with other unobserved factors, our results must be qualified.
     From our robustness analysis, we conclude that the hazard of termination is de-
creasing in PATENT STRENGTH and SECRECY. The hazard of commercialization is
decreasing in LEAD TIME, and increasing in LEARNING, PATENT SCOPE and also
PATENT STRENGTH. Based on Table 1, these results are consistent with the cash-flow
effect dominating the option effect on average for the technologies in the sample. Further-


                                            20
more, our result for lead time is consistent with the assumption that these technologies
are embryonic inventions for which further development is required.
    To get a sense of the magnitude of the effects, and following the literature of these
types of competing risks models, we compute the change in the predicted probabilities of
events for the sample. Because the Yale Survey measures are derived from a Likert scale,
we look at the effect of a change in one standard deviation from the mean on the predicted
probability of events for the sample. Model 5c predicts both the mean probability of
termination and commercialization for the sample to be 0.12 and 0.10 respectively (all
numbers are rounded to two digits). If each manager in a line of business associated
with each of the inventions had rated the effectiveness of patents one standard deviation
higher, the probability of termination for the sample patents would decrease to 0.10, or
21% while the probability of commercialization would increase to 0.13. Similarly, if each
manager had rated secrecy one standard deviation higher, the predicted probability of
termination decreases 12% to 0.11 while the predicted probability of commercialization
increases 16% to 0.11.
    We find that each additional international patent class associated with the patent
(measured by PATENT SCOPE) decreases the mean predicted probability of termination
by 12.5% to 0.11 and increases the mean predicted probability of commercialization to
0.12, which represents an increase of 21%. A one standard deviation change in LEAD
TIME is associated with a reduction in the commercialization probability to 0.08, a 17%
decline. A one standard deviation increase in the importance of LEARNING increases
the probability of commercialization by 25% (the mean predicted probability increases
to 0.12).


6    Concluding remarks
We investigate the role of patents and other appropriability mechanisms in the commer-
cialization of university inventions. An important characteristic of these inventions is
that they typically require further development, which is risky for both technical and
market reasons. In our theoretical discussion, we view a licensee’s decision as an optimal
stopping problem in which at every point in time the licensee can decide to either com-
mercialize, drop the license, or keep the license but delay commercialization. This gives
rise to a real option in commercialization. How different appropriability mechanisms af-
fect a firm’s decisions depends on their impact on the current market value of the license
and this real option.


                                           21
    Our empirical analysis applies a competing risks hazard model which allows for cor-
related risks and non-parametric unobserved heterogeneity to a dataset of 805 exclusive
licenses of MIT patents. We find that the hazard of terminating a license is decreasing in
the effectiveness of patent strength and secrecy. One of our most striking results is that,
when lead time is important, it appears to be optimal for firms to delay commercializa-
tion until the licensee has developed the product. In contrast, we find that patent scope
and learning have a positive effect on the hazard of commercialization. These results
suggest that, when profiting from embryonic inventions relies heavily on learning, firms
should commercialize them as soon as is technically feasible.
    A few caveats are in order. First, our analysis does not account for the structure
of license agreements. Work by Choi (2001), Jensen and Thursby (2001), Elfenbein
(2005), and Dechenaux et al. (2007) has shown that the structure of payment terms can
affect development efforts by licensees as well as the inventors themselves. Thus, while
considering these effects is beyond our scope, we cannot rule out license structure as a
determinant of termination and commercialization. Second, readers are cautioned that
MIT is a unique institution and that the results may not generalize to other universities.
This suggests the merits of future research based on data from other universities, as well
as more fine grained measures of technology characteristics.




                                            22
References
 [1] Arora, A., A. Fosfuri, and A. Gambardella (2001). Markets for Technology: The
     Economics of Innovation and Corporate Strategy. The MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.

 [2] Arora, A. and M. Ceccagnoli (2007) “Patent Protection, Complementary Assets,
     and Firms’ Incentives for Technology Licensing,” Management Science, Vol. 52, pp.
     293-308.

 [3] Arora, A., M. Ceccagnoli and W. M. Cohen (2007) “R&D and the Patent Premium,”
     International Journal of Industrial Organization, Forthcoming.

 [4] Arrow, K.J. (1962) “Economic Welfare and the Allocation of Resources for Inven-
     tion,” In R.R. Nelson, editor, The Rate and Direction of Inventive Activity, pp.
     609-625. Princeton University Press, Princeton.

 [5] Abbring, J.H. and G.J. van den Berg (2000) “The Non-Parametric Identification
     of the Mixed Proportional Hazards Competing Risks Model,” Tinbergen Institute
     Discussion Papers 00-066/3, Tinbergen Institute.

 [6] Bayus, B.L., S. Jain, and A.G. Rao (1997) “Too Little, Too Early: Introduction
     Timing and New Product Performance in the Personal Digital Assistant Industry,”
     Journal of Marketing Strategy, Vol. 34, pp. 50-63.

 [7] Benoit, J. P. (1987) “Innovation and Imitation in a Duopoly,” Review of Economic
     Studies, Vol. 52, pp. 99-106.

 [8] Choi, J. P. (2001) “Technology Transfer with Moral Hazard,” International Journal
     of Industrial Organization, Vol. 19, pp. 249-266.

 [9] Cohen, W., R. Nelson and J. Walsh (2000) “Protecting Their Intellectual Assets:
     Appropriability Conditions and Why U.S. Manufacturing Firms Patent (or Not),”
     NBER Working Paper 7552.

[10] Cohen W. and R. Levin, (1989) “Empirical Studies of Innovation and Market Struc-
     ture,” In R. Schmalensee and R. Willig, eds., Handbook of Industrial Organization,
     Vol. II. pp. 1059-1107. Elsevier, New York.

[11] Cohen W. and D. Levinthal (1990) “Absorptive Capacity: A New Perspective on
     Learning and Innovation,” Administrative Science Quarterly, Vol. 35, pp. 128-152.

[12] Dechenaux, E., M.C. Thursby and J. Thursby (2007) ”Shirking, Sharing Risk, and
     Shelving: The Role of University License Contracts,” mimeo.

[13] Dixit A.K. and R.S. Pindyck (1994). Investment under Uncertainty. Princeton Uni-
     versity Press, Princeton.


                                          23
[14] Elfenbein, D. (2005) “Contract Structure and Performance of Technology Transfer
     Agreements,” mimeo.

[15] Gallini, N.T. (2002) “The Economics of Patents: Lessons from Recent U.S. Patent
     Reform,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, Vol. 16, pp. 131-154.

[16] Gans, J.S., D.H. Hsu, and S. Stern (2003) “When Does Start-up Innovation Spur the
     Gale of Creative Destruction?” Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 33, pp. 571-586.

[17] Goldfarb, B. and M. Henrekson (2003) “Bottom-up versus top-down policies towards
     the commercialization of university intellectual property,” Research Policy, Vol. 32,
     pp. 639-658.

[18] Hahn, R. W. (2003) “The Economics of Patent Protection: Policy Implications from
     the Literature,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory Studies, mimeo.

[19] Hall, B.H., A.B. Jaffe, and M. Trajtenberg (2001) “The NBER Patent Citation Data
     File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools,” NBER Working Paper 8498.

[20] Han, A. and J. Hausman (1990) “Flexible Parametric Estimation of Duration and
     Competing Risk Models,” Journal of Applied Econometrics, Vol. 5, pp. 1-28.

[21] Jensen, R. and M. Thursby (2001) “Proofs and Prototypes for Sale: The Licensing
     of University Inventions,” American Economic Review, Vol. 91, pp. 240-259.

[22] Kamien, M. and N. Schwartz (1972) “Timing of Innovations Under Rivalry,” Econo-
     metrica, Vol. 40, pp. 43-60.

[23] Lerner, J. (1994) “The Importance of Patent Scope: An Empirical Analysis,”Rand
     Journal of Economics, Vol. 25, pp. 319-333.

[24] Levin, R., A. Klevorick, R. Nelson, and S. Winter (1987) “Appropriating the returns
     from industrial research and development,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity,
     Vol. 3, pp. 783-820.

[25] Lilien, G.L. and E. Yoon (1990) “The Timing of Competitive Market Entry: An
     Exploratory Study of New Industrial Products,” Management Science, Vol. 36, pp.
     565-585.

[26] Lowe, R. and A. Ziedonis (2006) “Overoptimism and Performance of Entrepreneurial
     Firms,” Management Science, Vol. 52, pp. 173-186.

[27] Mansfield, E. (1986) “Patents and Innovation: An Empirical Study,” Management
     Science, Vol. 32, pp. 173-181.

[28] Mansfield, E., M. Schwartz, and S. Wagner (1981) “Imitation costs and Patents:
     An Empirical Study,” Economic Journal, Vol. 91, pp. 907-918.

                                           24
[29] Matutes C., Regibeau P. and K. Rockett (1996) “Optimal Patent Design and the
     Diffusion of Innovations,” Rand Journal of Economics, Vol. 27, pp. 60-83.

[30] McCall, B. (1996) “Unemployment Insurance Rules, Joblessness, and Part-Time
     Work,” Econometrica, Vol. 64 , pp. 647-682.

[31] Murray, F. and S. Stern (2007) “Do Formal Intellectual Property Rights Hinder
     the Free Flow of Scientific Knowledge? An Empirical Test of the Anti-Commons
     Hypothesis,” Journal of Economic Behavior and Organization, Vol. 63, pp. 648-687.

[32] Reinganum, J.F. (1982) “A Dynamic Game of R and D: Patent Protection and
     Competitive Behavior,” Econometrica, Vol. 50, pp. 671-688.

[33] Santoro, M.D. and A.K. Chakrabarti (2002) “Firm Size and Technology Centrality
     in Industry-University Interactions,” Research Policy, Vol. 31, pp. 1163-1180.

[34] Shane, S. (2000) “Prior Knowledge and the Discovery of Entrepreneurial Opportu-
     nities,” Organization Science, Vol. 11, pp. 448-469.

[35] Shane, S. (2002) “Selling University Technology: Patterns from MIT,” Management
     Science, Vol. 48, pp. 122-137.

[36] Takalo, T. and V. Kanniainen (2000) “Do Patents Slow Down Technological
     Progress? Real Options in Patent Research, Patenting, and Market Introduction,”
     International Journal of Industrial Organization, Vol. 18, pp. 1105-1127.

[37] Taylor, C. and Z. Silberston (1973). The Economic Impact of the Patent System.
     Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.

[38] Thursby, J., R. Jensen, and M.C. Thursby (2001) “Objectives, Characteristics and
     Outcomes of University Licensing: A Survey of Major U.S. Universities,” Journal
     of Technology Transfer, Vol. 26, pp. 59-72.

[39] Thursby, J., and M.C. Thursby (2002) “Who is Selling the Ivory Tower? Sources of
     Growth in University Licensing,” Management Science, Vol. 48, pp. 90-104.

[40] Thursby, J. and M.C. Thursby (2003) “Buyer and Seller Views of Univer-
     sity/Industry Licensing,” In Buying In or Selling Out: The Commercialization of
     the American Research University, Don Stein, editor. Rutgers Press, Forthcoming.

[41] Thursby, J. and M.C. Thursby (2007) “University Licensing,” Oxford Review of
     Economic Policy, Forthcoming.




                                         25
7     Appendix
7.1    A simple model termination and commercialization deci-
       sions
Consider the problem of a firm that has exclusively licensed a patented invention from
MIT. Commercializing in period t yields a stream of expected profits per period whose
discounted sum is equal to Π̃t . We refer to it as the market value of the license in
period t. We assume that time is discrete. Before period t, from the point of view of the
licensee, market value is a random variable with cumulative distribution function Ft (Π̃t ).
The distribution of Π̃t depends on the time period t, but we assume that realizations of
market value are independent across time periods. In each period, the licensee learns
the current realization Πt before making any decision.
    In addition to market value, in every period before commercialization, the licensee
may earn a benefit bt (rents that are unrelated to commercialization) and must pay a
cost ct (further development cost plus licensing fees) if it keeps the license. For instance,
bt will capture the size of the rents the licensee obtains by successfully blocking a rival.
It is not excluded that bt = 0 holds for most of the licenses in our sample.
    To characterize the value of the license in a given period t, we assume that there
exists a period L such that Fs (0) = 1 and bs ≤ cs for every s ≥ L. It is clear that
if the firm has neither terminated, nor commercialized by period L, it will terminate
in that period because the value of the license is equal to zero. We now characterize
the value of the license in a given period t by using a standard recursive argument. In
period t = L − 1, the licensee learns the realization of the discounted value of profit
ΠL−1 and must then decide whether to commercialize, keep the license or terminate.
The licensee will commercialize if ΠL−1 > max{bL−1 − cL−1 , 0}, it will keep the license
without commercializing if bL−1 − cL−1 ≥ max{ΠL−1 , 0} and terminate otherwise. The
value of the license is thus ML−1 = max{ΠL−1 , bL−1 − cL−1 , 0} and its expected value is
equal to EML−1 . In period t = L − 2, the licensee must decide whether to terminate
the license to earn 0, commercialize to earn ΠL−2 or to keep the license, but delay
commercialization, to earn bL−2 − cL−2 + δEML−1 . The value of the license is thus equal
to ML−2 = max{ΠL−2 , bL−2 − cL−2 + δEML−1 , 0} and its expected value is equal to
EML−2 . Continuing in the same fashion, it is clear that in period t, the value of the
license is equal to
                            Mt = max{Πt , bt − ct + δEMt+1 , 0}
where Mt+1 is a defined above.
    The benefit bt surely depends on the strength of some of the appropriability mech-
anisms we consider in the empirical analysis. The term δEMt+1 , which represents the
discounted expected value of the license in the next period, depends on appropriability
mechanisms as well. Hence, in every period t < L, we write the option value of the



                                             26
license as follows:

                        Vt (Πt , bt , ct ) = max{Πt , bt − ct + δEMt+1 , 0}.

In period t < L, the firm’s optimal decision may be summarized as follows:

                  Commercialize if                 Vt (Πt , bt , ct ) = Πt
                         Delay if        Vt (Πt , bt , ct ) = bt − ct + δEMt+1
                     Terminate if                   Vt (Πt , bt , ct ) = 0

Put differently, the licensee will commercialize if
                ½
                   bt − ct + δEMt+1 > 0       and Πt > bt − ct + δEMt+1
                   or bt − ct + δEMt+1 ≤ 0 but Πt > 0

and it will terminate if and only if both

                              bt − ct + δEMt+1 ≤ 0 and Πt ≤ 0

Finally, the licensee will delay if and only if

                      bt − ct + δEMt+1 > 0 but Πt < bt − ct + δEMt+1 .

Thus, if it has neither terminated, nor commercialized by period t, the probability that
the licensee commercializes in period t is:
                    ½
                f      1 − Ft (bt − ct + δEMt+1 ) if bt − ct + δEMt+1 > 0
              ht =
                       1 − Ft (0)                 if bt − ct + δEMt+1 ≤ 0

If it has neither terminated, nor commercialized by period t, the probability that the
licensee terminates in period t is:
                             ½
                         d       0      if bt − ct + δEMt+1 > 0
                        ht =
                                 Ft (0) if bt − ct + δEMt+1 ≤ 0

    If the value of delaying, bt − ct + δEMt+1 , is strictly positive, the firm does not
terminate since keeping the license is more profitable than terminating it. In this case,
even if profits from commercializing in period t are low, the firm recognizes that the
license may have sufficient value in the future to justify paying licensing fees. If the license
has no value in the future unless commercialized immediately, bt − ct + δEMt+1 ≤ 0,
then the firm will commercialize in the current period as long as it does not make an
overall loss. Otherwise it will terminate. An interesting aspect of the commercialization
decision is that other things constant, a high value of bt − ct + δEMt+1 will lead to a
lower probability of commercialization.


                                                27
7.2    Cash-flow and option effect
Our econometric model uses industry-level measures of the effectiveness of various ap-
propriability mechanisms to estimate the hazards of termination and commercialization.
In the text, we discuss the relationship between appropriability mechanisms and the
hazards of termination and commercialization in terms of cash-flow and option effects.
We define theses two effects below.
    Note that, other things constant, the conditional probability of commercialization
increases if Ft decreases for a given Πt ; that is, if the distribution of the market value
assigns a greater probability to higher realizations. This is similar to what Takalo and
Kanniainen (2000) call the cash flow effect in their model. However, other things con-
stant, the probability of commercialization decreases as bt − ct + δEMt+1 increases. This
is similar to the option effect in Takalo and Kanniainen and we refer to it as such.
    The conditional probability of termination in period t also depends on the cash flow
and the option effects. By contrast to commercialization, it is easy to see that the two
effects reinforce each other and contribute to decreasing the hazard of termination.




                                            28
                        Figure 1: Unconditional event hazards by period
         




                 Figure 1: Unconditional event hazards by period



         
+D]DUG




                                                                              &RPPHUFLDOL]DWLRQ
                                                                              7HUPLQDWLRQ


          




         




           
                                                                     
                                             3HULRG




                                              29
                          Table 2: Descriptive Statistics
Variable                                       Mean Std. Dev. Min. Max.
Lead Time                                      5.369      0.506     4   6.13
Secrecy                                        3.923      0.406      3  4.88
Learning                                       5.003      0.435     4   5.75
Patent Strength                                4.108      0.747    1.75 5.32
Patent Scope                                   1.339      0.639      1    6
Start-up                                       0.327      0.469      0    1
Industry Funded                                0.168      0.374     0     1
Drug Patent                                    0.216      0.412     0     1
Chemical Patent                                0.311      0.463      0    1
Electric Patent                                0.265      0.441     0     1
Mechanical Patent                              0.032      0.177      0    1
Other Technology                               0.176      0.381      0    1
Remaining Patent Life (17- years since grant) 12.85        3.54     1    17
Remaining Patent Life * Pat. Strength          21.29      14.76    2.73 79.80
Remaining Patent Life * Pat. Scope              6.91       6.17      1   60
                    N                                          805


   Table 3: Termination, commercialization and right censoring by age of license

Age of License    Termination Commercialization           Right Censored      Total
       1              74            49                          79             805
       2              32            26                          48             604
       3              54            40                          98             497
       4              49            20                          35             305
       5              34            11                          34             201
       6               8             2                          10             122
       7              10            6                           11             103
       8               6             2                           9              76
       9               0            11                           8             59
      10               1            0                           15              39
      11               1            1                            7              24
      12               0            0                            2              15
      13               0            0                            8              13
      14               0            0                            2              6
      15               0            0                            2              4
      16               0            0                            2              2
     Total            269          168                          370           2875




                                        30
    Table 4: Termination, commercialization and right censoring by patent age

Remaining Patent Life     Termination First Sale       Right Censored      Total
         17                    38          9                   2            48
         16                    38         25                 49             112
         15                    31         15                 30              76
         14                    24         14                 36              74
         13                    37         21                 28              85
         12                    20          8                 40              68
         11                    12         14                 26              52
         10                    15         16                 38              69
          9                    13         14                  25            52
          8                    11         12                  21            44
          7                    12          5                 19              36
          6                     7          7                   5            19
          5                     8          5                   4            17
          4                     3          0                   9            12
          3                     0          1                   7             8
          2                     0          2                 15              17
          1                     0          0                 16              16
        Total                 269        168                 370            805




                                       31
                                                                        Table 5: Hazard Regressions
                                              a                           b                           c                           d                           e                            f
                                   Termi          Commerc      Termi          Commerc      Termi          Commerc      Termi          Commerc      Termi          Commerc      Termi           Commerc
                                   nation         ialization   nation         ialization   nation         ialization   nation         ialization   nation         ialization   nation          ialization

     PATENT STRENGTH               -1.22***       0.06         -1.19***       0.40         -1.29***       1.19**       -1.04***       1.31**       -0.55          1.55*        -0.70***        0.48
                                   (0.21)         (0.49)       (0.21)         (0.48)       (0.35)         (0.60)       (0.36)         (0.66)       (0.40)         (0.87)       (0.21)          (0.32)
     PATENT SCOPE                  -0.17          0.80***      -0.28          0.95***      -0.39*         0.79***      -0.49          -0.29        -0.18          -0.35        0.00            0.00
                                   (0.18)         (0.23)       (0.20)         (0.25)       (0.22)         (0.27)       (0.35)         (0.52)       (0.38)         (0.52)       (0.22)          (0.28)
     SECRECY                       -1.03**        1.57**       -1.52***       0.75         -1.68***       1.33*        -1.71***       1.37*        -1.68***       1.26         -0.88***        0.21
                                   (0.41)         (0.75)       (0.41)         (0.73)       (0.45)         (0.77)       (0.45)         (0.82)       (0.43)         (0.82)       (0.26)          (0.43)
     LEARNING                      -0.46          3.29***      0.32           3.90***      0.06           2.92***      0.26           2.99***      0.21           2.79***      -0.76**         0.84*
                                   (0.38)         (0.77)       (0.39)         (0.95)       (0.48)         (0.84)       (0.49)         (0.95)       (0.48)         (0.96)       (0.31)          (0.51)
     LEAD TIME                     0.67*          -1.18**      -0.04          -1.73***     0.28           -1.51**      0.18           -1.53**      0.17           -1.46**      0.76***         -0.24
                                   (0.35)         (0.54)       (0.33)         (0.57)       (0.45)         (0.61)       (0.44)         (0.68)       (0.43)         (0.67)       (0.27)          (0.37)
     REMAIN PAT LIFE                                                                                                                               -0.45**        -0.23
                                                                                                                                                   (0.22)         (0.38)

     REMAIN PAT LIFE                                                                                                   -0.02          -0.05*       -0.11**        -0.10        0.00            0.01
     X PATENT STRENGTH                                                                                                 (0.02)         (0.03)       (0.05)         (0.09)       (0.01)          (0.01)
     REMAIN PAT LIFE                                                                                                   0.02           0.18**       -0.05          0.19**       -0.02           0.04
     X PATENT SCOPE                                                                                                    (0.05)         (0.08)       (0.06)         (0.08)       (0.06)          (1.15)




32
     Other Control Variables

     STARTUP                                                   -1.15***       -0.02        -1.22***       0.61         -1.23***       0.65         -1.23***       0.64         0.01            0.05
                                                               (0.23)         (0.38)       (0.26)         (0.40)       (0.26)         (0.42)       (0.24)         (0.42)       (0.17)          (0.20)
     INDUSTRY FUNDED                                           -0.72**        -0.45        -0.81**        -0.35        -0.97***       -0.30        -0.96***       -0.42        -0.54**         0.35
                                                               (0.30)         (0.54)       (0.33)         (0.54)       (0.32)         (0.59)       (0.32)         (0.60)       (0.22)          (0.27)

     DRUGS                                                                                 -0.35          -1.19        -0.25          -0.81        -0.21          -0.80        -0.21           -0.68
                                                                                           (0.64)         (0.75)       (0.61)         (0.73)       (0.63)         (0.73)       (0.37)          (0.47)
     ELEC                                                                                  -0.34          0.68         -0.37          0.73         -0.39          0.69         -0.33           -0.10
                                                                                           (0.41)         (0.63)       (0.40)         (0.67)       (0.40)         (0.66)       (0.24)          (0.31)
     MECH                                                                                  0.04           -4.33        -0.24          -4.30*       -0.37          -4.46        -0.16           -0.96
                                                                                           (0.52)         (2.70)       (0.50)         (2.57)       (0.49)         (2.99)       (0.36)          (0.76)
     OTHER                                                                                 -0.47          -1.24*       -0.46          -0.99        -0.53          -0.95        -0.14           -0.71**
                                                                                           (0.44)         (0.63)       (0.43)         (0.66)       (0.42)         (0.67)       (0.25)          (0.33)

     Year Dummies                 Yes                     Yes                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes                                      Yes
     Correlated Risks w/
     Unobserved Heterogeneity Yes                         Yes                                Yes                       Yes                       Yes                                       No
     Log Likelihood               -1008.93                -997.54                          -988.27                   -980.55                   -977.39                                  -1031.65
     Note: Standard errors in parentheses below coefficients. *** significant at the 1% level, ** significant at the 5% level, * significant at the 10% level.
