                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                NEOCLASSICAL THEORY VERSUS
                                     PROSPECT THEORY:
                              EVIDENCE FROM THE MARKETPLACE

                                                 John A. List

                                            Working Paper 9736
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9736


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        May 2003




I would like to thank Don Fullerton, Glenn Harrison, Jack Knetsch, and Matthew Rabin for comments that
significantly improved the manuscript. Seminar participants at Cornell University, Harvard University, University
of California-Santa Barbara, University of Chicago, Iowa State University, University of Maryland, North Carolina
State, University of Pennsylvania (Wharton), Tilburg University, University of Rhode Island, and University of
South Florida also provided useful comments. Conference participants at the EAERE meetings in Greece, the
NBER meetings in Cambridge, as well as the ESA meetings in Tucson provided useful suggestions. Any errors
remain my own.The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by John A. List. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Neoclassical Theory Versus Prospect Theory: Evidence From the Marketplace
John A. List
NBER Working Paper No. 9736
May 2003
JEL No. C93, D11, H0, Q0

                                           ABSTRACT

Neoclassical theory postulates that preferences between two goods are independent of the
consumer’s current entitlements. Several experimental studies have recently provided strong
evidence that this basic independence assumption, which is used in most theoretical and applied
economic models to assess the operation of markets, is rarely appropriate. These results, which

clearly contradict closely held economic doctrines, have led some influential commentators to call

for an entirely new economic paradigm to displace conventional neoclassical theory—e.g., prospect
theory, which invokes psychological effects. This paper pits neoclassical theory against prospect
theory by investigating three clean tests of the competing hypotheses. In all three cases, the data,
which are drawn from nearly 500 subjects actively participating in a well-functioning marketplace,

suggest that prospect theory adequately organizes behavior among inexperienced consumers,
whereas consumers with intense market experience behave largely in accordance with neoclassical
predictions. The pattern of results indicates that learning primarily occurs on the sell side of the

market: agents with intense market experience are more willing to part with their entitlements than
lesser-experienced agents.



John A. List
AREC and Department of Economics
University of Maryland
2200 Symons Hall
College Park, MD 20742-5535
and NBER
jlist@arec.umd.edu
        Neoclassical models involve several fundamental postulates. While most of the

basic tenets appear to be reasonably met, the basic independence assumption—that

preferences are independent of the consumer’s current entitlements—has been directly

refuted in several experimental settings (see, e.g., Daniel Kahneman et al., 1990; Ian

Bateman et al., 1997). Although numerous theories have been advanced to explain this

anomaly, perhaps the most accepted conjecture invokes psychological effects, and is

broadly termed “prospect theory” (Daniel Kahneman and Amos Tversky, 1979).1

        Even though considerable laboratory evidence in favor of prospect theory has

accumulated, some economists believe the anomaly is merely the result of a mistake

made by inexperienced consumers and through time these consumers will learn, and their

behavior will more closely match predictions from neoclassical models (e.g., Peter Knez

et al., 1985; Don Coursey et al., 1987; Brookshire and Coursey, 1987). Yet, this evidence

has not been entirely convincing, as critics argue that overall the data do not conclusively

support the learning premise (e.g., Jack Knetsch and J.A. Sinden, 1987). In light of

arguments in Colin Camerer and Robin Hogarth (1999), who note that useful cognitive

capital most likely builds up slowly over months or years rather than in the limited

duration of a laboratory experiment, it is understandable that this important debate

remains unresolved.

        The major goal of this study is to extend the generality of the experimental

learning results by examining individual behavior within a well-functioning marketplace.

My investigation is unique in that my experimental laboratory is an actual marketplace.


1 Richard Thaler (1980) first coined the term “endowment effect”, which implies that a good’s value
increases once it becomes part of an individual’s endowment. Following the literature, in the remainder of
the paper I will refer to the anomaly as the endowment effect. The interested reader should see Elizabeth
Hoffman and Matthew Spitzer (1993), who provide a nice explanation of other theories.


                                                    1
This approach provides me with an opportunity to observe behavior of agents that have

endogenously chosen certain roles within the market, such as being an intense or casual

consumer, while simultaneously making use of certain controls afforded by an

experiment. A major advantage of examining behavior in a naturally occurring market is

that subjects would be engaging in similar market activities (e.g., buying, selling, and

trading commodities) regardless of whether I ran a field experiment or was a passive

observer. This added realism highlights the naturalness of this particular setting.

       My experimental investigation pits neoclassical theory against prospect theory by

investigating three clean tests of the competing hypotheses. In the first test, I vary the

endowment point across agents and examine individual trading rates of everyday

consumable goods. Prospect theory predicts a pattern of trading that depends on the

nature of current entitlements, whereas neoclassical theory predicts a pattern of trading

independent of entitlements. In the second and third tests, I elicit statements of value in

actual market auctions. The auction treatments provide data that permit a comparison of

Hicksian equivalent surplus and Hicksian compensating surplus as well as a measure of

the shape of compensation demanded (Hicksian equivalent surplus) in the number of

relinquished goods. In these treatments, prospect theory predicts that Hicksian equivalent

surplus will exceed Hicksian compensating surplus and that compensation demanded is

concave in the number of relinquished goods. Neoclassical theory predicts equivalence

of surplus measures and that compensation demanded is convex in the number of

relinquished goods.

       Besides these three tests, a key consideration of this study revolves around

understanding how the actual market learning process evolves.             In particular, if




                                             2
preferences are influenced by market experience, what is the underlying learning process

at work? Also, since an appropriate understanding of the benefits and costs of public

programs is necessary before efficient policies can be advanced, this study explores

whether the market findings spill over to the realm of collective choice mechanisms.

       The empirical results are sharp and provide three major insights. First, individual

trading rates for inexperienced consumers are consonant with predictions from prospect

theory. The endowment effect anomaly is not universal, however: consumers that have

significant market experience do not exhibit behavior consistent with prospect theory;

rather, their behavior is in line with neoclassical predictions. Empirical findings are

similar over collective choice mechanisms. Second, these results extend quite well to

auction data: whereas Hicksian equivalent surplus is considerably larger than Hicksian

compensating surplus for inexperienced agents, the difference converges to zero for

experienced agents.    The observed convergence is entirely due to lower Hicksian

equivalent surplus values among experienced agents. Third, consistent with the pattern

of results in the first two tests, compensation demanded is convex (concave) in the

number of items being relinquished for experienced (inexperienced) agents.

       Overall, the data pattern observed suggests that the learning process at work is

one where the psychological effects at the heart of prospect theory are gradually

attenuated: experienced agents are more willing to part with their endowments than

lesser-experienced agents. In this sense, the data are consistent with the notion that via

previous market interaction and arbitrage opportunities, agents have learned to treat

goods leaving their endowment as an opportunity cost rather than a loss. This result is

congruent with George Loewenstein and Kahneman (1991), who report that the main




                                            3
effect of endowment is not to enhance the appeal of the good one owns but rather the

pain of giving it up. Thus, while psychological effects have been extremely popular in

explaining the endowment effect anomaly, they may also have some explanatory power

regarding the attenuation of the anomaly.

       The remainder of this study proceeds as follows. The next section provides a

brief background and discusses the experimental design. Sections II and III present the

results and conclusions.

                       I. Background and Experimental Design

       Ever since the initial experimental findings that suggested mere ownership of a

good may induce an endowment effect, neoclassical models have been under heavy

scrutiny, as their basic independence assumption is clearly violated in such scenarios.

The treatments herein extend the work of Knetsch (1989) and Bateman et al. (1997),

among others. In an influential study, Knetsch (1989) examined trading rates among

Cornell undergraduate students and found that 89 percent of those originally endowed

with a mug chose to keep the mug, and 90 percent of those endowed with a chocolate bar

decided to keep the chocolate bar. Since subjects were allocated to one of the two

treatments randomly, a finding of less than 50 percent of the subjects swapping their

good provides evidence in favor of prospect theory.

       Bateman et al. (1997) use a unique experimental design to provide a further test of

prospect theory. Making use of divergences in predictions between neoclassical theory

and prospect theory, they use a classroom experiment to test the theories side-by-side.

Their experiment was carefully designed to satisfy important criteria necessary for a

clean comparison—e.g., incentive-compatible elicitation mechanism, explicit control for




                                            4
Hicksian income and substitution effects, etc. Like Knetsch (1989), Bateman et al.

(1997) find evidence in favor of prospect theory.

        A related line of research suggests this anomaly is attenuated when agents obtain

significant market experience (Knez et al., 1985; Coursey et al., 1987; Brookshire and

Coursey, 1987; List, 2003). The current study is most closely related to List (2003), who

controlled for Hicksian income and substitution effects by examining trading rates of

unusual pieces of memorabilia in the field. List’s (2003) field observations indicate an

inefficiently low number of trades for naïve traders, consistent with prospect theory. But

his data show that market experience and the decision to trade in his experiment are

positively correlated.

        Given that List (2003) was not primarily interested in testing the major theories,

his results are open to interpretation. First, his data may not properly delineate between

prospect theory and neoclassical theory because experienced agents may have planned on

re-selling the good. The importance of this deficiency is highlighted in Kahneman et al.

(1990, p. 1328), who note “there are some cases in which no endowment effect would be

expected, such as when goods are purchased for resale rather than for utilization.” Thus,

the data pattern observed may be driven by spurious correlation, as practiced consumers

may have planned on re-selling the good after the experiment.2                       In this sense, the

constructed market bore resemblance to a market where pure arbitrage was approached.

        Second, the extant literature typically reports endowment effects for everyday

consumable goods, such as mugs and candy bars. Accordingly, there is little doubt

whether subjects have well-structured preferences for the goods used in these


2Although in an exit interview List’s (2003) subjects stated that they planned to keep the good for personal
consumption, critics could contend that this was a case of experimenter satisficing.


                                                     5
experiments. Since List (2003) used several unique pieces of memorabilia, which most

of the subjects had never previously seen, or heard of, his findings may indicate that

experienced subjects are more certain of their preferences (or the goods’ values) and

therefore trade more often than lesser-experienced agents.3 Or the results might be

suggesting that certain classes of sportscard show consumers derive utility merely from

trading (perhaps this is the reason they participate in the sportscard market in the first

place). With an eye toward testing the competing hypotheses, and more fully exploring

learning effects, I turn to the experimental designs.

Experimental Design IA

        As a first attempt to resolve these and other issues, I examine trading rates of

everyday consumable goods (mugs and candy bars) in an actual marketplace where

subjects typically engage in buying, selling, and trading of sportscards and memorabilia.

This exercise represents a particularly strict test of the role of market experience on

shaping preferences since psychological research suggests that transfer of learning across

situations is quite weak (Loewenstein, 1999).

        Figure 1 illustrates the experimental design. Points A, B, C, and D are the initial

endowment levels. Point A = (0,1), B = (1,1), C = (0,0), and D = (1,0), where (University

of Arizona coffee mug, chocolate candy bar) represent the endowed goods. For example,

subjects in treatment group B are endowed with 1 mug and 1 chocolate bar. The

University of Arizona coffee mug was an attractive red and white mug that retailed for




3 Lesser-experienced agents may keep their endowed good simply to avoid making embarrassing mistakes.
Thus, if one takes into account informational asymmetries, neoclassical theory and prospect theory have
identical predictions for inexperienced agents.



                                                  6
$5.95 at the University of Arizona bookstore. The candy bar was an extra large fine

Swiss chocolate bar that retailed for about $6.00 at most fine-retail outlets.

        The fundamental insights gained from the treatments come from the choices

subjects make to trade their endowment for another point in Figure 1. In Treatment B

(C), subjects are endowed with B (C), and must trade their position 1,1 (0,0) for either A

or D (e.g., they choose A or D and give up B (C)). The decision is therefore which of the

two points, A or D, to choose. Likewise, in Treatment A (D), subjects who are initially

endowed with a candy bar (mug) decide whether to trade for a mug (candy bar). Hence,

the subject can either keep her initial endowment or trade it for the other good.

        The four treatments were run on the floor of a sportscard show in Tucson,

Arizona.4 Each participant’s experience followed three steps: (1) completing a survey,

(2) considering the potential trade, and (3) concluding the transaction and exit interview.

In Step 1, the monitor approached individuals entering the marketplace and inquired

about their interest in filling out a survey that would take about five minutes.5 If the

individual agreed, the monitor explained that in return for completing the survey the


4  Many readers may be unfamiliar with sportscard shows. With the rise in popularity of collector
sportscards and memorabilia across the U.S. in the past two decades, markets have naturally arisen that
organize buyers and sellers. Temporal assignment of the physical marketplace is typically done by a
professional association or local sportscard dealer who rents a large space, such as a gymnasium or hotel
conference center, and allocates six-foot tables to dealers for a nominal fee. When the market opens,
consumers mill around the marketplace, higgling and bargaining with dealers, who have their merchandise
prominently displayed on their six-foot table. The duration of a typical sportscard show is a weekend, and
a lucrative show may provide any given dealer hundreds of exchange opportunities (buying, selling, and
trading of goods). I should note that collector markets, such as the sportscard market, are much more than
fringe activities in the U.S.: the Beckett Fact Sheet notes that their collector sportscard magazines have a
paid circulation of over 889,000 copies. This circulation rate is comparable to popular magazines such as
Gourmet, Jane, and the New Yorker (see: http://www.beckett.com/publications/ and
http://asme.magazine.org (American society of magazine). Considering collectors broadly, according to
the U.S. Mint 2000 Annual Report, "an estimated 125,000,000 American adults collect Q50 Quarters from
pocket change with one-third collecting more than 25 of each state from pocket change, and the popularity
of the program only increases with time." See http://www.mint/gov). Relatedly, according to a March 13,
2000 article, the universe of stamp collectors includes 6,830,000 people (see:
http://www.linns.com/print/archives/20000313/editor.asp).
5 The survey is contained in Appendix A and is similar to List (2001).



                                                     7
subject would receive her endowed good(s). After physically giving the subject the

appropriate endowment (when applicable), the subject proceeded to fill out the survey.

No time limit was imposed. In Step 2, the monitor informed subjects in Treatments B

and C that they must trade their endowment for either point A or D, as represented in

Figure 1.    In treatment A (D), the monitor informed the subject that she had the

opportunity to trade her candy bar (mug) for the mug (candy bar). The monitor allowed

the subject to inspect both goods. Step 3 closed the experiment and included an exit

interview.

       I conducted some of the treatments with professional dealers and others with

ordinary consumers. The design was used to capture the distinction between consumers

that have intense trading experience (dealers) and those that have less trading experience

(nondealers). In the nondealer treatments, the endowment point was changed at the top

of each hour, so subjects’ treatment type was determined based on the time they visited

the table at the card show. The dealer treatments took place in the same fashion as the

nondealer treatments, with one exception: instead of waiting for participants to arrive at

the table, the monitor visited each dealer at her booth before the market opened,

alternating the endowment point. The nondealer treatments took approximately fourteen

hours to complete (11am to 6pm on Saturday and Sunday), while the dealer treatments

took about four hours (7am to 11am on Saturday).

       A few aspects of the experimental design merit further consideration. First, note

that subjects received the good(s) as payment for completing the survey, and had the

good(s) in their possession while filling out the survey. These two attributes have been

found to strengthen significantly the predictive accuracy of prospect theory. Second,




                                            8
when performing this type of trading exercise, care should be taken to select goods of

approximately equal value to avoid a result of everyone selecting one type of good. In a

market pre-test at a June 2001 Tucson trading card show, I asked fifty dealer and

nondealer subjects to choose one of the two items. Twenty-six chose the coffee mug,

whereas twenty-four chose the chocolate bar. I therefore concluded that the goods were

similar enough in value to use for a trading exercise. Third, no subjects participated in

more than one treatment. Fourth, the monitor worked one-on-one with each subject.

Experimental Design IB

       Besides these four treatments examining strictly private allocations, because the

existence of non-neoclassical preferences has vast importance for the provisioning of

public goods, I also ran four treatments using a collective choice mechanism. The four

collective choice treatments (denoted AP, BP, CP, DP) use the identical consumable

goods that were used in the private allocation treatments. For example, in Treatment AP,

subjects are endowed with a candy bar and must vote on a proposition to fund “Mr.

Twister”, a small metal box placed at the front of the room. If the group chooses to fund

Mr. Twister, which is determined via simple majority rule, all N (number of subjects in

the room) subjects must give their candy bar to the monitor; upon payment, Mr. Twister’s

handle is cranked N times and N mugs are delivered. Treatments BP, CP, and DP are the

public good analogs of Treatments B, C, and D.

       Because it was necessary to have group decisionmaking, I used an adjacent room

in the same building instead of running these treatments on the floor of the sportscard

trading show. In these treatments, each participant’s experience typically followed two

steps: (1) consideration of the invitation to participate in an experiment that would take




                                            9
about 30 minutes, and (2) participation in the experiment.       In Step 1, the monitor

approached potential subjects entering the trading card show and inquired about their

interest in participating in an experiment that would take about 30 minutes. If the

individual agreed to participate, the monitor briefly explained that in return the subject

would earn the chance to receive consumable goods at the experiment. The monitor

explained that at a pre-specified time (11:30am, 1:30pm, 2:30pm, and 3:30pm Sunday)

the subject should enter an adjacent room to take part in the experiment. Directions to

the room were provided and the subject was informed that she would receive instructions

for the experiment when she arrived.

       Step 2 began when subjects entered the room and signed a consent form in which

they agreed to abide by the rules of the experiment. After subjects were situated in the

room, the experiment began. The instructions, which are contained in Appendix B, were

read aloud, and after everyone understood the mechanism, a vote to fund Mr. Twister was

taken. Each subject filled out her own decision sheet (a sample decision sheet is provided

in Appendix C). Similar to the private good treatments, no subjects participated in more

than one treatment, and I randomized subjects into treatments to ensure an equal

representation across referenda. Finally, I used only nondealers in these treatments

because dealers could not leave their tables to participate.

Theoretical Predictions

       Under individual or group choice, neoclassical theory and prospect theory have

sharp and disparate predictions about behavior across the various endowment points.

Consider the Hicksian indifference curve in Figure 1. For preferences to be consistent

under neoclassical theory, the proportion of subjects who trade the mug for the chocolate




                                             10
bar should be equal to one minus the proportion who trade the chocolate bar for the mug.

Thus, if 70 percent of the subjects endowed with a chocolate bar keep the chocolate bar,

for preferences to be Hicksian, approximately 70 percent of subjects endowed with a mug

should trade for a chocolate bar.       Similarly, for points B and C there should be

independence between the point of endowment and the final entitlement.

       Alternatively, prospect theory conjectures that a value function exists that is (i)

measured over deviations from a reference point, (ii) convex for losses and concave for

gains, and (iii) initially steeper for losses than gains (Tversky and Kahneman, 1991).

Hence, prospect theory conjectures that mere ownership of a commodity will induce a

kink at the point of endowment, making the proportion of subjects who opt to trade the

mug for the candy bar considerably less than one minus the proportion who trade the

candy bar for the mug. Likewise, prospect theory predicts that subjects endowed at

points B and C will opt for point D more often than subjects initially endowed at point A.

This same prediction holds when one compares reference points D and B (or D and C)—

if prospect theory is an accurate predictor of behavior, then a larger proportion of subjects

starting at points B and C will choose A.

       In summary, neoclassical theory predicts that if the goods are equally valued,

roughly 50 percent of subjects will exit the experiment with a coffee mug and 50 percent

of the subjects will exit with a chocolate bar, regardless of their random treatment

assignment.   Alternatively, prospect theory conjectures that losses loom larger than

comparable gains; hence changing the reference point matters. Under prospect theory,

the likelihood of leaving with a mug is ordered as follows: those endowed at point D are




                                             11
most likely to leave with a mug, followed by subjects randomly allocated to points B and

C; finally, subjects endowed at point A will be least likely to exit with a mug.

Experimental Design II

         In an effort to provide a further test of individual preferences, I examine explicit

statements of willingness to accept (WTA) and willingness to pay (WTP) in an incentive-

compatible elicitation mechanism: a Vickrey sealed bid second-price auction.6 Figure 2,

which assumes quasi-concave utility functions, illustrates the experimental design. In

Figure 2, G represents extra large fine Swiss chocolate bars and $ denotes dollars (note

that while numerical subscripts on g represent number of candy bars, subscripts on $ are

for notational convenience only and do not depict actual dollar figures). To gather

statements of value, I randomly endow subjects at (g0,$3) or (g3,$0). Subjects endowed at

(g0,$3) state three Hicksian compensating surplus (WTP) values: their maximum WTP for

g1-g0, g2-g0, and g3-g0 units of G (denoted WTP1, WTP2, and WTP3). Likewise, subjects

endowed at (g3,$0) state three Hicksian equivalent surplus (WTA) values: their minimum

WTA to sell one, two, or three of their candy bars (e.g., to relinquish g3-g2, g3-g1, and g3-

g0 of their candy bars, denoted WTA1, WTA2, and WTA3).7 Each of the subjects knew

that only one of the three auctions, to be determined randomly, would be carried out for

real.



6 The import of this robustness test is highlighted by one important lesson from the experimental literature:
market institutions matter (see, e.g., Vernon L. Smith, 1982).
7 A simple exercise of randomly allocating subjects at (g $ ) and (g $ ) and eliciting minimum WTA and
                                                           3, 0       0, 0
maximum WTP values does not yield tremendous insights since both prospect theory and neoclassical
theory predict a value disparity. Neoclassical theory predicts divergence due to income (shifts in the
indifference curve) and substitution (curvature of the indifference curves) effects. This can be seen in
Figure 2 by noting WTA3=$3-$0 > WTP3=$0-$4. Prospect theory invokes psychological effects to predict
divergences. Thus, it is important to control for Hicksian income and substitution effects by compensating
WTP subjects to ensure that subjects are moving along the same indifference curve. The amount of
compensation used in the WTP treatment is the average WTA3.


                                                     12
          The treatments were run on the floor of a sportscard show in Tucson, Arizona.

Each participant’s experience followed four steps: (1) completing a survey, (2) learning

the auction rules, 3) considering the bid (offer), and (4) concluding the transaction and

exit interview. In Step 1, the monitor approached individuals entering the trading card

show and inquired about their interest in filling out a survey.8 If the individual agreed,

then the monitor explained that in return for completing the survey the subject would

receive an endowment (either three candy bars or the dollar value equivalent of the three

candy bars—see footnote 7).                  After the monitor physically gave the subject the

appropriate endowment, the subject proceeded to fill out the survey. The monitor worked

one-on-one with the participant and no time limit was imposed. In Step 2, the monitor

informed the subject that she now had the opportunity to bid (offer) in an auction for the

goods on the table (their goods). After inspecting the goods, the subject learned the rules

of the Vickrey second-price auction as well as the randomization mechanism (Appendix

D contains the experimental instructions).

          In the WTP (WTA) treatment, after completing the survey, learning the auction

rules, and examining the goods, each participant privately wrote three bids (offers) on the

bidding sheet and placed it in an opaque box. The monitor informed the participant that

her bidding sheet would not be opened until after the show and that all bids/offers would

be destroyed when the research project was completed. Each subject worked one-on-one

with the monitor and no time limit was imposed on her inspection of the goods. In Step

4, the monitor explained that if the participant won the auction, she would be contacted

by email or telephone within three days. Upon receipt of payment, the monitor would

send her the candy bars (or money), postage paid.

8   The survey is identical to Appendix A.

                                                     13
        Before proceeding, I should mention a few important aspects of the experimental

design. First, subjects were randomly placed into either the WTA or WTP treatment, and

competed against others in the same treatment. Second, no subject participated in more

than one treatment. Third, since I am not testing the incentive-compatibility of the

mechanism, and want to avoid any excess noise, I informed subjects that it was in their

best interest to bid (offer) their true value in the auctions. I reinforced this notion via

several examples that illustrated the optimal strategy of truth-telling. Fourth, I included

only nondealers in the treatments since dealer availability was limited at this particular

show. Fifth, each subject in the WTP treatment received the dollar value equivalent

(average WTA3 = $14.78) of the three candy bars received by the WTA subjects.

Theoretical Predictions

        Across these auction treatments neoclassical theory and prospect theory have

sharp and quite disparate predictions. A first difference in predictions is that neoclassical

theory conjectures WTA3 = WTP3, whereas prospect theory predicts WTA3 > WTP3.

This first test therefore represents a fundamental examination of whether individuals’

indifference curves are perfectly reversible—the basic independence assumption. This

test is similar to the trading exercise in Experimental Design IA. Any other comparisons

of WTA and WTP are not enlightening since both theories predict a disparity—offers and

bids represent movements along different segments of the same indifference curve.9

        While further comparison of WTA and WTP values may not yield considerable

insights, indifference curve convexity implies convexity of the expenditure function in




9 This is true unless there is infinite substitutability between money and candy bars, in which case
neoclassical theory predicts no value disparity, whereas prospect theory predicts divergences.


                                                14
g.10 Because the expenditure function is strictly convex in g, compensation demanded

will also be strictly convex in g.             In this case, neoclassical theory yields several

predictions about the nature of compensation demanded in the number of goods

relinquished:         2WTA1<WTA2,                3WTA1<WTA3,                3WTA2<2WTA3,                and

WTA1+WTA3<2WTA2.

         Alternatively, as previously mentioned, a major conjecture in prospect theory is

diminishing sensitivity, or that small gains are disproportionately more attractive relative

to large gains, and small losses disproportionately aversive relative to large losses.

Intuitively, convexity of the value function in losses is motivated by the idea that the

decline in value from a loss of $1100 to a loss of $1200 is less than the decline in value

from a loss of $100 to a loss of $200. Convexity of the loss value function implies

concavity of compensation demanded. Thus, again prospect theory has predictions that

are directly at odds with neoclassical theory:                     2WTA1>WTA2, 3WTA1>WTA3,

3WTA2>2WTA3, and WTA1+WTA3>2WTA2.11

                                                   II. Results

         Table 1 provides a statistical description of the subject characteristics in each of

the ten treatments as well as a summary of the experimental design. In total, I observed

behavior of nearly 500 subjects−more than 30 subjects in each dealer and non-dealer


10 This fact can be proven as follows: if the utility function u(g,$) is quasi-concave in (g,$), then the set
S(q,u*) ={$|u(g,$) ≥ u*} is convex. Because S(g) is convex, the set λS(g0) + (1-λ)S(g1) ⊂ S(λg0+(1-λ)g1)
for 0<λ<1. Hence, we have m(p,g0,u*) = inf{$⋅p|$∈S(g0)}; m(p,g1,u*) = inf{$⋅p|$∈S(g1)}; and m(p,λg0
+(1-λ)g1,u*) = inf{$⋅p|$∈S(λg0 +(1-λ)g1)}. Convexity in g requires λm(p,g0,u*) +(1-λ)m(p,g1,u*) ≥
m(p,λg0 +(1-λ)g1,u*).      The first expression can be rewritten λm(p,g0,u*)+(1-λ)m(p,g1,u*) =
inf{$⋅p|$∈λS(g0)+(1-λ) S(g1)}. But, inf{$⋅p|$∈λS(g0) + (1-λ)S(g1)} ≥ inf{$⋅p|$∈S(λg0 +(1-λ)g1)} because
λS(g0) + (1-λ) S(g1) ⊂ S(λg0+(1-λ)g1). Therefore, the expenditure function is convex in g (see Maler,
1974).
11 Examination of the shape of WTP yields no discernible tests since both theories predict that WTP is
concave in g. The interested reader should see Brookshire and Coursey (1987) for an early study that
gathered numerous statements of compensation demanded.


                                                     15
treatment for the private good trading treatments (Treatments A-D), roughly 30 subjects

for each of the public good trading treatments (Treatments AP-DP), and 120 subjects in

the auctions (Treatments WTA, WTP).

       Central tendencies of the variables reported in columns 1-3 of Table 1 are from

the pooled trading treatment data and reveal that dealers are much more active traders

(denoted trading intensity), and have had more years of market experience, than

nondealers. More importantly, within each of the dealer and nondealer subsamples there

is a considerable amount of subject variability in the level of trading intensity and years

of market experience, permitting an analysis of the effect of market experience on

behavior. In the data analysis below, I focus on the effects of trading intensity on

behavior. Yet I should note that if I use a measure of the stock of market experience—

the product of trading intensity and years of market experience—empirical results are

qualitatively similarly. Thus, I interchange “market intensity” and “market experience”

for the remainder of this study.

       Table 2, which provides a summary of the trading data for both nondealers and

dealers, can be read as follows: row 1, column 1, at the intersection of “Treatment A”

and “Number of Subjects Choosing A,” denotes that 25 nondealer subjects out of 31 (81

percent) that were initially endowed with 0 mugs and 1 chocolate bar chose to keep the

chocolate bar. The figure in row 1, column 2, complements this result and indicates that

6 out of 31 (19 percent) nondealers opted to trade their chocolate bar for the coffee mug.

The third column in Table 2 presents Pearson chi-square tests, which examine the null

hypothesis of Ho: pA = pB = pC = pD; where pi are the parameters of 4 independent

binomially distributed random variables, and therefore the null hypothesis tests whether




                                            16
there is a treatment effect. If the null hypothesis cannot be rejected, then evidence is in

favor of neoclassical theory; rejection of the null (with the correct pi signs) provides

evidence in favor of prospect theory.

       Overall, empirical results in panel A for ordinary consumers provide strong

support for prospect theory. As we move downward in column 1 of Table 2 from

Treatment A to Treatment D, a considerable number of subjects exhibit behavior in line

with prospect theory: whereas 81 percent of nondealers choose point A in Treatment A,

this percentage decreases significantly in Treatments B and C, and declines even further

in Treatment D—to 23 percent. The trading figures from Treatments A and D both

suggest that subjects were about four times more likely to exit the experiment with their

endowed good (computed as ½(Pi|i/Pi|j) + (Pj|j/Pj|i)). A Pearson chi-square test (~3 degrees

of freedom) suggests that the null hypothesis of no treatment effect should be rejected at

the p < .01 level (χ2 = 19.21).

       Examining behavior within the realm of a collective choice mechanism (in panel

B of Table 2) reveals nearly identical insights—88 percent and 83 percent of subjects

kept their endowed goods in treatments AP and AD, and slightly more than 50 percent of

subjects opted for the chocolate bar in Treatments BP and CP. A Pearson chi-square test

again suggests that the homogeneity null should be rejected at the p < .01 level (χ2 =

34.79). While there seems to be a slight tendency for subjects to exhibit a greater level of

endowment in the collective choice treatments than in the individual choice treatments,

the differences are not significant at conventional levels. Accordingly, whether behavior

is observed over private or collective allocation, the data for ordinary consumers provide

strong support in favor of prospect theory. This evidence, which is consistent with



                                            17
previous experimental studies, is at odds with conventional economic theory, which

assumes that indifference curves are reversible.

       Panel C in Table 2 tells a much different story, however. For example, the data

are not in accord with prospect theory’s reference point prediction. In fact, quite the

contrary result emerges—the data clearly emerge in support of neoclassical theory. First,

prospect theory predicts that losses are weighted more heavily than gains. Yet, of the 30

subjects initially endowed with a chocolate bar (Treatment A), only 14, or 47 percent,

keep the chocolate bar. This trading pattern holds for Treatment D as well: 44 percent

(14 of 32) of subjects trade their coffee mug for the chocolate bar. The intermediate

points provide a comforting validity check, as roughly 50 percent of subjects in

Treatments B and C leave with mugs. As neoclassical theory would predict, according to

a Pearson chi-square test the null hypothesis cannot be rejected at conventional

significance levels (χ2 = 0.59).

       Table 3 splits the data from Treatments A, D, AP, and DP into distinct

“experience” subsamples to more fully explore the influence of market experience on the

exchange rate. While the experience thresholds may appear ad hoc, I used the mean (≈6)

and standard deviation (≈6) of trading intensity as guidance. Liberal changes to these

thresholds do not significantly change the nature of the results. The pooled data indicate

that 18 percent of nondealers preferred an exchange. Using a Fisher’s Exact test, I find

that the null hypothesis of no endowment effect in the pooled data should be rejected at

the p < .01 level (z = 7.32). Even though exchange rates considerably increase as market

experience increases, Fisher’s exact tests suggest that the null hypothesis should be

rejected for those consumers that trade fewer than 6 times in a typical month



                                            18
(inexperienced consumers, row 2: z = 6.97) as well as for those consumers that make 6 or

more trades in a typical month (experienced consumers, row 3: z = 3.48).

       When we move to intense consumers—those consumers who trade more than 12

times per month, where 12 is roughly equivalent to the mean plus one standard

deviation—a much different result emerges.        In these data, 56 percent of subjects

preferred an exchange and the null hypothesis cannot be rejected at conventional levels (p

= 0.64; z = 0.33). Data from the dealer sample (contained in row 5 of Table 3) strongly

reinforce empirical results from the intense consumer data:        48 percent of dealers

preferred an exchange, and according to a Fisher’s exact test it is inappropriate to reject

the null hypothesis of no endowment effect (p = 0.80; z = 0.23).

       To provide a visual characterization of the pooled trading data (pooled across 129

dealers and 62 nondealers), I present Figure 3, which includes data across the 191

subjects and makes the trade probability a function of trading intensity. The figure

clearly shows that individual behavior converges to the neoclassical prediction as trading

experience intensifies—subjects who trade 11 or more times in a typical month conform

well to neoclassical predictions.

       The second and third tests of prospect theory and neoclassical theory revolve

around the auction data. Following the analysis above, I begin by presenting Table 4,

which provides sample statistics for WTA and WTP measures of value across several

experience thresholds. Again, in choosing thresholds for these samples, I considered

both the mean number of trades in a typical month (≈5) and its standard deviation (≈5)

(see Table 1). A first important insight gained from Table 4 is the discrepancy between

Hicksian equivalent surplus and Hicksian compensating surplus for the three candy bars




                                            19
in the pooled data (row 1). While compensation demanded is $14.78, WTP is only $7.73.

This value difference of nearly 50 percent is significant at the p < .01 level using a large-

sample t-test (t = 6.30) and suggests that preferences are inconsistent.12

           Parsing the data into subcategories yields insights that are consonant with the

trading results: predictions from prospect theory are met in the inexperienced consumer

group, as WTA3 ($18.36) is significantly greater than WTP3 ($7.54) at the p < .01 level (t

= 7.30). Yet data from the more experienced groups align with neoclassical predictions:

neither experienced consumers’ values (WTA3=$10.10, WTP3=$7.89) nor intense

consumers’ values (WTA3=$8.21, WTP3=$7.43) are significantly different at the p < .05

level (experienced: t = 1.72; intense: t = 0.72).13 Interestingly, the convergence of values

is entirely due to lower Hicksian equivalent surplus values among experienced agents—

inexperienced consumers provide a WTA3 value of $18.36, whereas intense consumers

provide a WTA3 value ($8.21) that is $10.16 lower, a difference of 55 percent, which is

significant at the p < .01 level (t = 6.70). A comparison of WTP3 values across these

same subject groups provides negligible value differences ($7.54 versus $7.43).

           The third test of the two theories requires a more careful exploration of the

curvature of Hicksian equivalent surplus measures over the number of relinquished

goods. Table 5 presents summary statistics across the curvature measures for each of the

subsamples.         Panel A in Table 5 provides means and standard deviations for the

measures: 2WTA1 - WTA2, 3WTA1 - WTA3, 3WTA2 - 2WTA3, and WTA1+WTA3 -

2WTA2. Accordingly, a negative entry in panel A indicates a tendency toward concavity

of compensation demanded, whereas a positive figure indicates a tendency toward


12   These results, and those discussed above, are consistent across parametric and non-parametric tests.
13   Note that WTP is concave in g for all subsamples, as predicted by both theories.


                                                       20
convexity. The data pattern strongly supports results from the first two tests. For

inexperienced consumers, three out of the four measures support prospect theory: at the

p < .05 level the data in columns 1-3 all support concavity of the Hicksian equivalent

surplus measures. The fourth measure in column 4 is directionally correct but not

significant at conventional levels.

         Data gathered from the experienced and intense consumer samples provide

evidence that supports neoclassical predictions, as convexity of compensation demanded

is evident. For experienced consumers, the differences are significant at the p < .05 level

for the first two column measures and at the p < .08 and p < .15 levels for the last two

column measures. For intense consumers the results become sharper, as significance is

achieved at the p < .05 level for the first three column measures and at the p < .12 level

for the fourth column measure.

         Panel B in Table 5 presents a much more disaggregated look at the WTA data by

compiling the number of subjects that comply with neoclassical theory (denoted NT) and

prospect theory (denoted PT) for each of the four curvature measures.14                            Besides

providing a robustness check of whether a few outliers are driving the results displayed in

panel A, these figures provide a sense of individual-level behavior. One can draw

inference from these figures by moving up and down rows in any given column, or across

columns in any given row.

         Overall, the data in panel B provide insights comparable to inference gained from

panel A. First, in the pooled data the number of subjects conforming to neoclassical


14 A zero value for any particular measure indicates linearity and is not counted as following either theory.
Hence, the summation of the number of subjects following neoclassical theory and prospect theory for each
measure is not equal to the total number of subjects that participated in the treatment.



                                                     21
theory and prospect theory is roughly equivalent across all four curvature measures.

Second, across the four curvature measures, 41-65 percent (18-29 percent) of

inexperienced agents conform to prospect theory (neoclassical theory).            A test of

proportions indicates that for curvature measures in columns 1-3, a significantly greater

proportion of inexperienced agents conform to prospect theory than neoclassical theory (z

= 2.76; z = 3.94; z = 2.46).

       Third, 50-70 percent (19-23 percent) of experienced agents are in line with

neoclassical (prospect theory) predictions. Using a test of proportions, I find that for all

four curvature measures these differences are significant at the p < .05 level. Fourth, 50-

72 percent (16-22 percent) of intense consumers conform to neoclassical predictions

(prospect theory predictions). Again, a proportions test indicates that in all four curvature

cases these differences are significant at the p < .05 level. Finally, comparing the

proportion of subjects who conform to neoclassical theory or prospect theory across the

inexperienced and experienced consumer samples, I find that for each of the four

curvature measures, experienced (inexperienced) consumers are significantly more likely

to behave in accordance with neoclassical theory (prospect theory).

       Although analysis of the raw data provides evidence that suggests market

experience attenuates the anomaly, there has been no attempt to control other factors that

may affect the propensity to trade or the bid/offer level. These other subject-specific

factors, which include years of market experience, gender, income, education, and age, can

be adequately accounted for in an econometric model. In Appendix E, I present a series of

empirical results that are consistent with the unconditional results discussed above. For




                                             22
example, market experience is found to influence trading rates and considerably influences

Hicksian equivalent surplus measures, as suggested by the unconditional analysis.

        Combining results from the entire set of exercises provides the following major

insight: while prospect theory can go a long way in explaining behavior of naïve subjects,

behavior converges to the neoclassical prediction as subjects gain market experience.

Figure 4 provides a summary of individual behavior across the WTA and WTP

treatments. The figure includes data across the 120 subjects and makes the WTA/WTP

ratio a function of trading intensity. Akin to Figure 3, Figure 4 clearly shows that

individual behavior converges to the neoclassical prediction as trading experience

intensifies. In light of the extant body of psychological evidence that reports limited

transfer of learning across tasks, these results are quite surprising.

        The richness of the data also permits an examination of the underlying market

learning process.      In this sense, the results in this study rule out many potential

explanations that could not be discarded in previous data sets (e.g., List, 2003). For

example, preference uncertainty, subjects obtaining utility from the trading exercise,

avoidance of dealing with informed agents when one is ill-informed, etc., cannot credibly

explain all of the trading and auction results herein.15 Yet the data are broadly consistent

with at least one potential explanation: as aforementioned, recent findings suggest that

the main effect of endowment is not to enhance the appeal of the good one owns, but

rather the pain of giving it up (Loewenstein and Kahneman, 1991). Thus, via market

interaction and numerous arbitrage opportunities, practiced agents may have learned to

overcome this “pain” and treat the good leaving their endowment as an opportunity cost


15While these data do not discern between treatment effects (learning) versus selection effects (subject
pool), List (2003) presents evidence that suggests learning drives the observed behavioral differences.


                                                  23
rather than a loss.      While psychological effects have been extremely popular in

explaining the endowment effect anomaly, data herein suggest that psychological effects

may also help to explain the attenuation of the anomaly.

                                    III. Concluding Remarks

       Indifference curves are traditionally drawn without reference to current

entitlements. In practice, this convention implies that with small income effects and

many available substitutes differences between equivalent and compensating variation

are negligible.    From a positive perspective, this assumption represents a necessary

condition for the invariance result of Coase. In a normative sense, this interpretation of

indifference curves legitimizes cost/benefit analysis and provides a basis to resolve

damage disputes. Yet substantial evidence has mounted that illustrates the importance of

entitlements:     in an influential experimental study, Kahneman et al. (1990) provide

compelling evidence to reject the basic independence assumption. These experimental

findings have been robust across unfamiliar goods, such as irradiated sandwiches, and

common goods, such as chocolate bars, persuading even the most ardent supporters of

neoclassical theory to doubt the validity of certain neoclassical postulates.

       In this study, I make use of three clean tests that pit neoclassical theory against

prospect theory. I test the three hypotheses with data gathered from a naturally occurring

market.   Examining trading patterns and bid/offer schedules in actual auctions for

everyday consumables yields several unique insights. First, prospect theory is found to

have strong predictive power for inexperienced consumers across both the trading and

auction treatments. Second, for those consumers that have had a considerable amount of

exchange opportunity in the sportscard marketplace, neoclassical theory predicts




                                             24
reasonably well, as I find sharp evidence that behavior approaches the neoclassical

prediction for experienced agents. In light of the extant body of psychological evidence

that reports limited transfer of learning across tasks, these results are quite surprising.

The tentative conclusion regarding the underlying learning process at work is that agents

with intense market experience have learned to part with entitlements, suggesting

attenuation of the anomaly appears to take place on the sell side of the market rather than

on the buy side.




                                            25
                                      References
Bateman, Ian, Munro, Alistair, Rhodes, Bruce, Starmer, Chris, and Sugden, Robert. “A
        Theory of Reference-Dependent Preferences,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
        1997, 112, pp. 479-505.
Brookshire, David and Coursey, Don. “Measuring the Value of a Public Good: An
       Empirical Comparison of Elicitation Procedures,” American Economic Review,
       September 1987, 77(4), pp. 554-566.
Camerer, Colin F. and Hogarth, Robin M. “The Effects of Financial Incentives in
       Experiments: A Review and Capital-Labor-Production Framework,” Journal of
       Risk and Uncertainty, 1999, 19, pp. 7-42.
Coursey, Don, Hovis, John, and Schulze, William. “The Disparity Between Willingness
        to Accept and Willingness to Pay Measures of Value.” Quarterly Journal of
        Economics, 1987, 102(3), pp. 679-90.
Hoffman, Elizabeth and Spitzer, Matthew. “Willingness to Pay vs. Willingness to
        Accept: Legal and Economic Implications,” Washington University Law
        Quarterly, 1993, 71(1), pp. 59-114.
Kahneman, Daniel, Knetsch, Jack L., and Thaler, Richard H. "Experimental Tests of the
        Endowment Effect and the Coase Theorem." Journal of Political Economy,
        December 1990, 98(6), pp. 1325-48.
Kahneman, Daniel, and Tversky, Amos. “Prospect Theory: An Analysis of Decision
        Under Risk.” Econometrica 47 (March 1979): 263-91.
Knetsch, Jack L. “The Endowment Effect and Evidence of Nonreversible Indifference
        Curves,” American Economic Review, December 1989, 79(5), pp. 1277-1284.
Knetsch, Jack L. and J.A. Sinden. “The Persistence of Evaluation Disparities,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 1987, 102(3), pp. 691-695.
Knez, Peter, Smith, Vernon L., and Williams, Arlington. “Individual Rationality, Market
        Rationality, and Value Estimation,” American Economic Review, May 1985,
        75(2), pp. 397-402.
List, John A. “Do Explicit Warnings Eliminate the Hypothetical Bias in Elicitation
        Procedures? Evidence from Field Auctions for Sportscards,” American Economic
        Review, December 2001, pp. 1498-1507.
List, John A. “Does Market Experience Eliminate Market Anomalies?" Quarterly
        Journal of Economics, 2003, forthcoming.
Loewenstein, George “Experimental Economics from the Vantage-Point of Behavioural
        Economics,” Economic Journal, 1999, 109 (February), pp. F25-F34.
Loewenstein, George, and Kahneman, Daniel. “Explaining the Endowment Effect,”
        Working paper, Carnegie Mellon, 1991.
Maler, Karl-Goran. Environmental Economics: A Theoretical Inquiry. Baltimore: Johns
        Hopkins Univ. Press, 1974.
Smith, Vernon L. "Microeconomic Systems as an Experimental Science." American
        Economic Review, December 1982, 72(5), pp. 589-97.
Thaler, Richard. “Toward a Positive Theory of Consumer Choice,” Journal of Economic
        Behavior and Organization, 1980, 1, pp. 39-60.
Tversky, Amos, and Kahneman, Daniel. “Loss Aversion in Riskless Choice: A
        Reference-Dependent Model.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1991:
        pp. 1039-61.


                                          26
Table 1 Selected Characteristics of Participants

                             Trading Treatments                          Auction Treatments
                   Dealers       Nondealers Nondealers                      Nondealers
                    Mean              Mean             Mean                    Mean
                  (Std. dev.)       (Std. dev.)      (Std. dev.)             (Std. dev.)
                                                                          WTA            WTP

Trading intensity 11.81                4.94              6.88             5.07              5.23
                  (10.9)              (6.58)            (6.39)           (5.24)            (4.82)

Yrs. of market       9.88              7.15              7.21            10.13              8.92
experience          (9.79)            (9.83)            (8.03)          (10.71)            (9.90)

Income               4.15              4.10              4.18             3.55              3.78
                    (1.75)            (1.69)            (1.81)           (2.27)            (2.24)

Age                 36.55             34.54             37.04            31.74             31.61
                    (13.1)           (14.41)            (14.1)          (13.42)           (14.38)

Gender (% male) 0.94                   0.85              0.82             0.83              0.83
               (0.24)                 (0.35)            (0.39)           (0.38)            (0.38)

Education            3.54              3.44              3.54             3.51              3.48
                    (1.40)            (1.33)            (1.54)           (1.70)            (1.68)

Sample Sizes
Treatment A           30                31                ---              ---               ---
Treatment B           32                30                ---              ---               ---
Treatment C           35                33                ---              ---               ---
Treatment D           32                30                ---              ---               ---
Treatment AP          ---               ---               33               ---               ---
Treatment BP          ---               ---               28               ---               ---
Treatment CP          ---               ---               29               ---               ---
Treatment DP          ---               ---               35               ---               ---
WTA/WTP               ---               ---               ---              60                60
Notes:
1. Trading intensity represents the number of trades made in a typical month.
2. Yrs. of market experience denotes years that the subject has been active in the market.
3. Income denotes categorical variable (1-8): 1) Less than $10,000, 2) $10,000 to $19,999, 3) $20,000 to
    $29,999, 4) $30,000 to $39,999, 5) $40,000 to $49,999, 6) $50,000 to $74,999, 7) $75,000 to $99,999 8)
    $100,000 or over.
4. Age denotes actual age in years.
5. Gender denotes categorical variable: 0 if female, 1 if male.
6. Education denotes categorical variable 1) Eighth grade or less, 2) High School 3) 2-Year College, 4)
    Other Post-High School, 5) 4-Year College, 6) Graduate School Education.




                                                   27
Table 2 Experimental Results for Trading Treatments


                          Number of Subjects           Number of Subjects
                             Choosing A                   Choosing D                   Pearson χ2
Panel A. Nondealers
  Treatment A                    25 (81%)                    6 (19%)                   19.21 (3 df)
  Treatment B                    18 (60%)                    12 (40%)
  Treatment C                    15 (45%)                    18 (55%)
  Treatment D                     7 (23%)                    23 (77%)

Panel B. Nondealers
  Treatment AP                   29 (88%)                    4 (12%)                   34.79 (3 df)
  Treatment BP                   16 (57%)                    12 (43%)
  Treatment CP                   17 (59%)                    12 (41%)
  Treatment DP                    6 (17%)                    29 (83%)

Panel C. Dealers
  Treatment A                    14 (47%)                    16 (53%)                   0.54 (3 df)
  Treatment B                    14 (44%)                    18 (56%)
  Treatment C                    18 (51%)                    17 (49%)
  Treatment D                    14 (44%)                    18 (56%)

Notes:
1. Initial endowment levels are as follows: Treatment A = (0,1); Treatment B = (1,1); Treatment C =
    (0,0); Treatment D = (1,0), where (University of Arizona coffee mug, chocolate bar) are the private
    goods. Treatments AP, BP, CP, and DP are public good analogs of Treatments A-D.
2. Pearson Chi-Square test, which is distributed with 3 degrees of freedom, has a null hypothesis of
    Hicksian preferences, or that the proportions of subjects choosing A and D are equivalent across
    treatments.




                                                  28
Table 3 Summary Trading Statistics


                                 Preferred             p-value for
Group                            Exchange           Fisher’s exact test

Pooled nondealers (n = 129)      0.18 (0.38)               <0.01

Inexperienced consumers          0.08 (0.27)               <0.01
(< 6 trades monthly; n = 74)

Experienced consumers            0.31 (0.47)               <0.01
(≥ 6 trades monthly; n = 55)

Intense consumers                0.56 (0.51)                0.64
(≥ 12 trades monthly; n = 16)

Pooled dealers (n = 62)          0.48 (0.50)                0.80

Notes:
   1. Data are from Treatments A, D, AP, and DP. Standard deviations are in parentheses.
   2. Experienced consumers are those consumers who trade 6 or more times per month (6 is
       roughly the mean level of monthly trades). Intense consumers trade 12 or more times per
       month (12 is roughly the mean plus one standard deviation).
   3. Fisher’s exact test has a null hypothesis of no endowment effect.




                                               29
Table 4 WTA/WTP Sample Statistics Across Consumer Types

                        WTA1        WTA2        WTA3               WTP1        WTP2        WTP3
                        Mean        Mean        Mean               Mean        Mean        Mean
Group                 (Std. dev.) (Std. dev.) (Std. dev.)        (Std. dev.) (Std. dev.) (Std. dev.)

Pooled
  Bid or Offer           5.58        10.04        14.78             4.11         5.99         7.73
  (WTA, n=60)            (3.7)       (5.4)        (7.0)             (2.5)        (3.6)        (5.0)
  (WTP, n=60)

Inexperienced consumers
  Bid or Offer     7.75              13.16        18.36             4.08         5.91         7.54
  (WTA, n=34)      (3.5)             (4.6)        (6.1)             (3.0)        (3.7)        (5.2)
  (WTP, n=27)

Experienced consumers
  Bid or Offer     2.74               5.96        10.10             4.14         6.05         7.89
  (WTA, n=26)     (1.31)              (3.0)       (5.0)             (2.0)        (3.5)        (4.8)
  (WTP, n=33)

Intense consumers
   Bid or Offer    2.29               5.00         8.21             3.87         6.28         7.43
   (WTA, n=18)    (0.83)              (1.9)        (2.5)            (1.8)        (3.3)        (3.7)
   (WTP, n=15)

Note: “Inexperienced” consumers are those that trade fewer than 5 times in a typical month;
“Experienced” consumers are those that trade 5 or more times in a typical month; “Intense” consumers are
those that trade 10 or more times per month. In choosing these thresholds, I considered both the mean
number of trades in a typical month (≈5) and its standard deviation (≈5) (see Table 1). Thus,
“Inexperienced” consumers are those subjects who are below the average trading rate; “Experienced”
consumers are those subjects who are above the average trading rate; and “Intense” consumers are those
consumers at least one standard deviation above the average trading rate.




                                                  30
Table 5 WTA Summary Results Across Consumer Types

            WTA2-2WTA1 WTP3-3WTA1                              2WTA3-3WTA2 WTA1+WTA3–2WTA2
                Mean        Mean                                   Mean          Mean
Group         (Std. dev.) (Std. dev.)                            (Std. dev.)   (Std. dev.)
Panel A: Aggregate data
Pooled                 -1.12*                 -1.96                  -0.56                       0.28
(n=60)                  (4.0)                 (8.1)                  (7.3)                       (3.4)
Inexperienced          -2.35*               -4.91*                 -2.76*                      -0.20
consumers               (4.9)                (9.2)                  (7.1)                      (3.5)
(n=34)
Experienced               0.50*               1.89*                   2.32                       0.92
consumers                 (1.2)               (4.1)                   (6.6)                      (3.2)
(n=26)
Intense                   0.43*               1.34*                  1.42*                       0.50
consumers                 (0.8)               (1.8)                  (3.2)                       (1.7)
(n=18)

Panel B: Individual data—number of subjects satisfying each theory

                    NT        PT         NT       PT            NT        PT               NT        PT
Pooled              20        23         24       27            25        25               25        20
(n=60)
Inexperienced         7       18          6        22            9            19            10           14
consumers
(n=34)
Experienced          13           5      18           5          16           6             15           6
consumers
(n=26)
Intense               9           3      13           3          13           3             11           4
consumers
(n=18)
Notes: For definition of consumer types please see Table 4. NT and PT denote neoclassical theory and
prospect theory. Figures in Panel B on the number of subjects following each theory is determined by the
signs of the four measures: WTA2-2WTA1, WTP3-3WTA1, 2WTA3-3WTA2, and WTA1+WTA3–2WTA2.
A positive value (implying convexity in the number of goods relinquished) is in favor of neoclassical
theory whereas a negative value (implying concavity in the number of goods relinquished) favors prospect
theory. A zero value indicates linearity and is not counted as following either theory; hence, the summation
of the number of subjects following NT and PT for each convexity measure is not equal to the total number
of subjects that participated. In panel A, a * indicates value is significantly different from zero at the p <
.05 level.




                                                          31
32
                    Figure 3. Summary of Trading Results

                             0.6


                             0.5




     Proportion that trade
                             0.4


                             0.3

                              0.2

                              0.1

                                   0
                                        0 and 1
                                                   2 to 5
                                                                6 to 10
                                                                          11 and
                                                                          above
                                       Trades per month



                             Figure 4. Summary of WTA/WTP Ratios

                              2.5


                                   2
WTA/WTP Ratio




                               1.5


                                   1


                               0.5


                                    0
                                        0 and 1
                                                  2 to 5
                                                            6 to 10
                                                                      11 and
                                                                      above
                                    Trades per month




                                                           33
Appendix A Private Good Trading Treatments Survey

       These questions will be used for statistical purposes only. THIS INFORMATION
WILL BE KEPT STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL AND WILL BE DESTROYED UPON
COMPLETION OF THE STUDY.


1. How long have you been active in the sportscards and memorabilia market?
   _______yrs


2. Approximately how many trades (cards or memorabilia) do you make in a typical
   month? _______. Note that trades could include pokemon cards, sportscards, other
   trading cards, and sports memorabilia.
Has your trading rate changed over time? Why?




3. Are you a sportscard or sports memorabilia professional dealer?________


4. Gender: 1) Male       2) Female


5. Age ______            Date of Birth ____________


6. What is the highest grade of education that you have completed. (Circle one)
   1) Eighth grade 3) 2-Year College                5) 4-Year College
   2) High School 4) Other Post-High School         6) Graduate School Education


7. What is your approximate yearly income from all sources, before taxes?
  1) Less than $10,000      5) $40,000 to $49,999
  2) $10,000 to $19,999     6) $50,000 to $74,999
  3) $20,000 to $29,999     7) $75,000 to $99,999
  4) $30,000 to $39,999     8) $100,000 or over


                                             34
Appendix B Summary of the Instructions for Public Goods Treatment AP


       Welcome!! For participating in today’s experiment, we give you a Swiss fine
   extra large chocolate bar, which should be in front of you. Today you have the
   opportunity to vote on whether “Mr. Twister”, this small metal box, will be
   “funded”. If “Mr. Twister” is funded, I will turn the handle and N [the amount of
   people in the room] University of Arizona coffee mugs will be distributed—one
   to each participant [illustrate]. To fund Mr. Twister, all of you will have to give
   me your chocolate bar. Below please find the proposition and referendum rules.

                                      Proposition

   Everyone in the room will contribute their chocolate bar to the fund. The
   contribution will be used for the purpose of funding Mr. Twister, a mechanism
   that if funded will distribute one University of Arizona coffee mug to everyone
   [illustrate].


                                 Referendum Rules

   •   If more than 50% of you vote YES on this proposition, all of you will give me
       your chocolate bar. In return, “Mr. Twister” will be funded and I will crank the
       handle, providing one University of Arizona coffee mug to each participant
       [illustrate].

   •   If 50% or fewer of you vote YES on this proposition, no one will give me
       their chocolate bar and “Mr. Twister” will not be funded. Hence, no one will
       receive a University of Arizona coffee mug.


Any questions? You should note that it is in your best interest to truthfully reveal your
preferences—if you want to keep the chocolate bar, vote NO on the proposition. If you
prefer the mug, vote YES on the proposition.


I now want you to complete the decision sheet.




                                            35
Appendix C Decision Sheet for the Public Good Treatments


My vote for the proposition is (please circle one response):

                       YES                                     NO

Please sign the line below to verify your vote.

Signature_______________________________

We now want to ask you a few more questions. These questions will be used for statistical
purposes only. THIS INFORMATION WILL BE KEPT STRICTLY CONFIDENTIAL
AND WILL BE DESTROYED UPON COMPLETION OF THE STUDY.


1. How long have you been active in the sportscards and memorabilia market? _______yrs
2. Approximately how many trades (cards or memorabilia) do you make in a typical
month? _______. Note that trades could include Pokemon cards, sportscards, other trading
cards, and sports memorabilia.
Has your trading rate changed over time? Why?




3. Are you a sportscard or sports memorabilia professional dealer?________
4. Gender: 1) Male       2) Female
5. Age ______            Date of Birth ____________
6. What is the highest grade of education that you have completed? (Circle one)
   1) Eighth grade 3) 2-Year College                 5) 4-Year College
   2) High School 4) Other Post-High School          6) Graduate School Education
7. What is your approximate yearly income from all sources, before taxes?
  1) Less than $10,000       5) $40,000 to $49,999
  2) $10,000 to $19,999     6) $50,000 to $74,999
  3) $20,000 to $29,999     7) $75,000 to $99,999
  4) $30,000 to $39,999     8) $100,000 or over




                                              36
Appendix D Subject Instructions for WTP Vickrey Second-Price Auction

Welcome to Lister’s Auctions. The money that I have just given you is yours to keep—
thanks for participating! You now have the opportunity to bid in an auction for the candy
bars on the table.

Auction Rules:
        A sealed bid second-price auction will be used to determine the winner of the
auction. Thus, if your bid of $X is the highest bid and the next highest bid is $X-Z, you win
the auction but only pay $X-Z. Under this bidding mechanism it is best for you to bid your
true value because overbidding may cause you to pay too much and underbidding decreases
your odds of winning the auction.
        I will accept bids until Sunday at 5PM. On Monday morning I will order the bids
from highest to lowest in order to determine the winner.

       For example, if the top four bids are ranked highest to lowest as follows:
              $A
              $B
              $C
              $D
       The bidder who bid $A wins the auction and pays $B.

        Note that there are three candy bars on the table. I am going to have you place
three bids. The first bid will be your bid for 1 of the candy bars—this is called auction 1.
Your second bid will be your bid for 2 of the candy bars—this will be auction 2. Your
third bid will be your bid for all 3 of the candy bars—this will be auction 3.
        But, it is important to note that only one of the three auctions will be for real. To
decide which one is for real, on Sunday night at 5PM I will roll the six-sided on the table.
If a 1 or 2 is rolled, the first auction will be for real; a roll of 3 or 4 and the second
auction will be for real; finally, a roll of 5 or 6 and the third auction will be for real.
        Note that in this setting it is optimal for you to bid your true value in each of the
three auctions.
        Given that the winner of the auction will pay a price equal to the amount of the
second-highest bid, please place your bids below:
1 candy bar $_____ 2 candy bars $_____3 candy bars $______
        After the winner pays me cash or check, the good(s) will be awarded to the
winner (we pay postage). Please sign the dotted line below to verify your bids. Also,
please provide your name, telephone number and mailing address below:


Signature__________________________Printed Name__________________________

Address___________________________ or email_____________________________

Phone#_________________________________




                                             37
Appendix E Conditional Data Analysis

        To provide a robustness test of the unconditional results presented in the text, this
Appendix presents empirical results that condition on factors that may influence trading
rates and bids/offers. For the trading rate data, I estimate the following logit model using
data from Treatments A, D, AP, and DP:
        trade = g(α + β`X),                                                            (1E)
where trade equals 1 if a trade was executed, 0 otherwise; g(•) is the standard logit
function; and X includes subject-specific variables that may affect the propensity to trade.
Variables in X are listed in Table 1 and include the number of trades in a typical month,
years of market experience, yearly income, age, gender, education, and a series of
dichotomous variables indicating the initial endowment point. Estimation of equation (1)
therefore provides insights into the factors that influence a subject’s propensity to trade.
        To provide conditional insights into the auction data, I estimate the following
bid/offer model:
        Y = f(α + β`X),                                                               (2E)
where Y is subject i’s bid or offer; X includes subject-specific variables that may affect
the bid or offer. Variables in X are noted above. For the WTP equation, I use a Tobit
specification since there are zero bids in the data.
        Summary estimates of equations (1E) and (2E) are presented in Table E on the
following page. In the trading specifications contained in columns 1 and 2, the emphasis
is on the sign and magnitude of the response coefficients, as the treatment dummies
merely control for starting points. These empirical results suggest that for certain subject
pools, the propensity to trade and trading intensity are positively related. For nondealers,
the logit coefficient estimate of 0.11 is significantly different from zero at the p < .01
level, suggesting market intensity has a positive influence on the propensity to trade mugs
and chocolate bars. Alternatively, the effect of trading intensity for dealers (logit
coefficient of 0.02) is considerably weaker and not significant at conventional levels (t ≈
1.2). For comparison purposes, the dealer trading intensity coefficient is statistically
different from the nondealer coefficient estimate at conventional levels, which may
suggest that some dealers have had substantial opportunity to interact in a market setting,
rendering the marginal impact of another trade less important. If I examine a measure of
the stock of market experience—the product of trading intensity and years of market
experience—empirical results are qualitatively similarly.16
        The auction specifications presented in columns 3 and 4 focus on bids (and offers)
from the three goods auction (results are not qualitatively different across the one and two
goods specifications). The empirical results strongly support the unconditional findings.
For example, the coefficient estimate of trading intensity in the WTA specification is
significantly different from zero at the p < .01 level and implies that a one standard
deviation increase in intensity (≈ 5.2) is correlated with a $3.70 decrease in WTA.
Results from the WTP specification suggest that market intensity is not an important

16 Note that given the design of the experiment the maximum probability the subject should trade is ½, not
1 as in the logit framework. Thus, the econometric model as specified is not consistent with the alternative
hypothesis that, as experience intensifies, the probability of trading tends to ½. To rectify this potential
shortcoming, I estimated a non-parametric model that involves mixing categorical and continuous kernels.
Results from these models are consonant with the logit estimates.


                                                    38
marginal influence on WTP values. Again, I should note that if I examine a measure of
the stock of market experience empirical results are qualitatively similarly.




Table E Summary Empirical Estimation Results

                    Trading Treatments                                Auction Treatments
                 Dealers         Nondealers                      Nondealers        Nondealers
Variable      Trade Function Trade Function                     WTA Function      WTP Function

Constant         -0.20(1.93)           -3.62(1.46)**             17.86(3.40)**                4.64(3.01)

Trading           0.02(0.02)            0.11 (0.04)**            -0.74(0.13)**                0.09(0.60)
intensity

Yrs. of       -0.06(0.05)                0.04(0.03)                -0.01(0.07)                -0.08(0.09)
market experience

Income            0.14(0.17)             0.26(0.18)                0.05(0.36)                 -0.38(0.41)

Age              0.003(0.03)             0.001(0.02)               -0.03(0.07)                0.01(0.06)

Gender           -2.68(1.53)*            0.09(0.75)                2.10(2.20)                3.79(1.91)**

Education       0.69(0.26)**             0.05(0.21)                -0.02(0.03)                0.17(0.33)

Treatment D -0.98(0.66)                  0.15(0.72)                     ---                        ---

Treatment AP           ---               -1.03(0.82)                    ---                        ---

Treatment DP           ---               -0.55 (0.75)                   ---                        ---

R2                     ---                    ---                      0.37                        ---

N                      58                    121                        55                         47
Notes:
1. In the trading treatments, the dependent variable equals 1 if subject chose to trade, 0 otherwise. In the
    auction treatments, the dependent variable is the individual’s offer (or bid) in the three goods auction. In
    the WTP function, I estimate a Tobit model and present marginal effects computed at the sample means.
    Gender = 1 if male, 0 otherwise; Treatment i = 1 if subject was in treatment i, 0 otherwise.
2. Standard errors are in parentheses beside coefficient estimates.
3. Sample sizes may not match with sample sizes in Table 1 due to some respondents not including income
    responses. Reported results omit these observations. If means are used to fill in the missing observations,
    results are not quantitatively or qualitatively different from the results reported.
4. **(*)Denotes coefficient estimate is significant at the p < .05 (.10) level.




                                                    39
