NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HEALTH INEQUALITY, EDUCATION
AND MEDICAL INNOVATION
Sherry Glied
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Working Paper 9738
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9738
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
May 2003

We would like to thank Angus Deaton, Joshua Graff Zivin, Bo Honoré , Darren Lubotsky, Christina Paxson,
Jonathan Skinner , the seminar participants at the Princeton OPR seminar and the participants of the NBER
Health Care meetings for useful comments. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Sherry Glied and Adriana Lleras-Muney. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Health Inequality, Education and Medical Innovation
Sherry Glied and Adriana Lleras-Muney
NBER Working Paper No. 9738
May 2003
JEL No. I12, I20
ABSTRACT
Recent studies suggest that health inequalities across socio-economic groups in the US are large and
have been growing. We hypothesize that, as in other, non-health contexts, this pattern occurs
because more educated people are better able than to take advantage of technological advances in
medicine than are the less educated. We test this hypothesis by relating education gradients in
mortality with measures medical innovation. We focus on overall mortality and cancer mortality,
examining both the incidence of cancer and survival conditional on disease incidence. We find
evidence supporting the hypothesis that education gradients are steeper for diseases with more
innovation.
Sherry Glied
Department of Health Policy and Management
Mailman School of Public Health
600 West 168th Street, Room 610
New York, NY 10032
and NBER
sag1@columbia.edu
Adriana Lleras-Muney
Department of Economics and Woodrow Wilson School
Princeton University
320 Wallace Hall
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
alleras@princeton.edu

Socioeconomic disparities in health have increased over the past century in the
U.S., the U.K., and continental Europe (Feldman et al., 1989, Pappas et al., 1993,
Prston and Elo, 1994, Black Report, 1980, Kunst et al., 2001, Shkolnikov et al.,
1998). In the U.S., between 1960 and 1986, the age-adjusted mortality rate for white
men who had attended college declined from 5.7 to 2.8 per 1000, while the rate
declined only from 9 to 7.6 for those who had not graduated high school (Pappas et
al., 1993).

Moreover, the principal causes of death and disability generating

socioeconomic differentials today are quite different from those a century ago
(McKeown, 1976; Cutler and Meara, 2002). Over this period, housing, nutrition, and
sanitation have improved; the infectious diseases that were the prime causes of death
before World War I account for little mortality today; and access to effective medical
care for those diseases that remain has become more widespread. Today, gradients are
largest for chronic diseases.
Many factors can generate socioeconomic differences in health status at a point
in time.

What is more difficult to explain is that these differentials have increased

and have shifted among diseases during the past century (Carroll, Davey, Smith, and
Bennett,

1996).

To

our

knowledge

there

is

no

existing

research

that

has

sy stematically investigated the question of why gradients move among diseases and
widen over time.
In this paper we propose and test one explanation for this pattern: the gradient
moves among diseases because more educated people are able to exploit technological
advances in medicine more rapidly. For this reason, the gradient increases where and
when technological change occurs. The most educated make the best initial use of new
information about different aspects of health.

Over time, this information diffuses

along the education gradient. Thus, all else equal, if technological change ceased, we
would expect the gradient to flatten as well.
Our hypothesis is an extension to health of Nelson and Phelps’ (1966) theory
that “the return to education is greater the faster the theoretical level of technology
has been advancing (p. 72).”

A substantial literature examines this pattern in the

labor market (see, for example, Bartel and Sicherman, 1999; Allen, 2001) and in the
agricultural sector (Wozniak, 1984). Our hy pothesis is also closely related to the
sociological conjecture that socioeconomic status is a “fundamental social cause” of
gradients in health (Link and Phelan 1995, Link, et al., 1998). A fundamental cause is

1

one that involves access to resources that can be used to avoid or minimize risks,
influences multiple risk factors, and affects multiple disease outcomes. In this view,
higher socioeconomic status enables people to better exploit new information and
resources.
A recurring difficulty in the literature associating gradients in wages to
technological progress is the difficulty of measuring progress (Griliches, 1994). This
problem also arises in our context and we follow the labor literature in addressing it
by considering several different measures of technological progress. We examine the
effects of these measures in two different datasets that have distinctive strengths and
weaknesses for this analy sis. Although our data are limited in several dimensions, we
find evidence that is generally (though not uniformly) supportive of our hypothesis:
gradients appear to be largest for diseases where there has been more progress.
This paper is organized as follows. We first present a simple formalization of
our proposed explanation of the relationship between education, health, and the rate of
innovation (Section II).

We then present a case study of the HIV epidemic to

illustrate how such gradients may evolve.
In Section III, we describe our measures of progress and our empirical
approach. In section IV we look at gradients in 5-year mortality across all diseases
using data from the National Health Interview Survey (NHIS).

We then relate our

estimated education gradients to disease categories with divergent rates of progress.
In Section IV, we focus on gradients in cancer incidence and 5-y ear survival
(conditional on stage of diagnosis) using data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology
and End Results (SEER) database. Among diseases, cancer is second only to
cardiovascular diseases as a contributor to educational gradients in mortality. Cancer
provides a good area to study because improvements (albeit small) have occurred in
the incidence, diagnosis, and treatment of several cancers, and these improvements
vary substantially among cancer subtypes. 1 Additionally, the SEER data links cancer
diagnosis to cancer outcomes in a consistent way across subtypes, whereas for other
diseases, surveillance data on risk factors cannot be as readily linked to outcomes. 2

1 For example, there have been substantial improvements in survival after diagnosis of early stage colon cancer
(DHHS, 2001). Progress has been made in diagnosing breast and prostate cancer.
2 For example, people with high cholesterol or high blood pressure are at risk of mortality from multiple
diseases, making it difficult to link mortality outcomes for each of these diseases with progress.

2

In Section V, we examine how changes in progress affect changes in the
education gradient.
results.

In Section VI, we evaluate different causal explanations of our

In Section VII, we relate gradients to technological progress prospectively.

Section VIII concludes.

II. – Relating Outcomes to Progress
Many recent studies of health status differentials focus on gradients associated
with education. These studies generally find that education is closely correlated with
health status (even controlling for income), and suggest that the relationship is
causal. 3 Several explanations have been proposed. Grossman (1972) suggested that
education leads to better health by improving the technology for health production.
This might include having access to more information about health risks, making
better use of that information or more effectively searching for high quality health
providers (Rosenzweig, 1995).
Education may also have indirect effects on health by increasing income and
improving access to the resources needed to improve health. The extent to which
education affects health may also depend on the available health care technology,
because better-educated people might be better able to use certain health care
technologies (Goldman and Lackdawalla, 2002).

Rather than understanding the

specific mechanism than generate the education gradient for

particular disease at a

given point in time, this paper’s objective is to understand what makes education
gradients increase over time or shift from one disease to another. To do this, we focus
on the role of education in the diffusion of technological progress.
A formalization of the relationship between health, education and the rate of
innovation
The following formalization closely follows Nelson and Phelps (1966). This
model is only illustrative. It captures the basic features of our hypothesis in a simple
fashion and provides guidelines for our empirical approach.
Suppose that the health H of an individual can be modeled as a function of the
level of technology A that the individual has access to, and other inputs C:
3 For example see Lleras-Muney (2002) shows that increases in education induced by compulsory schooling
laws lead causally to improvements in health status.

3

H = H ( A, C )
The frontier level of technology is given by T(t), where

T (t ) = T0eλt
T(t) is the level of technology if technology is instantaneously diffused and λ is the
exogenous rate of technological progress. Suppose now that the level of technology
available

to

any

individual

depends

on

how

rapidly

individuals

adopt

new

technologies, and that the lag between innovation and adoption is a decreasing
function of education, so that

A(t ) = T (t − w(e)) = T0eλ ( t − w( e ))
where w’(e)<0. This key assumption captures the ideas that were presented in the
introduction -- that is that the more educated “adopt” new technologies at a faster rate
because of better access to information, better use of information, and better capacity
to search for better providers and or treatments. This feature can be generated from
maximization principles simply by assuming differential costs of technology adoption.
Note that this model assumes that individuals have chosen education in previous
periods and that technological changes are unanticipated. In this context, we can
express the health of the individual as:

H = H (T0eλ ( t − w( e )) , C )
The derivative of the health production function with respect to education gives u s
what is known as “the education gradient” in health. It gives the marginal gain in
health induced by an additional unit of schooling. In this model it can be expressed
as:

∂H
∂H
= −λw' (e) A
>0
∂e
∂A
∂H
∂H
= − w' (e) A
>0
∂e∂λ
∂A
Since w’(e) is negative, the model predicts that health is an increasing function
of education and that the rate of return of education is larger the higher the rate of
technological change. We can test this prediction in the data, first by estimating the
disease-specific education gradient, and then by relating the size of the gradient to

4

measures of innovations that proxy for the parameter λ. Note that we think of
technology here in very broad terms: it includes all innovations that affect the manner
and the rate in which we can transform inputs into health. So in this view, new
knowledge is considered innovation.
This simple model predicts that in the absence of technological change (λ = 0),
there should be no difference between the educated and the uneducated. We do not
believe that technology adoption is the only reason why education and health might be
related. For example, even in the absence of progress we can expect education
gradients if the more educated are better at utilizing complex technologies (e.g.
Rosenzweig, 1995 Goldman and Smith, 2001). A more elaborate model could
incorporate these other mechanisms. As the literature review in the introduction
showed, there is a substantial amount of work that has investigated these. We will
therefore focus only on whether higher rates of technological progress are associated
with larger gradients in our empirical work. 4

A Case Study
HIV disease provides an interesting case study of the relationship between
education gradients and medical progress because the disease is new.

At the

beginning of the HIV epidemic, in the early 1980s, before information about
transmission or treatment was available, cases were concentrated among gay men, a
group with substantially higher than average educational attainment: 67% have at least
a college degree (Bozzette, 1998).
Since the early 1980s, however, there have been markedly different trends in
the HIV/AIDS epidemic for groups with different levels of education.

Behavioral

changes among gay men began immediately after the method of transmission of the
human immunodeficiency virus was identified in 1982.

In the largest study of

transmissions in that period, new infections in this group fell from 20.8% of a
susceptible cohort in 1982 to 2.1% of that cohort in 1983 (Centers for Disease
Control, 1987).

By the late 1980s, new cases among gay men were well below

4 Note that there is no sense in which there exist general equilibrium effects in the health model: if everyone
obtains more schooling everyone’s health improves. While the income returns to education are determined by
the labor market, the returns to education in health are only determined by the individual health production
function. In this respect our theory differs from the “fundamental causes” theory in that it is not a zero sum
game.

5

projected rates, while rates among IV drug users were at or above projected levels,
suggesting that there had been little behavioral change in this group (Bloom and
Glied, 1992). As early as 1983, new AIDS cases began to be concentrated in lowincome areas (Fordy ce, 1998).
The effects of new information on the gradient in HIV incidence were later
magnified by the effects of new treatment technologies on HIV mortality.

We use

data from the Centers for Disease Control WONDER system to map annual death rates
among the population living with AIDS by exposure category (Figure 1). There were
two major treatment advances in HIV care over this period. After a short period of
clinical trials, the FDA approved the first effective AIDS drug, AZT, in 1987 (Brown,
1987). A second, more effective, group of drugs, the highly active antiretroviral
therapies (HAART) based on protease inhibitors, was introduced beginning in the late
1990s.

The FDA approved the first HAART-related protease inhibitor, invirase, in

December 1995 and the development of combination therapies that made use of these
drugs followed over the subsequent 18 months (McGinley and Womack, 1995;
Goldman and Lakdawalla, 2001). As Figure 1 shows, the introduction of AZT and of
HAART drugs was associated with a divergence in the death rate between gay men and
other transmission groups. 5 This pattern suggests that the more educated group was
quicker in taking advantage of the new treatment technology.
Case studies of specific populations support this finding (see Appendix Table
1).

Crystal,

Sambamoorthi,

and

Merzel

report

that

there

were

significant

socioeconomic differences (measured by race and exposure group) in receipt of AZT
in a cohort studied in 1987-1988, but that these differences had largely disappeared by
1989-1990.

Two studies examine changing socioeconomic status disparities in

HAART between 1996 and 1998 (Cunningham et al, 2001; Sambamoorthi et al, 2001).
Cunningham et al. find that the gap between the percentage of college educated HIVinfected people who had ever used HAART compared to the percentage among those
with less than a high school degree shrank form 27 points in 1996 (49:22) to 14 points
in 1998 (79:65). Sambamoorthi et al, 2001 find a similar pattern in receipt of HAART
over time by race and exposure group.

5 Note that these death rates are conditional on incidence of AIDS. Our data do not capture the extent to which
people with HIV began taking these drugs before developing AIDS symptoms and never progressed to AIDS.

6

Today, lower educational attainment is highly correlated with mortality among
AIDS patients (Schechter, 1994).

More highly educated patients are more likely to

adhere to therapy (Goldman and Smith, 2002), have greater access to antiretroviral
therapy and protease inhibitors (Sorvillo, 1999), are more likely to participate in
clinical trials (Seltzer, 1989), and have far more knowledge about AIDS (Sorenson,
1999).

The HIV case study provides an interesting example of how education may

interact with new treatment technologies.

Several other case studies similarly

document more rapid diffusion of new health innovations among more highly educated
people relative to less educated people (see, for example, Link et al. (1998)). In the
next sections, we attempt to find more sy stematic evidence for this pattern.

III. –Progress measures and empirical approach
Measures of progress
There is no consensus about how to measure either progress or the relative
importance of progress (Allen, 2001; Bartel and Sicherman, 1999).

Instead, we

compute multiple measures of innovation for each of the 55 diseases in the NHISMCD and the 81 cancer sites in the SEER data. Table 1 describes these measures. Not
all progress measures are available in both datasets.
Measurement of progress by disease is particularly problematic because
progress in the prevention or treatment of one disease can leave a larger population
susceptible

to

another

disease.

Thus,

the

most

straightforward

measures

of

technological progress are those that describe innovation in survival conditional on
diagnosis of a disease. 6
1. Number of drugs
The SEER data contain information on survival conditional on diagnosis. We
can link these data to information on the number of drugs approved by the FDA to
treat a particular cancer (SEER), a direct measure of the rate of pharmaceutical
innovation for each particular cancer site. 7

We cannot assign drugs to disease

6 Note that progress in the treatment or prevention of other diseases may still affect outcomes conditional on
diagnosis if the newly susceptible population is different (for example, more or less fragile) from the original
population.
7 As in Lleras-Muney and Lichtenberg (2002) or Lichtenberg (2002), we use the number of new active
ingredients approved by the FDA rather than the number of new drugs, which we consider a better measure of
innovation in drug treatments (the FDA also approves generic equivalents and new dosages of the same drug

7

categories in the NHIS because the match between drugs and causes of death is highly
imperfect, since drugs are used for conditions that can lead to death from multiple
causes. For example, drugs to control diabetes can reduce death rates from diabetes,
heart disease, stroke, kidney failure, and other conditions.
2. Change in 5-year survival rates
Using the SEER data, we compute the change in the 5-year survival rate
conditional on diagnosis. Like the drug measure, this measure is related to innovation
that affects survival conditional on diagnosis. Unlike drugs, which only capture a
specific type of innovation, this measure is more comprehensive: progress in surgical
procedures, radiation and other aspects will be reflected in the survival rate. However
note that this measure is also affected by innovations in diagnostic technology that
lead to cancers being diagnosed earlier. 8

Over this period, survival conditional on

diagnosis has increased.
3. Change in age-adjusted mortality
A broader measure of progress, which can be confounded by changes in disease
incidence, is the change in the age-adjusted mortality rate. The National Cancer
Institute provides a measure of the trend in age-adjusted mortality from each type of
cancer: the estimated annual percent change (EAPC), which is the coefficient from a
log-linear regression of mortality rates on calendar year. The EAPC is positive if ageadjusted mortality increased and negative if age-adjusted mortality decreased;
therefore a negative value for EAPC constitutes progress. Across all 81-cancer sites
there has been progress in cancer mortality over this period.
For the NHIS data we calculate the same measure (EAPC) of age-adjusted
mortality using data from the compressed mortality files provided by the CDC. The
compressed mortality files provide us with age-adjusted mortality rates for whites for
each year from 1986 to 1995 that we use to calculate the EAPC using the same metho d
that the National Cancer Institute uses.
4. Changes in age-adjusted incidence

for example). For each cancer site we compute the number of drugs that exist in the market as of 1999. These
data were constructed using several sources: First Data Bank provided a list of the drugs that are used to treat
cancers, and the date of FDA approval of the active ingredient in each drug was kindly provided by Frank
Lichtenberg.
8 We examine this directly by evaluating changes in the gradient in stage of diagnosis, discussed in footnote xx
below, and by controlling for stage of diagnosis in the regression analyses.

8

A final measure of technological change is innovation in disease prevention.
New knowledge associated with disease prev ention should allow people to avoid
getting a disease in the first place. Unfortunately, we do not have any direct measures
of information about disease risk factors.
The efficiency with which epidemiologists are able to identify risk factors for
disease increases as the proportion of all susceptible people who develop the disease
approaches 0.5 (Rothman and Greenland, 1998).

In our context, the prevalence of

every disease or disease subtype in the population is well below 0.5.

This suggests

that the amount of available information about risk factors for a disease or disease
subtype will be increasing in the incidence of that disease. 9

We conjecture that as

disease incidence increases, information (and gradients) also increase.

This pattern

should hold even if increases in disease incidence are simply a consequence of
improvements in the prevention and treatment of other diseases.

We examine this

interpretation of changes in incidence in Section VII below.
The National Cancer Institute provides a measure of the trend in age-adjusted
incidence: the estimated annual percentage change in age-adjusted incidence (EAPCI).
In light of our argument above, positive EAPCI values constitute proxies for progress
in the identification of disease risk factors. Overall, incidence rates for most cancer
subtypes have increased.

Note that there are multiple reasons why incidence could

increase including advances in diagnostic technology, increases in environmental risk
or in progress in the prevention and treatment of other diseases (who leave more
people alive and susceptible to cancer). Our conjecture that information about risk
factors increases with increasing prevalence should hold regardless of the causes for
increasing incidence. 10 Innovation measures by disease are listed in appendices A and
B.
While these measures are related to one another, the correlation among them is
not very high, suggesting that they all describe distinct components of progress (Table
2). Changes in incidence and mortality are positively and highly correlated. Increases
in survival and in mortality are negatively correlated, but survival and incidence are
not highly correlated. Both incidence and mortality are positively correlated with new

9 In a preliminary search of Medline, we found that publications on the etiology of diseases are increasing in
disease prevalence.
10
Note that as information about risk factors diffuses incidences will fall, and so we would expect incidence
to diminish

9

drugs, which may indicate that pharmaceutical manufacturers target diseases with
rising incidence (as we discuss below). Drugs are positively correlated with changes
in survival.
Empirical implementation Across Diseases and Disease Subtypes
Our hypothesis suggests that gradients in education should be greatest
where medical progress has been greatest.

Our empirical strategy to evaluate this

hypothesis consists in estimating education gradients (by disease or disease subtype)
and relating these gradients to measures of medical progress.

Although there exist

different measures of the gradient, in this study we alway s define gradients as the
difference (rather than the ratio) in health outcomes between educated and uneducated
individuals. We consider three empirical specifications.
In the most flexible, specification, which we employ in both the NHIS and
SEER data, we estimate separate regressions for each disease (NHIS) or cancer site
(SEER), including a full set of controls,
(1) P (died = 1)ij = β 0 + β1 j educationij + X ijγ + eij , j = 1...n .
where i indexes individuals, and j indexes the n different diseases. We use the
coefficient on education from each regression as the dependent variable in the second
stage regression that contains as many observations as disease gradients (n),
(2) β j = δ 0 + δ1 progress j + ε j , j = 1...n
According to our hypothesis, we expect δ 1 to be negative: larger progress translates
into more negative gradients. In this fully flexible form, none of the variables are
constrained to be the same across sites.
Unfortunately, because of the very large number of dummy variables in our
SEER specification, there is little statistical power available to identify results using
this specification in these data so for these data, we begin with two less flexible
specifications. 11 In the least flexible specification, we estimate a linear probability
model of the probability of dying within 5 y ears after diagnosis (conditional on stage
at diagnosis), where education is interacted with progress:

11 I n p r i n c i p l e , t h e d u m m y v a r i a b l e s a l o n e f u l l y i d e n t i f y 7 3 , 7 8 2 o b s e r v a t i o n s , a n d f o r m a n y c a n c e r s i t e s w e
have far fewer observations available (see Appendix 1).

10

(3) P (died = 1) = β 0 + β1education + β 2education * progress + Xγ + e .
Our model suggests β 2 should be negative. Note that in this specification we constrain
the coefficients on all variables to be the same across all cancer sites, except that we
allow education to vary with our measure of medical progress.
In a second, preferred specification, we free up the functional form by
separating the two stages. Initially, we run a single individual level regression,
including a full set of controls and interacting education with cancer site dummies and
stage of diagnosis dummies:
(4) P (died ij = 1) = β 0 +

81

81

j =1

j =1

∑ β j educationi * cancerj + ∑θ j stage j * cancerj + X ijγ + eij

where i indexes individuals, and j indexes the 81 different cancers. As with the fully
flexible form, the resulting 81 coefficients (labeled β j ) from the interaction terms
(education*cancer site) become the dependent variable in a second stage regression
where medical progress related to that cancer site is the independent variable:
(5) β j = δ 0 + δ1 progress j + ε j , j = 1...81
In this specification, the effects of education and stage are allowed to vary by cancer
site, but all other variables are constrained to have the same effect across sites. As in
the fully flexible specification, measures of progress are not included when estimating
education gradients, eliminating the possible endogeneity of the progress measures
with respect to the probability of dying.

IV- Gradients by Disease – Results from the NHIS
Data
We first measure education gradients in mortality using the NHIS-MCD files.
The NHIS is an annual cross sectional survey of the U.S. population. All respondents
18 years of age or older in the 1986-1994 surveys were subsequently matched to the
Mortality

Cause

of

Death

(MCD)

files

from

1986

to

1995.

Following

the

epidemiological literature, we focus on five-year mortality and, to avoid censoring,
use only observations from the 1986-1990 NHIS interviews. The data contain several
socio-economic variables including y ears of education and family income, and the

11

mortality data contain information on all causes of death. For purposes of comparison
with the cancer data described below, we restrict the NHIS sample to whites ages 40
and

above.

In

all,

our

sample

from

the

NHIS-MCD

files

contains

164,373

observations. Summary statistics for the NHIS-MCD data are reported in Table 3.
The Effect of Education on Mortality
We first examine the overall effect of education on the probability of surviving
5 years.

We estimate the model in (1) above where the X includes Hispanic status,

gender, marital status, interview y ear and single years-of-age dummies. 12

Table 4

documents the gradient in education for all-cause mortality. The effect of education is
negative and significant, slightly larger for males than for females but this difference
is not statistically significant. At the mean, these coefficients imply that one more
year of education reduces 5-y ear mortality by about 5%. Table 5 shows the results by
disease category for broad categories. We find a negative effect of education o n
mortality from cancer, respiratory system diseases, cardiovascular diseases, digestive
sy stem diseases and other diseases. The effect of education on mortality from diabetes
or infectious diseases is negative but not statistically significant.
The Effect of Progress on the Gradient
We next relate the education gradients by disease with progress in mortality for
that disease. Figure 2 shows the relationship for broad disease categories. The figure
shows

(excluding

digestive

and

genitourinary

diseases),

consistent

with

our

hypothesis, that the gradient is largest for diseases where mortality has decreased
most.
We next examine the relationship using 55 detailed categories of death. 13 For
each cause of death we estimate the effect of education on the probability of dying in
the next five y ears as in tables 4 and 5. We then match coefficients from these
regressions to changes in disease-specific mortality. Table 6 presents results from
regressions that are weighted by the number of deaths from that disease in our sample
(column 1) and by the inverse of the variance of the first stage coefficient (column 2).

12 C o x p r o p o r t i o n a l h a z a r d m o d e l s y i e l d e d s i m i l a r r e s u l t s b u t g i v e n t h a t t h e d a t a a r e l a r g e a n d t h a t w e i n c l u d e
many variables, these estimations take a very long times to converge. We therefore present linear probability
models instead.
13 T h e N H I S - M C D r e c o d e s I C D 9 c a u s e s o f d e a t h i n t o 7 2 c a t e g o r i e s . W e u s e t h i s c l a s s i f i c a t i o n s W e e x c l u d e d
deaths from external causes, deaths from birth complications, deaths from ill-defined causes, and causes of
death for which we did not observe any deaths. See appendix B for a detailed list of the causes of death we
use.

12

When weighting by the number of deaths, we find that the gradient in education
is larger and statistically significant for diseases where there has been more progress.
Medical progress, measured as changes in mortality, explains about 13.6% of the
gradient

in

education

0.0000612*1.067/0.0048).

(evaluated

at

the

mean

for

progress,

i.e.,

When weighting by the standard error of the coefficient,

however, the result is negative but much smaller and not statistically significant.
In order to investigate why the different weights strongly affect the results, we
plotted education gradients and their standard errors against the number of deaths in
that disease (Figure 3). Figure 3 shows that both gradients and standard errors are
larger for more common diseases. That the standard errors increases with the number
of deaths is not surprising: the variance of a binary random variable is (1-p)p, and
since p (the probability of dying, i.e. the number of deaths divided by population) is
alway s less than 0.5, the variance increases with the number of deaths. But note that
gradients increase with the number of deaths. Therefore weightin g by the standard
error leads us to place the most weight on rare causes of death. We conclude that the
regressions that are weighted with the number of deaths are more accurate.
Note that this exercise has uncovered an interesting pattern that is consistent
with our hypothesis about progress in incidence.

Education gradients appear to

increase with disease incidence. We discuss this pattern more extensively below.

V. Gradients by Disease Subtype – Results from the SEER
Data
Our cancer data come from the SEER Cancer Incidence Public Use Database
collected by the National Cancer Institute. The data contain information on every
person diagnosed with cancer from 1973 to 1998 in 9 SEER registries. The SEER
registries are composed of several counties located in San Francisco, Connecticut,
Detroit, Hawaii, Iowa, New Mexico, Seattle, Utah and Atlanta. 14 Information on vital
status was recorded for all individuals in the sample as of 1998. These data allow us
to look at mortality rates conditional on cancer diagnosis. To avoid censoring in our
analysis of 5-y ear mortality, we limit our sample to those diagnosed with cancer no

14 T h e S e e r d a t a i n c l u d e t w o m o r e r e g i s t r i e s ( S a n J o s e a n d L A ) b u t w e e x c l u d e t h e m s i n c e d a t a a r e o n l y
available from 1992 to 1998 for these registries.

13

later

than

1993.

The

SEER

data

contain

a

large

number

of

observations

(N=2,556,432) so we can perform analy ses of death rates within detailed disease
category (sites).
We focus on two outcome measures in the cancer data: 5-year mortality rates
and cancer incidence rates. We focus most of our attention on gradients in mortality
rates (conditional on stage of diagnosis), because these gradients are relatively
independent of trends in the incidence of other diseases.
Summary statistics for the final SEER sample used in this paper are in Table 7.
Average age at diagnosis for this sample is around 70. About 2/3 of the population
died within 5 years of diagnosis. The most common cancers are cancers of the
digestive system, of the respiratory system and of the genital system. Note that our
sample is relatively old because we exclude people born after 1925. 15
Education Measures
Unfortunately,
educational status.

the

SEER

registry

data

do

not

include

information

on

Instead, we use two distinct proxies for educational status –

compulsory schooling laws and average education level by cohort and registry .
The SEER data contain information about state of birth, y ear of birth, gender
and race. We can therefore match individuals to compulsory attendance and child
labor laws in place in their state of birth when they were 14 y ears of age. Several
papers have shown that these laws had an impact on educational attainment. 16 These
laws, which implicitly specified the number of years that a child had to attend school,
serve to identify the effect of education. 17 The implicit number of compulsory y ears
ranges from 0 to 10 for the cohorts we study.
By including laws in place of education in a model of mortality/health, we are
estimating a reduced form equation. The advantage of this method is that we can argue
that the effects we measure are causal effects of education. Note however that we are
possibly identifying the effect of education only for those affected by these laws, i.e.
those at the lower end of the distribution of education. Because compulsory schooling
15 T h e a v e r a g e a g e a t d i a g n o s i s i s a r o u n d 6 2 i n t h e f u l l S E E R d a t a . O u r s a m p l e i s o l d e r b u t n o t m u c h m o r e .
16 S e e A c e m o g l u a n d A n g r i s t ( 1 9 9 9 ) , A n g r i s t a n d K r u e g e r ( 1 9 9 1 ) , L l e r a s - M u n e y ( 2 0 0 2 b ) , M a r g o a n d F i n n e g a n ,
(1996) and Schmidt (1996).
17 T h e d a t a o n c o m p u l s o r y a t t e n d a n c e a n d c h i l d l a b o r l a w s w e r e c o l l e c t e d f r o m m u l t i p l e s o u r c e s ( S e e L l e r a s Muney, 2002, for details). We use only two laws: the age at which a child had to enter school and the age at
which he could get a work permit and leave school. The difference between these two variables measures the
implicit number of years a child had to attend school.

14

laws were most effective in the first half of the 20 t h century and they only affected
whites (see Lleras-Muney 2002a) we restrict our attention to white cohorts born
between 1901 and 1925.
As an alternative, we also match individuals with average education levels in
their cohort, gender, and registry. This measure of education can be calculated from
the census in 1970, 1980 and 1990. We match individuals to education by decade, i.e.
individuals diagnosed in the 1970s are matched to the average education in their
cohort, gender, and registry, calculated from the 1970 census. Unfortunately mean
education and income are not available for all possible cells. Therefore we must
further restrict our sample to those individuals for whom average education and
income is available.
An advantage of the registry-level average education proxy is that we can also
calculate total family income for the same cells. We can, therefore, include this
income control in the regressions. A problem with this proxy, however, is that it may
also capture average characteristics of the registry or it may be correlated with
unobservable characteristics, such as rates of time preference (Fuchs, 1982). Finally
when using average education, the other coefficients in the regression will most surely
be biased since the error term now contains the difference between individual and
mean education, which is most likely correlated with other covariates in our model.
Throughout the cancer analyses, we provide results using each of these two
proxies. Although there are many reasons as we just discussed why the two measures
might provide different answers, we will feel more confident about our results to the
extent that both measures provide similar estimates. The two proxies both predict
income (about equally well), but they are not highly correlated with each other. The
simple correlation between them is 0.12.

Using the Census data, we estimate

individual education levels as a function of registry-cohort level average education
and compulsory schooling laws. The result is:
Education = 0.030 registry mean education + 0.070 compulsory schooling + controls
(0.004)

(0.010)
2

where controls include female, age, age , cohort, state of birth, registry, census y ear.

The Effect of Education on Outcomes

15

In the SEER data, we examine the overall effect of education on the probability
of dying 5 years conditional on being diagnosed with cancer. We estimate the model
in (1) above where X includes 47 state of birth, 24 cohort dummies, 8 registry
dummies, 2 decade dummies, 4 stage of diagnosis dummies, and 80 dummies for
cancer sites. 18 Since we include state of birth and cohort dummies, the effect of
compulsory schooling laws is identified from variations in the laws within states over
time.
These results are reported in Table 8.

The effect of education on overall

mortality is negative and significant, using either the compulsory schooling or mean
education specifications. The effect of education is greater for cancers affecting men
than for those affectin g women.

This finding is consistent with other studies (e.g.,

Elo and Preston, 1994), which also show that the effect of education on health is
greater for men than for women. The effect of education on the probability of dying
from cancer that we measure here is greater than that suggested by the NHIS all-cause
data, but notice that in the NHIS we are estimating unconditional probabilities,
whereas everyone in the SEER data has cancer.
Using the compulsory schooling laws, we estimate two-stage IV estimates of
the effect of education in Table 8. Using the census we can estimate the first stage
equation of the effect of compulsory schooling on education. Since the model is
exactly identified and provided that we include the same covariates in both
estimations, the Two-Sample IV estimate of the effect of education on mortality can
be calculated as the ratio of the reduced form equation estimate and the first stage
estimate. 19 We estimate the first stage using the 1960, 1970 and 1980 censuses and
find that the effect of compulsory schooling on education is 0.079. Using this
information we calculate that the TSIV estimate of the effect of education on
mortality is somewhere between –0.02 and –0.05. At the means, this coefficient
suggests that one more year of schooling reduces the probability of dying postdiagnosis by 3-7%. The TSIV estimates are close (somewhat larger) to those found by
Elo and Preston (1996) who report that the effect of one more y ears of schooling on 5year (all cause) mortality is also between 0.02 and 0.05. Since our objective in this
paper is not to provide accurate estimates of the effect of education on cancer, bu t
18 C o x p r o p o r t i o n a l h a z a r d m o d e l s y i e l d e d s i m i l a r r e s u l t s b u t g i v e n t h a t t h e d a t a a r e l a r g e a n d t h a t w e i n c l u d e
many variables, these estimations take a very long times to converge. We therefore present linear probability
models instead.

16

rather to look at whether the education gradient is related to progress, in the
remainder of the paper we will present reduced form estimates of the effect of
compulsory schooling on outcomes. 20
Next, we look at cancers according to a primary classification of 16 types and
estimate the effect of education separately for each type of cancer (Table 9).
effect of education on cancer survival differs by type of cancer.

The

For example, the

effect of education on survival with urinary sy stem cancers is about 5 times greater
than the effect on survival with respiratory cancers.

We also find that significant

gradients by education exist for cancers of the respiratory system, genital system,
urinary system and for buccal cavity and pharynx cancers. We do not find statistically
significant effects for other cancers. The results are similar for the two measures of
education.
We next examine the effects of education on the incidence of cancer (Table 10).
We calculate annual incidence rates by cancer site, interview y ear, gender cohort and
state of birth. In the SEER data we count the number of people diagnosed with cancer
by interview y ear, gender, cohort, state of birth and cancer site. Alternatively, we
calculate rates by cancer site, census year, gender and registry. We then divided by
the population in that group obtained from the 1970, 1980 and 1990 censuses.

We

generate estimates of the population for each gender/cohort/state-of-birth/site cell
using a linear time trend.

We then match these incidence rates with our education

measures.
Incidence rates provide a measure of the progress in knowledge about cancer
risk factors. However, changes in cancer incidence (both overall, by education level,
and by cancer subtype) also reflect progress in the incidence and treatment of other
diseases, particularly cardiovascular disease.

For example, increases in the age-

adjusted incidence of cancer in a group may simply reflect a decline in cardiovascular
disease mortality for that group. We hypothesize that changes in cancer incidence are
likely to be associated with behavioral changes – or changes in the incidence of other
diseases -- rather than changes in medical treatment.

We find that increases in

compulsory schooling lead to significant reductions in cancer incidence for all cancers

19 T h i s m e t h o d w a s u s e d b y D e e a n d E v a n s ( 1 9 9 9 ) .
20 T h e i n c l u s i o n o f s t a t e - o f - b i r t h a n d c o h o r t s p e c i f i c v a r i a b l e s ( s u c h a s i n f a n t m o r t a l i t y , n u m b e r o f h o s p i t a l s
per mile and number of doctors per capita in state-of -birth at age 14) did not affect the results. Results
available upon request.

17

and for several specific types of cancer.

These effects are large (one more year of

education decreases the incidence rate by about 40%). By contrast, we find that
increases in mean education at the registry level have little impact on incidence. 21
The difference between the compulsory schooling and mean education results
may be an artifact of the aggregation process. In computing incidence rates, we use
data that are aggregated.

The aggregation is much greater using mean education

(N=20,348) than using compulsory schooling laws (N=336,509).

Results using

compulsory schooling include lots of cells that each contain very few people, while
results that use mean education have fewer cells but more people in each cell.
We also find that higher mean education is associated with later age at
diagnosis, although we do not find this result using the compulsory schooling measure
(not shown). These coefficients are small: the largest effect of mean schooling
indicates that a one year increase in mean schooling induces a .1% reduction in the
age at diagnosis, the implied effect of education is larger – about 1.3% – since mean
schooling is only partially related to education.
This result may at first appear surprising since more educated people are likely
to be diagnosed early. 22

However more educated people are likely to be older, not

younger, when they get cancer. Given that the more educated are diagnosed at older
ages, we conclude that the apparent survival advantage of more educated people is not
simply due to earlier diagnosis.
To summarize, our results suggest that education has significant effects on all
cause morality, on the age of incidence of cancer, stage of cancer diagnosis, and
survival after cancer diagnosis and (by some measures) on the incidence of cancer. In
the SEER data, more educated people are likely to be older when they are diagnosed
with cancer, they are more likely to survive for 5 years after diagnosis, and they may
be less likely to get cancer at all. Most of these results are similar regardless of which
measure of education is used.
The Effect of Progress on the Gradient in Mortality

21 H i g h e r m e a n e d u c a t i o n o r c o m p u l s o r y s c h o o l i n g i s a l s o c o r r e l a t e d w i t h a g r e a t e r p r o b a b i l i t y t h a t c a n c e r i s
localized when diagnosed. Localized cancers are likely to be more treatable than cancers found after they have
spread. Using the coefficient on compulsory schooling, we can calculate that one more year of schooling
results in an 11% increase in the probability that the cancer is localized at time of diagnosis.
22 T h e c a l c u l a t i o n i s n o t r e l i a b l e h o w e v e r s i n c e , u n l i k e t h e c a s e o f c o m p u l s o r y s c h o o l , w e c a n n o t a r g u e t h a t
mean education is really an instrument for education.

18

As we had done for the NHIS, we next relate the education gradients in
morality by disease with measures of progress for that disease. In this case, we use
the three specifications described above (see Tables 11-13).
The first panel of Table 11 provides the results of the most constrained
specification where progress is measured by reductions in age-adjusted mortality.
Education improves survival in both education proxy specifications, but the results for
mortality progress are contradictory – the mean education measure suggests that the
education gradient is steeper where progress has been greater, but the compulsory
The 2 n d panel shows the results where

schooling measure shows the opposite.

progress is measured as information about risk factors, proxied by age-adjusted
incidence.

Here, using either measure of education, we find that progress increases

the gradient in education. This implies that the cancer survival gradient in education
is steepest for those cancers whose incidence is increasing. This result is consistent
with our earlier finding in the NHIS that gradients were larger for more prevalent
diseases. We comment again on this result below.
The third panel, which uses our preferred measure of progress, increases in
survival after diagnosis, shows that the education gradient in survival is steepest for
those diseases where survival is improving. The final panel shows results for drugs,
which also have their effect primarily on survival after diagnosis. Here too, we find
that the education gradient is steepest for those diseases where there has been th e
most progress.
Table 12 shows results for our preferred flexible specification. The results in
this specification for progress measured as incidence, survival, or drugs are similar in
direction

and

magnitude

to

those

in

the

constrained

specification,

although

significance levels are somewhat lower. Table 13 shows the results for the fully
flexible specification. Again, the results are largely in the same direction as those in
the more constrained specification but, as we had expected based on the large number
of dummy variables, the estimates are much smaller in magnitude and are mainly
statistically insignificant.
All these results are weighted by the inverse of the variance of the estimated
education coefficient. Unlike in the NHIS, results weighting by the number of
individuals with the disease give similar results (See Appendix Table 4). Intuitively,
this is because in the SEER data the variance of the estimated coefficient of education

19

is estimated using a different sample for each disease: diseases with larger incidence
have more precisely estimated coefficients. Additionally, note that the probability of
death is in general larger than 0.5 so that again if we weight by the number of deaths,
we place more weight on larger diseases. Consequently in the SEER, any weighting
scheme places relatively more weight on cancers that are more common.
We next examine the effect of progress on incidence (Table 14).

Using our

preferred, flexible specification, we find that again that gradients in incidence become
larger (more negative) when there is progress in information about risk factors,
proxied by increasing disease incidence.
We also find that gradients in incidence become larger (more negative) when
survival rates improve (or when more drugs are introduced).

If pharmaceutical

companies targeted their efforts toward diseases that particularly affected more
educated people, we would expect to see a positive correlation between drugs and the
gradient.

Instead, we find that highly educated people are less likely to get those

cancers where we observe the largest improvements in survival. This result provides
important evidence suggesting that technological progress drives the gradient, rather
than the gradient driving technological progress.

VI – Changes in Progress and in the Gradient
Our model suggests that progress affects the gradient because more educated
people are quicker to take advantage of progress.

New technologies later diffuse to

less educated people. This theory has implications about the relationship between the
gradient and the timing of progress. It suggests that more recent progress should lead
to widening in the gradient, while progress y ears earlier should lead to a narrowing of
the gradient. The HIV case study is consistent with this pattern. It also suggests that
changes in the gradient should be related to changes in progress over time.
We have limited data to test these secondary hypotheses.

Because of the

construction of the SEER education measures, they vary only as cohorts age and there
is much less variation in predicted education among older cohorts than among younger
cohorts, confounding efforts to examine changes in the gradient over time. The NHIS
data cover only a very short time span (1986-1994), but we can conduct preliminary
analyses of these data.

20

We estimate two regressions using the NHIS gradients we estimated earlier
(Table 15).

First, we examine whether more recent or older progress has greater

effects on the gradient. We examine how recent progress and older progress affect the
gradient measured in 1990. We find that only recent progress leads to a widening in
the gradient.

Earlier progress appears to have only a very small, negative effect on

the size of the gradient. Second, we examine whether the change in the education
gradient by disease is related to the change in progress for that disease. We find that
gradients widened most for those diseases where progress was greatest. These results
are both consistent with our theory .

VII. Incidence, gradients and technology: are they related?
We conjectured that information about risk factors would be most efficiently
obtained for diseases with higher prevalence.

Thus, we expect that progress in the

discovery of disease risk factors is likely to be increasing in disease incidence.
Similarly, prior research has suggested that technological progress in treatment is
related to the burden of a disease (Lichtenberg and Waldfogel, 2001). Thus, another
way to examine our hypothesis is to see whether factors that predict future rates of
technological progress also predict future gradients.

An observation that future

progress and future gradients are both asso ciated with the initial prevalence of a
disease would provide indirect evidence of our hypothesis.
We construct this indirect test by examining the relationship between the
number of deaths in 1980 (calculated from the Mortality detail files in 1980) and the
change in age-adjusted mortality for that disease from 1985 to 1995, or alternatively
from 1990 to 1999 (using CDC data).

We likewise look at the relationship between

the number of deaths in 1980 by disease and the size of the education gradient for that
disease in the NHIS from 1986 to 1990.
We present the results using un-weighted regressions, and regressions that
weight by the inverse of the variance of the estimate of the rate of progress EAPC
(recall that this is a regression of mortality rates on time). 23

Here, the weighted

regressions place more emphasis on those diseases where the mortality trend is more
precisely measured.
23 W e c a l c u l a t e d t h e v a r i a n c e o f t h e E A P C u s i n g t h e D e l t a m e t h o d .

21

Results of these analyses are reported in Table 16. The results suggest that the
higher the number for deaths in a given disease in 1980 the greater the percentage
decline in age-adjusted mortality from 1985 to 1995. The effect is negative and, when
weighting by the inverse of the variance, statistically significant. On the other hand,
the number of deaths appears to be unrelated to progress in the later 1990-1998
period. Most interestingly, the education gradient 1986-1990 is always larger for
diseases with more deaths in 1980 (results are significant irrespective of weighing
scheme). Finally, the number of drugs 1986-1996 is positively correlated with number
of deaths in 1980 but the coefficient is not significant.
Overall these results do suggest that education gradients and progress are
driven by the same factors, in particular incidence. This suggests that information
about diseases is increasing in disease incidence. Innovation in treatment may also be
occurring more for diseases that are common or are becoming common.

VIII—Mechanisms by Which Education May Affect Outcomes
Our results are largely (though not uniformly ) consistent with our hypothesis,
suggesting that education may enable people to make more effective use of
technological progress in reducing mortality or in surviving cancer.

They do not,

however, explain the mechanisms through which this might occur.
The existing literature on disparities in cancer treatment between whites and
blacks and among education groups suggests a broad array of mechanisms that might
generate the relationship we observe (Shavers and Brown, 2002).

It describes

differences between groups in receipt of radiation treatment following surgery,
staging

of

cancer,

nature

of

radiation

therapy

received,

receipt

of

adjuvant

chemotherapy, receipt of surgery, and aggressiveness of treatment. Groups also differ
in the rate of referral to oncologists (Earle et al., 2002), the rate at which they
followed up on screening mammograms (Strzelcyk and Dignan, 2002), and the rate at
which they participate in clinical trials (Svensson CK, 1989).

There are many ways

that education could generate these differences. Education might have direct effects
(for example, by making it less difficult for people to understand consent procedures
in clinical trials or to follow new health information) or indirect effects (for example,
because poorly educated people are less likely to have health insurance or more likely

22

to live in low income areas where oncologists are unavailable and environmental risk
factors are greater).
We do not have strong tests that allow us to distinguish between these
hypotheses, but we consider two here. First, we compare the effects of education with
and without controls for average family income. The results for both the SEER and
the NHIS are reported in the first 2 columns of Table 17. We find that average family
income has an independent effect on cancer survival. However, we also find that the
relationship between the education gradient in survival and measures of progress
persists even when adding controls for family income.
Next, we compare the effects of education for those diagnosed before and after
Medicare eligibility (age 65) in the SEER data.

For the population below Medicare

eligibility age, education may be related to differences in health insurance and access
to medical care, but this should be less true of the population 65 and over. Note that
because our sample is quite old, the sample of people diagnosed before age 65 is
relatively small. Nonetheless, we find effects that go in the same direction for both
samples and are significant for both sub samples. Overall, however, the correlations
between the gradient and progress appear, if anything, greater for the population with
Medicare than for the population below age 65.
Another possible mechanism is that it is not education per se but some other
characteristic of people who become educated that drives our results. In this respect,
we note that the results in the SEER that show the effects of education measured as
compulsory schooling and as mean education are quite similar in almost every case.
The compulsory schooling measure can reasonably viewed as showing a causal effect
of education here, particularly in examining the effects of survival after diagnosis of
cancer.

These results suggest that education itself, rather than some other

characteristic of those who choose to become educated, has an effect on cancer
survival.

IX. Conclusions and Limitations
This study finds some evidence to support our hypothesis: gradients appear to
be larger for diseases where there has been more progress. While we do not find that

23

all measures of progress are correlated with education gradients, the bulk of the
evidence is quite suggestive.
Our results do not explain the mechanisms through which gradients arise,
although our findings suggest that the relationship between the gradient and
technological progress is not explained away by family income.

Mechanisms are

likely to vary among diseases and to change over time. For any specific condition at a
specific point in time, understanding the mechanisms is critical to reducing the
gradients.

Over time, however, there is unlikely to be a single mechanism that can

account for gradients.
In exploring the relationship between education gradients and rates of
innovation, we find that gradients are largest for diseases that afflict many, and that
gradients increase for diseases where incidence is increasing. We also find evidence
that incidence predicts future innovation. Our interpretation is therefore that
innovation occurs for diseases that are common or are becoming common and that this
is a reason why education gradients to appear for those diseases.
Our data have some important limitations. In the SEER data, we do not have
direct measures of education.
changes in gradients over time.

Use of proxy measures limits our ability to examine
In the NHIS data, our samples are relatively small,

particularly for some causes of death. Moreover, the causes of death recorded in the
NHIS are quite broad, and progress may be very different for some subtypes of disease
than for others. Additionally we do not have a unique measure of progress, but rather
a number of proxies. Our results suggest that progress explains 14% - 31% of
education gradient, but the precision of this estimate is low given the limited variation
in education or diseases across our sample.

Gradients in health outcomes that arise because of technological progress make the
distribution of health less equitable. The existence of a gradient suggests that there exists the
technological potential for improving the health of the less well off. But gradients that arise due
to improvements in the health of the most well off, rather than a diminution in the health of the
least well off may be a Pareto efficient outcome of technological progress in medicine.

24

References
Acemoglu, Daron and Joshua Angrist, “How Large are the Social Returns to Education? Evidence from
Compulsory schooling Laws,” NBER Working Paper No. W7444, December 1999
Allen, Steven G., “Technology and the Wage Structure.” Journal of Labor Economics, Vo. 19, No. 2:
440-483.
Angrist, Joshua D. and Alan B. Krueger, "Does Compulsory School Attendance Affect Schooling and
Earnings?,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, November 1991
Bartel, Ann P. and Nachum Sicherman, “Technological Change and Wages: An Interindustry Analysis,”
The Journal of Political Economy, April 1999: 285-325.
Bloom, D.E and S. Glied. 1992. “Projecting the Number of AIDS Cases in the United States.”
International Journal of Forecasting 8: 339-365.
Bozzette, S.A. et al. 1998. “The Care of HIV-infected adults in the United States. HIV Cost and Services
Utilization Study Consortium.” New England Journal of Medicine 339(26):1897-904.
Brown, J. 1987. “Approval of AZT.” Food and Drug Administration, U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services. < http://www.aegis.com/news/fda/1987/FD870301.html> (11 February 2003).
Centers for Disease Control (1987). “Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection in the United States: A
review of current knowledge.” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report, 36, 18 Dec., S-6.
Crystal, Stephen; Sambamoorthi, Usha;Merzel, Cheryl. The diffusion of innovation of AIDS treatment:
Zidovudine use in two New Jersey cohorts. Health Services Research; Chicago; Oct 1995: 30(4):593615.
Cunningham WE, Markson LE, Andersen RM, Crystal SH, Fleishman JA, Golin C, Gifford A, Liu HH,
Nakazono TT, Morton SC, Bozzette SA, Shapiro MF, Wenger NS. Prevalence and Predictors of Highly
Active Antiretroviral Therapy Use in Persons with HIV Infection in the U.S. Journal of Acquired
Immune Deficiency Syndromes, Vol. 25, No. 2, October 2000, pp. 115-123

25

Elo, Irma T. and Samuel H. Preston, “Educational Differentials in Mortality: United States, 1979-85,”
Social Science and Medicine 42(1), 1996
Feldman J. D. Makuc, J. Kleinman and J. Cornoni-Huntley, “National Trends in Educational Differences
in Mortality,” American Journal of Epidemiology, 1989
Fordyce, E.J. et al. 1998. “Economic and Geographic Diversity in AIDS Incidence Among HIV Exposure
Groups in New York City: 1983-1995.” AIDS and Public Policy Journal 13(3): 103-114.
Fuchs, Victor R., ``Time Preference and Health: An Exploratory Study,: in Victor Fuchs, Ed., Economic
Aspects of Health, Chicago: The University of Chicago Press, 1982
Goldman, D.P and J.P. Smith. 2002. “Can Patient Self-Management Help Explain the SES Health
Gradient?” Proceeding of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 99(16):
10929-10934.
Griliches, Zvi. Productivity, R&D, and the Data Constraint," American Economic Review 84 (March
1994): 1-23.
Grossman, Michael, ``The Human Capital Model of the Demand for Health,'' in the Handbook of Health
Economics, edited by Culyer et al, Elsevier 2000
Lichtenberg, Frank, “the Benefits and Costs of Newer Drugs: Evidence from the 1996 Medical
Expenditure Panel Survey,” mimeo, Columbia University 2000
Link, Bruce G. et at, “Social Epidemiology and the Fundamental Cause Concept: on the Structuring of
effective Cancer Screens by Socioeconomic Status,” The Milkbank Quarterly Vol. 76, No. 3, 1998
Lleras-Muney, Adriana, “Were State Laws on Compulsory Education Effective? An analysis from 1915
to 1939,” Journal of Law and Economics, Vol. XLV(2), October 2002a
Lleras-Muney, Adriana “The Relationship between Education and Adult Mortality in the U.S.” NBER
Working Paper #8986, May 2002b

26

Margo, Robert A. and T. Aldrich Finegan, “Compulsory Schooling Legislation and School Attendance in
Turn-of-The Century America: A ‘Natural Experiment’,” Economics Letters, October 1996
McGinley, L. and A. Womack. 1995. “Technology & Health: An FDA Panel Urges Approval of AIDS
Drug.” .” Food and Drug Administration, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
<http://www.aegis.com/news/wsj/1995/WJ951101.html> (11 February 2003).
McKeown, Thomas, The modern rise of Population, New York: Academic Press, 1976
Nelson, Richard R. and Edmund S. Phelps, “Investment in Humans, Technological Diffusion and
Economics Growth,” American Economic Review, 1966
Pappas, Gregory, Susan Queen, Wolber Hadden and Grail Fisher, “The Increasing Disparity in Mortality
Between Socioeconomic Groups in the United States, 1960 and 1986,” The New England Journal of
Medicine, 1993
Richards, H. and Berry, R. (1998). U.S. life tables for 1990 by sex, race, and education. Journal of
Forensic Economics 11, 9–26.
Rosenzweig, Mark R., “Why are there returns to Schooling?,” American Economic Review, Volume 85,
Issue 2, May 1995
Rosenzweig, Mark R. and Paul T. Schultz “Schooling, Information and Nonmarket Productivity:
Contraceptive Use and its effectiveness,” International Economic Review, May 1989, 30920), pp. 457-77
Rothman, Kenneth J. and Sander Greenland. Modern Epidemiology, Second Edition. Philadelphia:
Lippincott-Raven , 1998.
Sambamoorthi, Usha, et al. 2001. "Use of Protease Inhibitors and Non-Nucleoside Reverse Transcriptase
Inhibitors Among Medicaid Beneficiaries with AIDS." American Journal of Public Health 91(9): 147481.
Schechter, M.T, et al. 1994.“Higher Socioeconomic Status Is Associated With Slower Progression of HIV
Infection Independent of Access to Health Care.” Journal of Clinical Epidemiology47(1): 59-67.

27

Schmidt, Stefanie, “School Quality, Compulsory Education Laws, and the Growth of American High
School Attendance, 1915-1935,” MIT Ph.D. Dissertation 1996
Seltzer, R. 1989. “Race, Age Education and Knowledge of AIDS.” Sociology and Social Research 73(4):
189-193
Sorenson, W., Oar, H.S., and K. Corson. 1999. “The Relationship Between Educational Background and
Decline to Death In a Sample of Louisiana Male AIDS Cases.” International Journal of STD and AIDS
10(3): 195-198.
Sorvillo, F. et al. 1999. “Use of Protease Inhibitors Among Persons with Aids in Los Angeles County.”
AIDS Care 11(2): 147-155.
Wozniak, Gregory D., “The Adoption of Interrelated Innovations: A Human Capital Approach,” The
Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 66, No. 1. (Feb., 1984), pp. 70-79.

28

Table 1: Summary Statistics on measures of progress
Variable

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

NHIS data
Estimated Annual Percent Change in ageadjusted mortality (1)

55

-1.067

4.149

-9.064

15.043

81

-1.279

2.572

-9.1

8.5

80

0.238

2.196

-7.3

9

81
81

0.079
9.654

0.101
10.015

-0.36
0

0.299
48

SEER cancer data
Estimated Annual Percent Change in ageadjusted mortality (1)
Estimated Annual Percent Change in the ageadjusted incidence rate(2)
Change in the 5-year survival rate, conditional on
diagnosis(3)
Number of drugs(4)

Notes:
(1) Estimated Annual Percent Change in age-adjusted mortality is calculated as follows:
EAPC=(eb-1)*100,
where b is the coefficient from the following regression:
log(rate)= constant + b*(calendar year),
where rate refers to the age-adjusted mortality rate for whites, and the time period used to calculate the change is 1969 to 1999.
This data are provided by the National Cancer Institute, mortality rates are calculated from Vital Statistics using the entire US.
Age adjustments use the 2000 US population. This statistics is calculated for men and women jointly with the exception of
diseases of the genital system which are calculated for each gender separately (site recodes 27010, 27020, 27030, 27040, 27050,
27060 and 27070 for women; site recodes 28020, 28030 and 28040 for men).
(2) Estimated Annual Percent Change in age-adjusted incidence is calculated as follows:
EAPC=(eb-1)*100,
where b is the coefficient from the following regression:
log(rate)= constant + b*(calendar year),
where rate refers to the age-adjusted incidence rate for whites, and the time period used to calculate the change is 1973 to 1999.
This data are provided by the National Cancer Institute, age-adjusted incidence rates are calculated using 9 registries in the SEER
data base. Age adjustments use the 2000 US population. This statistics is calculated for men and women jointly with the
exception of diseases of the genital system which are calculated for each gender separately (site recodes 27010, 27020, 27030,
27040, 27050, 27060 and 27070 for women; site recodes 28020, 28030 and 28040 for men). This statistic is not provided for
Other Monocytic Leukimia (site recode 35033).
(3) Change in the 5-year survival rate conditional on diagnosis is calculated as follows:
(% diagnosed in 1973,1974,1975 who died in 5 years)-(% diagnosed in 1991, 1992, 1993 who died in 5 years), where only whites
are used to calculate the survival rates. This statistics is calculated by the authors using the SEER mortality data.
(4) The number of drugs by cancer site is calculated only using the number of distinct active ingredients approved by the FDA. In
other words, we do not simply calculate the number of drugs in the market, we calculate the number of chemically distinct
compounds available, which results in a much smaller number of drugs available. Note that it is not always straightforward to
assign drugs to cancer sites. Therefore there is some measurement error. A list of all cancer drugs, the conditions they are used
for and their year of approval is available from the authors upon request.

29

Table 2: Correlation between the different measures of progress
Estimated
Annual
Estimated
Percent
Annual
Percent in Change in change in
the age- Number of
the agethe 5-year
drugs
adjusted survival rate adjusted
(active
mortality conditional incidence
on diagnosis
rate
ingredients)
rate

SEER cancer data
Estimated Annual percent change in
age-adjusted mortality rate
Change in the 5-year survival rate,
conditional on diagnosis
Estimated Annual Percent Change in
the age-adjusted incidence rate
Number of drugs

1
-0.20

1

0.56
0.17

-0.05
0.30

Notes: See previous table for definitions and data sources.

30

1
0.17

1

TABLE 3: NHIS Summary statistics

Died in 5 years=1
Education
Interview Year (1986=0)
Hispanic
Married
Female
Age
Causes of death
Infectious diseases
Cancer
Diabetes
Cardiovascular Diseases
Respiratory System
Diseases
Digestive System Diseases
Urinary System
Other Diseases

Obs

Mean

Std.
Dev.

Min

Max

164373
164373
164373
164373
164373
164373
164373

0.095
12.113
2.222
0.049
0.734
0.540
58.081

0.293
3.239
1.312
0.216
0.442
0.498
12.482

0
0
0
0
0
0
40

1
18
4
1
1
1
90

164373
164373
164373
164373

0.0014
0.0280
0.0021
0.0419

0.0378
0.1649
0.0458
0.2004

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

164373
164373
164373
164373

0.0077
0.0018
0.0009
0.0014

0.0871
0.0427
0.0300
0.0375

0
0
0
0

1
1
1
1

Notes: Data: NHIS-MDC data.
Sample consists of whites ages 40 and above with no missing values.

31

TABLE 4: Results with the NHIS
The effect of education on the probability of dying in five years
(all causes of death)
Dependent Variable: dead=1 if
died within 5 year
Education
Interview Year (1986=0)
Hispanic
Married
Female
N

All

-0.0048***
(0.0003)
-0.0008
(0.0006)
-0.0204**
(0.0030)
-0.0137***
(0.0019)
-0.0489***
(0.0015)
164,710

Males

Females

-0.0055*** -0.0035***
(0.0004)
(0.0004)
-0.0014
-0.0004
(0.0009)
(0.0007)
-0.0207** -0.0194**
(0.0048)
(0.0036)
-0.0354*** -0.0153**
(0.0035)
(0.0022)
75,770

88,940

Notes: Data: NHIS-MDC data. Sample consist of whites ages 40 and above with no
missing values. Regressions also include single year of age dummies and use person
weights provided by NHIS.

32

TABLE 5: The effect of education by disease type in the NHIS
Dependent Variable: dead=1 if died in 5 year
Infectious diseases

Education(1)
-0.000040
(0.000040)
-0.001249***
(0.000158)
-0.000051
(0.000050)
-0.002355***
(0.000183)
-0.000628***
(0.000083)
-0.000068*
(0.000034)
-0.000058**
(0.000027)
-0.000074**
(0.000038)

Cancer
Diabetes
Cardiovascular Diseases
Respiratory System Diseases
Digestive System Diseases
Urinary System
Other Diseases

Notes: Data: NHIS-MDC data.
Sample consist of whites ages 40 and above with no missing values.
Regressions also include single year of age dummies and use person
weights provided by NHIS.

33

Table 6: Results using the NHIS: Is the Effect of education on mortality larger
for diseases where more progress has occurred between 1985 and 1995?
Fully Flexible specification
Dependent variable:
Effect of education on the
probability of dying within 5
years of diagnosis (separate
regression by cause of death)
WEIGHT
Progress measured by decreases
in age-adjusted mortality
(-Estimated annual percent
change in age-adjusted mortality)

Education

Education

Inverse of variance
of beta

Number of deaths by
disease in 1986

-1.64e-07
2.26e-07

-0.0000612***
(0.0000216)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=55. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the
effect of education for each cause of death is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation, using
the variance of the effect of education as weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression
of the probability of dying in 5 years after the interview, which includes single age dummies, family income, female
dummy, Hispanic dummy and interview year. We obtained 55 different coefficients (and their standard errors) by
running a regression for each cause of death. Sample consists of whites ages 40 and above with no missing data.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

34

Table 7: SEER Summary Statistics
Variable
Years of compulsory school
Mean education in cohort, gender and
registry
Mean total family income in cohort,
gender and registry
Female=1
Birth year
Age at Diagnosis
Hispanic=1
Married=1
Died within 5 year of diagnosis=1
Year of diagnosis
Cancer localized or in situ when diagnosed
Incidence rate*
Cancer Site (Broad categories)
Bones and joints
Brain and other nervous system
Breast
Digestive system
Endocrine system
Eye and orbit
Genital system
Leukimia
Lymphomas
Buccal cavity and pharynx
Multiple Myeloma
Ill-defined and unspecified sites
Respiratory system
Skin
Soft tissue
Urinary system

Obs

Mean

Std. Dev.

Min

Max

711450

6.93

1.05

0

10

711450

10.93

1.06

4.944

16

711450 30258.68 36101.75 891.277 527999.5
711450
0.46
0.50
0
1
711450 1913.68
6.67
1901
1925
711450 69.48
8.00
47
92
711450
0.02
0.14
0
1
711450
0.64
0.48
0
1
711450
0.63
0.48
0
1
711450 1983.65
5.74
1973
1993
711450
0.38
0.48
0
1
0.0028
0.007 0.00006
0.1
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450
711450

0.00
0.01
0.12
0.23
0.00
0.00
0.20
0.03
0.03
0.03
0.01
0.03
0.20
0.02
0.00
0.07

0.03
0.11
0.33
0.42
0.07
0.04
0.40
0.16
0.18
0.17
0.11
0.17
0.40
0.13
0.06
0.26

0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0
0

Notes: Total family income was deflated using the CPI. The base year is 1989.
*incidence rates are calculated using aggregated data (see text)

35

1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1
1

Table 8: The effect of education on the probability of dying in the next 5 years
conditional on cancer diagnosis (all cancers)

Effect of education measured using
compulsory schooling laws

Years of
Effect of
compulsory compulsory
school on the schooling on
probability of education
1970/80/90
dying in 5
Census
years
All

Males

Females

TSIV Effect of
education on the
probability of
dying in 5 years

Effect of education
measured using mean
education in cohort,
gender and registry
No
controls
for family
income

Controls
for mean
family
income

-0.002***
(0.001)

0.079***
(0.015)

-0.025*
(0.014)

-0.005*** -0.004***
(0.001)
(0.001)

-0.002*
(0.001)

0.041*
(0.024)

-0.049
(0.038)

-0.003**
(0.001)

-0.002*
(0.001)

-0.003***
(0.001)

0.107***
(0.019)

-0.028**
(0.011)

-0.000
(0.002)

0.000
(0.002)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions include age at diagnosis, age at diagnosis squared, 47 state of birth
dummies, 24 cohort dummies, 80 cancer site dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies and 4 stage of cancer at
diagnosis dummies. Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could
be imputed. Standard errors for the TSIV estimates were calculated using the Delta method.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

36

Table 9: The effect of education on 5-year death rates
by cancer type
Dependent Variable:
N
Buccal cavity and pharynx

21356

Digestive system

165944

Respiratory system

140033

Bones and joints

675

Soft tissue

2472

Skin

12338

Breast

87729

Genital system

140671

Urinary system

52514

Eye and orbit

1233

Brain and other nervous system

9008

Endocrine system

3516

Lymphomas

24162

Multiple Myeloma

9017

Leukemia

18561

Ill-defined and unspecified sites

22221

Died within 5 years of diagnosis
Compulsory Mean education
schooling
0.004
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.001)
-0.002*
(0.001)
0.022
(0.023)
0.002
(0.012)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.002
(0.002)
-0.003**
(0.001)
-0.010***
(0.003)
0.009
(0.018)
0.001
(0.004)
-0.002
(0.009)
-0.001
(0.004)
0.001
(0.005)
-0.004
(0.004)
0.001
(0.003)

-0.010*
(0.006)
-0.003*
(0.002)
-0.001
(0.002)
-0.008
(0.031)
0.003
(0.016)
-0.002
(0.007)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.010***
(0.002)
-0.006*
(0.003)
-0.02
(0.023)
0.006
(0.005)
0.002
(0.014)
0.001
(0.005)
0.004
(0.007)
-0.002
(0.005)
-0.003
(0.003)

Notes: Each coefficient reported is estimated using a separate regression. Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions
include age at diagnosis, age at diagnosis squared, diagnosis year, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies,
cancer site dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. Sample
consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

37

Table 10: The Effect of education on Incidence rates
Compulsory Mean education
school (1)
in cohort gender
and registry(2)
Sample
All cancers
Buccal cavity and pharynx
Digestive system
Respiratory system
Bones and joints
Soft tissue
Skin
Breast
Genital system
Urinary system
Eye and orbit
Brain and other nervous
system
Endocrine system
Lymphomas
Multiple Myeloma
Leukimia
Ill-defined and unspecified
sites

-0.00008***
(0.00001)
-0.0001
(0.000)
-0.0001***
(0.000)
-0.0001
(0.0001)
0.000
(0.000)
-0.0001**
(0.0001)
-0.0001***
(0.000)
0.0000
(0.0001)
-0.0001
(0.0001)
-0.0001**
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0002
(0.0002)
-0.0002*
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0001
(0.0002)
-0.0003
(0.0004)
0.0001
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0000)

-0.0001
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0000)
-0.0002**
(0.0001)
-0.0001
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0001
0.0000
(0.0000
0.0002**
(0.0001)
0.0000
(0.0000)
0.0000
(0.0000)

-0.0001**
(0.0001)

0.0000
(0.0001)

Notes: standard errors in parenthesis.
(1)Data that has been aggregated by cancer site, diagnosis year, gender, cohort and state-of-birth. N=336,509.
Regressions include age, age squared, diagnosis year, state-of-birth dummies, cohort dummies, cancer site
dummies and census year dummies.
(2) Data that has been aggregated by cancer site, diagnosis year, gender, cohort and registry of residence.
N=20,348. Regressions include age, age squared, diagnosis year, registry dummies, cohort dummies, cancer
site dummies and census year dummies.

38

Table 11: Is the Effect of Education on mortality larger for diseases where
more progress has occurred between 1973 and 1998?
Dependent variable:
Died within 5 years of diagnosis

Progress measured by decreases in ageadjusted mortality
Education
Education*(-Estimated annual percent
change in age-adjusted mortality)
Progress measured by increases in ageadjusted incidence rates
Education
Education*(Estimated annual percent
change in age-adjusted incidence rates)
Progress measured by increases in 5 yearsurvival rates after diagnosis
Education
Education*change in 5-year survival rate
conditional on diagnosis

Compulsory
schooling
law

Mean
education in
gender,
cohort and
registry

-0.002***
(0.001)
0.001**
(0.000)

-0.005***
(0.001)
-0.001***
(0.000)

0.001**
(0.001)
-0.001***
(0.000)

0.000
(0.001)
-0.005***
(0.000)

-0.001
(0.001)
-0.013***
(0.005)

0.010***
(0.001)
-0.117***
(0.005)

Progress measured by the number of drugs available
(Match by 3 digit icd9 code)
Education
-0.002*
(0.001)
Education*Number of drugs
-0.000
(0.000)

0.004***
(0.001)
-0.00039***
(0.00003)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Regressions include diagnosis year, age at diagnosis, age at diagnosis
squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies, 80 cancer site dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8
registry dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states
between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

39

Table 12: Is the Effect of education on mortality larger for diseases where
more progress has occurred between 1973 and 1998?
Flexible specification-Including interaction between site and stage
Dependent variable:
Effect of education on the probability of dying
within 5 years of diagnosis (education*cancer site
dummies)
Progress measured by decreases in age-adjusted
mortality
(-Estimated annual percent change in ageadjusted mortality)
Progress measured by increases in incidence rates
(Estimated annual percent change in age
adjusted incidence rates)
Progress measured by increases in the 5 yearsurvival rates after diagnosis
change in 5-year survival rate conditional on
diagnosis

Compulsory
school

Mean
education

0.00069
(0.00051)

-0.00125
(0.00088)

-0.00119**
(0.00055)

0.00026
(0.00099)

-0.02706**

-0.0596***

(0.01257)

(0.0218)

Progress measured by the number of drugs available for treatment
(Match by 3 digit icd9 code)
number of drugs
-0.00015
(0.00010)

-0.00039**
(0.00017)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=81. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the effect of
education for each cancer is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation, using the variance of
the effect of education as weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression of the
probability of dying, which includes age at diagnosis, age at diagnosis squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort
dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies, 80 cancer site dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies.
We obtained 78 different coefficients (and their standard errors) by running a regression where education is interacted
with a dummy fir each cancer site. Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and 1925 for whom
education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

40

Table 13: Is the Effect of Education on mortality larger for diseases where
more progress has occurred between 1973 and 1998?
Fully flexible specification
Dependent variable:
Effect of education on the probability of dying
within 5 years of diagnosis (separate regression by
cancer site)

Compulsory
school

Mean
education

Progress measured by decreases in age-adjusted
mortality
(-Estimated annual percent change in ageadjusted mortality)

-0.00003
(0.00001)

-0.00073
(0.00056)

Progress measured by increases in incidence rates
(Estimated annual percent change in age
adjusted incidence rates)

0.00002
(0.00001)

-0.00017
(0.00050)

-0.0007
(0.0077)

-0.01780**
(0.00818)

Progress measured by increases in the 5 yearsurvival rates after diagnosis
change in 5-year survival rate conditional on
diagnosis

Progress measured by the number of drugs available for treatment
(Match by 3 digit icd9 code)
number of drugs
0.00001
(0.00005)

-0.00001
(0.00006)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=78. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the effect of
education for each cancer is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation, using the variance of
the effect of education as weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression of the
probability of dying, which includes age at diagnosis, age at diagnosis squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort
dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. We obtained 78 different
coefficients (and their standard errors) by running a regression for each cancer site. There are 3 cancers for which the
regressions could not be estimated because of small sample sizes. Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states
between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

41

Table 14: Is the Effect of Education on incidence larger for diseases where
more progress has occurred between 1973 and 1998?
Flexible specification
Dependent variable:
Effect of education on the annual incidence rate
(education*cancer site dummies)
Progress measured by decreases in age-adjusted
mortality
Estimated annual percent change in ageadjusted mortality
Progress measured by increases in incidence rates
Estimated annual percent change in age
adjusted incidence rates
Progress measured by increases in the 5 yearsurvival rates after diagnosis
change in 5-year survival rate conditional on
diagnosis
Progress measured by the number of drugs available for
treatment (Match by 3 digit icd9 code)
number of drugs

Compulsory
school

Mean
education

0.00001
(0.00001)

-0.00000
(0.00001)

-0.00003***
(0.00001)

-0.00002*
(0.00001)

-0.00078***
(0.00015)

-0.00087***
(0.00019)

-0.00002***
(0.00000)

-0.00000
(0.00000)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=81. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the effect of education for
each cancer is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation, using the variance of the effect of education as
weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression of the probability of dying, which includes age at
diagnosis, age at diagnosis squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies, 80
cancer site dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. We obtained 78 different coefficients (and their standard errors)
by running a regression where education is interacted with a dummy fir each cancer site. Sample consists of whites born in the 48
states between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

42

Table 15: Changes in the 4-Year Mortality Education Gradient over Time
(NHIS)
Change in the Effect of
Education on the Probability
of Dying 1990 vs. 1986
Change in the Rate of
Technological Progress
1990-1993 vs. 1983-1986

Effect of Education on the
Probability of Dying 1990

-0.000019**
(0.000007)

Tech Progress 1983-1985

-0.000015
(0.000014)
0.000006
(0.000022)
-0.000055**
(0.000027)

Tech Progress 1986-1989
Tech Progress 1990-1993

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=55. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the effect of
education for each cause of death is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation, using the
variance of the effect of education as weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression of
the probability of dying in 5 years after the interview, which includes single age dummies, family income, female
dummy, Hispanic dummy and interview year. We obtained 55 different coefficients (and their standard errors) by
running a regression for each cause of death. Sample consists of whites ages 40 and above with no missing data.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

43

Table 16: Does incidence predict progress and gradients?
Dependent
variable:

Estimated
Annual
Percentage
Change in
age-adjusted
mortality
1985-1995

Estimated
Annual
Percentage
Change in
age-adjusted
mortality
1985-1995

Estimated
Annual
Percentage
Change in
age-adjusted
mortality
1990-1998

Estimated
Annual
Percentage
Change in
age-adjusted
mortality
1990-1998

Gradient in
education
1986-1990
(NHIS)

Gradient in
education
1986-1990
(NHIS)

Number of
drugs
approved
1986-1996

WEIGHT
(inverse of)

--

Variance of
EAPC
1985-1995

--

Variance of
EAPC

--

Variance of
estimated
gradient

--

-1.93e-06

-5.83e-06**

9.52e-07

-4.15e-07

-2.41e-09**

-1.70e-09**

4.37e-06

(9.32e-06)

(1.53e-06)

(9.40e-06)

(3.37e-07)

(2.24e-10)

(2.76e-10)

(0.0000252)

Number of
deaths in 1980

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the effect of education for each cause of death is regressed on a constant
and on the relevant measure of innovation, using the variance of the effect of education as weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression
of the probability of dying in 5 years after the interview, which includes single age dummies, family income, female dummy, Hispanic dummy and interview year. We
obtained 55 different coefficients (and their standard errors) by running a regression for each cause of death. Sample consists of whites ages 40 and above with no
missing data.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

44

Table 17: Is the education-mortality gradient only due to access?
Mean
education
No income

Mean
education
Control for
total family
income

-0.0000612***
(0.0000216)
4.64e-06
(4.93e-06)

-0.0000402**
(0.0000192)
5.44e-06
(4.18e-06)

SEER cancer data
Progress measured by decreases in
age-adjusted mortality
(-Estimated annual percent change in
age- adjusted mortality)

-0.00076
(0.00129)

Progress measured by decreases in
incidence rates
(-Estimated annual percent change in
age adjusted incidence rates)
Progress measured by increases in the
5 year-survival rates after diagnosis
change in 5-year survival rate
conditional on diagnosis

Dependent variable:
Effect of education on the probability
of dying within 5 years of diagnosis
(education*cancer site dummies)

Effect for
those 65 and
above

Effect for
those below
65

-0.00079
(0.00128)

0.00062
(0.00116)

-0.00110
(0.00095)

0.00429***
(0.00109)

0.00422***
(0.00109)

0.00490***
(0.00089)

0.00103
(0.00099)

-0.11264***
(0.01575)

-0.11160***
(0.01580)

-0.11919***
(0.01124)

-0.05217***
(0.01685)

Progress measured by the number of drugs available for treatment (Match
by 3 digit icd9 code)
number of drugs
-0.00040***
-0.00039***
(0.00014)
(0.00014)

-0.00053***
(0.00011)

-0.00011
(0.00011)

NHIS data
Progress measured by decreases in
age-adjusted mortality
(-Estimated annual percent change in
age-adjusted mortality)
number of drugs approved 1973-1993

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=81. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the effect of education for each
cancer is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation, using the variance of the effect of education as weights.
The effect of education is the coefficient on education in a regression of the probability of dying, which includes age at diagnosis, age
at diagnosis squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies, 80 cancer site dummies
and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. We obtained 78 different coefficients (and their standard errors) by running a regression
where education is interacted with a dummy fir each cancer site. Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and
1925 for whom education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

45

Figure 1: HIV/AIDS Case study

HIV/AIDS Death rates by exposure category
FDA approves AZT

FDA approves first protease inhibitor

Homosexual

1
20
0

9
19
9

7
19
9

19
9

5

3
19
9

2
19
9

0
19
9

8
19
8

6

Intra-venous
drug users

19
8

19
8

4

0.5
0.45
0.4
0.35
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

Source: 1984-1992 from the AIDS Microfiche Data on CDC Wonder. We divided the number of
deaths per year by the cumulative population (number diagnosed total minus the death from
previous years). 1993-2001 is from the CDC HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report Vol. 13(2). We
divided the death rate by the total number of people living with HIV/AIDS.

46

Figure 2: Relating education gradients and changes in mortality rates:
NHIS
-.00004

Diabetes

Urinary
Digestiv

Infectio

effect of education

Respirat

Cancer

-.002355

Cardiova

-2.31817

Est. annual % change mortality

47

5.86762

Figure 3: Gradients and the Number of Deaths
.000043

190
400 620
140
230
340
550
270
680
590
370
690
500
80
660
120
610
730
20
650
50
240
290
460
160
530
600
630
480
40
440
570
250 770 490
260
280
380
420 90
320
450
670
560
210
330

200

220

470

520

effect of education

170

580

410

390

360

180

-.000802
1

1670

number deaths

360

.00013
390

180

standard error of education

410
170

260

520

580470
200 220

240
190

1.1e-06

490
620
770
90210
670
560
400
330
230
420
450
140
480 440
320
370
250
160
660
590
610
340
630
570
550
270
120
530
280
730
380
40
680
500
600
80
690
290
460
650
20
50

1

number of deaths

48

1670

Appendix A: Progress measures for 81 cancer sites

Code

Cancer Site Name

# of white
persons born
in the 48
Estimated
states
Annual
between
1901 and Percent in the
1925 in our age-adjusted
mortality rate
sample

Estimated
Number of
Change in
Annual
drugs
the 5-year Percent in the
approved
survival rate age-adjusted Number of 1973-1993
conditional incidence drugs (active
(active
on diagnosis
rate
ingredients) ingredients)

20010

Lip

2976

-5.5

0.036

-3.2

12

7

20020

Tongue

4166

-1.7

0.164

0.5

12

7

20030

Salivary gland

1467

-1.5

-0.009

0.6

12

7

20040

Floor of mouth

2579

-4.5

0.034

-2

12

7

20050

Gum & other mouth

3631

-1.4

0.055

-0.4

12

7

20060

Nasopharynx

699

-1.5

0.225

-0.9

12

7

20070

Tonsil

2031

-2.6

0.208

0.2

12

7

20080

Oropharynx

646

1.3

0.109

-0.3

12

7

20090

Hypopharynx

2345

-2.5

0.090

-1

12

7

20100

Other buccal cavity and pharynx

816

-0.9

0.091

-0.1

12

7

21010

Esophagus

7415

1.2

0.079

1.2

0

0

21020

Stomach

14866

-2.7

0.046

-2

1

1

21030

Small intestine

1998

0.2

0.130

2.5

0

0

21041

Cecum

16445

-0.9

0.098

0.1

8

3

21042

Appendix

394

-0.9

-0.235

1.3

8

3

21043

Ascending colon

9755

-0.9

0.123

0.5

8

3

21044

Hepatic flexure

3197

-0.9

0.111

2.1

8

3

21045

Transverse colon

7421

-0.9

0.140

-1.3

8

3

21046

Splenic flexure

2825

-0.9

0.118

0.1

8

3

21047

Descending colon

5650

-0.9

0.147

-2

8

3

21048

Sigmoid colon

26684

-0.9

0.137

-1.1

8

3

21049

Large intestine, NOS

3418

-0.9

-0.001

-0.6

8

3

21051

Rectosigmoid junction

10896

-2.9

0.143

-1.1

8

3

21052

Rectum

20641

-2.9

0.145

-0.9

8

3

21060

Anus, anal canal & anorectum

1597

4.3

0.044

2.1

0

0

21071

Liver

3995

0.8

-0.038

2.4

0

0

21072

Intrahepatic bile duct

602

8.5

-0.078

9

0

0
0

21080

Gallbladder

2687

-3

0.025

-2.5

0

21090

Other biliary

2569

-2.2

0.054

-0.7

6

4

21100

Pancreas

21280

-0.1

-0.013

-0.4

12

8

21110

Retroperitoneum

618

-4.4

0.201

-0.6

0

0

21120

Peritoneum, omentum & mesentery

404

0.4

0.172

6.7

0

0

21130

587

-2.8

0.022

-0.2

0

0

22010

Other digestive organs
Nasal cavity, middle ear & accessory
sinuses

1134

-2.6

0.060

-0.2

0

0

22020

Larynx

9818

-0.7

0.009

-1

4

1

22030

Lung and bronchus

127003

1.6

0.031

1

23

10

22050

Pleura
Trachea, mediastinum & other respiratory
organs

1718

0

-0.029

2.4

0

0

360

-4.5

0.073

-1.3

0

0

22060
23000

Bones & joints

675

-3.2

0.173

0.6

11

6

24000

Soft tissue (including heart)

2472

1.8

0.071

0.9

20

5

49

Appendix A (continued): Progress measures for 81 cancer sites

Code

Cancer Site Name

25010

Melanomas-skin

25020

Other non-epithelial skin

26000

Breast

27010

Cervix

27020

Corpus

27030

Uterus, NOS

# of white
persons born
in the 48
Estimated
states
Annual
between
1901 and Percent in the
1925 in our age-adjusted
mortality rate
sample
11289

Estimated
Number of
Change in
Annual
drugs
the 5-year Percent in the
approved
survival rate age-adjusted Number of 1973-1993
conditional incidence drugs (active
(active
on diagnosis
rate
ingredients) ingredients)

1.4

0.134

3.6

22

8

1049

-0.3

-0.356

4.9

1

1

87729

-0.4

0.140

1.3

48

10

7630

-2.9

0.059

-2

12

5

26216

-0.4

-0.055

-1.2

1

0

361

-2.3

-0.087

-2

8

3

27040

Ovary

13758

-0.4

0.154

0.5

25

7

27050

Vagina

834

-1.4

0.099

-1.2

0

0

27060

Vulva

2281

-0.8

0.096

0.9

1

1

27070

Other female genital organs

621

-0.5

0.173

-0.2

0

0

28010

Prostate

87592

0.5

0.298

3.2

34

10

28020

Testis

358

-4.7

0.201

2

14

7

28030

Penis

826

-1.9

0.106

-1.4

2

1

28040

Other male genital organs

194

-3

0.023

0.8

0

0
4

29010

Bladder

35240

-1

0.098

0.5

16

29020

Kidney and Renal pelvis

14873

0.7

0.102

1.8

15

4

29030

Ureter

1626

-0.3

0.090

-1

0

0

29040

Other urinary organs

775

-1.2

0.128

-0.6

0

0

30000

Eye & orbut

1233

-2.6

0.046

-0.6

1

0

31010

Brain

8712

1.5

0.092

0.8

8

3

31040

Other nervous system

296

-9.1

0.169

0.7

8

3

32010

Thyroid

2979

-1.3

0.036

2

7

2

32020

Other endocrine ( include. Thymus)

537

0

0.160

1.3

13

6

33011

Hodgkin's Disease-Nodal

1899

-4.6

0.168

-0.2

27

6

33012

Extranodal

52

-4.6

0.160

1.4

2

0

33041

Non- Hodgkin's Lymphomas--Nodal

17122

1.9

0.078

1.9

38

9

33042

Extranodal

5089

1.9

0.054

4.7

40

9

34000

Multiple myeloma

9017

1.3

0.100

0.7

20

3

35011

Acute lymphocytic leukimia

490

-1.6

0.248

1.2

22

2

35012

Chronic lymphocytic

7328

0.6

0.083

-0.5

20

2

35013

Other lymphocytic

267

-5.8

0.070

-1.8

14

1

35021

Acute granulocytic

4509

0.2

0.077

0.5

15

4

35022

Chronic granulocytic

2507

-0.7

0.166

-0.2

15

2

35023

Other granulocytic

536

-4.5

0.159

-7.3

4

1

35031

Acute monocytic Leukimia

339

-5.3

0.127

0.5

3

0

35032

Chronic monocytic leukimia

38

-2.9

-0.118

-4

1

0

1

0

3

1
0

35033

Other monocytic leukimia

35041

Other acute leukimia

50

-8.9

0.119

1080

0.5

-0.058

35042

Other chronic

35043

Aleukemic, subacute, and NOS

65

-0.6

-0.141

-2

2

1352

1.2

0.162

0.5

12

37000

Ill defined and unspecified sites

22221

2

0.8

0.050

-0.7

22

9

50

-0.2

Appendix B: Progress measures for 56 causes of death

Recode

Number of Estimated Annual
deaths in Percent change in
sample
the age-adjusted
mortality rate

Disease name

Number of
drugs
approved
1986-1996

20

Shigellosis and amebiases

1

15.04

2

40

Tuberculosis of respiratory system

6

-4.70

0

50

Other tuberculosis

1

0.00

1

80

Meningococcal infection

90

Septicemia

120

1

0.00

0

105

-1.27

6

Viral Hepatitis

9

12.94

0

140

All other infections

75

-2.30

60

160

Neoplasms-lip, oral cavity and pharynx

43

-1.67

0

170

Neoplasms-digestive system

870

-0.74

2

180

Neoplasm-respiratory system

1151

0.74

0

190

Neoplasms-breast

304

-0.95

0

200

Neoplasms-genital organs

408

0.47

1

210

Neoplasms-urinary organs

145

0.39

0

220

Neoplasms-unspecified site

478

-0.26

6

230

Leukemia

130

0.17

5

240

Other malignant neoplasms of lymphatic tissues

210

1.68

10

250

Begin neoplasms

39

0.25

33

260

Diabetes

274

3.43

1

270

Nutritional deficiencies

16

-0.13

1

280

Anemias

18

-0.27

0

290

Meningitis

1

-7.31

6

320

Rheumatic fever and rheumatic heart disease

38

-3.85

0

330

Hypertensive heart disease

111

0.36

0

340

Hypertensive heart and renal disease

9

-2.70

0

360

Acute myocardial infarction

1670

-3.71

2

370

Other forms of ischemic heart disease

31

-4.40

0

380

Angina pectoris

12

-4.70

10

390

Old myocardial infection, chronic heart disease

1465

-2.03

4

400

Other diseases of endocardium

98

3.65

1

410

All other forms of heart disease

1035

-2.02

26

420

Hypertension with or without renal disease

47

2.94

24

440

Intracerebral and other intracranial hemorrhage

135

-0.90

0

450

Cerebral Thrombosis

79

-8.25

1

460

Cerebral embolism

2

-2.75

1

470

All other late effects of cerebrovascular disease

537

-0.82

2

480

Atheosclerosis

76

-6.10

0

490

Other disease of arteries, arterioles and capillaries

165

0.10

3

500

Acute bronchitis and bronchiolitis

5

-4.56

1

520

Pneumonia

348

-0.38

29

530

Influenza

8

-7.48

2

550

Bronchitis, chronic and unspecified

18

-2.17

14

51

Appendix B: Progress measures for 56 causes of death
Number of Estimated Annual Number of
deaths in
Percent change
drugs
sample
in the age-adjusted approved
mortality rate
1986-1996

Recode Disease name
560

Emphysema

131

0.68

3

570

Asthma

26

1.99

5

580

other chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases

492

2.56

2

590

Ulcer of stomach and duodenum

38

-3.34

15

600

Apendicitis

2

-8.44

0

610

Hernia

38

-0.77

0

620

Chronic liver disease and cirrhosis

155

-1.61

2

630

Cholelithiasis and other disorders of the gallbladder

19

-3.18

1

650

Acute glomerulonephritis and nephrotic syndrome

2

0.00

0

660

Chronic glomerulonephritis and nephrotic syndrome

13

-0.99

0

670

Renal failure

99

-1.03

0

680

Infections of the kidney

5

-9.06

1

690

Hyperplasia of prostate

1

0.00

4

730

Congenital anomalies

14

-1.22

2

52

Appendix Table 1:
Case Studies of HIV/AIDS Treatment Disparities Over Time
Study
Cunningham et
al. (2000)

Treatment
Highly Active
Antiretroviral
Therapy
(HAART)

Characteristic

Outcome
Percent with
cumulative
incident use by
1996

Percent with
cumulative
incident use by
second follow-up
(1998)

Race:
Black
White
Hispanic
Exposure Group
IVDU
Homosexual
Education:
Some HS
HS Diploma
Some College
College degree
Sambamoorthi et
al. (2001)

Crystal et al.
(1995)

Protease
Inhibitor/NonNucleoside
Reverse
Transcriptase
Inhibitor

Zidovudine
Treatment

Characteristic

47
20
34

78
59
73

32
45

65
78

22
35
41
49

65
70
71
79

Odds
Ratio
1996

Odds
Ratio
1997

Odds
Ratio
1998

.43
.54

.58
.56

.81
.75

.73
-

.98
-

1.13
-

Race
White
Black
Hispanic
Exposure Group
IVDU
Non-IVDU
Characteristic

Odds Ratio
1987-1988

Odds Ratio
1989-1990

.46
-

.79
-

.84

1.09
-

Race
White
Black
Exposure Group
IVDU
Non-IVDU

53

Appendix Table 2: The effect of education on age at diagnosis
by cancer type
Dependent Variable:

Age at diagnosis
N

Compulsory
schooling

Mean education

All cancer sites

711450

-0.003
(0.004)

0.027***
(0.005)

Buccal cavity and
pharynx

21356

Digestive system

165944

Respiratory system

140033

0.013
(0.023)
-0.002
(0.008)
-0.011
(0.01)
-0.015
(0.125)
0.011
(0.061)
0.033
(0.029)
-0.001
(0.012)
0.000
(0.008)
-0.001
(0.015)
-0.099
(0.091)

0.010
(0.030)
0.017*
(0.010)
0.015
(0.012)
-0.008
(0.165)
0.111
(0.083)
-0.018
(0.035)
0.064***
(0.018)
0.033***
(0.010)
0.005
(0.018)
0.038
(0.116)

-0.055
(0.037)
-0.036
(0.054)
-0.002
(0.018)
0.010
(0.033)
-0.013
(0.023)
-0.013
(0.020)

0.101**
(0.049)
-0.167**
(0.083)
-0.019
(0.024)
-0.029
(0.045)
0.021
(0.030)
0.072***
(0.028)

Bones and joints

675

Soft tissue

2472

Skin

12338

Breast

87729

Genital system

140671

Urinary system

52514

Eye and orbit

1233

Brain and other nervous
system

9008

Endocrine system

3516

Lymphomas

24162

Multiple Myeloma

9017

Leukimia

18561

Ill-defined and
unspecified sites

22221

Notes: Each coefficient reported is estimated using a separate regression. Standard errors in parentheses.
Regressions include diagnosis year, age, age squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies, cancer
site dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. Sample
consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

54

Appendix Table 3: The effect of education on probability that cancer is
in situ or localized at time of diagnosis- by cancer type
Dependent Variable:

Cancer stage in situ or localized
N

Compulsory schooling

Mean education

All cancer sites

711450

0.000
(0.001)

0.001
(0.001)

Buccal cavity and
pharynx

21356

Digestive system

165944

Respiratory system

140033

-0.004
(0.004)
-0.001
(0.001)
-0.002
(0.002)
0.029
(0.025)
-0.012
(0.013)
0.007
(0.005)
0.004
(0.002)
0.003*
(0.002)
0.002
(0.003)
-0.023
(0.016)

0.002
(0.006)
0.003
(0.002)
0.000
(0.002)
-0.013
(0.033)
-0.008
(0.018)
-0.004
(0.006)
0.006
(0.004)
-0.003
(0.002)
0.007**
(0.003)
0.003
(0.021)
0.003*
(0.002)
-0.012
(0.017)
0.000
(0.004)
-

Bones and joints

675

Soft tissue

2472

Skin

12338

Breast

87729

Genital system

140671

Urinary system

52514

Eye and orbit

1233

Brain and other nervous
system

9008

Endocrine system

3516

Lymphomas

24162

Multiple Myeloma

9017

0.001
(0.001)
-0.018*
(0.011)
-0.001
(0.003)
-

Leukimia

18561

-

-

Ill-defined and
unspecified sites

22221
-

-

Notes: Each coefficient reported is estimated using a separate regression. Standard errors in parentheses.
Regressions include 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies, cancer site dummies, 2 decade dummies,
8 registry dummies. Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and 1925 for whom
education could be imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%; *** significant at 1%

55

Appendix Table 4: Weighting SEER regression by number of
individuals with the disease (alternative specification to Table 12)
Dependent variable:
Effect of education on the probability of dying within
5 years of diagnosis (education*cancer site dummies)
Progress measured by decreases in age-adjusted
mortality
(-Estimated annual percent change in ageadjusted mortality)
Progress measured by increases in incidence rates
(Estimated annual percent change in age
adjusted incidence rates)
Progress measured by increases in the 5 year-survival
rates after diagnosis
change in 5-year survival rate conditional on diagnosis

Compulsory
school

Mean
education

0.00022
(0.00048)

-0.00175
(0.00121)

-0.00094**
(0.00045 )

-0.00323***
(0.00112 )

-0.01426*
(0.00758 )

-0.09576***
(0.01629 )

Progress measured by the number of drugs available for treatment
(Match by 3 digit icd9 code)
-0.00003
number of drugs
(0.00005)

-0.00022*
(0.00012)

Notes: Standard errors in parentheses. N=81. Each coefficient comes from a separate regression, where the
effect of education for each cancer is regressed on a constant and on the relevant measure of innovation,
using the variance of the effect of education as weights. The effect of education is the coefficient on
education in a regression of the probability of dying, which includes age at diagnosis, age at diagnosis
squared, 47 state of birth dummies, 24 cohort dummies, 2 decade dummies, 8 registry dummies, 80 cancer
site dummies and 4 stage of cancer at diagnosis dummies. We obtained 78 different coefficients (and their
standard errors) by running a regression where education is interacted with a dummy for each cancer site.
Sample consists of whites born in the 48 states between 1901 and 1925 for whom education could be
imputed.
* significant at 10%; ** significant at 5%

56

