NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENDOGENOUS TRADABILITY AND MACROECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS
Paul R. Bergin
Reuven Glick
Working Paper 9739
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9739

NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003

We thank seminar participants at Harvard, Humboldt University, Johns Hopkins, Stanford, U.C. Santa
Cruz, University of Paris, University of Southern California, Yale, NBER, Federal Reserve System
Committee for International Economic Analysis, International Monetary Fund, and European University
Institute. This paper is a revised version of NBER Working Paper No. 9739 “Endogenous Nontradability
and Macroeconomic Implications.” The views expressed below do not represent those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of San Francisco or the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.
© 2003 by Paul R. Bergin and Reuven Glick. All rights reserved. Short sections of text, not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit, including © notice,
is given to the source.

Endogenous Tradability and Macroeconomic Implications
Paul R. Bergin and Reuven Glick
NBER Working Paper No. 9739
June 2003, Revised September 2009
JEL No. F4
ABSTRACT
International macroeconomic models long have had difficulty explaining the surprisingly low volatility
of the relative price between traded and nontraded goods compared to real exchange rates. This apparent
puzzle may reflect a restrictive way of thinking about the nature of nontraded goods. Rather than imposing
an artificial dichotomy between traded and nontraded, we regard all goods as parts of a single continuum,
where the margin between traded and nontraded is endogenous. This implies that their prices are linked
together via a marginal good and a new equilibrium condition. A simple and transparent model is used
to demonstrate this approach, featuring a small open economy where differentiated goods are heterogeneous
in terms of their iceberg trade costs. The paper goes on to find implications for other basic macroeconomic
issues, such as limiting the potency of real exchange rate movements to correct large current account
imbalances.

Paul R. Bergin
Department of Economics
University of California, Davis
One Shields Ave.
Davis, CA 95616
and NBER
prbergin@ucdavis.edu
Reuven Glick
Economic Research Department
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco
101 Market Street
San Francisco, CA 94105
reuven.Glick@sf.frb.org

1. Introduction
While open economy macroeconomics by definition analyzes trade across national
borders, the field has long found it useful to allow for the fact that some goods are not traded
internationally. As examples, nontraded goods have been central in prominent theories explaining
the determination of real exchange rates (Balassa, 1964; Samuelson,1964) and current accounts
(Dornbusch, 1983). However, nontraded goods raise some puzzles for international
macroeconomics. Consider the puzzling stylized fact featured in several recent empirical papers
that the relative price of nontraded goods to traded goods is not very volatile. Empirical measures
in Betts and Kehoe (2001a, 2005) indicate that movements in the relative price of nontraded
goods are only about 37% as large as movements in the real exchange rate. Empirical work by
Engel (1993, 1999) indicates this ratio may be a good deal smaller yet. This fact stands in contrast
to standard theoretical models such as that used by Balassa and Samuelson above; these presume
that traded goods are constrained by the law of one price, and they explain movements in the real
exchange rate primarily in terms of movements in the relative price of nontraded goods.
Theoretical models with nontraded goods have had difficulty replicating the relative price
volatilities found in empirical work.
The purpose of this paper is to argue that this difficulty may stem from the habit of open
economy macroeconomics to think about nontraded goods in a restrictive way. It may be
misleading to impose a rigid and artificial dichotomy, where some goods exogenously are labeled
as tradable and other as nontradable. Instead, we find insight in recent advances in trade theory
regarding the endogenous nature of tradedness, modeling the firm decision of whether to enter the
global marketplace. We regard all goods as parts of a single continuum, where the margin
between traded and nontraded is endogenous. Whether a good is tradable or not depends on
whether the costs of trading that good make trade profitable or not. This fundamental idea of
endogenous tradability offers an elegant and simple explanation for the price puzzle above. On
the margin there is a seller who is indifferent between selling his good domestically only, or
branching out into the international market. As a result, this marginal nontraded good forms a link
between the prices of goods that are traded and other similar goods that are nontraded.
We use a simple and transparent model to explain this point and illustrate its usefulness.
We build on the small open economy model with trade costs used in Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000),
where monopolistically competitive firms can sell differentiated goods at home and in a world
market. Goods differ in terms of the iceberg trade costs they face, and we model these costs as
following a particular distribution over the continuum. By integrating over a continuum of goods,

1

our approach allows us to avoid the difficulty implied by the Kuhn-Tucker conditions in Obstfeld
and Rogoff (2000), whereby the relevant equilibrium conditions for an individual good change
discontinuously as it switches between being traded and nontraded.
The model shows that when the small open economy is subjected to demand shocks, the
degree to which the relative price of nontraded goods moves depends on the degree of
heterogeneity of the trade cost distribution. Depending on the value chosen for the curvature
parameter in this distribution, the model can easily generate the range of relative price volatilities
found in the empirical literature.
This modeling approach responds to recent findings in empirical research on trade costs.
Empirical work by Hummels (1999, 2001) has emphasized that trade costs -- including tariff and
nontariff barriers, shipping costs, and other associated costs of marketing and distribution -- vary
greatly across classes of goods and play an important role in trade decisions. Collecting detailed
trade data for individual goods, he finds that freight costs alone can range from more than 30
percent of value for raw materials and mineral fuels down to 4 percent for some manufactures.
Depending on factors such as weight, distance, and the time sensitivity of demand, trade costs can
be high and variable for many manufactured goods as well. In a broad survey of trade cost
evidence, Anderson and van Wincoop (2004) likewise reach the conclusion that trade costs are
very large and very heterogeneous among goods. Empirical work has also found support for the
idea that there is switching over time between status as traded and nontraded. Using a panel of
U.S. manufacturing plants from 1987 to 1997, Bernard and Jensen (2001) find that year to year
transition rates are noteworthy: on average 13.9% of non-exporters begin to export in any given
year during the sample, and 12.6% of exporters stop.1
This research also takes inspiration from trade theory, which long has worked to
understand firm decisions to engage in trade. However, a prominent distinction of the model here
is that it focuses on heterogeneity in trade costs rather than productivity. For example,
Dornbusch, Fisher and Samuelson (1977) ranks goods by their productivities, while the size of
trade costs are assumed to be uniform. Those goods with the greatest comparative advantage in
one country or the other are traded, while those goods with small gains from trading relative to
the uniform trade costs remain nontraded. In contrast to this convention, we think that when the
issue of primary interest is tradedness, it makes more sense to focus on the variation of trade costs
among goods. For example, the reason that many types of services are nontraded is not because
1

The results to follow in no way rely upon implausibly large numbers of firms switching between traded
and nontraded status, but rather upon the simple fact that firms have the ability to choose. In fact, the
results are strongest in those cases where only a small number of firms actually do switch in equilibrium.

2

countries are so similar in their productivities in these sectors; rather, they remain nontraded
primarily because such services are particularly costly to trade across borders. Further, the usual
convention has some strongly counterfactual implications regarding nontraded goods. For
example, it does not account for the empirical observations that there is a great deal of
heterogeneity among goods in terms of their deviations from the law of one price across
countries, nor that these deviations systematically tend to be greater for nontraded goods than for
traded goods (Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis, 2005). Dornbusch, Fisher, and Samuelson
(1977) imply the opposite of this last observation. While such models are appropriate for
explaining the distinction between exported versus imported goods, it arguably is not the most
appropriate model for understanding the distinction between traded versus nontraded goods. 2
This paper is also related to recent research in Ghironi and Melitz (2005), as well as Naknoi
(2005) and Bergin, Glick and Taylor (2005), which incorporate trade features in a macro model
with a continuum of heterogeneous firms. One significant difference is that these papers follow the
trade literature in specifying heterogeneity in terms of firm productivity.3 Betts and Kehoe (2001b)
allow heterogeneous trade costs, but we differ in that we have a share of goods that are fully
nontraded, which is what allows us to examine shifts of the nontraded extensive margin. Although
Bergin and Glick (2006, 2007) also utilize heterogeneous trade costs, they focus on issues different
from the relative volatility of nontraded prices focused upon here – the issues of current account
adjustment and pricing to market, respectively.4
We also find that endogenous tradedness has implications for other basic macroeconomic
issues, such as intertemporal trade. Previous work assuming exogenous tradedness (Dornbusch,
1983) found that the presence of nontraded goods strongly discourages intertemporal trade, where
countries with large current account imbalances are discouraged from further borrowing by high
domestic interest rates and depreciating real exchange rates. We find that if tradedness is
endogenous, the share of nontraded goods will tend to adjust so as to minimize this friction. Our

2

The macro model here will differ also in several other respects from the related trade literature. The
model describes a small open endowment economy where world price levels are exogenously given. We
abstract from production and entry decisions. We also abstract from monopolistic competition and markup
pricing by firms. In this context, we do not need fixed costs of trade to induce some firms to forgo
international trade; iceberg costs alone are sufficient.
3
The model of Ghironi and Melitz (2005) also differs in many other details, as it is geared mainly to
analyze business cycle regularities. It utilizes a two-county framework, with monopolistic competition and
entry decisions into domestic production as well as international trade, which in turn requires fixed entry
costs as well as per-unit costs of exporting.
4
The papers differ also in terms of their models. Bergin and Glick (2007) develops a two-country model
that combines heterogeneity in trade costs and productivity. Bergin and Glick (2006) is limited to the case
of three discrete goods rather than a continuum, and hence cannot solve for the extensive margin of
tradedness as an endogenous variable, which is key to our results in the present paper.

3

result also differs from that of Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000), which likewise models endogenous
tradedness to examine current account dynamics, but under a simpler goods market structure of
two goods. In contrast to the preceding papers, our model indicates that exchange rate movements
are most potent in helping correct current account imbalances when these are small, and that this
mechanism begins to break down when a country’s current account deficit is large.

2. Model
To focus on the issue of tradedness, we follow Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000) in considering
a very simple small open endowment economy. This choice is a useful starting point for our
analysis because it permits some analytical results and makes very transparent the new insights on
which we wish to focus. An endowment economy is clearly a special case, but an addendum
available from the authors demonstrates that the results are robust to including production in the
model. The small open economy assumption is highly relevant for most countries in the world.
The country is endowed with a continuum of goods indexed by i on the unit interval,
where yi represents the level of endowment, ci is the level of consumption, and pi is the
domestic price level of this good. All of these home goods have the potential of being exported,
but some endogenously determined fraction of the goods, n , will be nontraded in equilibrium. For
each traded home good there is a prevailing world price pi* that may differ from the home price
because of trade costs. The small open economy may also import foreign goods for consumption
purposes, with consumption level cF and price level pF . We initially omit time subscripts in the
notation, but introduce them when extending the framework to two periods. For simplicity, we
assume that the endowments and world price levels of all home goods are uniform, implying
yi = y, pi* = p * for all i.

The aggregate consumption index is specified as:5
θ

1−θ

c c
c = θ H F 1−θ .
θ (1 − θ )

(1)

Here cH is an index of home goods consumption:

5

For simplicity we limit ourselves here to a Cobb-Douglas specification, implying a unitary elasticity of
substation between home and foreign goods. Empirical work on this elasticity suggests a value between 0.5
and 1.5, with our value of 1 in the middle; e.g., see Pesenti (2002). In the present case, the Cobb-Douglas
specification has the added benefit of making the algebraic results more easily interpretable. See the
appendix of the working paper version (Bergin and Glick, 2003) for the derivations of the CES case.

4

cH

(φ −1) / φ

n

= ∫ ( ci
0

)

(φ −1) / φ

c 
= n N 
 n 

di +

(φ −1) / φ

1

∫ (c )

(φ −1) / φ

di

i

n

 c 
+ (1 − n )  T 
1− n 

(φ −1) / φ

(2)

where
φ /(φ −1)

 1 n (φ −1) / φ 
cN ≡ n  ∫ ci
di 
n 0


.
φ /(φ −1)

 1 1 (φ −1) / φ 
cT ≡ (1 − n) 
∫ ci di 
1− n n

are consumption indexes of nontraded and traded goods, respectively, and n is the share of goods
on the continuum {0,1} that are nontraded. Price indexes are defined as usual for each category
of goods, in correspondence to the consumption indexes above:
θ

p = p H pF
pH

1−φ

=∫

n

0

1−φ

(p )

= npN

i

1−φ

1−θ

di +

(3)
1−φ

1

∫ (p )
i

n

+ (1 − n) pT

di

(4)

1−φ

where p is the aggregate price level, pH is the price index of all home goods, and the price
index of home nontraded goods pN and the price index of home traded goods pT are defined as
1/(1−φ )

 1 n 1−φ 
pN ≡  ∫ pi di 
n 0


1//(1−φ )

 1 1 1−φ ) / φ 
pT ≡ 
∫ pi di 
1− n n

Note that if world prices are normalized to unity, i.e. p* = 1, pF = 1 , p may be interpreted as the
reciprocal of the real exchange rate for this small open economy.
The home goods are distinguished from each other by the presence of good-specific
iceberg costs, ( τ i ) where a certain fraction of the good disappears in transport. We assume that
the home country pays for this cost so that the domestic price will be pi = p* /(1 + τ i ) if the
country exports good i .6 These trade costs are specified to follow the distribution:
1 + τ i = α i −β ; α ≥ 1, β ≥ 0
which implies the following distribution of export prices

6

The presence of trade costs (obviously) implies segmentation between domestic and foreign markets.

5

pi =

p*
p*i β
=
.
1+τi
α

(5)

The parameter β controls the curvature of the distribution, while α controls the level.7 Figure 1
illustrates how the distribution of export prices varies with β (assuming p* /α = 1 ). The goods at the
left end of the continuum ( i near 0) tend to have lower prices when exported because the trade cost is
large; these goods are less tradable. Goods toward the right end of the continuum ( i near 1) have
higher prices because the trade cost is low; they are more tradable. β characterizes how quickly the
price of an individual good rises with the goods index -- in fact, it can be viewed as an elasticity. For
example, for a high β , the percent change in costs is high for a given percent change in the index.8
In positing a distribution of transport costs over a continuum of firms, we do not take a
stand on how much of this heterogeneity is due to differences across industries versus differences
across plants within an industry, as there is empirical evidence indicating heterogeneity on both
levels. Our continuum simply ranks all firms according the trading costs they face, without regard
for whether this coincides with any notion of industrial grouping.
In the endowment economy in our model the decision of whether to export a good is
determined solely on the basis of whether the export price (i.e. the world price) less iceberg costs,
exceeds the domestic price. If the export price is higher, then the good is exported, if it is lower,
then it is not traded.
Given the cutoff between traded and nontraded goods at index n , it is straightforward to
compute the price index for traded goods from the price distribution of exported varieties:
1/(1−φ )

  1   1  p*i β 1−φ  
 
pT =  
 di  
  1 − n   ∫n  α 


 


1/(1−φ )

ω
 
 p*    1  1   1 
=  
− 1 






 α    1 − n  ω   n 
 

(6)

where we define ω ≡ β (φ − 1) − 1 , ω ≥ −1 (since β ≥ 0 and φ > 1 ).9 Keep in mind that this n is
itself an endogenous variable that will be solved as part of the general equilibrium system.
7

This cost distribution is related to the Pareto function, where α is the “scale” parameter and β is the
“shape” parameter.
8
That the domestic price of more tradable goods is greater than that of less tradable goods can be attributed
to our normalization that the world price of all goods is constant. Had we assumed that the foreign price pi*
rises with i at a rate faster than trade costs fall, the domestic price of exported goods could be higher than
that of nontraded goods. In Section 4 in an extension to the model we show how export prices may be
relatively higher as a result of heterogeneous productivity in domestic production. Note also that we
abstract from possible heterogeneity in import goods; see footnote 17.
9
Note pT ≥ 0 with our specification of trade costs, since for 0 > ω ≥ −1 and for ω > 0 , it follows that

(1/ ω ){n−ω − 1} > 0 for 1 ≥ n ≥ 0 ; for ω = 0 ,

 − p* log(n) 
pT = 
≥ 0 as well.
 α (1 − n) 



6

Equation (6) expresses the price of traded goods as a function of the share of traded goods n, the
elasticity of substitution across domestic goods φ , and the trade cost parameters, β and α . It is
straightforward to establish that ∂pT / ∂n > 0 ; i.e. the price of traded goods increases with the

share of nontraded goods. The reason is that, as the proportion of home goods that are nontraded
rises, it is no longer profitable to export goods with marginally higher trade costs; as these goods
are withdrawn from export markets, the average price of the remaining export goods rises.10
The price index of nontraded goods is even easier to determine. As usual, intratemporal
optimization implies relative demands for each pair of home goods i and j:
−φ

ci  pi 
=  .
c j  p j 
Since consumption must equal the endowment of nontraded goods, and endowments are uniform
for all goods here (i.e. yi = y for all i), we can conclude that for any pair of nontraded goods it
will be true that ci / c j = yi / y j = 1 , and so pi / p j = 1 .11 In other words, the price of each
nontraded good will be identical, because they each are by definition not affected by the trade
costs which vary by good. This logic applies equally well to the home good that is just on the
margin between being traded and nontraded (i=n). The marginal trader decides to export solely
on the basis of whether the world price less iceberg costs exceeds the domestic price. But because
this good is on the margin of being traded, the domestic price must be the same as that as if it
were sold in the world market: pn = ( p * /α ) n β . As a result, the price index of nontraded goods is
pinned down as the price of the marginal traded good:
1/(1−φ )

 1 n

1−φ
pN =     ∫ ( pi ) di  
 n 

0



1/(1−φ )

 1 n

1−φ
=     ∫ ( pn ) di  
 n 

0



 p* 
= pn =   n β .
α 

(7)

This equilibrium condition will be important in the analysis to follow, and it will be referred to as
the “marginal nontraded condition.” It implies that the price of nontraded goods rises with the

10

This conclusion is robust to the particular definition of the price index. If a naïve statistician did not
know the set of traded goods had changed, but collected price data on all goods that previously had been
traded, this average price level would still rise. However, the reason would be that the average includes
newly nontraded goods, whose individual prices have risen, rather than the fact that an average is being
taken over a subset of goods where the lower price items have been removed.
11
This assumption can be relaxed without undermining our ability to compute a price index for nontraded
goods; the only difference is that the distribution of productivities and endowments would have to be
included in the integral, making the resulting price index more complicated. Because our focus here is on
the role of heterogeneous trade costs, we utilize the assumption of uniform endowments to make the results
more transparent.

7

share of nontraded goods with elasticity β . Figure 2 below illustrates how this equilibrium price
level varies with the share of nontraded goods (still assuming p* /α = 1 ).
It is easily verified that there can be no discontinuous jump in price either up or down
between the last nontraded good and the first traded good. Note that the iceberg trading costs for
adjacent goods are essentially identical and that there is no fixed cost to trade. Suppose that the price
of the first traded good jumped discontinuously above the price of the last nontraded good; then it
would be profitable for the last nontraded good to become traded instead. Similarly, suppose that the
price of the first traded good jumped discontinuously below the price of the last nontraded good; then
it would be profitable for the first traded good to become nontraded instead.12
The price indices of traded and nontraded goods are related to each other. Figure 3 shows
their relationship as the share of nontraded goods varies. Observe that (i) pT is everywhere higher
than p N , since traded goods are less costly to transport,13 and (ii) both p N and pT rise with n.14
Equations (6) and (7) can be combined to obtain a characterization of how the relative
price structure is pinned down by the share of nontraded goods n, the elasticity of transportation
costs β , and the elasticity of substitution of home goods φ :15
1

φ −1
pN  n  1 
ω 
= 
  (1 − n ) 
pT  1 − n  ω 


where once again ω ≡ β (φ − 1) − 1 .
As additional equilibrium conditions, intratemporal optimization implies the demand functions:
−φ

p 
c N = n  N  cH
 pH 

(8)

−φ

 p 
cT = (1 − n )  T  cH
 pH 
12

(9)

If we included a constant fixed cost of exporting per firm f X , the price setting condition for the marginal

exporter changes from pn = p* /(1 + τ n ) to pn = p* /(1 + τ n ) − f X . This implies a vertical jump down in our
figure 2. Note that these price setting conditions are equivalent to zero profit conditions in our endowment
economy framework with quantities normalized to unity.
13
It is not clear how one should compare this prediction to data, given that in the model quantity units are
normalized to be constant for all goods, while in actual data they obviously vary across goods. The main
testable implication is that there is a greater price wedge on average between the level of prices of
individual nontraded goods across countries than there is for the prices of traded goods across countries.
This implication is easily verified in data (e.g., see Crucini, Telmer, and Zachariadis, 2005).
14
These results should hold for any cost distribution that is monotonically increasing in i. We can verify
this at least for the class of power functions
15

β

( λ0 + λ1i )

, which are easily integrable.

Note that the absence of trade cost heterogeneity ( β = 0 ) implies ω = −1 and p N = pT .

8

−1

p 
cH = θ  H  c
 p 

(10)

−1

p 
cF = (1 − θ )  F  c
 p 

(11)

It is assumed that residents of the small open economy must pay the cost of transport for imports
of foreign goods. The price of imported foreign goods is normalized to unity in the world market,
so its domestic price is set exogenously as
pF = 1 + τ F ≡ α F
for some given τ F representing iceberg trade costs for imported goods.16 17
Market clearing for nontraded goods requires
n

cN = ∫ yi
0

pi
di = ny
pN

(12)

given our assumption yi = y for all i and that pi = pn = pN for all i∈{0, n} .
The goods market described above will be analyzed in the context of a two-period model
with a representative consumer. The consumer maximizes two-period utility

δ U ( c1 ) + U ( c2 )
subject to the intertemporal budget constraint.

16

We assume transport costs on imports may differ from those on exports (i.e., α ≠ α F ) because of, for
example, differential tariff costs. We do not consider heterogeneity in the trade costs of foreign goods nor
the endogenous determination of which goods produced abroad are traded (and imported by the domestic
economy), and which are nontraded, as the small open economy framework is better suited for considering
the endogeneity of home-country variables. Extending the model to endogenize heterogeneous imports
from abroad would not harm our main results, since our price indices are defined in terms of exported, not
imported, goods. Further, including the latter under heterogeneity would likely only enhance our result that
positive demand shocks raise the price of traded goods, since a rise in demand would induce the importing
of foreign goods with higher trade costs and lead to higher import prices and hence higher traded good
prices in the domestic market.
17
The existence of a world price for all varieties of home goods implies that these goods must all be
available abroad as well as in the home country. We rule out the possibility that any goods with which the
home country is endowed are ever imported because of the transport costs incurred by domestic residents
of doing so. Specifically, if the home country started importing what it had previously been exporting, the
price of these goods would jump from below the world price to above the world price. It would only be an
extreme case where domestic residents would be willing to pay this price and still consume enough of these
good to import them. Moreover, as long as some goods are always exported each period (i.e. n < 1 ), such
an extreme case will never be reached. Intuitively, since the last goods to stop being exported have the
lowest transport costs, they would also have to be the first ever to be imported. Hence, the exporting of all
home goods would need to cease in a period before importing any of them would begin, implying a huge
current account deficit and a zero level of gross (not merely net) exports. This is ruled out as long as n <1.

9

 pH 2

p 
p

yH 2 − c2  = −  1  (1 + r )  H 1 yH 1 − c1  .

 p2

 p2 
 p1


(13)

Here r is the world interest rate. The term δ is an exogenous discount factor that can change,
thereby allowing us to consider shifts in demand from one period to the next. Intertemporal
optimization implies the usual intertemporal Euler equation:
U c'1 =

 '
1  p1
 (1 + r ) U c 2 .
δ  p2


(14)

Equilibrium here determines values each period for the variables ct , cHt , cTt , cNt , cFt , pt ,
pHt , pTt , p Nt , nt , satisfying equations (3-4, 6-12) for each period as well as the intertemporal budget

constraint (13) and the intertemporal consumption Euler equation (14). This system is identical to a
standard two-period model, with the addition of one extra endogenous variable, n , which is pinned
down by one additional equilibrium condition, the marginal nontraded condition (7).

3. Results
A. Solution for the share of nontraded goods under balanced trade
Viewing nontradedness as endogenous offers some new insights into what drives the
degree of international integration and the openness of a country’s goods markets. Consider first a
static version of the model where δ is constant at a value of unity (and accordingly r = 0). We
will refer to this version as a steady state of the model, in that consumption and all other variables
are constant across the two periods. According to the intertemporal budget constraint, the value of
domestic production equals the value of domestic consumption in this case, and the trade balance
is zero: pH 1 yH 1 − p1c1 = pH 2 yH 2 − p2 c2 = 0 .18 In the appendix we show that the equilibrium
conditions above can be solved together to yield the following expression for the equilibrium
trade balance (surplus) Z:
Z≡

1 + n β +1β
1
 n β +1 (ω + 1) − n βφ  = 0
−
1+ β
ωθ 

(15)

where ω ≡ β (φ − 1) − 1 (and time subscripts are still omitted). In appendix A we show that the
trade balance Z falls as n increases. Intuitively, increasing n implies trade in fewer varieties of
goods and lowers the trade surplus. Condition (15) implies that the balanced trade condition
determines the steady-state share of nontraded goods, n . It is easily verified that this solution is
18

Note that pH yH is the value of the endowment.

10

the unique solution that lies within the permissible range of zero to one (see the appendix). It is
clear that if n were 0 and all goods were traded, then the trade balance is positive here. For some
n > 0 , the trade balance will fall to zero.

Condition (15) provides a number of insights concerning the determinants of the
equilibrium share of nontraded goods. One observation is that the curvature parameter in the
distribution of trade costs ( β ) plays an important role in determining n . Table 1 reports
numerical simulations for a benchmark calibration of φ = 10, p* /α = 1 , θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1 .19
Column 2 shows that a rise in β progressively raises the share of home goods that are nontraded.
This result is fairly intuitive: if trade costs rise very quickly as one exports more classes of goods,
it is optimal to export a smaller number of classes of goods. A country should then concentrate its
exports in those commodities for which international trade is so much less costly.
Another important determinant of tradedness is the elasticity of substitution between
home goods ( φ ). Table 2 shows in column 2 that as this elasticity rises, n rises gradually. The
intuition is that if home goods are highly substitutable in consumption, one can conserve on trade
costs by concentrating one’s exports in the goods that are easiest to trade. This means there will
be a smaller quantity of these particular classes of goods to consume, but under a high elasticity,
it is easy to compensate for this by consuming a greater quantity of other types of goods. On the
other hand, if home goods were less substitutable with each other, one would want to consume a
more even distribution of home goods, thereby requiring the country to export a smaller portion
of a larger number of goods to pay the bill for imports.
Lastly, observe that the scale parameter in the distribution of trade costs, α , does not
appear in equation (15) above. When one considers the effects of trade costs here, it is their
relative levels between goods (summarized in β ), not their overall level (summarized in α )
which determines the varieties of goods that are nontraded. In part, this last implication results
from the assumption of Cobb-Douglas preferences over home and foreign goods, which is a
common assumption in this literature, known to have certain implications that help simplify
analytical solutions.20 Some intuition can be found in the fact that a unitary elasticity of
substitution between home and foreign goods implies that a constant share of consumption
expenditure goes toward foreign goods, regardless of the relative price between goods, and hence

19
20

A calibration of φ = 10 is based on estimates in Basu (1996) and Basu and Fernald (1995).
See Corsetti and Pesenti (2001) for an example.

11

regardless of the size of transport costs. A sufficient quantity of home goods then must be traded
and exported to pay for these imports under balanced trade.21
However, if we consider a more general CES specification between home and foreign
goods, the scale of trade costs does affect the share of nontraded goods. The counterpart to
equation (15) for the CES case is:22
φ −γ

1 + n β +1 β   −ω  1 + ω  1  1−φ
− 

 n 
 ω  ω
 1+ β  

1−γ

1−φ
1

1
+
1

ω
1−γ
 


= n βφ    θ  n −ω 
−  + (1 − θ ) (α pF ) )

 θ   
 ω  ω







(15’)

where γ is the elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods and 1 > θ > 0 reflects
the degree of bias for home goods. A rise in α raises trade costs which lowers the price of home
goods and raises the price of imported goods in our model, shifting demand towards home goods.
For an elasticity of substitution between home and foreign goods greater than unity, it can be
confirmed that a rise in the scale of trade costs ( α ) then raises the share of nontraded goods, n ,
as one might expect. In words, expenditures on home goods rise and expenditures on foreign
goods falls. Since the domestic country is importing less, it need not export as much to balance
trade. Hence it need not export as many varieties of goods, leading to a rise in n . This result is
reversed if the elasticity between home and foreign goods is less than unity; in this case a rise in

α , increases expenditures on imports relative to that on home goods, leading to lower exports,
and lower n . For a unitary elasticity, as shown here for the Cobb-Douglas case, α has no effect
on n , since the level of relative expenditures on home and foreign goods is unchanged.
Empirical work on this elasticity suggests a value between 0.5 and 1.5, with our value of 1 in the
middle (see Pesenti, 2002).

B. Implications for the relative price of nontraded goods

21

Condition (A6) in the appendix shows that under balanced trade and Cobb-Douglas preferences, a
constant fraction of home goods will be consumed domestically and a constant fraction will be exported,
without any regard for the relative price of home to foreign goods. Because the scale parameter of transport
costs enters only through price terms, it does not enter in this condition. As long as the world prices of
home goods are uniform, the same result holds for changes in p* .
22
See the appendix in the working paper version of Bergin and Glick (2003) for the derivation of this
condition. In the case of Cobb-Douglas preferences for the home and foreign good, γ = 1 , and (15’)
reduces to (15).

12

Viewing nontradedness as endogenous also offers some new insights into the behavior of
international relative price dynamics. If we wish to solve for the dynamics of the model when
trade is not restricted to be balanced, the equilibrium conditions cannot be summarized in a single
equation as in (15); instead there is a system of four equations that must be solved numerically for
n1 , n2 , c1 and c2 :

y1n1

βφ

y2 n2

βφ

1−φ −θ
1−φ

 1  −ω

  n1 (1 + ω ) − 1 
ω



1−φ −θ
1−φ

 1  −ω

  n2 (1 + ω ) − 1 
ω


1−θ

= θα 1−θ pF 1 c1

(16)

1−θ

= θα 1−θ pF 2 c2

(17)

θ

1



β +1


 y1 1 + n1 β     −ω  1 + ω  1  1−φ 

1−θ
c2 = (1 + r ) 
−    n1 
 −   (α pF 1 ) c1  
β +1
 ω  ω 


  






1
β +1
y2 1 + n2 β     −ω  1 + ω  1  1−φ 
 •   n2 
+
−  
 
β +1
 ω  ω 
 


(18)

−θ

θ −1

(α pF 2 )



p2
c1 = δ 
 c2
 p1 (1 + r ) 

(14’)

See the appendix A for derivations. Equations (16) and (17) reflect the intratemporal allocation of
domestic consumption for home goods in periods 1 and 2 respectively, while (18) reflects the
effects of the budget constraint on intertemporal allocation. Together these three equations define
the set of combinations of c1 and c2 that are permissible for the small open economy,
characterizing the intertemporal tradeoffs that are possible. The fourth equation is the
intertemporal Euler equation (14) written for the particular case of additively separable log utility.
This condition indicates the intertemporal tradeoff between c1 and c2 that consumers in the small
open economy prefer, and captures how demand shocks to δ enter the system.
Columns (3-6) of Table 1 illustrate the ability of the model to generate a range of possible
relative price volatilities. This is done for the case of a shock to δ that raises period-one
consumption by 1.5 percent relative to its steady-state level under balanced trade. (This is the
standard deviation of U.S. consumption typically used in calibration studies.)23 The benchmark
calibration will be used again here: φ = 10, p * /α = 1, θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1, r = 0 .

23

The rise in consumption requires a shock to δ that varies from 3.14% for the case of β =0.1, to 4.26%
for β =1.5, and 4.96% for β =10.

13

Column (3) shows that the volatility of the relative price of nontraded goods depends a
great deal on the curvature parameter β . As there is only one intertemporal shock in this twoperiod experiment, this column reports the percentage “standard deviation” of pN / pT as
p /p
log  N 1 N
 pT 1 / pT


 , where overbars indicate levels in the balanced trade steady state. This volatility


is reported as a ratio to the percentage standard deviation in the real exchange rate for
1 p computed in the same manner in absolute value. This relative volatility falls dramatically as

the curvature of trade costs rises, and for a value of β = 1.5 , the model is able to approximately
replicate the value of 0.37 found in the empirical study by Betts and Kehoe (2001a, 2005).24
Empirical work by Engel (1999) finds that the volatility of nontraded prices may yet be lower
than this, but the table shows that the model is capable of replicating even very low values of
volatility as the curvature parameter β is assumed to be progressively larger.
This result stands in sharp contrast to the standard result of open economy models in the
literature, where the share of nontraded goods is taken to be exogenous. For example the classic
Balassa-Samuelson model explains real exchange rate levels exclusively in terms of shifts in the
relative price of nontraded goods. The same is true for the well-known two-period model of
Dornbusch (1983), which is very similar to the model considered here, except for the assumption
that the share of nontraded goods is fixed. Under such an assumption, a rise in consumption
demand will tend to push up the price of consumption goods, but this will be expressed only for
nontradeds, because the price of traded goods is pinned down to the world price level by
arbitrage. A rise in the relative price of nontraded goods is necessary for equilibrium, to convince
households to take their extra consumption in the form of additional imports of tradable goods,
given that the consumption of nontraded goods is limited by definition to the domestic supply of
such goods.
This conclusion is illustrated in column (7) of Table 1, where the movement in the
relative price of nontraded goods is solved for a version of the model here where n is taken to be
24

The traded goods included in the aggregate price index include only home traded goods and exclude
imported foreign goods. This is in part a matter of technical necessity: the model is designed to avoid an a
priori demarcation between different types of home goods, so there is no clear way to define a price index
combining imported foreign goods together with a subset of goods in the home goods CES index, while
excluding other goods in this CES index. Very fortunately, the stylized fact which the model is trying to
replicate is defined in precisely the same manner. When Betts and Kehoe (2001a) compute the relative
price of nontraded to traded goods, they likewise define pT in terms of the prices of goods in traded sectors
that are produced at home (using either gross output deflators by sector or a domestic producer price
index). In addition, the statistic we report for our model likewise reflects Betts and Kehoe by using the full
consumer price index for the domestic price level, p.

14

exogenous. The model is identical to the one reported in the earlier columns, except that the
“marginal nontraded condition” (equation 7) is dropped. To maintain comparability with the
earlier columns of the table the exogenous value of the nontraded share, n , is set at the level of n
found for the corresponding endogenous nontraded model reported in the preceding columns.
Note that it is true for all the cases in the table, that the relative price of nontraded goods moves
much less under the assumption of endogenous tradedness than for the standard assumption of
exogenous tradedness. In fact, it is easy to demonstrate that the ratio of volatilities reported in
column (7) must always be greater than unity when n is exogenous. Since the aggregate price
level p is a weighted average of nontraded prices ( pN ), traded home goods prices ( pT ), and
import prices ( pF ), where the latter two are fixed by world levels, the movement in the first
component must always be larger than the movement in the overall average that it induces. This
explains why a small open economy model with exogenously determined nontraded goods has
such difficulty explaining a low volatility in the price of nontraded goods relative to the overall
real exchange rate.
A comparison of columns (3) and (7) makes clear that the one change of making n
endogenous has a very dramatic effect on the ability of the model to explain this empirical
regularity. The chain of events characteristic of standard models, explained above, no longer
applies. Now, as a rise in demand starts to push up the relative price of nontraded goods, some
traded goods sellers on the margin will find it profitable to sell more in the home market, to the
point of abandoning attempts to market their good abroad where they need to deal with costs of
trade. This endogenous rise in the share of nontraded goods allows the supply of nontraded goods
to rise, despite the fact that the endowment of each individual good is fixed. This rise in supply
reduces the pressure for the relative price of nontradeds to rise in the face of the higher demand.
The main insight here is that, when one begins to view nontraded goods as being
endogenously determined, one can see there is a potentially strong force limiting the movement in
the relative price of these nontraded goods. The marginal trading condition from the model (eqn.
7) is useful in seeing how this result arises. Recall that this equation states that the price index of
nontraded goods will equal the price of the marginal traded good. This linkage between nontraded
and traded prices prevents one price index from straying too far from the other, and thus helps
dampen the volatility in their ratio.
It is interesting to note that this dampened volatility in the relative price of nontradeds
does not rule out volatility in the overall price index or real exchange rate here. Columns (5) and
(6) in Table 1 show that for high levels of β , the price of nontraded and traded goods tend to

15

move more volatility and in a synchronized fashion. Given that these two prices are important
components in the overall CPI, this overall price index moves a good deal. But because the two
components are moving in synchronization, the relative price of one in terms of the other is not
moving significantly. This explains why the ratio reported in column (3) is able to take on such
small values under endogenous tradedness, whereas it can never take a value less than unity under
the assumption of exogenous tradedness.
Why does this mechanism work best for high values of β ? Looking at the marginal
condition (equation 7), it becomes clear that β is the elasticity of the nontraded price index with
respect to changes in n . It is at high values of β where the demand shock induces a small change
in n and a large change in the price of nontraded goods. But this also requires a larger change in
the price index of traded goods, so the overall price index changes more. One interesting
implication of this logic, is that the mechanism outlined here to explain the stylized fact does not
require an implausible degree of movement in the share of nontraded goods. In fact, inspection of
column (4) of Table 1 confirms that the mechanism is at its most potent when n moves the least
between the two periods. For the benchmark case of β =1.5, the nontraded share moves 1.67%
between the periods, from a share of about 0.585 to 0.575, and this shift is yet smaller for cases
with higher β in the table.
The curvature parameter is not the only parameter to play an important role in this mechanism.
Table 2 shows that a higher elasticity of substitution between home goods ( φ ) also plays an
important role. Column (3) shows that as φ rises, the volatility in relative nontraded prices as a
ratio to that of the real exchange rate falls. Intuitively, if the last nontraded good and the marginal
traded good are highly substitutable, this makes the link between their two prices stronger. This in
turn strengthens the linkages between the price indexes of traded and nontraded goods.

C. Implications for the intertemporal price and intertemporal trade
Through its effects on relative price movements, endogenous tradability has important
implications for other macroeconomic issues. One such issue is intertemporal trade, the ability of
a country to borrow in world financial markets to finance a current account deficit in a given
period. Recently, large current account deficits in the U.S. have renewed interest in this issue.
Dornbusch (1983) demonstrated that when nontraded goods are present, a change in their relative

16

price can discourage intertemporal trade.25 Looking at the intertemporal budget constraint
(equation 13), one sees that the cost of borrowing in foreign markets includes not only the world
rate of interest, r, but also the change in the price level or real exchange rate over time. Since
borrowing takes place in units of the world consumption index, a change in the relative price of
home to foreign goods affects the cost of repaying the loan. In particular, if a temporary rise in
consumption induces a temporary rise in the domestic price level, the expected fall in price for
the next period implies that repayment of the loan will be larger in units of the home consumption
index than implied by the interest rate alone. This rise in the “intertemporal price” can discourage
such intertemporal trade.
This theory was extended in a limited but important way to endogenously nontraded
goods by Obstfeld and Rogoff (2000). In a model with one home good that can switch into and
out of being traded, it was shown that changes in the intertemporal price may be highly nonlinear,
and may come into effect only for large current account imbalances. A disadvantage of this
approach is the difficulty of dealing with Kuhn-Tucker conditions which imply discrete changes
in equilibrium conditions for various ranges of variable realizations. The model in the present
paper reformulates the equilibrium conditions for the case of a continuum of goods. Rather than
making the solution yet more complex, this permits us to eliminate the discrete changes and
discontinuities in the prices of individual goods, and instead focus on smoothly changing levels of
various integrals over regions of the continuum. As shown above, this method of dealing with
endogenous tradedness is much easier to work with, and has the promise of being incorporated
into a wide range of international macro models.
To gauge the effect of endogenous tradedness on intertemporal trade, we use our model
to compute the intertemporal price ( p1 p2 ) for various levels of intertemporal borrowing. Figure
4 plots this intertemporal price against various levels of intertemporal reallocation of
consumption ( c1 c2 ). The solid line represents the benchmark model and the dashed line the
exogenous nontraded case defined above. The exogenous share of nontraded goods for this case
is calibrated to equal the share of the endogenous model in its balanced-trade steady state.
Several conclusions emerge. First, the intertemporal price rises smoothly in the
endogenously nontraded model, in contrast to the earlier papers with only one or two home
goods. The absence of price changes for small shocks to the current account and the dramatic
kinks and sudden price rises for large imbalances characteristic of the earlier models disappear

25

This version of the intertemporal theory of the current account receives empirical support in Bergin and
Sheffrin (2000).

17

here in the more realistic case of many goods.26 This smooth rise in intertemporal price indicates
that there is no special cost that kicks in to discourage only large current account deficits.
A second conclusion is that the intertemporal price rises less steeply when tradedness is
endogenous, compared to the standard model with exogenous tradedness. The general insight of
Dornbusch (1983) is still correct, that the rise in nontraded prices implied by the presence of
nontraded goods drives up the intertemporal price. However, when goods can switch in and out of
being nontraded, they will tend to do so in a way to minimize this cost. When consumption rises
in period 1 and falls in period 2, the share of nontraded goods rises in period 1 to free up more
domestic goods for home consumption, and the share of nontraded goods falls in period 2 as the
country needs to export more goods to repay its debt. In each case, the endogenous movement in
the quantity of nontraded goods partly insulates the price of nontraded goods and thereby the
intertemporal price from the shock. The difference between the two models is small for small
current account imbalances, where the share of nontraded goods is about the same for both
models. But the difference grows for larger current account imbalances, as the share of nontraded
goods in the endogenous model deviates more from the steady-state level.
We conclude that the model with a continuum of endogenously traded goods differs from
past studies, both those assuming exogenous tradedness and those assuming simple forms of
endogeneity with a small number of goods. Not only does the more general model warn that there
is no special intertemporal price effect that might kick in to help restore balance when a country
reaches an especially large current account imbalance, but to the contrary, the automatic
mechanism working through intertemporal prices begins to break down as current account
imbalances become progressively larger.

5. Conclusions
This paper has proposed a new way of thinking about nontraded goods in a macro model,
focusing on tradedness as an endogenous decision in the face of good-specific trading costs. The
paper develops a very tractable way of dealing with this endogeneity, and explores its
implications in the context of a simple small open economy macro model. This way of thinking
offers an appealing explanation for a long-standing puzzle: the relative price of nontraded goods
tends to move with much less volatility than the real exchange rate. This fact stands in contrast to

26

In these models the kinks in the price response occur because there are a finite number of domestic goods
with discontinuously differing trade costs. Hence, as goods shift from being traded or nontraded, export
prices jump suddenly.

18

standard theoretical models such as Balassa-Samuelson, which rely almost entirely on such
relative price movements.
The paper then shows that the endogeneity of tradedness can have implications for other
macroeconomic issues. In particular, the ability of nontraded goods to discourage intertemporal trade
will be less severe than in past models, which assumed goods were exogenously nontraded.
We do not view endogenous tradability as the sole explanation for the many puzzles in
international macroeconomics. Rather we view our mechanism as complementary to other
explanations that suggest roles for sticky prices, nontraded distributive services, vertical production
arrangements, etc. In fact, the incorporation of this approach into models with these other features is a
fruitful line of research. The mechanism developed here is sufficiently simple that it has the potential
for being applied to a wide variety of macro models to analyze a range of macroeconomic issues.

6. References
Anderson, James, and Eric van Wincoop, 2004. “Trade Costs,” Journal of Economic Literature
42.
Balassa, Bela, 1964. “The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal,” Journal of Political
Economy 72, 584-596.
Basu, S., 1996. “Procyclical Productivity: Increasing Returns or Cyclical Utilization?” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 111, 719-751.
Basu, S. and Fernald, J.G., 1995. “Are Apparent Productivity Spillovers a Figment of
Specification Error?” Journal of Monetary Economics 36, 165-188.
Bernard, Andrew and J. Bradford Jensen, 2001. “Why Some Firms Export,” NBER Working
Paper No. 8394.
Bergin, Paul R. and Reuven Glick, 2003. “Endogenous Nontradability and Macroeconomic
Implications,” NBER Working Paper No. 9739.
________, 2006. “A Model of Endogenous Nontradability and its Implications for the Current
Account,” Review of International Economics, forthcoming.
________, 2007. “Productivity, Tradability, and Understanding International Economic
Integration, Journal of International Economics, forthcoming.
________, and Alan M. Taylor, 2005. “Productivity, Tradability, and the Long Run Price
Puzzle,” forthcoming in the Journal of Monetary Economics.
Bergin , Paul R. and Steven Sheffrin, 2000. “Interest Rates, Exchange Rates and Present Value
Models of the Current Account,” The Economic Journal 110, 535-558.

19

Betts, Caroline and Timothy Kehoe, 2001a. “Real Exchange Rate Movements and the Relative
Price of Nontraded Goods,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report.
________, 2001b. “Tradability of Goods and Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations,” Federal Reserve
Bank of Minneapolis Staff Report.
________, 2005. "U.S. Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations and Relative Price Fluctuations,"
forthcoming in Journal of Monetary Economics.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Paolo Pesenti, 2001. “Welfare and Macroeconomic Interdependence,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 116, 421-445.
Crucini, Mario J., Chris I Telmer and Marios Zachariadis, 2005. “Understanding European Real
Exchange Rates,” American Economic Review 95, 724-738.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, 1983. “Real Interest Rates, Home Goods and Optimal External Borrowing,”
Journal of Political Economy 91, 141-153.
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fisher and Paul Samuelson, 1977. “Comparative Advantage, Trade,
and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,” American Economic
Review 67, 823-839.
Engel, Charles, 1993. “Real Exchange Rates and Relative Prices: An Empirical Investigation,”
Journal of Monetary Economics 32, 35-50.
________, 1999. “Accounting for Real Exchange Rate Changes,” Journal of Political Economy
107, 507-538.
Ghironi, Fabio, and Marc Melitz, 2005. “International Trade and Macroeconomic Dynamics with
Heterogeneous Firms,” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 120, 865-915.
Hummels, David, 1999. “Toward a Geography of Trade Costs,” working paper, Purdue
University.
_______, 2001. “Time as a Trade Barrier,” working paper, Purdue University.
Naknoi, Kanda, 2005. “Real Exchange Rate Fluctuations, Endogenous Tradability and Exchange
Rate Regime,” mimeo Purdue University.
Obstfeld, Maurice and Kenneth Rogoff, 2000. “The Six Major Puzzles in International
Macroeconomics: Is there a Common Cause?” in Ben Bernanke and Kenneth Rogoff, eds.,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual, Cambridge: MIT press, 339-390.
Pesenti, Paolo, 2002. “International Monetary Policy Cooperation and Financial Market
Integration,” discussant comments at European Central Bank International Research Forum
on Monetary Policy, Frankfurt, July.
Samuelson, Paul A., 1964. “Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems,” Review of Economics and
Statistics 46, 145-154.

20

Table 1: Demand shock, role of β
Endogenous n
(1)

(2)

β

n

0.1

Exogenous n*

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

sdev ( pN pT )
sdev (1 p )

n 
log  1 
 n2 

sdev ( p N )

sdev ( pT )

0.1966

3.5350

0.0458

0.0023

0.0008

5.5679

0.5

0.4507

0.8988

0.0239

0.0059

0.0038

2.5509

1.5

0.5802

0.3810

0.0167

0.0124

0.0103

2.1689

5

0.7184

0.1623

0.0085

0.0209

0.0193

2.0500

10

0.7963

0.1109

0.0025

0.0246

0.0232

2.0251

sdev ( pN pT )
sdev (1 p )

Benchmark parameter values: φ = 10, p * α = 1, θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1, r = 0 .
Computed for a taste shock that leads to a 1.5% rise in period one consumption.
The volatility of variables, reported as ‘sdev,’ is computed as the absolute value of the log deviation
between the period 1 and steady-state values. For example:

p

sdev ( p N pT )

p 

 p

= log  N 1 T 1  log   .
sdev (1 p )
 p N pT 
 p1 

*Computed for the corresponding level of n , to facilitate comparison with the endogenous n case.

Table 2: Demand shock, role of φ
Endogenous n
(1)

(2)

φ

n

5

Exogenous n*

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

(7)

sdev ( pN pT )
sdev (1 p )

n 
log  1 
 n2 

sdev ( p N )

sdev ( pT )

0.5503

0.7787

0.0165

0.0124

0.0083

2.3895

10

0.5802

0.3810

0.0167

0.0124

0.0103

2.1689

20

0.5937

0.1801

0.0169

0.0126

0.0115

2.0815

sdev ( pN pT )
sdev (1 p )

Benchmark parameter values: β = 1.5, p * /α = 1, θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1, r = 0 .
Computed for a taste shock that leads to a 1.5% rise in period one consumption.
The volatility of variables, reported as ‘sdev,’ is computed .as the absolute value of the log deviation
between the period 1 and steady-state values.
*Computed for the corresponding level of n , to facilitate comparison with the endogenous n model.

21

Fig. 1: Price of good if traded ( p* /α = 1)
1.0
β=0.1
0.8
β=0.5

β=1.5

0.4

0.2

0.0
0.0

β=5
β=10
0.1

0.2

0.3

0.4

0.5

0.6

0.7

0.8

0.9

1.0

good index (i)

Fig. 2: Aggregate price level of nontraded goods
(shown for β = 1.5, p* /α = 1 )
1

p(i)

pN __________________________

..................................

price level

p(i)

0.6

0
0

n
good index (i)

22

1

Fig. 3: Price indexes of traded and nontraded goods
as a function of n
(shown for β = 1.5, p* /α = 1, φ = 10 )
.9
.8

price level

.7

price index
of traded goods

.6
.5

price index
of nontraded goods

.4
.3
.2
.4

.5

.6
.7
n (share of nontraded goods)

.8

Fig 4: Intertemporal price, log(p1/p2)
.15
exogenous n case
.10
endogenous n case
slope = 0.3849

log(p1/p2)

.05
.00

-.05
-.10
-.15
-.3

-.2

-.1

.0
.1
log(c1/c2)

.2

.3

Plotted for β = 1.5, α = 1, θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1, Cobb-Douglas preferences ,
where n set to 0.5802 for the exogenous n case.

23

.4

Appendix: Derivation of equilibrium conditions
Combine (8) and (12) to solve out for cN :
φ

cH = y ( p N / p H )

(A1)

Substitute in (A1) for pN with (7):
φ

pH cH = ( p* /α ) yn βφ pH

1−φ

.

(A2)

Substitute in (4) for pT with (6) and for pN with (7):
1−φ

pH

 p *  1 −ω
 n (1 + ω ) − 1
= 
α  ω

1−φ

(A3)

where ω ≡ β (φ − 1) − 1 . Combine (A3) with (A2) to obtain
p* y  n βφ  −ω

  n (1 + ω ) − 1 .
α  ω 
Note next that the domestic value of aggregate home production can be derived as
p H cH =

n

1

0

n

(A4)

1

n

pH yH = ∫ pi yi di + ∫ pi yi di = ∫ pN ydi + ∫ pi ydi
0

 p*i β
= ( p* /α )( n β ) ny + y ∫ 
α
n
1

=

p* y

α

n β +1 +

n


 di


p* y  1 
(1 − nβ +1 )
α  β + 1 

implying
pH yH =

p* y 1 + n β +1β 
.
α  1 + β 

(A5)

With balanced trade, pH yH = pc . Noting that (10) implies pH cH = θ pc and combining this with
the balanced trade condition gives
1
p H y H =   p H cH .
θ 

(A6)

Substituting in (A6) on the lefthand side for pH yH with (A5) and on the righthand side for
pH cH with (A4):

 p* y  1 + n β +1 β  p* y  n βφ



=
 α   1 + β  θα  ω

 −ω
  n (1 + ω ) − 1 .


Canceling p* y / α from both sides, recalling ω ≡ β (φ − 1) − 1 , and rearranging gives equation
(15) in the text, the equilibrium condition for n in the case of a zero trade balance surplus Z:
Z≡

1 + n β +1 β
1
 n β +1 (ω + 1) − n βφ  = 0 .
−
1+ β
ωθ 

24

(15)

To show a unique solution exists for condition (15), it is straightforward to see that for n = 0 ,
Z = 1/(1 + β ) > 0 , and for n = 1 , Z = −(1 − θ ) / θ < 0 . Showing that ∂Z / ∂n < 0 implies that Z
crosses the 0 axis only once and is sufficient to establish the existence of a unique solution for n:
β
∂Z ( β + 1) n β
1
( β + 1) n β (ω + 1) − βφ n βφ −1 
=
−
∂n
1+ β
θω
1
 n β β (θ − 1)ω − n β βφ (1 − nω )  < 0
=
θω

since θ < 1 and 1 − nω > 0 for 0 < n < 1 and ω > 0 .27
Given the level of n that implicitly solves condition (15), it is straightforward to solve for
the other endogenous variables: first the prices, pT and pN through (6) and (7), pH through
(A3), p through (3); and then the quantities, cN and cT through (8) and (9), cH and cF through
(10) and (11), and c through (1).
For the multiperiod case, we introduce time subscripts and solve out for cHt with (A2)
and (10) together to get

yt

α

φ

βφ

nt pHt

1−φ

= θ pt ct .

(A7)

Substitute in (3) for pHt with (A3) to get
θ /(1−φ )

1  1 −ω

pt = θ   nt (1 + ω ) − 1 
α ω


pFt

1−θ

.

(A8)

Substitute in (A7) for pHt with (A3) and for pt with (A8):
θ /(1−φ )

1 1
1−θ
 nt −ω (1 + ω ) − 1 = θ θ   nt −ω (1 + ω ) − 1 
pFt ct .




α
ω
α ω

Rearranging gives the equations (16) and (17) that express the intratempoal consumption
allocation relation between ct and nt that holds for each period t =1,2:

yt

nt

βφ

1

(A9)

1−φ −θ

 1 −ω
 1−φ
1−θ
= θα 1−θ pFt ct .
yt nt   nt (1 + ω ) − 1 
ω

Lastly, we rearrange the intertemporal budget constraint (13) to get
βφ

c2 = (1 + r )( pH 1 yH 1 − p1c1 ) + pH 2 yH 2  / p2 .

(16,17)

(A10)

Substituting in (A10) for pHt yHt with (A5) and for pt with (A8), t =1,2 gives (18):
θ


1


β +1

 y1 1 + n1 β     −ω  1 + ω  1  1−φ 


1−θ

−
−   (α pF 1 ) c1  
c2 = (1 + r ) 
   n1 

β +1


 ω  ω 
  
 





 


−θ
y2 1 + n2 β +1β     −ω  1 + ω  1  1−φ 
• n
+
−
   2  ω  ω  
β +1



 

27

−θ

θ −1

( α pF 2 )

.



If ω < 0 , then 1 − nω < 0 , but it is straightforward to see that ∂Z / ∂n < 0 still.

25

(18)

The system of three equations – (16), (17), and (18) -- can be solved numerically for n1 , n2 , and

c2 , given a value of c1 . The Euler equation (14) completes the system.

26

Addendum: Generalizing to Production Economies

While the price implications of endogenous tradability were most transparently
demonstrated in an endowment economy, we demonstrate here the robustness of the result to a
more general environment, including production and productivity shocks. We begin by allowing
production of home goods with a homogenous production function, while maintaining the
assumption of heterogeneous trade costs. We then go on to consider an alternative case where
productivity, rather than transport costs, vary heterogeneously across goods.

A. Homogenous productivity and heterogeneous transport costs
We introduce output through a Ricardo-Viner specific factors production function which
implies a decreasing returns to scale in the variable factor:
a

yi = A ( li ) ,

0 ≤ a ≤1

(19)

where li denotes workers employed in production of each individual good i, and A is a
productivity level parameter. This approach is necessary here to ensure a non-degenerate set of
traded goods -- the “full specialization problem” -- and is a common device in the trade literature
(see Jones, 1971; Samuelson, 1971; and Mussa, 1974 for early examples). Under a constant
returns alternative, the small open economy would concentrate production for export in only the
final variety in the continuum that has the lowest transport cost. We employ the usual assumption
that labor is mobile across sectors within each economy, but immobile internationally.
With perfect competition, marginal costs are equalized to price:

pi =

W
W
1/ e
,
=
y
1/ a ( i )
ayi / li a ( A)

implying output of good i is 28
e

 a ( A)1/ a 
yi =  pi
 , e ≡ a /(1 − a) > 0
W 


(20)

where W denotes the domestic wage rate and e is the price elasticity of output. Output rises as
productivity increases or wages decline.
As in the endowment case, the small open economy assumption implies traded goods
prices are pinned down by the world price (still normalized to a uniform constant for all goods)

28

Note lim a a = 1 .
a→0

and transport costs. Thus the export prices of individual goods pi are still given by (5) and the
price index for traded goods pT is still given by (6).
To determine the price of nontraded goods, note that (20) implies that the relative
supplies for each pair of goods i and j depend positively on their relative prices:
e

y i  pi 
=  ,
y j  p j 
while intratemporal optimization implies their relative demands are
−φ

ci  pi 
=  .
c j  p j 
Since consumption must equal production of nontraded goods, ci / c j = yi / y j , it follows that

pi / p j = 1 , yi / y j = 1 in equilibrium for i, j ∈ {0, n} . In other words, if there are no productivity
differences among home goods, then their prices and quantities are identical when they are not
traded. (When they are traded, their prices differ if trade costs are heterogeneous.) The
uniformity of nontraded prices is the same result derived in the uniform endowment case. As
before, the price of the marginally traded good n, p n = ( p * /α ) n β , pins down the price level of all
nontraded goods, and the average price of nontradeds p N is still given by (7). So the inclusion of
production has no effect on the equilibrium condition for nontraded prices, and it can only
influence the equilibrium value of these prices via its effects on the share of nontradeds, n, in that
condition.
Output levels reflect the pattern of prices. Inserting the expression for traded goods
prices (5) into (20) yields

 p *i β a ( A )1/ a
yi = 
 α
W







e

i ∈{n, 1}

(21)

while the price of the marginally traded good n , and the property of uniform nontraded prices
imply

 p * n β a ( A)1/ a 
yi = y n = 

W 
 α

e

i ∈ {0, n} .

(22)

Thus, for given levels of wages and the nontraded share, the output of nontraded goods is
constant, while the output of tradeds increases as trade costs fall.
In appendix B we show that the labor market equilibrium condition yields an equation
linking wages to the share of nontraded goods and other exogenous variables:
ii

1− a

p* aA 1 + n β (1+ e )+1 β (1 + e) 
W = 1−a 
α L  β (1 + e) + 1 

(23)

where L is the fixed labor supply. With export prices pinned down by the world market, wages
rise in response to an increase in productivity or to an increase in the share of nontraded goods n.
In the single period setting the model is closed by the trade balance condition (see the appendix):

Z≡

1 + n β (1+ e ) +1 β (1 + e) 1
 n β (1+ e ) +1 (ω + 1) − n β (φ + e )  = 0
−
1 + β (1 + e)
ωθ 

(24)

It is readily apparent that (24) is a generalized version of the trade balance condition derived in
the endowment case that determines the equilibrium share of nontraded goods n . (In the special
case that the price elasticity of output e is zero eqn. (24) reduces to eqn. (15)). As in the prior
case, with Cobb-Douglas preferences, n is independent of homogenous shocks to transport costs

α ; here it is independent of homogenous productivity level shocks in A as well.
In the multiperiod case allowing unbalanced trade, equilibrium involves solving a set of
equations analogous to (16)-(18). However, in addition to solving for n1 , n2 , and c2 , given a
value of c1 , now we must also determine wages W1 , W2 . We do so by adding to the system the
wage equation (23) for periods 1 and 2. We relegate a listing of this system of equations to
appendix B and report in Table 3 the results of a demand shock in the production model.
Numerical experiments in this expanded model require calibration of some additional parameters.
We set the steady-state level of technology A , and the labor supply L to unity. This implies that
as the production scale term a goes to zero, the economy converges to the endowment economy
shown earlier in the paper. For the purpose of our experiments, we set a at 0.5. All other
parameters are the same as in the endowment model, as reported in Table 1. Once again, the
shock is a rise in δ sufficient to raise consumption in period one by 1.5%.29
The results of the experiment are similar to those in Table 1 for the endowment economy.
Increases in β and greater heterogeneity in transport costs dampen movements in the relative
price of nontradables to tradables, so it is still true that a low magnitude in the movement of this
relative price is possible for the appropriate choice of heterogeneity in transport costs.
Several differences with the endowment economy model are worth highlighting. First,
the steady-state share of nontraded goods in column 2 is somewhat higher with production.
Intuitively, endogenous production allows the small open economy to take advantage of the
heterogeneity in transport costs more fully. Even in the endowment economy trade was
29

This implies a rise in δ of 3.9% for the main case of β =1.5, compared to 4.26% in the endowment
model.

iii

concentrated in sectors with low trade costs, though this came at the cost of shifting consumption
toward the remaining sectors; now production can be concentrated in these sectors to permit
greater exports in these tradable sectors with smaller costs for consumption allocations. The
dynamic response of the share of nontrades to the shock is also somewhat smaller than that in the
endowment economy, on a percentage basis.
Second, the fact that the values of n differ somewhat from the endowment economy case
means that the behavior of prices differs somewhat. In general, the movement in the relative price
of nontradeds (column 3) is somewhat higher than that in the endowment economy for each
magnitude of β listed. We know from the analytical results above that this difference comes
about simply because of the different values of n ; conditional on n , the equilibrium conditions
for prices are identical in the production and endowment economies. Nevertheless, the differences
in prices are rather small, and they still follow a steady downward trajectory as the magnitude of

β rises.
Since we now have a model with endogenous production, it is natural to consider another
type of experiment, involving a shock to the production function rather than the demand
condition. Table 4 presents numerical results for a shock that raises the technology term A in
period 2 by 1.5 percent. (This shock raises equilibrium output in period 2 by 1.32 percent for the
benchmark case of β =1.5). Note that this is the type of supply shock considered by Dornbusch
(1983).
Results for a productivity shock are extremely similar to those for the demand shock.
While the movements in the share of nontraded goods are different, they still move in the manner
needed to buffer the change in nontraded prices and facilitate movements in the price of traded
goods. Once again the role play by nontraded prices in column (3) varies inversely with β , and
low magnitudes of relative price movement are possible for the appropriate choice of this
heterogeneity parameter. We conclude that our main insight from the simple endowment
economy extends to a model including production and even including supply shocks.

B. Heterogeneous productivity and homogeneous transport costs
While the focus of this paper is on the important role of heterogeneity in terms of trade
costs, given that the preceding literature has focused on heterogeneity in terms of productivities,
we briefly consider this alternative here.
In particular, we assume a production function
a

yi = Ai ( li ) ,

iv

0 ≤ a ≤1

(19’)

where productivity is an increasing function of i

Ai = Ai β A
with A denoting the homogenous component constant across goods and β A capturing the degree
of heterogeneity across varieties.
To highlight the role of productivity differences we also assume trade costs are
homogenous, i.e. β = 0 in (5), implying the prices of all traded goods are identical:

pi =

p*
p*
=
1+τi
α

for i ∈ {n,1} .

(5’)

Hence

pT =

p*

α

.

(6’)

Thus the average price of traded goods is now independent of n.
The equalization of marginal costs and price implies output of each good depends on its
productivity

 a ( Ai )1/ a 
yi =  pi

W 


e

(20’)

implying in turn

y i  pi 
= 
y j  p j 

e

 Ai

 Aj





1+ e

.

It follows from the equilibrium condition for nontradeds ci / c j = yi / y j that (noting that

e ≡ a /(1 − a ) implies 1 + e = e / a )

pi  Ai 
= 
p j  A j 

−

e+ 1
e +φ

y A 
, i = i 
y j  A j 

 e +1 

 e+φ 

φ

for i ∈ {0, n}

or, for j = n
A 
pi = p n  i 
 An 

−

e+1
e+φ

i
= pn  
n

 e+1 
−β

 e+φ 

,

A 
yi = yn  i 
 An 

 e+ 1 

 e +φ 

φ

i
= yn  
n

 e+ 1 

 e +φ 

βφ 

(25)

Thus, in contrast to the case with homogenous productivity, heterogeneous productivity implies
that the prices and output of the intramarginal nontraded goods differ, with their prices falling and
output rising as productivity increases across varieties. It follows that the price index of nontraded
goods is

v

1/(1−φ )

 1 n

1−φ
pN =     ∫ ( pi ) di  
 n 

0



1+ e

 
−
  1   n   Ai  e +φ
=     ∫ pn  

  n   0   An 
 


1−φ







1/(1−φ )



di  
 


(7’)

1/(1−φ )


 n β A e1++φe (φ −1)  
  1   Ai

= pn     ∫
di  
1+ e
(
−
1)
β
φ
  n   0 An A e +φ
 




1/(φ −1)

  1+ e 

= pn  β A 
 (φ − 1) + 1
  e +φ 


where the appearance of n in the integral cancels that in the multiplicative weighting term, so that
n is eliminated in the final form of the expression (7’). Since p n , the price of the marginally
traded good, is pinned down by its export price, p * /α , which as noted above is independent of n
, the price index of nontradeds is independent of n as well. Because pT and p N depend only on
constant parameters, their ratio, the relative price of nontradeds p N / pT , is clearly invariant to
shocks, even if the tradability of goods changes. This does not mean that individual goods prices
are invariant; solving for the price of individual nontraded goods prices (see eqn. 25) indicates
that these goods prices all rise when a shock raises n. (The mechanism through which this occurs
is rising wages, which are passed on to higher marginal costs.) But it is this same shift in n that
guarantees that the aggregate price index of nontraded goods does not change. In particular, as the
distribution of prices of individual nontraded goods shifts up, the support of this distribution
expands to include a new set of cheaper goods, enough to hold constant the average price among
nontradeds as a group.
Nor does this result imply that there are no effects on broader price aggregates.
Comparison of (6’) and (7’) indicates p N > pT . Since nontraded goods by definition display
lower average productivity than traded goods, their prices are higher. This contrasts with our
earlier analysis where traded prices always exceed nontraded prices (because the latter are pinned
down by the marginal traded good which has a lower price than that of traded goods on average).
Given this fact, inspection of (4) implies that an increase in n raises p H since it raises the weight
of the higher priced nontradeds in the home goods basket. And this in turn raises the overall price
level p. Further details of the model in this case are relegated to appendix C.
Since the analytical equations (6’) and (7’) make clear that shocks have no effect on the
relative price of nontraded goods through changes in tradability regardless of the value of the
heterogeneity parameter β A , there is little benefit in presenting numerical simulations in tables
analogous to Tables 3 and 4. However, such numerical simulations do confirm that a demand
shock raises the share of nontraded goods as the rise in demand in period 1 generates a current

vi

account deficit in that period. Similarly, if we consider the same experiment as in Table 4 of a rise
in period two technology A2 , this also has very similar effects: an anticipated rise in future output
generates a rise in current consumption and hence a current account deficit, which again raises the
endogenous share of nontraded goods. The price effects discussed above then naturally ensue.
We conclude that, despite the very different nature of this model with productivity
heterogeneity, it generates results broadly consistent with our main insight from the earlier
models with endowments or production with homogeneous productivity. Once again it is
adjustment in the endogenous share of nontraded goods that buffers the effect of shocks on the
relative price of nontraded goods. In fact for the case considered with heterogeneous productivity,
the movement in n completely neutralizes the effect that any movement in individual goods prices
will have on the nontraded price aggregate. Further, similar to our previous results, this fact does
not rule out movements in the overall national price level. The particular mechanism generating
this portion of the result is somewhat different in this model specification, in that it no longer is a
matter of nontraded and traded prices moving together, but the fact that nontraded prices receive a
greater weight in the overall aggregate. But again it is the endogenous movement in the nontraded
margin n that facilitates this result.

References
Jones, R. W., 1971. “A Three-Factor Model in Theory, Trade and History.” In J.N. Bhawati, R.A.
Mundell, and J. Vanek, eds., Trade Balance of Payments and Growth: Essays in Honor of
Charles P. Kindelberger. Amsterdam: North Holland.
Mussa, M. 1974. “Tariffs and the Distribution of Income: The Importance of Factor Specificity,
Substitutability, and Intensity in the Short and Long Run.” Journal of Political Economy
82, 1191-1204.
Samuelson, Paul A. 1971. “Ohlin Was Right.” Swedish Journal of Economics 73, 365-84.

vii

Table 3: Demand shock in production economy, role of β

(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

β

n

sdev ( pN pT )
sdev (1 p )

n 
log  1 
 n2 

sdev ( p N )

sdev ( pT )

0.1

0.2214

3.3072

0.0417

0.0021

0.0008

0.5

0.4974

0.9302

0.0196

0.0049

0.0031

1.5

0.6490

0.4487

0.0115

0.0086

0.0068

5

0.7948

0.2225

0.0049

0.0122

0.0109

7.5*

0.8363

0.1845

0.0035

0.0130

0.0118

*

Benchmark parameter values: φ = 10, p /α = 1, θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1, r = 0 , A = 1, L = 1, a = 0.5 .
Computed for a taste shock that leads to a 1.5% rise in period one consumption.
The volatility of variables, reported as ‘sdev,’ is computed as the absolute value of the log deviation
between the period 1 and steady-state values.
* Numerical solutions converge for values of β only up to 7.5.

Table 4: Productivity shock in production economy
(1)

(2)

(3)

(4)

(5)

(6)

β

n

sdev ( pN pT )
sdev (1 p )

n 
log  1 
 n2 

sdev ( p N )

sdev ( pT )

0.1

0.2214

3.3173

0.0202

0.0010

0.0004

0.5

0.4974

0.9293

0.0086

0.0021

0.0013

1.5

0.6490

0.4475

0.0045

0.0034

0.0027

5

0.7948

0.2219

0.0017

0.0044

0.0039

9*

0.8531

0.1704

0.0010

0.0046

0.0042

Benchmark parameter values: φ = 10, p * /α = 1, θ = 0.5, τ F = 0.1, r = 0 , A = A1 = 1, L = 1, a = 0.5 .
Computed for a rise in A in period 2 by 1.5%.
The volatility of variables, reported as ‘sdev,’ is computed as the absolute value of the log deviation
between the period 1 and steady-state values.
* Numerical solutions converge for values of β only up to 9.

viii

Technical Appendix to the Addendum
A. Production economy with homogenous productivity
Equations (1) to (11) continue to apply when the model includes production. Given the property
that yi = yn and pi = pn = pN for i ∈ {0, n} when productivity is homogenous, the marketclearing condition for nontradeds (12) becomes
n

cN = ∫ yi
0

pi
di = nyn
pN

(B12)

e

 p* n β a ( A )1/ a 
 is the output of the marginally traded good n, e ≡ a /(1 − a ) , a is the
where yn ≡ 
 α
W 


output elasticity of labor in the production function (19). Following the same sequence of
substitutions in deriving (A1)-(A4) yields
φ

cH = yn ( p N / p H )

(B1)

φ

 p* 
pH cH = yn   n β φ pH 1−φ
α 
1−φ

pH

1−φ

 p* 
= 
α 

pH cH =

1

(B2)

 n−ω (1 + ω ) − 1

(B3)

 −ω
  n (1 + ω ) − 1


(B4)

ω

yn p*  n βφ

α  ω

where ω ≡ β (φ − 1) − 1 . (Comparing with (A1)-(A4), note that yn replaces y in (B1), (B2), and
(B4), while (A3) and (B3) are identical.) The value of aggregate home production can be derived
as :
e

 i β p*  p*i β a( A)1/ a 
pH yH = ∫ pi yi di + ∫ pi yi di = ∫ pn yn di + ∫ 

 di
α  α
W 
n
n
0
0
n

1

1

n

1+ e

1
= npn yn +  
α 

 a ( A )1/ a 


 W 

e
1+ e

( p* )

(1 − n

β (1+ e ) +1

)

β (1 + e) + 1

by again utilizing the property that pi = pn = pN and yi = yn for i ∈{0, n} and by substituting
for pi , yi , i ∈{n, 1} with (5) and (21), respectively. Substituting in for pn =

p* n β

α

,

e

 p* n β aA1/ a 
yn ≡ 
 then gives
W 
 α
e

1+ e

 a ( A )1/ a   p* 
pH y H = 
  
 W  α 

ix

1 + β (1 + e)n β (1+ e ) +1 

.
1 + β (1 + e)



(B5)

The trade balance condition can be derived by first substituting for yn in (B4) and then
substituting the resulting expression for pH cH on the righthand side of (A6) and substituting (B5)
for pH yH on the lefthand side of (A6) to obtain:
e

1+ e

 a ( A)1/ a   p* 

  
 W  α 

e

 ( β (1 + e) ) n β (1+ e ) +1 + 1 
1 *  p* a ( An )1 / a   n β ( e+φ )
p 

=
 
W
β (1 + e) + 1
  ω

 θα  α

 −ω
  n (1 + ω ) − 1 .


Cancelling the term ( p* /α )1+ e from both sides and rearranging gives the trade balance condition
(24) in the text:
To derive the wage equation, substitute for li with the production function (19) into the

∫

labor market equilibrium condition

n

0

li di +

1

∫ l di

1/ a

y 
∫0  Ai  d i +
n

= L , implying

i

n

1/ a

y 
∫n  Ai  d i = L .
1

Further substitution for yi with (21) and (22) gives
  * β a A 1/ a
( )
 p i
1 α
W


∫n 
A



which, upon noting e / a = 1 + e and integrating, results in
   p*  n β a ( A)1/ a
  
n 
W
   α 

∫0
A



1+ e

 p* a A 


 αW 

1/ a

e
 
 
  di +





1+ e

n

β (1+ e )

 p* a A 
n +

 αW 






e

1/ a




 di = L





1
1 − n β (1+ e )+1 ) = L .
(
β (1 + e) + 1

Solving for W and noting 1/(1 + e) = 1 − a gives expression (23) in the text.
To derive the analogues to (16), (17), and (18) in the multiperiod case, we reintroduce
time subscripts and solve out for cHt with (B2) and (10) together to get
φ

 p* 
1−φ
βφ
  ynt nt pHt = θ pt ct .
α 

(B7)

Next substitute in (3) for pHt with (B3) to get
θ

θ /(1−φ )
 p *   1 −ω

1−θ
pt =  t    nt (1 + ω ) − 1 
pFt
(B8)
α
ω


 
which is identical to (A8). Substituting in (B7) for pHt with (B3) and for pt with (B8) gives an

gives expression equivalent to (A9) with y replaced by yn . Rearranging gives the equations
(B16) and (B17) that express the intratemporal consumption allocation relation between ct and
nt that holds for each period t = 1, 2:
ynt nt

βφ

1−φ −θ
1−φ

 1 −ω

  nt (1 + ω ) − 1 
ω


x

1−θ

 p 
= θ  *Ft 
 pt /α 

c1 .

(B16, B17)

e

  p *  β a ( At )1/ a
where (recall) ynt ≡   t  nt
 α 
Wt



 . Lastly, substitute for pHt yHt with (B5) and for pt


with (B8) in the rearranged intertemporal budget constraint (A9) to get (B18):

( )

θ
θ

 * 1+e

β (1+ e ) +1
1/ a e

1  1−φ  p1* 
−ω  1 + ω 
1−θ
(1 + r )   p1   a ( A1 )  1 + β (1 + e) n1


− ( n1 ) 
 −    ( pF 1 ) c1  

  α   W1 
1
+
(1
+
e
)
β
ω
ω
α



  




c2 = 
1
+
e
e


β
(1
+
e
)
+
1
 p2*   a ( A2 )1/ a  1 + β (1 + e)n2


+  



1 + β (1 + e)
 α   W2 
−θ
−θ


θ −1 
1  1−φ  p2* 
−ω  1 + ω 

•  ( n2 ) 
 −    ( pF 2 ) 
 ω  ω  α 
 

The system of five equations – (B16), (B17), (B18) and the wage equation (23) for periods 1 and

2 – can be solved numerically for n1 , n2 , c2 , W1 , W2 , given a value of c1 .

B. Production economy with heterogeneous productivity
Equations (1) – (11) continue to apply as in the homogenous productivity case.
Using (25) to substitute for pi and yi in (12), it follows that
cN = ∫

n

0

p
1
yi i di =
pN
pN

y n pn
pN

=

i
0 n
 

∫

n

∫

n

0

i
yn  
n

 (φ −1)(1+ e ) 

e +φ



βA

 1+ e 

 e +φ 

β Aφ 

i
pn  
n

 1+ e 
− βA

 e +φ 

di





y p
1
 n.
di = n n 
pN   (1 + e)(φ − 1)  
 + 1 
 β A 
e +φ
 
 

which, after substituting for p N with (7’), yields

cN =

yn pn
1/(φ −1)

 (1 + e)(φ − 1) 
pn  β A
+ 1
e +φ







1

n
  (1 + e)(φ − 1)  
 β A 
 + 1 
e +φ
 
 

φ /(φ −1)

 1 
=

 1 + ωA 

nyn

e

 p * a( An β A )1/ a 
p*
(1 + e)(φ − 1)
where ω A = β A
, yn ≡ 
> 0 , pn =
 .
e +φ
α
W
α


xi

(C12)

The analogue expressions obtained for (A1)-(A4) are given by30
−φ

φ

cH = yn (1 + ω A )φ −1 ( pN / pH )

(C1)

φ

 p* 
pH cH =  
α 
1−φ

pH

1−φ

 p* 
= 
α 

 p * yn
pH c H = 
 α

1−φ

( pH )

(C2)

yn



1 
1 − n 1 −

 1 + ω A 




1
 1 − n 1 −

 1 + ωA

(C3)

 .



(C4)

Following the same sequence of substitutions as in prior variants of the model, we can then derive
expressions for the value of aggregate home output:

 a ( A)
pH yH = 
 W

1/ a

1+ e

*
 (p )


 
  α 
e

ωφ ωφ β A (1+e )+1 

+
n
1−

ωe ωe




1 + ωA





(C5)

the trade balance:
1 
 1   β 1+ e
β 1+ e +1 
−    n A ( ) − n A ( ) 1 −

ωe
1 + ωA
θ 
 1 + ω A 
intratemporal consumption allocation:
Z=

1

+

(ωφ / ωe )

n

β A (1+ e ) +1



1 
ynt 1 − nt  1 −


 1 + ω A  

1−φ −θ
1−φ

(C15)

θ −1

 p* 
=θ 
α 

1−θ

pFt ct

(C16, C17)

budget constraint (C18):

1/ a
 * 1+e 
a ( A1 )

 p 
c2 = (1 + r )  1  
  α   W1



1+e

 p* 
+ 2 
α 

 a ( A )1/ a
2

 W2







e






e

θ /(1−φ )

θ
1 − ω /ω + ω /ω ( n )ωe  



 p1* 
e
e
1
φ
φ
1

1−θ


 − 1 − n 1−
p
c

  F1 1 
1


1 + ωA
α 
 1 + ω A  


 


(

) (

)

1 − ω /ω + ω /ω ( n )ωe
e
e
2
φ
φ


1 + ωA


(

) (

)

−θ /(1−φ )
−θ
 

 p2* 
θ −1
  •1 − n 1− 1  
  pF 2
2
  
1
+
ω
α


A 
 
 

and the wage equation:

30

Solving out for cN with (8) and (C12) gives (C1). Substituting in (C1) in turn for pN with (7’) gives

(C2). Substituting into (4) with expressions for pT (6’) and pN (7’) gives (C3). Combining (C2) and (C3)
gives (C4).

xii

1

β A (1+ e ) +1 1+ e

 p a At   1 − (ωφ / ωe ) + (ωφ / ωe ) ( nt )

Wt =  1− a  

1 + ωA
 α L  

*
t

(C23)

 1+ e 
(1 + e)(φ − 1)
where ωe ≡ β A(1 + e ) + 1 > 1, ωφ ≡ β A 
= ωe − ωφ − 1 > 0 ,
 (1 + e ) > 0 , ω A = β A
e +φ
e +φ 
e

 p * a ( An β A )1/ a 
a
e≡
> 0 , and y n ≡ 
 .
W
1− a
α


xiii

