                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       FIRMS, CONTRACTS, AND TRADE STRUCTURE

                                                Pol Antràs

                                          Working Paper 9740
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9740


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       May 2003




I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Marios Angeletos, Gene Grossman, and Jaume Ventura for invaluable
guidance, and to Manuel Amador, Lucia Breierova, Francesco Caselli, Fritz Foley, Gino Gancia, Andrew
Hertzberg, Elhanan Helpman, Bengt Holmström, Ben Jones, Oscar Landerretche, Alexis León, Gerard Padró,
Thomas Philippon, Diego Puga, Jeremy Stein, Joachim Voth, two anonymous referees, and the editor (Ed
Glaeser) for very helpful comments. I have also benefited from suggestions by seminar participants at
Berkeley, Chicago GSB, Columbia, Harvard, MIT, NBER, Northwestern, NYU, Princeton, San Diego,
Stanford, and Yale. Financial support from the Bank of Spain is gratefully acknowledged. All remaining
errors are my own. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Pol Antràs. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted
without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Firms, Contracts, and Trade Structure
Pol Antràs
NBER Working Paper No. 9740
May 2003
JEL No. D23, F12, F14, F21, F23, L22, L33

                                            ABSTRACT

Roughly one-third of world trade is intrafirm trade. This paper starts by unveiling two systematic
patterns in the volume of intrafirm trade. In a panel of industries, the share of intrafirm imports in
total U.S. imports is significantly higher, the higher the capital intensity of the exporting industry.

In a cross-section of countries, the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports is significantly
higher, the higher the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country. I then show that these patterns can

be rationalized in a theoretical framework that combines a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm
with a Helpman-Krugman view of international trade. In particular, I develop an incomplete-
contracting, property-rights model of the boundaries of the firm, which I then incorporate into a
standard trade model with imperfect competition and product differentiation. The model pins down

the boundaries of multinational firms as well as the international location of production, and it is
shown to predict the patterns of intrafirm trade identified above. Econometric evidence reveals that
the model is consistent with other qualitative and quantitative features of the data.


Pol Antràs
MIT, Department of Economics
Room E52-262A
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02139 USA
and NBER
pol@mit.edu
1         Introduction
Roughly one-third of world trade is intrafirm trade. In 1994, 42.7 percent of the total
volume of U.S. imports of goods took place within the boundaries of multinational
firms, with the share being 36.3 percent for U.S. exports of goods (Zeile, 1997). In
spite of the clear significance of these international flows of goods between aﬃliated
units of multinational firms, the available empirical studies on intrafirm trade provide
little guidance to international trade theorists. In this paper I unveil some novel
patterns exhibited by the volume of U.S. intrafirm imports and I argue that these
patterns can be rationalized combining a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm,
together with a Helpman-Krugman view of international trade.
        In a hypothetical world in which firm boundaries had no bearing on the pattern of
international trade, one would expect only random diﬀerences between the behavior of
the volume of intrafirm trade and that of the total volume of trade. In particular, the
share of intrafirm trade in total trade would not be expected to correlate significantly
with any of the classical determinants of international trade.
        Figure 1 provides a first illustration of how diﬀerent the real world is from this
hypothetical world. In a panel consisting of 23 manufacturing industries and four
years of data (1987, 1989, 1992, and 1994), the share of intrafirm imports in total
U.S. imports is significantly higher, the higher the capital intensity in production
of the exporting industry. Figure 1 indicates that firms in the U.S. tend to import
capital-intensive goods, such as chemical products, within the boundaries of their
firms, while they tend to import labor-intensive goods, such as textile products, from
unaﬃliated parties.1
        Figure 2 unveils a second strong pattern in the share of intrafirm imports. In
a cross-section of 28 countries, the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports
is significantly higher, the higher the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country.
U.S. imports from capital-abundant countries, such as Switzerland, tend to take place
    1
    The pattern in Figure 1 is consistent with Gereﬃ’s (1999) distinction between ‘producer-driven’
and ‘buyer-driven’ international economic networks. The first, he writes, is “characteristic of capi-
tal- and technology-intensive industries [...] in which large, usually transnational, manufacturers
play the central roles in coordinating production networks” (p. 41). Conversely, ‘buyer-driven’
networks are common in “labor-intensive, consumer goods industries” and are characterized by
“highly competitive, locally owned, and globally dispersed production systems” (pp. 42-43). The
emphasis is my own.


                                                 1
 Figure 1: Share of Intrafirm U.S. Imports and Relative Factor Intensities


                               0
                                                                                                                           dru
                                                                                                                  dru
                                                                                                                        dru
                                                                                                               dru       ochoch
                                                                                           ele          cle     vehveh
                                                                                                        com
                                                                                                         ele cle veh
                                                                                                                  comcom                              cheche
                                                                                                ele                cle och
                                                                                           rub       aud ele                                                   che
                                                                                                   aud
                                                                                                 com           veh                                     che
                                                                                          rub
                                                                                    oel     rub                       och
                             -1.5                                         oel                  ima foo
                                                                                             ima
                                                                                               aud
                                                                                                        cle
                                                                                      oel ima
                                                                                           aud
                                                                             oel                    foo sto                      bev
          log of (Mif / M)




                                                                        tra             rub
                                                                                       fme                                          bev
                                                                                                                                     bev
                                                                                        fmeima                           pap pap bev
                                                                            ins fme  ins          foo      sto                  pap
                                                                            pla             ins tra sto
                                                                       ins                                              pap
                                                                           tra pla
                                                                                pla
                                                                                                 foo sto
                                                                          pla fmetra
                                                       pri       pri
                                                                pri
                                                   lum
                              -3                      lum
                                                        lum
                                                          pri
                                           tex
                                             tex                  oma
                                                                  oma
                                                                oma                                                                              y = -6.79 + 1.15x
                                                      lum       oma
                                                                                                                                                     R2 = 0.50
                                                tex


                             -4.5
                                          tex


                                     3                                             4                         5                                                         6
                                                                                  log of (Capital / Employment)

      Notes: The Y-axis corresponds to the logarithm of the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports for 23 manufacturing
      industries and 4 years: 1987, 1989, 1992, 1994. The X-axis measures the log of that industry’s ratio of capital stock to total
      employment in the corresponding year, using U.S. data. See Table A.1. for industry codes and Appendix A.4. for data sources.




Figure 2: Share of Intrafirm U.S. Imports and Relative Factor Endowments


                               0
                                                                                                                                                             CHE
                                                                                                                                           SGP
                                                                                                                                           IRL
                                                                                                                    MEX                         CAN
                                                                                                                                               NDL
                                                                                                          PAN                        GBR
                                                                                                             MYS                                  DEU
                                                                                                           BRA                                 BEL
                                                                                                                                                 FRA
                                                                                                                                          ESPSWEAUS
                                                                                                                                           JPN
                              -2                                                                                     HKG
                                                                                                                                      ISR
                                                                                 PHL                                                                 ITA
      log of (Mif / M)




                                                                                                                         ARG
                                                                                                   COL            OAN




                              -4                                                                                                 VEN
                                                                                 IDN                          CHL




                                                                                                                                                 y = -14.11 + 1.14 x
                                                                                                                                                      (2.55) (0.29)
                              -6
                                                                                                                                                 R2 = 0.46
                                                   EGY


                                    7.5                                           9                        10.5                                                        12
                                                                                   log of Capital-Labor Ratio

         Notes: The Y-axis corresponds to the logarithm of the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports for 28 exporting
         countries in 1992. The X-axis measures the log of the exporting country’s physical capital stock divided by its total number of
         workers. See Table A.2. for country codes and Appendix A.4. for details on data sources.




                                                                                             2
between aﬃliated units of multinational firms. Conversely, U.S. imports from capital-
scarce countries, such as Egypt, occur mostly at arm’s length. This second fact
suggests that the well-known predominance of North-North trade in total world trade
is even more pronounced within the intrafirm component of trade.2
       Why are capital-intensive goods transacted within the boundaries of multinational
firms, while labor-intensive goods are traded at arm’s length?3 To answer this ques-
tion, I build on the theory of the firm initially exposited in Coase (1937) and later de-
veloped by Williamson (1985) and Grossman and Hart (1986), by which activities take
place wherever transaction costs are minimized. In particular, I develop a property-
rights model of the boundaries of the firm in which, in equilibrium, transaction costs
of using the market are increasing in the capital intensity of the imported good.
To explain the cross-country pattern in Figure 2, I embed this partial-equilibrium
framework in a general-equilibrium, factor-proportions model of international trade,
with imperfect competition and product diﬀerentiation, along the lines of Helpman
and Krugman (1985). The model pins down the boundaries of multinational firms
as well as the international location of production. Bilateral trade flows between
any two countries are uniquely determined and the implied relationship between in-
trafirm trade and relative factor endowments is shown to correspond to that in Figure
2. The result naturally follows from the interaction of comparative advantage and
transaction-cost minimization.
       In drawing firm boundaries, I build on the seminal work of Grossman and Hart
(1986). I consider a world of incomplete contracts in which ownership corresponds
to the entitlement of some residual rights of control. When parties undertake non-
contractible, relationship-specific investments, the allocation of residual rights has a
critical eﬀect on each party’s ex-post outside option, which in turn determines each
party’s ex-ante incentives to invest. Ex-ante eﬃciency (i.e., transaction-cost mini-
   2
     This is consistent with comparisons based on foreign direct investment (FDI) data. In the year
2000, more than 85% of FDI flows occured between developed countries (UNCTAD, 2001), while the
share of North-North trade in total world trade was only roughly 70% (World Trade Organization,
2001).
   3
     At this point, a natural question is whether capital intensity and capital abundance are truly
the crucial factors driving the correlations in Figures 1 and 2. In particular, these patterns could in
principle be driven by other omitted factors. Section 4 will present formal econometric evidence in
favor of the emphasis placed on capital intensity and capital abundance in this paper.




                                                  3
mization) then dictates that residual rights should be controlled by the party whose
investment contributes most to the value of the relationship.
   To explain the higher propensity to integrate in capital-intensive industries, I
extend the framework of Grossman and Hart (1986) by allowing the transferability of
certain investment decisions. In situations in which the default option for one of the
parties (a supplier in the model) is too unfavorable, the allocation of residual rights
may not suﬃce to induce adequate levels of investment. In such situations, I show that
the hold-up problem faced by the party with the weaker bargaining position may be
alleviated by having another party (a final-good producer in the model) contribute
to the former’s relationship-specific investments. Investment-sharing alleviates the
hold-up problem faced by suppliers, but naturally increases the exposure of final-good
producers to opportunistic behavior, with the exposure being an increasing function of
the contribution to investment costs. If cost sharing is large enough, ex-ante eﬃciency
is shown to command that residual rights of control, and thus ownership, be assigned
to the final-good producer, thus giving rise to vertical integration. Conversely, when
the contribution of the final-good producer is relatively minor, the model predicts
outsourcing.
   What determines then the extent of cost sharing? Business practices suggest that,
in many situations, investments in physical capital are easier to share than invest-
ments in labor input. Dunning (1993, p. 455-456) describes several cost-sharing
practices of multinational firms in their relations with independent subcontractors.
Among others, these include provision of used machinery and specialized tools and
equipment, prefinancing of machinery and tools, and procurement assistance in ob-
taining capital equipment and raw materials. There is no reference to cost sharing
in labor costs, other than in labor training. Milgrom and Roberts (1993) discuss
the particular example of General Motors, which pays for firm- and product-specific
capital equipment needed by their suppliers, even when this equipment is located in
the suppliers’ facilities. Similarly, in his review article on Japanese firms, Aoki (1990,
p. 25) describes the close connections between final-good manufacturers and their
suppliers but writes that “suppliers have considerable autonomy in other respects,
for example in personnel administration”. Even within firm boundaries, cost sharing
seems to mostly take place when capital investments are involved. In particular, Ta-

                                            4
ble 1 indicates that British aﬃliates of U.S.-based multinationals tend to have much
more independence in their employment decisions (e.g., in hiring of workers) than in
their financial decisions (e.g., in their choice of capital investment projects).


                 Table 1. Decision-Making in U.S. based multinationals
     % of British aﬃliates in which parent influence on decision is strong or decisive
 Financial decisions                              Employment/personnel decisions
   Setting of financial targets              51     Union recognition                     4
   Preparation of yearly budget              20     Collective bargaining                 1
   Acquisition of funds for working capital 44      Wage increases                        8
   Choice of capital investment projects     33     Numbers employed                     13
   Financing of investment projects          46     Lay-oﬀs/redundancies                 10
   Target rate of return on investment       68     Hiring of workers                    10
   Sale of fixed assets                      30     Recruitment of executives            16
   Dividend policy                           82     Recruitment of senior managers       13
   Royalty payments to parent company        82
 Source: Dunning (1993, p. 227). Originally from Young, Hood and Hamill (1985).



   In this paper, I do not intend to explain why cost sharing is more significant in
physical capital investments than in labor input investments. This may be the result
of suppliers having superior local knowledge in hiring workers, or it may be explained
by the fact that managing workers requires a physical presence in the production
plant. Regardless of the source of this asymmetry, the model developed in section 2
shows that if cost sharing is indeed more significant in capital-intensive industries,
the propensity to integrate will also be higher in these industries. In order to explain
the trade patterns shown in Figures 1 and 2, I then embed the partial-equilibrium
relationship between final-good producers and suppliers into a general-equilibrium
framework with a continuum of goods in each of two industries. In section 3, I open
this economy to international trade, allowing final-good producers to obtain inter-
mediate inputs from foreign suppliers. In doing so, I embrace a Helpman-Krugman
view of international trade with imperfect competition and product diﬀerentiation,
by which countries specialize in producing certain varieties of intermediate inputs and
export them worldwide. Trade in capital-intensive intermediate inputs will be trans-
acted within firm boundaries. Trade in labor-intensive goods will instead take place
at arm’s length. The model solves for bilateral trade flows between any two countries,

                                             5
and predicts the share of intrafirm imports in total imports to be increasing in the
capital-labor ratio of the exporting country.4 This is the correlation implied by Fig-
ure 2. Moreover, some of the quantitative implications of the model are successfully
tested in section 4.
       This paper is related to several branches in the literature. On the one hand,
it is related to previous theoretical studies that have rationalized the existence of
multinational firms in general-equilibrium models of international trade.5 Helpman’s
(1984) model introduced a distinction between firm-level and plant-level economies
of scale that has proven crucial in later work. In his model, multinationals arise only
outside the factor price equalization set, when a firm has an incentive to geograph-
ically separate the capital-intensive production of an intangible asset (headquarter
services) from the more labor-intensive production of goods. Following the work of
Markusen (1984) and Brainard (1997), an alternative branch of the literature has
developed models rationalizing the emergence of multinational firms in the absence
of factor endowment diﬀerences. In these models, multinationals will exist in equilib-
rium whenever transport costs are high and whenever firm-specific economies of scale
are high relative to plant-specific economies of scale.6,7
       These two approaches to the multinational firm share a common failure to properly
model the crucial issue of internalization. These models can explain why a domestic
firm might have an incentive to undertake part of its production process abroad, but
they fail to explain why this foreign production will occur within firm boundaries (i.e.,
within multinationals), rather than through arm’s length subcontracting or licensing.
   4
     This second part of the argument is based on the premise that capital-abundant countries tend to
produce mostly capital-intensive commodities. Romalis (2002) has recently shown that the empirical
evidence is indeed consistent with factor proportions being a key determinant of the structure of
international trade.
   5
     The literature builds on the seminal work of Helpman (1984) and Markusen (1984). For extensive
reviews see Caves (1996) and Markusen and Maskus (2001).
   6
     The intuition for this result is straightforward: when firm-specific economies of scale are im-
portant, costs are minimized by undertaking all production within a single firm. If transport costs
are high and plant-specific economies of scale are small, then it will be profitable to set up multiple
production plants to service the diﬀerent local markets. Multinationals are thus of the “horizontal
type”.
   7
     Recently, the literature seems to have converged to a “unified” view of the multinational firm,
merging the factor-proportions (or “vertical”) approach of Helpman (1984), together with the
“proximity-concentration” trade-oﬀ implicit in Brainard (1997) and others. Markusen and Maskus
(2001) refer to this approach as the “Knowledge-Capital Model” and claim that its predictions are
widely supported by the evidence.


                                                  6
In the same way that a theory of the firm based purely on technological considerations
does not constitute a satisfactory theory of the firm (c.f., Tirole, 1988, Hart, 1995),
a theory of the multinational firm based solely on economies of scale and transport
costs cannot be satisfactory either. As described above, I will instead set forth a
purely organizational, property-rights model of the multinational firm. My model
will make no distinction between firm-specific and plant-specific economies of scale.
Furthermore, trade will be costless and factor prices will not diﬀer across countries.
Yet multinationals will emerge in equilibrium, and their implied intrafirm trade flows
will match the strong patterns identified above.
       This paper is also related to previous attempts to model the internalization deci-
sion of multinationals firms. Following the insights from the seminal work of Casson
(1979), Rugman (1981) and others, this literature has constructed models studying
the role of informational asymmetries and knowledge non-excludability in determin-
ing the choice between direct investment and licensing (e.g., Ethier, 1986, Ethier
and Markusen, 1996). Among other things, this paper diﬀers from this literature in
stressing the importance of capital intensity and the allocation of residual rights in
the internalization decision, and perhaps more importantly, in describing and testing
the implications of such a decision for the pattern of intrafirm trade.
       Finally, this paper is also related to an emerging literature on general-equilibrium
models of industry structure (e.g., McLaren, 2000, Grossman and Helpman, 2002a).
My theoretical framework shares some features with the recent contribution by Gross-
man and Helpman. In their model, however, the costs of transacting inside the firm
are introduced by having integrated suppliers incur exogenously higher variable costs
(as in Williamson, 1985). More importantly, theirs is a closed-economy model and
therefore does not consider international trade in goods, which of course is central in
my contribution.8
       The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 describes the closed-
economy version of the model and studies the role of factor intensity in determining
   8
     Although in this paper I show that a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm is consistent with
the facts in Figures 1 and 2, neither my theoretical model nor the available empirical evidence is rich
enough to test this view of the firm against alternative ones. This would be a major undertaking on
its own. See Baker and Hubbard (2002) and Whinston (2002) for more formal treatments of these
issues.



                                                  7
the equilibrium mode of organization in a given industry. Section 3 describes the
multi-country version of the model and discusses the international location of produc-
tion as well as the implied patterns of intrafirm trade. Section 4 presents econometric
evidence supporting the view that both capital intensity and capital abundance are
significant factors in explaining the pattern of intrafirm U.S. imports. Section 5 con-
cludes. The proofs of the main results are relegated to the Appendix.


2      The Closed-Economy Model: Ownership and Cap-
       ital Intensity
This section describes the closed-economy version of the model. In section 3 below, I
will reinterpret the equilibrium of this closed economy as that of an integrated world
economy. The features of this equilibrium will then be used to analyze the patterns
of specialization and trade in a world in which the endowments of the integrated
economy are divided up among countries.

2.1    Set-up
Environment Consider a closed economy that employs two factors of production,
capital and labor, to produce a continuum of varieties in two sectors, Y and Z.
Capital and labor are inelastically supplied and freely mobile across sectors. The
economy is inhabited by a unit measure of identical consumers that view the varieties
in each industry as diﬀerentiated. In particular, letting y(i) and z(i) be consumption
of variety i in sectors Y and Z, preferences of the representative consumer are of the
form                       µZ                 ¶ αµ µZ               ¶ 1−µ
                                  nY                    nZ             α
                                          α                      α
                     U=                y(i) di               z(i) di      ,        (1)
                              0                     0

where nY (nZ ) is the endogenously determined measure of varieties in industry Y
(Z). Consumers allocate a constant share µ ∈ (0, 1) of their spending in sector Y and
a share 1 − µ in sector Z. The elasticity of substitution between any two varieties in
a given sector, 1/(1 − α), is assumed to be greater than one.


Technology Goods are also diﬀerentiated in the eyes of producers. In particular,
each variety y(i) requires a special and distinct intermediate input which I denote by

                                               8
xY (i). Similarly, in sector Z, each variety z(i) requires a distinct component xZ (i).
The specialized intermediate input must be of high quality, otherwise the output of
the final good is zero. If the input is of high quality, production of the final good
requires no further costs and y(i) = xY (i) (or z(i) = xZ (i) in sector Z).
       Production of a high-quality intermediate input requires capital and labor. For
simplicity, technology is assumed to be Cobb-Douglas:
                           µ         ¶β µ        ¶1−β k
                             Kx,k (i) k Lx,k (i)
                  xk (i) =                              , k ∈ {Y, Z}                          (2)
                              βk          1 − βk
where Kx,k (i) and Lx,k (i) denote the amount of capital and labor employed in pro-
duction of variety i in industry k ∈ {Y, Z}. I assume that industry Y is more
capital-intensive than industry Z, i.e. 1 ≥ β Y > β Z ≥ 0.
       Low-quality intermediate inputs can be produced at a negligible cost in both
sectors.
       There are also fixed costs associated with the production of an intermediate in-
put. For simplicity, it is assumed that fixed costs in each industry have the same
factor intensity as variable costs, so that the total cost functions are homothetic. In
particular, fixed costs for each variety in industry k ∈ {Y, Z} are frβ k w 1−β k , where r
is the rental rate of capital and w the wage rate.

Firm structure There are two types of producers: final-good producers and sup-
pliers of intermediate inputs. Before any investment is made, a final-good producer
decides whether it wants to enter a given market, and if so, whether to obtain the
component from a vertically integrated supplier or from a stand-alone supplier. An
integrated supplier is just a division of the final-good producer and thus has no con-
trol rights over the amount of input produced. Figuratively, at any point in time
the parent firm could selectively fire the manager of the supplying division and seize
production. Conversely, a stand-alone supplier does indeed have these residual rights
of control. In Hart and Moore’s (1990) words, in such a case the final-good producer
could only “fire” the entire supplying firm, including its production. Integrated and
non-integrated suppliers diﬀer only in the residual rights they are entitled to, and in
particular both have access to the same technology as specified in (2).9
   9
    This is in contrast with the transaction-cost literature that usually assumes that integration
leads to an exogenous increase in variable costs (e.g. Williamson, 1985, Grossman and Helpman,

                                                9
    As discussed in the introduction, a premise of this paper is that investments in
physical capital are easier to share than investments in labor input. To capture
this idea, I assume that while the labor input is necessarily provided by the supplier,
capital expenditures rKx,k (i) are instead transferable, in the sense that the final-good
producer can decide whether to let the supplier incur this factor cost too, or rather rent
the capital itself and hand it to the supplier at no charge.10 Irrespective of who bears
their cost, the investments in capital and labor are chosen simultaneously and non-
cooperatively.11 Once a final-good producer and its supplier enter the market, they
are locked into the relationship: the investments rKx,k (i) and wLx,k (i) are incurred
upon entry and are useless outside the relationship. In Williamson’s (1985) words, the
initially competitive environment is fundamentally transformed into one of bilateral
monopoly. Regardless of firm structure and the choice of cost sharing, fixed costs
associated with production of the component are divided as follows: fF rβ k w1−β k for
the final-good producer and fS rβ k w1−β k for the supplier, with fF + fS = f .12
    Free entry into each sector ensures zero expected profits for a potential entrant.
To simplify the description of the industry equilibrium, I assume that upon entry
the supplier makes a lump-sum transfer Tk (i) to the final-good producer, which can
vary by industry and variety. Ex-ante, there is a large number of identical, potential
suppliers for each variety in each industry, so that competition among these suppliers
2002a).
   10
      Alternatively, one could assume that labor costs are also transferrable, but that their transfer
leads to a significant fall in productivity. This fall in productivity could be explained, in an interna-
tional context, by the inability of multinational firms to cope with idiosyncratic labor markets (c.f.,
Caves, 1996, p. 123).
   11
      The assumption that the final-good producer decides between bearing all or none of the capital
expenditures can be relaxed to a case of partial transferability. For instance, imagine that xk (i) was
produced according to:
                Ã              !βk Ã                        !η(βk )(1−βk ) µ                              ¶(1−η(β k ))(1−βk )
                     F                        S
                    Kx,k (i)               Kx,k  (i)                                  Lx,k (i)
     xk (i) =
                     βk                η(β k ) (1 − β k )                      (1 − η(β k )) (1 − β k )

          F                                                                                        S
where Kx,k  (i) represents the part of the capital input that is transferable, and where Kx,k         (i) is
inalieanable to the supplier. As long as the elasticity of output with respect to transferable capital is
higher, the higher the capital intensity in production, the same qualitative results would go through.
In particular, as long as β k + η(β k ) (1 − β k ) increases with β k , the model would still predict more
integration in capital-intensive industries (see footnote 24). I follow the simpler specification in (2)
because it greatly simplifies the algebra of the general equilibrium.
  12
     Henceforth, I associate a subscript F with the final-good producer and a subscript S with the
supplier.



                                                                 10
will make Tk (i) adjust so as to make them break even. The final-good producer
chooses the mode of organization so as to maximize its ex-ante profits, which include
the transfer.


Contract Incompleteness The setting is one of incomplete contracts. In partic-
ular, it is assumed that an outside party cannot distinguish between a high-quality
and a low-quality intermediate input. Hence, input suppliers and final-good pro-
ducers cannot sign enforceable contracts specifying the purchase of a certain type of
intermediate input for a certain price. If they did, input suppliers would have an
incentive to produce a low-quality input at the lower cost and still cash the same
revenues. I take the existence of contract incompleteness as a fact of life, and will
not complicate the model to relax the informational assumptions needed for this in-
completeness to exist.13 It is equally assumed that no outside party can verify the
amount of ex-ante investments rKx,k (i) and wLx,k (i). If these were verifiable, then
final-good producers and suppliers could contract on them, and the cost-reducing
benefit of producing a low-quality input would disappear. For the same reason, it
is assumed that the parties cannot write contracts contingent on the volume of sale
revenues obtained when the final good is sold. Following Grossman and Hart (1986),
the only contractibles ex-ante are the allocation of residual rights and the transfer
Tk (i) between the parties.14
       If the supplier incurs all variable costs, the contract incompleteness gives rise to
a standard hold-up problem. The final-good producer will want to renegotiate the
price after xk (i) has been produced, since at this point the intermediate input is
useless outside the relationship. Foreseeing this renegotiation, the input supplier will
  13
      From the work of Aghion, Dewatripont and Rey (1994), Nöldeke and Schmidt (1995) and oth-
ers, it is well-known that allowing for specific-performance contracts can lead, under certain circum-
stances, to eﬃcient ex-ante relationship-specific investments. Che and Hausch (1997) have shown,
however, that when ex-ante investments are cooperative (in the sense, that one party’s investment
benefits the other party), specific-performance contracts may not lead to first-best investment levels
and may actually have no value.
   14
      The assumption of non-contractibility of ex-ante investments could be relaxed to a case of partial
contractibility. I have investigated an extension of the model in which production requires both
contractible and non-contractible investments. If the marginal cost of non-contractible investments
is increasing in the amount of contractible investments, the ability to set the contractible investments
in the ex-ante contract is not suﬃcient to solve the underinvestment problem discussed below, and
the model delivers results analogous to the ones discussed in the main text.



                                                  11
undertake suboptimal investments. The severity of the underinvestment problem is
directly related to how weak the supplier’s bargaining power is ex-post.
   If the final-good producer shares capital expenditures with the supplier, the hold-
up problem becomes two-sided. Because the investment in capital is also specific
to the pair, the final-good producer is equally locked in the relationship, and thus
its investment in capital will also tend to be suboptimal, with the extent of the
underinvestment being inversely related to its bargaining power in the negotiation.
   Because no enforceable contract will be signed ex-ante, the two firms will bargain
over the surplus of the relationship after production takes place. At this point, the
ex-ante investments as well as the quality of the input are observable to both parties
and thus the costless bargaining will yield an ex-post eﬃcient outcome. I assume that
Generalized Nash Bargaining leaves the final-good producer with a fraction φ ∈ (0, 1)
of the ex-post gains from trade.
   As discussed in the introduction, cost-sharing will emerge in equilibrium whenever
the bargaining power of suppliers is low. I hereafter assume that:

Assumption 1: φ > 1/2.

   Following the work of Grossman and Hart (1986) and Hart and Moore (1990),
and contrary to the older transaction-cost literature, I assume that integration of the
supplier does not eliminate the opportunistic behavior at the heart of the hold-up
problem. Bargaining will therefore occur even when the final-good producer and the
supplier are integrated. Ownership, however, crucially aﬀects the distribution of ex-
post surplus through its eﬀect on each party’s outside option. More specifically, the
outside option for a final-good producer will be diﬀerent when it owns the supplier
and when it does not. In the latter case, the amount xk (i) is owned by the supplier
and thus if the two parties fail to agree on a division of the surplus, the final-good
producer is left with nothing. Conversely, under integration, the manager of the final-
good producer can always fire the manager of the supplying division and seize the
amount of input already produced.
   If the final-good producer could fully appropriate xk (i) under integration, there
would be no surplus to bargain over after production, and the supplier would optimally
set Lx,k (i) = 0 (which of course would imply xk (i) = 0). In such case, integration

                                          12
                                        Figure 3: Timing of Events




               t0                        t1                    t2              t3                t4

       Choice of ownership     Ex-ante investments        Intermediates   Generalized Nash   Final goods
       Choice of who rents K   and fixed costs in K & L   x produced      bargaining         produced and
       Ex-ante transfer T                                                                    sold




would never be chosen. To make things more interesting, I assume that by integrating
the supplier, the final-good producer obtains the residual rights over only a fraction
δ ∈ (0, 1) of the amount of xk (i) produced, so that the surplus of the relationship
remains positive even under integration. I take the fact that δ is strictly less than
one as given, but this assumption could be rationalized in a richer framework.15
    On the other hand, and because the component is completely specific to the
final-good producer, the outside option for the intermediate input producer is zero
regardless of ownership structure.
    In choosing whether to enter the market with an integrated or a stand-alone
supplier, the final-good producer considers the benefits and costs of integration. By
owning the supplier, the final-good producer tilts the bargaining power in its favor
but reduces the incentives for the supplier to make an eﬃcient ex-ante investment in
labor (and perhaps capital).
    I now summarize the timing of events (see also Figure 3). At t0 , the final-good
producer decides whether it wants to enter a given market. At this point, residual
rights are assigned, the extent of cost sharing is decided, and the supplier makes a
lump-sum transfer to the final-good producer. At t1 , firms choose their investments
in capital and labor and also incur their fixed costs. At t2 , the final-good producer
  15
     For instance, consider the following alternative set-up. Production of intermediates procedes in
two stages. When firms enter the bargaining, only a fraction δ ∈ (0, 1) of xk (i) has been produced.
After the bargaining and immediately before the delivery of the input, the supplier (and only him)
can costlessly refine the component, increasing the amount produced from δxk (i) to xk (i) (one could
think of this second stage as the branding of the product). Suppose, further, that the supplier does
not perform this product refinement unless the two firms agree in the bargaining (this strategy is, in
fact, subgame perfect). In such case, the surplus of the relationship would also be strictly positive.



                                                          13
hands the specifications of the component (and perhaps the capital stock Kx,k ) to its
partner, and this latter produces the intermediate input (which can be of high or low
quality). At t3 , the quality of the component becomes observable and the two parties
bargain over the division of the surplus. Finally at t4 , the final good is produced and
sold. For simplicity, I assume that agents do not discount the future between t0 and
t4 .

2.2        Firm Behavior for a Given Demand
The model is solved by starting at t4 and moving backwards. I will initially assume
that final-good producers always choose to incur the variable costs rKx,k (i) them-
selves. Below, I will show that Assumption 1 is in fact suﬃcient to ensure that this
is the case in equilibrium.
        The assumption of a unit elasticity of substitution between varieties in industry
Y and Z implies that we can analyze firm behavior in each industry independently.
Consider industry Y , and suppose that at t4 , nY,V pairs of integrated firms and
nY,O pairs of stand-alone firms are producing.16 Let pY,V (i) be the price charged by
an integrating final-good producer for variety i in industry Y . Let pY,O (i) be the
corresponding price for a non-integrating final-good producer.
        From equation (1), demand for variety i in industry Y is given by

                                        y(i) = AY pY (i)−1/(1−α) ,                            (3)

where
                                                        µE
                   AY = R nY,V                            Rn                         ,        (4)
                          0
                                 pY,V   (j)−α/(1−α) dj   + 0 Y,O pY,O (j)−α/(1−α) dj
and E denotes total spending in the economy. I treat the number of firms as a
continuum, implying that firms take AY as given.


Integrated pairs Consider first the problem faced by a final-good producer and its
integrated supplier. If the latter produces a high-quality intermediate input and the
   16
    Henceforth, a subscript V will be used to denote equilibrium values for final-good producers
that vertically integrate their suppliers. A subscript O will be used for those that outsource the
production of the input.




                                                   14
firms agree in the bargaining, the potential revenues from the sale of the final good
are RY (i) = pY (i)y(i), which using (2) and (3) can be written as
                                         µ              ¶αβ Y µ              ¶α(1−β Y )
                                             Kx,Y (i)             Lx,Y (i)
                       RY (i) =   A1−α
                                   Y                                                      .
                                              βY                  1 − βY
On the other hand, if the parties fail to agree in the bargaining, the final-good pro-
ducer will only be able to sell an amount δy(i), which again using (3) will translate
into sale revenues of δ α RY (i). The ex-post opportunity cost for the supplier is zero.
The quasi-rents of the relationship are therefore (1 − δ α ) RY (i).
       The contract incompleteness will give rise to renegotiation at t3 . In the bargaining,
Generalized Nash bargaining leaves the final-good division with its default option
plus a fraction φ of the quasi-rents. On the other, the integrated supplier receives the
remaining fraction 1 − φ of the quasi-rents. Since both φ and δ are assumed to be
strictly less than one, the supplier’s ex-post revenues from producing a high-quality
input are always strictly positive. Low-quality inputs will therefore never be produced
at t2 .
       Rolling back to t1 , the final-good producer will therefore set its investment in
capital Kx,Y (i) to maximize φRY (i) − rKx,Y (i) where

                                      φ = δ α + φ (1 − δ α ) > φ.

The program yields a best-response investment Kx,Y (i) in terms of factor prices, the
level of demand as captured by AY , and the investment in labor Lx,Y (i). On the other
                                                                      ¡      ¢
hand, the integrated supplier simultaneously sets Lx,Y (i) to maximize 1 − φ RY (i)−
wLx,Y (i), from which an analogous reaction function Lx,Y (i) is obtained.17 Solving
for the intersection of the two best-response functions yields the equilibrium ex-ante
investments.18 Plugging these investments into (2) and (3) and rearranging, yields
  17
      The supplier could in principle find it optimal to complement the capital investment of the
                                                                               S
final-good division with some extra investment of its own, call it Kx,Y           . Nevertheless, if the two
investments in capital are perfect substitutes in production, Assumption 1 is suﬃcient to ensure that
the
¡ optimal
        ¢¡     capital investment
                            ¢          of the supplier is 0. To see this, notice that φ (∂RY (i)/∂Kx,Y ) >
                       S
  1 − φ ∂RY (i)/∂Kx,Y         for φ > φ > 1/2. The complementary slackness condition thus implies that
   S
Kx,Y    = 0.
                                                              µ                  ¶−α/(1−α)
                                                                  rβ Y w1−β Y
   18
      In particular, these are Kx,Y,V (i) = αβrY φ AY             β        1−β Y           and Lx,Y,V (i) =
                                                                αφ Y (1−φ)
                   µ                    ¶−α/(1−α)
α(1−β Y )(1−φ)          rβ Y w1−βY
        w      A Y      β         1−β Y           .
                     αφ Y (1−φ)


                                                    15
the following identical optimal output and price for all varieties in industry Y :
                                             Ã                         !−1/(1−α)
                                                    rβ Y w 1−β Y
                         yV = xY,V = AY            β ¡        ¢1−β Y                                    (5)
                                                 αφ Y 1 − φ

                                                 rβ Y w 1−β Y
                                     pY,V =     β ¡        ¢1−β Y .                                     (6)
                                              αφ Y 1 − φ
Facing a constant elasticity of demand, the final-good producer charges a constant
                                                  β ¡     ¢1−β Y
mark-up over marginal cost. The mark-up is 1/(φ Y 1 − φ          ) times higher than
the mark-up that would be charged if contracts were complete. From equation (6), if
β Y is high, the mark-up is relatively higher, the lower is φ. Conversely, if production
of xY requires mostly labor (β Y low), the mark-up is relatively higher, the higher is
φ.
      Using the expressions for yV and pY,V , it is easy to check that the equilibrium
investment levels are also identical for all varieties and satisfy rKx,Y,V = αβ Y φpY,V yV
and wLx,Y,V = α(1 − β Y )(1 − φ)pY,V yV .
      At t1 , the two parties also choose how much capital and labor to rent in incurring
the fixed costs. Applying Shepard’s lemma, factor demands in the fixed costs sector
are
                                                      ³ w ´1−β Y
                                 Kf,h,Y    = β Y fh
                                                         r
                                                             ³ w ´−β Y
                                 Lf,h,Y    = (1 − β Y )fh                ,                              (7)
                                                               r
for h ∈ {F, S}.
      Finally, at t0 the supplier makes a lump-sum transfer TY,V to the final-good pro-
ducer. As discussed above, at t0 , there is a large number of potential suppliers, so
that ex-ante competition among them ensures that this transfer exactly equals the
supplier’s ex-ante profits.19 Using the value of this transfer, ex-ante profits for an
integrating final-good producer can finally be expressed as
                     ¡                               ¢    −α/(1−α)
            π F,V,Y = 1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y ) AY pY,V      − f rβ Y w1−β Y ,                    (8)

where pY,V is given in (6).
 19                                                                      −α/(1−α)
      In particular, this transfer is TY,V = (1 − φ)(1 − α(1 − β Y ))AY pY,V        − fS rβY w1−β Y .


                                                    16
Pairs of stand-alone firms If the firms enter the market as stand-alone firms, the
supplier is entitled to the residual rights of control over the amount of input produced
at t2 . The ex-post opportunity cost for the final-good producer is therefore zero in
this case. As for the supplier, since the component is specific to the final-producer,
the value of xY (i) outside the relationship is also again zero. It follows that if the
intermediate input producer hands a component with the correct specification, the
potential sale revenues RY (i) will entirely be quasi-rents. The final-good producer
will obtain a fraction φ of this surplus in the bargaining, so at t1 it will choose Kx,Y (i)
to maximize φRY (i) − rKx,Y (i). On the other hand, the supplier will set Lx,Y (i) so
as to maximize (1 − φ) RY (i) − wLx,Y (i).
       From here on, it is clear that the solution to the problem is completely analogous
to that for pairs of integrated firms, with φ replacing φ in equations (5) through
(8). In particular, profits for a final-good producer that chooses to outsource the
production of the intermediate input will be

                                                                             −α/(1−α)
            π F,Y,O = (1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y )) AY pY,O                             − f rβ Y w1−β Y ,                (9)

where pY,O = rβ Y w1−β Y /(αφβ Y (1 − φ)1−β Y ).


Comparison with an environment with complete contracts We can compare
the previous two situations to one in which the quantity and quality of the component
(as well the ex-ante investments) were verifiable. In such a case, the two parties
would bargain over the division of the surplus upon entry and the contract would
not be renegotiated ex-post. Upon entry, the threat point for both parties would be
zero . The surplus of the relationship would thus be given by SY (i) = pY (i)y(i) −
rKx,Y (i)−wLx,Y (i)−frβ Y w1−β Y . At t1 , the final-good producer would choose Kx,Y (i)
to maximize φSY (i), while the supplier would set Lx,Y (i) to maximize (1 − φ) SY (i).
It is straightforward to check that the impossibility of writing enforceable contracts
                                                                         ∗
leads to underinvestment in both Kx,Y and Lx,Y . In particular, letting Kx,Y and
L∗x,Y denote the optimal contractible investments, it is easy to show that Kx,Y
                                                                            ∗
                                                                                >
max {Kx,Y,V , Kx,Y,O } and L∗x,Y > max {Lx,Y,V , Lx,Y,O }.20
  20
   In the case of capital this follows
                                   ( from µ                                                                                      )
          ³ β 1−β ´ 1−α
                      −α                                                   ¶ 1−α
                                                                             −α
                                                                                                  ³                      ´ 1−α
                                                                                                                            −α
  αβ Y AY                                              βY       1−β Y                                    βY   1−β Y
           r Yw
                           > max αβ YrφAY          r        w                          αβ Y φAY         r    w
                   Y
     r        α                                βY                  1−β Y           ,       r          αφβ Y (1−φ)1−β Y
                                                                                                                                     .
                                              αφ        (1−φ)

                                                   17
                          Figure 4: Complete vs. Incomplete Contracts

                 Kx                      SV                SO         S*
                                                                  A        F*
                 Kx   *

                                                                           FV
                Kx,V                          B
                                                       C
                                                                           FO
                Kx,O




                                         Lx,V     Lx,O          Lx*              Lx



       Underinvestment stems from the fact that, with incomplete contracts, each firm
receives only a fraction of the marginal return to its ex-ante investment. The inef-
ficiency is depicted in Figure 4. The curves F ∗ and S ∗ represent the reaction func-
       ∗
tions Kx,Y (Lx,Y ) and L∗x,Y (Kx,Y ) under complete contracts, with the corresponding
equilibrium in point A. Similarly, B and C depict the incomplete-contract equilibria
corresponding to integration and outsourcing, respectively. An important point to
notice from Figure 4 is that the underinvestment in labor relative to that in capital
tends to be greater under integration that under outsourcing.21 This follows from the
fact that under integration, the supplier has a relatively weaker bargaining power and
thus receives a smaller fraction of the marginal return to its ex-ante investment. A
similar argument explains why the investment in capital tends to be relatively more
ineﬃcient under outsourcing.
  21
                          ¡             ¢ ¡ ∗           ¢    ¡              ¢ ¡ ∗            ¢
    By this I mean that L∗x,Y /Lx,Y,V / Kx,Y     /Kx,Y,V > L∗x,Y /Lx,Y,O / Kx,Y      /Kx,Y,O . Note
that this also implies that controlling for industry characteristics, integrated suppliers should be
using a higher capital-labor ratio in production than nonintegrated ones. This is consistent with
the results of some empirical studies, discussed in Caves (1996, pp. 230-231) and Dunning (1993,
p. 296), that compare capital intensity in overseas subsidiaries of multinational firms with that of
independent domestic firms in the host country.




                                                  18
The rationale for cost sharing Consider now the problem faced by an inde-
pendent supplier when the final-good producer decides not to contribute to vari-
able costs. In such a case, the supplier chooses Kx,Y (i) and Lx,Y (i) to maximize
(1 − φ) RY (i) − rKx,Y (i) − wLx,Y (i), and the final-good producer simply receives
φRY (i) ex-post. Following similar steps as before, it is easy to show that ex-ante
profits for a final-good producer can now be expressed as
                                        µ β 1−β ¶−α/(1−α)
                                         r Yw Y
      eF,Y,O = (φ + (1 − α) (1 − φ)) AY
      π                                                   − f rβ Y w1−β Y .          (10)
                                         α (1 − φ)
The case of an integrated supplier is completely analogous. In particular, the same
expression (10) applies with φ replacing φ.
   The following result follows from comparing equation (10) with (8) and (9):

Lemma 1 Under Assumption 1 (i.e., if φ > 1/2), final-good producers will always
decide to bear the cost of renting the capital required to produce the intermediate input.
   Proof. See Appendix A.1.

   The intuition for this result is that the higher is φ, the smaller is the fraction of
the marginal return to its ex-ante investments that the supplier receives, and thus
the less it will invest in Kx,Y . This underinvestment will have a negative eﬀect on the
value of the relationship, which is what the final-good producer maximizes ex-ante.
For a large enough φ (in this case 1/2), the detrimental eﬀect of the underinvestment
in capital is large enough so as to make it worthwhile for the final-good producer
to bear the cost of renting Kx,Y itself, even if by doing so it now exposes itself to a
hold-up by the supplier. In other words, for φ > 1/2, a supplier incurring all variable
costs faces a too severe hold-up problem, which the final-good producer finds optimal
to alleviate by sharing part of the required ex-ante investments.

2.3    Factor Intensity and Ownership Structure
At t0 , a final-good producer in industry k = {Y, Z} chooses the ownership structure
that maximizes its ex-ante profits. Comparing equations (8) and (9), it is straightfor-
ward to check that a final-good producer will choose to integrate its supplier whenever
                                                                 µ     ¶
        π F,V,k + frβ Y w 1−β Y   1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y ) pY,V −α/(1−α)
  Θ=                            =                                                > 1.
        π F,O,k + frβ Y w1−β Y    1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y ) pY,O

                                           19
This inequality is more likely to hold, the lower is pY,V relative to pY,O , that is, the
less distorted is the mark-up under integration relative to that under outsourcing.
Plugging the equilibrium prices and using φ = δ α +φ (1 − δ α ), it is possible to express
Θ in terms of the fundamental parameters of the model:

                    µ                                                  ¶µ                             ¶ αβ k
                                α (1 − φ) δ α (1 − 2β k )                                δα             1−α               α
 Θ (β k , α, φ, δ) = 1 +                                                 1+                                    (1 − δ α ) 1−α .
                            1 − α(1 − β k ) + αφ(1 − 2β k )                          φ (1 − δ α )
                                                                                                                           (11)
       An important point to notice here is that Θ(·) is not a function of factor prices.
This follows directly from the assumption of Cobb-Douglas technology and isolates
the partial equilibrium decision to integrate or outsource from any potential general-
equilibrium feedbacks. This implied block-recursiveness is a useful property for solv-
ing the model sequentially, but the main results should be robust to more general
specifications for technology.22
       In order to explain the pattern in Figure 1, it is central to understand how the
relative attractiveness of integration (as captured by Θ) is aﬀected by the capital in-
tensity in production. The following lemma states that Θ (β k , α, φ, δ) is an increasing
function of β k .

Lemma 2 The attractiveness of integration, as measured by Θ (·), increases with
the capital intensity of intermediate input production β k : ∂Θ (·) /∂β k > 0 for all
β k ∈ [0, 1].
       Proof. See Appendix A.2.

       The intuition for why Θ (β k , α, φ, δ) is increasing in β k is straightforward. The
higher the capital intensity of an industry, the more value-reducing will the under-
investment in capital be. Furthermore, as discussed above, the underinvestment in
  22
       In particular, with a more general CES technology of the type
                               Ã     µ          ¶ σ−1                  µ            ¶ σ−1 ! σ−1
                                                                                             σ

                                         Kx,k      σ
                                                                            Lx,k       σ
                        xk =    βk                      + (1 − β k )                              ,
                                          βk                               1 − βk

Θ (·) also becomes a function of the wage-rental ratio in the economy. Interestingly, for σ < 1, the
model predicts that, ceteris paribus, the propensity to outsource will be higher in countries with
a higher wage-rental ratio. The drawback of this generalization is that the model turns out to be
beyond the reach of paper-and-pencil analysis.



                                                           20
capital tends to be more severe under integration than under outsourcing. It thus
follows that profits under integration relative to those under outsourcing will tend to
be higher, the higher the capital intensity in production.23
    Lemma 2 paves the way for the following central result:

Proposition 1 Given a triplet α, φ, δ ∈ (0, 1), there exists a unique threshold capital
          b (α, φ, δ) ∈ (0, 1) such that all firms with β k < β
intensity β                                                   b (α, φ, δ) choose to out-
source production of the intermediate input (i.e., Θ(β k , ·) < 1), while all firms with
βk > βb (α, φ, δ) choose to integrate their suppliers (i.e., Θ(β k , ·) > 1). Only firms
                       b (α, φ, δ) are indiﬀerent between these two options.
with capital intensity β
    Proof. See Appendix A.3.

    The logic of this result lies at the heart of Grossman and Hart’s (1986) seminal
contribution. Ex-ante eﬃciency dictates that residual rights should be controlled by
the party undertaking a relatively more important investment. If production of the
intermediate input requires mostly labor, then the investment made by the final-good
producer will be relatively small, and thus it will be optimal to assign the residual
rights of control to the supplier. Conversely, when the capital investment is important,
the final-good producer will optimally choose to tilt the bargaining power in its favor
by obtaining these residual rights, thus giving rise to vertical integration.24
    Proposition 1 advances a rationale for the first fact identified in the introduction.
To the extent that vertical integration of suppliers occurs mostly in capital-intensive
industries, one would expect the share of intrafirm trade in those industries to be
relatively higher than that in labor-intensive industries. Nevertheless, Proposition
1 cannot by itself justify the trade pattern in Figure 1. An explanation of this
fact requires a proper modelling of international trade flows, which I carry out in
section 3. Furthermore, the open-economy version of the model will naturally give
   23
      Despite this clear intuition, proving that ∂Θ(·)/∂β k is positive is somewhat cumbersome (see
Appendix A.2). This is due to a counterbalancing eﬀect. Integration enhances eﬃciency in capital-
intensive industries by reducing the underinvestment problem. But this, of course, comes at the
expense of higher capital expenditures which, ceteris paribus, tend to reduce profits. Lemma 2
shows, however, that this latter eﬀect is always outweighed by the former.
   24
      The result goes through if the input is produced according to the technology in footnote 11 and
β k + η(β k ) (1 − β k ) increases with β k . In particular, the function Θ (β k , α, φ, δ) is identical in this
more general case, so that Proposition 1 still holds for the same β.    b Having the final-good producer
incur all capital expenditures is therefore not an important asumption.


                                                      21
rise to the cross-country pattern unveiled in Figure 2. Before moving on, however, a
characterization of the general equilibrium of the closed economy is necessary.


       Other comparative statics Equation (11) lends itself to other comparative
static exercises. For instance, it is possible to show that Θ(·) is a decreasing function
of φ, which by the implicit function theorem implies that the cut-oﬀ β       b (α, φ, δ) is
an increasing function of φ. To understand this result, notice that an increase in
φ shifts bargaining power from the supplier to the final-good producer regardless
of ownership structure (since φ increases with φ). It thus follows that increasing φ
necessarily worsens the incentives for the supplier. To compensate for this, the final-
good producer will now find it profitable to outsource in a larger measure of capital
intensities.
       The eﬀect of α is in general ambiguous as it appears in several terms in equation
(11). Numerical analysis indicates, however, that an increase in competition (a higher
α) tends to enhance outsourcing in suﬃciently labor-intensive firms, while promoting
integration in the most capital-intensive ones. The intuition for this result is that
the higher the elasticity of substitution in demand, the more sensitive will profits be
to the price charged by the final-good producer. A natural response to an increase
in α is thus a shift towards higher eﬃciency, which translates into giving more bar-
gaining power to suppliers in labor-intensive pairs, and better incentives to final-good
producers in capital-intensive pairs.25
       Finally, an increase in δ corresponds to an increase in φ holding constant φ, i.e.,
a fall in the bargaining power of the supplier under integration. The eﬀect of such an
increase depends again on the capital intensity of the production process. In labor-
intensive firms the incentives of the supplier are very important and thus eﬃciency
considerations will dictate a shift towards more outsourcing in response to an increase
in δ. On the other hand, in capital-intensive firms, an increase in δ may make integra-
tion more attractive, as it now secures the more significant investor a larger fraction
  25
     To see where the result is coming from, ignore the first term in (11) as well as the eﬀect of α
through the terms δ α . Then the eﬀect of α is positive as long as (1 − δ α ) (1 + δ α / (φ (1 − δ α )))β > 1,
that is if β > β for some β (φ, δ, α) ∈ (0, 1). Naturally, the sign of the derivative also depends on the
values of φ and δ. I stress the role of factor intensity here since the channel is absent in other papers
that have studied the relationship between market competition and the attractiveness of outsourcing
(e.g. Grossman and Helpman, 2002a, and Marin and Verdier, 2001).


                                                     22
of the marginal return to its investment. Numerical analysis tends to broadly support
these intuitions.

2.4     Industry Equilibrium
In this section, I describe the partial equilibrium in a particular industry taking factor
prices as given. Again, without loss of generality, I focus on industry Y . In equilib-
rium, free entry implies that no firm makes positive expected profits. In principle,
three equilibrium modes of organization are possible: (i) a mixed equilibrium with
some varieties being produced by integrated pairs and others by non-integrated pairs;
(ii) an equilibrium with pervasive integration in which no final-good producer finds it
profitable to outsource the production of the intermediate input; and (iii) an equilib-
rium with pervasive outsourcing in which no final-good producer chooses to vertically
integrate its supplier.
   The assumption that all firms in a given industry share the same capital inten-
sity greatly simplifies the analysis. In particular, the following is a straightforward
corollary of Proposition 1:

Lemma 3 A mixed equilibrium in industry Y only exists in a knife-edge case, namely
         b (α, φ, δ) (i.e., Θ (β , ·) = 1). An equilibrium with pervasive integration
when β = β
        Y                           Y
                                   b (α, φ, δ) (i.e., Θ (β Y , ·) > 1). An equilibrium with
in industry Y exists only if β Y > β
pervasive outsourcing in industry Y exists only if β Y < β  b (α, φ, δ) (i.e., Θ (β Y , ·) < 1).

   Since a mixed equilibrium does not generically exist, I focus below on a charac-
terization of the two remaining types of equilibria.

Equilibrium with Pervasive Integration Consider an equilibrium in which only
integrating final-good producers enter the market. As discussed above, the ex-ante
transfer TY,V ensures that suppliers always break even. If no final-good producer
outsources the production of xY , all firms will charge a price for y(i) given by equation
                                                                 α/(1−α)
(6). Since nY,O = 0, equation (4) simplifies to AY,V = µEpY,V              /nY,V . On the other
hand, from equation (8), for integrating final-good producers to make zero profits,
demand must also satisfy:
                                       f rβ Y w1−β Y           α/(1−α)
                     AY,V =                                   pY,V     .                   (12)
                              1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y )

                                              23
It thus follows that the equilibrium number of varieties in an equilibrium with perva-
sive integration must be given by:

                                    1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y )
                          nY,V =                                    µE.           (13)
                                             f rβ Y w1−β Y
Naturally, the equilibrium number of varieties in industry Y depends positively on
total spending in the industry and negatively on fixed costs. The equilibrium level of
output of each variety can be obtained by plugging the equilibrium demand (12) into
equation (5):
                                             βY   ¡         ¢1−β Y
                                          αφ          1−φ            f
                             yV =                                        .        (14)
                                    1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y )
Equilibrium factor demands can similarly be obtained by plugging (12) into the ex-
pressions in footnote 18.


Equilibrium with Pervasive Outsourcing Consider next an equilibrium in which
no final-good producer vertically integrates its supplier. In such an equilibrium every
firm charges a price given by pY,O which makes equation (4) simplify to AY,O =
      α/(1−α)
µEpY,O          /nY,O . Combining this expression with the free-entry condition

                                          f rβ Y w1−β Y           α/(1−α)
                        AY,O =                                   pY,O     ,       (15)
                                 1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y )
yields the equilibrium number of pairs undertaking outsourcing,
                                    1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y )
                          nY,O =                                    µE,           (16)
                                             f rβ Y w 1−β Y

which is identical to (13) with φ replacing φ. The equilibrium values for output
and factor demands are also analogous to those for the equilibrium with pervasive
integration.

2.5      General Equilibrium
Having described the equilibrium in a particular industry, we can now move to the
general equilibrium of the closed economy, in which income equals spending

                                         E = rK + wL,                             (17)

and the product, capital and labor markets clear.

                                                  24
      By Walras’ law, we can focus on the equilibrium in the labor market.26 Letting LY
and LZ denote total labor demand by each pair in industries Y and Z, labor market
clearing requires nY LY + nZ LZ = L. We can decompose LY into three components,
depending on the equilibrium mode of organization. In an equilibrium with pervasive
integration,
                                 LY = Lx,Y,V + Lf,F,Y + Lf,S,Y .                       (18)

The first term is the total amount of labor hired by integrated suppliers for the
manufacturing of intermediate inputs. The remaining terms are the amounts of labor
hired to cover fixed costs: Lf,F,Y is the amount of labor employed in total fixed costs by
final-good producers and Lf,S,Y is the analogous demand by suppliers. From equation
(7), notice that neither Lf,F,Y nor Lf,S,Y are aﬀected by the equilibrium organization
mode.
      Plugging (7) and (17) into equation (18), and substituting nY,V and Lx,Y,V for
their equilibrium values, it is possible to simplify to:
                                        ¡                 ¢ µ (rK + wL)
                    nY,V LY = (1 − β Y ) 1 − αβ Y (2φ − 1)              .              (19)
                                                                 w
      Following the same steps, it is straightforward to show that in an equilibrium with
pervasive outsourcing,
                                                                µ (rK + wL)
                    nY,O LY = (1 − β Y ) (1 − αβ Y (2φ − 1))                .          (20)
                                                                     w
      Equations (19) and (20) imply that the share of income that labor receives is
sensitive to the equilibrium mode of organization. Given the assumption of Cobb-
Douglas technology, in a world of complete contracts, the share of income accruing
to labor in industry Y would be µ(1 − β Y ). With incomplete contracts, the share
received by labor will be larger or smaller than µ(1 − β Y ) depending on whether φ or
φ are smaller or greater than 1/2. Under Assumption 1, incomplete contracts tend to
bias the distribution of income towards owners of capital. Intuitively, with φ > 1/2,
the underinvestment in labor is relatively more severe. For a given supply of factors,
the relatively higher demand for capital tends to push up its price and thus its share
in total income. As is clear from equations (19) and (20), this bias is greater under
integration than under outsourcing.
 26
      The product market has already been assumed to clear in the previous sections.

                                                25
    To set the stage for an analysis of the share of intrafirm trade in total trade, I
make the following assumption:

                    b > βZ .
Assumption 2: β Y > β

    In words, I assume that the equilibrium in industry Y is one with pervasive in-
tegration. Conversely, firms in the more labor-intensive industry Z are assumed to
outsource pervasively. It is useful to define the shares of income that accrues to capital
in each sector, which using equations (19) and (20) are given by

                           βf
                            Y = β Y (1 + α (1 − β Y ) (2φ − 1))


and
                          βfZ = β Z (1 + α (1 − β Z ) (2φ − 1)) .

Notice that β Y > β Z implies βf   f
                               Y > β Z , and the presence of incomplete contracts does

not create factor intensity reversals. Denoting the average labor share in the economy
by σ L ≡ µ(1− βfY )+(1−µ)(1− βfZ ) and imposing the condition nY,V LY +nZ,O LZ = L,
the equilibrium wage-rental ratio in the economy can be expressed as:
                                     w     σL K
                                       =          ,                                  (21)
                                     r   1 − σL L
    The equilibrium wage-rental ratio is a linear function of the aggregate capital-labor
ratio. This is a direct implication of the assumption of a Cobb-Douglas technology in
both industries. The factor of proportionality is equal to the average labor share in
the economy divided by the average capital share. As discussed above, Assumption
1 implies that labor shares are depressed relative to their values in a world with
complete contracts. It follows that incomplete contracts also tend to depress the
equilibrium wage-rental ratio in the economy.


3     The Multi-Country Model: Capital Abundance
      and Intrafirm Trade
Suppose now that the closed-economy described above is split into J ≥ 2 countries,
with each country receiving an endowment K j of capital and an endowment Lj of
labor. Factors of production are internationally immobile. Countries diﬀer only in

                                            26
their factor endowments. In particular, individuals in all J countries have identical
preferences as specified in (1) and share access to the same technology in (2). The
parameters φ and δ are also assumed to be identical everywhere. Countries are
allowed to trade intermediate inputs at zero cost. Final goods are instead assumed to
be nontradable, so that final-good producers produce their varieties in all J countries.
To be more specific, each final-good producer has a (costless) plant in each of the J
countries.27 Conversely, varieties of intermediates inputs will be produced in only
one location in order to exploit economies of scale. I assume that for all j ∈ J,
the capital-labor ratio K j /Lj is not too diﬀerent from K/L, so that factor price
equalization (FPE) holds, and the equilibrium prices and aggregate allocations are
those of the integrated economy described above. Below, I derive both necessary and
suﬃcient conditions for FPE to be achieved.
       This section is in three parts. I first study the international location of pro-
duction of intermediate inputs and show how the cross-country diﬀerences in factor
endowments naturally give rise to cross-country diﬀerences in the relative number of
varieties produced in each industry. I then analyze the implied patterns of interna-
tional trade and discuss the determinants of its intrafirm component. Finally, I study
the robustness of the results to alternative assumptions on the tradability of final
goods.

3.1       Pattern of Production
Because countries diﬀer only in their factor endowments, the cut-oﬀ capital intensity
b will be identical in all countries, and by Assumption 2, suppliers in industry Y will
β
be vertically integrated while those in industry Z will remain non-integrated.
       The factor market clearing conditions in country j ∈ J can be written as:
                ¡ j                     ¢      ¡ j                     ¢
             njY Kx,Y    j
                      + Kf,F,Y    j
                               + Kf,S,Y   + njZ Kx,Z    j
                                                     + Kf,F,Z    j
                                                              + Kf,S,Z   = Kj

and
                 ¡                         ¢     ¡                         ¢
              njY Ljx,Y + Ljf,F,Y + Ljf,S,Y + njZ Ljx,Z + Ljf,F,Z + Ljf,S,Z = Lj ,
  27
    Because final goods are costlessly produced, the model cannot endogenously pin down where
their production is located. Assuming that they are not traded resolves this indeterminacy. In
section 3.3, I show that the main result goes through under alternative set-ups that equally resolve
the indeterminacy.


                                                27
where njk refers now to the number of industry k varieties of intermediate inputs
produced in country j.28 It is straightforward to check that factor demands for
each variety depend only on worldwide identical parameters and on aggregate prices,
which by assumption are also common in all countries. This implies that diﬀerences
in the production patterns between countries will be channelled through the number
of industry varieties produced in each country. In particular, using the integrated
economy equilibrium values for nY and nZ , the factor demand conditions can be
simplified to:
                                           Ã                               !
                                             nj              nj
                               (rK + wL) µβfY Y + (1 − µ) βfZ Z                = rK j
                                             nY              nZ
                           Ã                                               !
                         ³       ´ nj           ³         ´ j
              (rK + wL) µ 1 − βf    Y
                                      + (1 − µ)   1 − f nZ
                                                      β                        = wLj
                               Y                        Z
                                   nY                      nZ

       Combining these two expressions and plugging the equilibrium wage-rental ratio
of the integrated economy, w/r = (σ L /1 − σ L ) K/L, yields the number of varieties of
intermediate inputs of each industry produced in each country:
                   µ³         ´                         ¶
               j           f              K j f Lj            nY
              nY =     1 − β Z (1 − σ L )    − β Z σL     ³       ´                             (22)
                                          K           L    βf − βf µ   Y       Z


and                  µ                                ¶
                       f     Lj ³   f
                                       ´           Kj           nZ
              njZ   = β Y σ L − 1 − β Y (1 − σ L )      ³          ´         ,                  (23)
                             L                     K      βf − f
                                                               β     (1 − µ)
                                                           Y     Z

where nY is given by (13) and nZ by (16) with β Z replacing β Y . Equation (22) states
that a given country j ∈ J will produce a larger measure of varieties of intermediates
in industry Y the larger its capital-labor ratio. Conversely, from equation (22), the
measure of industry-Z varieties it produces is a decreasing function of its capital-labor
ratio.
       Note also that for a given K j /Lj both njY and njZ are increasing in the size of the
country, as measured by its share in world GDP, sj ≡ (rK j + wLj ) / (rK + wL). In
fact, it is straightforward to check that njY > sj nY if and only if K j /Lj > K/L, and
njZ > sj nZ if and only if K j /Lj < K/L. In words, capital (labor)-abundant countries
  28
    To simplify notation, I drop all subscripts associated with the equilibrium mode of organization.
For instance, I will denote the equilibrium number of industry Y (X) varieties of intermediate inputs
produced in country j as njY (njZ ) instead of njY,V (njZ,O ).

                                                 28
                               Figure 5: Pattern of Production for J = 2

                          LS
                                                                                            OS
                                    B
              KN                                      nZS
                                        nZN
                                Y


                         nYS                   E



                        nYN
                                                      C



                                                                                   Z

                                                                                                 KS
                                                             w/r    B’
                   ON
                                                                                       LN




tend to produce a share of input varieties in the capital (labor)-intensive industries
that exceeds their share in world income.
       For the above allocation to be consistent with FPE, it is necessary and suﬃcient
that njY > 0 and njZ > 0 for all j ∈ J, i.e., that no country fully specializes in any
one sector.29 Using equations (22) and (23), this condition can be written as:

                                    βf
                                     Y σL          K j /Lj           βf
                                                                      Z σL
Assumption 3: κ =                   f          >             >       f          = κ for all j ∈ J.
                                ( Y )(1−σL )
                                 1−β                K/L          ( Z )(1−σL )
                                                                  1−β


       It can be checked that the upper bound κ is greater than one, while the lower
bound κ is smaller than one. Assumption 3 thus requires the capital-labor ratio
K j /Lj to be suﬃciently similar to K/L.
       Figure 5 provides a graphical representation of the production pattern for the case
of two countries, the North (N) and the South (S). The graph should be familiar
  29
    To understand necessity, notice that when factor prices depend only on world factor endowments,
the capital-labor ratio in production is fixed and identical for all countries. Therefore, a given
country cannot employ all its factors by producing in only one industry except in the knife-edge
case in which its endowment of K j and Lj exactly match that industry’s factor intensity. For a
discussion of suﬃciency, see Helpman and Krugman (1985, p. 13-14).



                                                        29
to readers of Helpman and Krugman (1985). ON and OS represent the origins for
the North and the South, respectively. The vectors ON Y and ON Z represent world
employment of capital and labor in industries Y and Z in the equilibrium of the
integrated economy. The set of factor endowments that satisfy Assumption 3 (i.e.,
FPE) corresponds to the set of points inside the parallelogram O N Y OS Z. Point E
defines the distribution of factor endowments. In the graph, the North is capital-
abundant relative to the South. Line BB 0 goes through point E and has a slope of
w/r. The relative income of each country is thus held fixed for all points in line BB 0
and inside the FPE set.
  To map this figure to the pattern of production described above, I follow Help-
                                                                 °       °
man and Krugman (1985) in choosing units of measurement so that °O N Y ° = nY y,
° N °                °      °
°O Z ° = nZ z, and °O N OS ° = E = rK + wL. With the first two normal-
izations, we can graphically determine the number of varieties of intermediate in-
puts produced in each country. Moreover, with the last normalization, we can
           °     ° °        °
write sN = °ON C ° / °ON OS °. Basic geometry then implies that nN    N
                                                                 Y > s nY and

nN    N
 Z < s nZ , which is what we expected given that the North is capital abundant in

the graph.
       So far I have assumed that factors of production are internationally immobile.
I therefore have not allowed final-good producers to rent the capital stock in their
home country and export it to the country where intermediates are produced. Al-
lowing for such international factor movements would not invalidate the equilibrium
described above. In fact, by equalizing factor prices everywhere, international trade
in intermediate inputs eliminates the incentives for capital to flow across countries.30

3.2       Pattern of Trade
Having described the international location of production of intermediate inputs, we
can finally move to the study of trade patterns. Since the final good is nontradable,
the entire volume of world trade will be in intermediate inputs. Before describing
these flows in more detail, we must first confront the problem of how to value them.
  30
    More generally, I only require that costs of capital mobility are higher than costs of trading
goods, so that international diﬀerences in rates of return are arbitraged away through trade flows
rather than capital flows (c.f., Mundell, 1957).



                                               30
The fact that contracts are incomplete implies that there is no explicit price for these
varieties. Because all variable costs are incurred in the country where the input is
produced, a plausible assumption is to value these intermediates at average cost. And
because the final good is produced at no cost, the implicit price of an intermediate
input is simply pY,V in industry Y and pZ,O in industry Z.31
       Without loss of generality, consider now a given country N ’s imports from another
country S. Country N will host nY + nZ plants producing final-good varieties. Of
the nY plants in industry Y , a measure nSY will be importing the intermediate input
from their integrated suppliers in country S. This volume of trade will thus be
intrafirm trade. On the other hand, of the nZ plants in industry Z, a measure nSZ
will be importing the input from independent suppliers in country j 6= N. These
transactions will thus occur at arm’s length. Furthermore, because preferences are
homothetic and identical everywhere, consumers in country N will incur a fraction sN
of world spending on each variety. It thus follows that the total volume of N imports
                  ¡                  ¢
from S will be sN nSY pY y + nSZ pZ z , or simply

                                  M N,S = sN sS (rK + wL) .                                     (24)

Similarly, the total volume of country N exports to country S is sS sN (rK + wL),
implying that trade is balanced. Since both industries produce diﬀerentiated goods,
for a given sN + sS , the volume of bilateral trade is maximized when both countries
are of equal size (c.f., Helpman and Krugman [1985]).
       Now let us look more closely at the composition of imports. Since only in in-
dustry Y do final-good producers vertically integrate their suppliers, only imports in
this industry will occur within firm boundaries. Denoting the volume of country N
                             N,S                    N,S
intrafirm imports from S by Mi−f , it follows that Mi−f = sN nSY pY y. Plugging the
equilibrium value for nSY and rearranging, it is possible to express intrafirm imports
as                                            ³  ´
                                          1 − βfZ (1 − σ L ) K      f K
                                                               S
                                                             LS − β Z σL L
                N,S      N S
               Mi−f   = s s (rK + wL) ³           ´³                       ´.                   (25)
                                        βfY − βfZ (1 − σ L ) K
                                                                  S      K
                                                                 LS
                                                                    + σ LL
  31
    As suggested by a referee, intermediates could alternatively ¡be valued
                                                                        ¢ according to the supplier’s
average revenues. In such case, the implicit prices would be 1 − φ pY,V and (1 − φ) pZ,O . This
would reduce the value of trade flows, with a disproportionate reduction in industry Y . As a result,
the link between factor endowments and the volume of trade established in Proposition 2 below
would be attenuated.

                                                  31
Intrafirm imports are thus increasing in the size of both the importing and exporting
countries, and, from simple diﬀerentiation of (25), are also increasing in the capital-
labor ratio of the exporting country.
   Figure 6 depicts combinations of factor endowments that yield the same volume of
                   N,S
intrafirm imports Mi−f , for the case in which there are only two countries, N and S.
The arrows in the graph point in the direction of increasing intrafirm imports. Point
               °      ° °      °
C is such that °O N C ° = °COS °, implying that the line BB 0 contains all points for
which sN = sS . The graph shows how for a given capital-labor ratio of the exporting
                            N,S
country (i.e., the South), Mi−f is maximized when the two countries are of equal size.
                                                                    N,S
On the other hand, for a given relative size of the two countries, Mi−f is increasing
in the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country. In sum,

Lemma 4 For any pair of countries N, S ∈ J with S 6= N, the volume of N’s
                           N,S
intrafirm imports from S, Mi−f , is, for a given size sN of the importing country, an
increasing function of the capital-labor ratio K S /LS and the size sS of the exporting
                                                    N,S
country. Furthermore, for a given K S /LS and sS , Si−f is also increasing in the size
sN of the importing country.

            N,S                                                               N,S
   Now let Si−f denote the share of intrafirm imports in total imports, i.e. Si−f ≡
 N,S
Mi−f /M N,S . Dividing equation (25) by (24) yields
                               ³        ´
                                     f
                                 1 − β Z (1 − σ L ) K
                                                      S
                                                         − βfZ σ L K
                      N,S                           LS             L
                     Si−f   =³           ´³                         ´.             (26)
                               βfY − βfZ (1 − σ L ) K
                                                          S       K
                                                        LS  + σ L L

                              N,S
Notice that by Assumption 3, Si−f ∈ (0, 1). Furthermore, when K S /LS goes to
κ · K/L, the South stops producing varieties of intermediates in industry Y , and thus
 N,S
Si−f goes to 0. Similarly, when K S /LS goes to κ · K/L, the South fully specializes
                          N,S
in industry Y , and thus Si−f goes to 1. More importantly, simple diﬀerentiation of
(26) reveals that:

                                                                          N,S
Proposition 2 For any pair of countries N, S ∈ J with S 6= N , the share Si−f of
intrafirm imports in total N ’s imports from S is an increasing function of the capital-
                                                                                  N,S
labor ratio K S /LS of the exporting country. Furthermore, for a given K S /LS , Si−f
is unaﬀected by the relative size of each country.

                                            32
               Figure 6: Volume of Intrafirm Imports

          LS
                                                                         OS
                           B
KN

               Y
                                 E




                                              C




                                                                Z

                                                                              KS
                                                     w/r   B’

     ON
                                                                    LN




                   Figure 7: Share of Intrafirm Imports

          LS
                                                                         OS
                     B
KN

               Y

                            E




                                     C



                                                                Z

                                                                              KS
                                              w/r   B’
     ON
                                                                    LN




                                         33
       The first statement is one of the key results of the paper. In particular, it shows
how in a world with international trade, the pattern of Figure 2 in the introduction
is a direct implication of the pattern in Figure 1.
       Figure 7 provides a graphical illustration of Proposition 2 for the case of two
                  N,S
countries. Since Si−f is uniquely determined by K S /LS , the sets of points for which
 N,S
Si−f is constant are simple straight lines from the origin of the South. The arrows
                                                      N,S
indicate that for any relative size of each country, Si−f is increasing in K S /LS .
                                                                        N,S      N,S
       In the next section, I will test the theoretical predictions on Si−f and Mi−f
using data on U.S. imports. Before doing so, I briefly argue that the assumption of
nontradability of the final-good varieties is not crucial for the results derived above.

3.3        Alternative Assumptions on the Tradability of Final Goods
       A. Probabilistic Location of Final-Good Production Consider the case in
which final-good varieties can be traded, but assume that each variety is produced
in only one location.32 Let final goods be traded only at arm’s length. Assume also
that production of these varieties is distributed across countries in a probabilistic
manner. Denote by Pkj (i) the probability that a given final-good variety i of industry
k is assigned to country j. Let Pkj (i|j 0 ) be the same probability conditional on the
intermediate input corresponding to that variety being produced in country j 0 . The
international location of intermediate-input production is as described in section 3.1.
Consider the imports of a given country N ∈ J from another country S ∈ J. These
consist of final-good varieties assigned to country S, as well as of intermediate inputs
required for the production of final-good varieties assigned to N . Expected total
imports can be expressed as:

                     Z   nY                       Z   nZ                    Z   nS                      Z   nS
                                                                                 Y                           Z
    N,S      N
M         = s pY y            PYS (i)di+sN pZ z            PZS (i)di+pY y            PYN (i|S)di+pZ z            PZN (i|S)di,
                     0                            0                         0                           0

where the first two terms correspond to imports of final-good varieties and the
remaining ones are imports of intermediate inputs.                               Of these imports, only the
third component will be traded within firm boundaries.                                   As a benchmark, con-
sider the case in which the location of final-good varieties is completely random and
  32
   Imagine, for instance, that there is a negligible but positive fixed cost of final-good production.
The discussion characterizes the limit in which this cost goes to zero.

                                                            34
Pkj (i) = Pkj (i|j 0 ) = sj . In words, the probability that a given final-good variety is
produced in a certain country is proportional to the size of the country, but is in-
dependent of the variety, industry and location of intermediate-input production. It
is straightforward to check that, in this probabilistic framework, expected imports
are twice as large as in the previous section, i.e., M N,S = 2sN sS (rK + wL), while
expected intrafirm imports are identical to those in the case of nontradable final
              N,S
goods, i.e., Mi−f = sN nSY pY y. It thus follows that the share of intrafirm imports in
total imports will be one-half of that in equation (26). Therefore, all the claims in
Lemma 4 and Proposition 2 remain valid in this alternative set-up. This example
illustrates that in order to eliminate the prediction relating the share of intrafirm
imports and relative capital abundance, one needs to introduce ad hoc correlations
in the cross-country distribution of final-good varieties.33


       B. Technical Know-How and North-South Trade Consider yet an alter-
native set-up. Countries not only diﬀer in factor endowments but also in their stock
of knowledge. In particular, there is a set of countries, the North, that possess the
know-how to produce varieties of final-goods. The remaining countries, the South, do
not have this know-how and thus export only intermediate inputs and import only
final goods. Denote the former set by N ⊆ J and the latter by S ⊆ J. The final
good is traded at arm’s length at a negligible but positive cost. Since production of
final varieties is costless, this implies that countries belonging to N will only trade in-
termediates inputs between themselves (it follows that if S = ∅, the pattern of trade
would be identical to the one discussed above). In order to service the Southern
markets for final goods, countries in the North will import varieties of intermediate
input in excess of the amount needed to satisfy their domestic demand. Assume that
these excess imports are not biased towards any particular industry, in the sense that
these excess imports constitute the same fraction of the exporter’s production in each
industry.
       Since countries in S import only final-good varieties, the bilateral share of intrafirm
imports in total imports is trivially 0 for all s ∈ S. Conversely, a given country
  33
    For instance, if the locations of intermediate and final-good production were perfectly correlated,
then Pkj (i|j 0 ) = 0 for all j 6= j 0 , and the share of intrafirm imports would be zero for all countries.



                                                    35
n ∈ N will only import intermediate inputs. In particular, given an exporting country
j ∈ J, imports from j will be comprised of those intermediates required for domestic
consumption of final goods and those required to service Southern countries. Denote
by η jn the share of j’s production that is imported to service Southern countries.
Then total imports from j will be (sn + η jn )sj E, with their intrafirm component being
(sn + η jn )nSY pY y. When taking the ratio, the terms in η n cancel, and the share of
intrafirm imports in total imports is again given by an expression identical to equation
(26). Conditional on the importing country belonging to N (which is surely the case
for the United States), Proposition 2 thus still remains valid. Notice also that the
                                   n,j
total volume of intrafirm imports Mi−f will again increase in the capital-labor ratio
and the size of the exporting country. Furthermore, unless η jn is negatively correlated
with the size of country n, the second statement in Lemma 4 will also still apply.


4     Econometric Evidence
In this section, I use data on intrafirm and total U.S. imports to test more formally
the empirical validity of the main results of the paper. I start by studying more
closely the relationship between the factor intensity of the exporting industry and
the share of intrafirm imports in total imports. In particular, I show that the clear
correlation in Figure 1 does not seem to be driven by the omission of other relevant
variables. Next, I move on to the relationship between relative factor endowments and
the share of intrafirm imports. The link predicted by Proposition 2 is confirmed even
after controlling for additional factors that could reasonably be expected to aﬀect this
share. Furthermore, as predicted by the theory, the size of the exporting country is
shown not to have an independent eﬀect on the share of intrafirm imports. Finally,
I analyze the determinants of the total volume of intrafirm imports and show that,
consistently with Lemma 4, total intrafirm imports are indeed significantly aﬀected
by the size of the exporting country.
    Before discussing the econometric results, however, the next two sections discuss
the specifications and the data I use to test the hypotheses.




                                          36
4.1     Specification
Cross-Industry Tests The first hypothesis to test is that the share of intrafirm
imports is higher, the higher the capital intensity of the exporting industry. The
model presented above actually predicts that the share should be 0 for industries with
                                                b and 1 for industries with β k > β,
capital intensity β k below a certain threshold β                                   b
a prediction that does not seem to be borne by the data. Imagine, however, that
the model provides a valid description of the world, but the statistician disaggregates
the industry data under a criterion diﬀerent from the one dictated by preferences or
technology. In particular, instead of the sectors Y and Z in the model, the statistician
disaggregates the data into M industries. Denote by njY (m) the measure of firms in
country j that produce varieties of intermediate inputs of sector Y and that are
included in industry m ∈ M by the statistician. Let njZ (m) be the analogous measure
for sector Z. The statistician will report an average capital intensity in industry m
and country j equal to:34

                                           njY (m)KY + njZ (m)KZ
                               k j (m) =                         .                               (27)
                                           njY (m)LY + njZ (m)LZ
On the other hand, letting j be the rest of the world, the statistician will record
U.S. imports in industry m amounting to sU S (njY (m)pY y + njZ (m)pZ z), of which
sU S njY (m)pY y will be reported as intrafirm imports and sU S njZ (m)pZ z as imports at
arm’s length. The share of intrafirm imports in industry m will therefore be:

                              U S,j                njY (m)pY y
                             Si−f   (m) =                             .                          (28)
                                            njY (m)pY y + njZ (m)pZ z
Combining equations (27) and (28) yields

                   US,j                     k j (m) − KZ /LZ
                  Si−f  (m) =                                            ,                       (29)
                                (1 − qLY /LZ )k j (m) + qKY /LZ − KZ /LZ
where q = pZ z/pY y. It is straightforward to check that the recorded share of intrafirm
imports in industry m ∈ M is an increasing function of the recorded average capital
intensity in that industry.35 The model can thus deliver the smooth pattern in Figure
  34
     I drop the superscript j when the theory dicates that a certain variable will be identical in all
countries. This is the case, for instance, of LY , which in the model is given by equation (18).
  35                 U S,j
     In particular, Si−f   (m) increases with kj (m) as long as KY /LY > KZ /LZ , which is true in the
model since βf      f
               Y > βZ .


                                                 37
1.36
       In the econometric results below, I report estimates from regressions of the form:
                            ³             ´
                                 US,ROW
                       ln       Si−f              = θ1 + θ 2 ln (K/L)m + Wm0 θ3 + ²m ,         (30)
                                              m

        U S,ROW
where (Si−f     )m is industry m’s share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports
from the rest of the world, (K/L)m is the average capital-labor ratio in the exporting
industry, Wm is a vector of controls, and ²m is an error term, which is assumed to
be orthogonal to the regressors. The vector Wm is included to control for other
possible industry-specific determinants of vertical integration. Since I observe the
share (Si−f )m in four diﬀerent years, I also include industry eﬀects in some of the
regressions. In light of Proposition 1, I hypothesize that θ2 > 0.


Cross-Country Tests The second hypothesis that I test is that, in the cross-section
of countries, the share of intrafirm imports in total imports is higher, the higher the
capital-labor ratio of the exporting country. Equation (26) actually provides a closed-
form solution for this relationship. Denoting the importing country by US and the
exporting country by j, and applying a log-linear approximation to (26) leads to the
following specification:37
                    ³      ´               ¡       ¢        ¡ ¢
                      US,j
                  ln Si−f    = γ 1 + γ 2 ln K j /Lj + γ 3 ln Lj + Wj0 γ 4 + εj ,               (31)

       U S,j
where Si−f   is the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports from country j,
K j /Lj is capital-labor ratio of country j, Lj is population in country j, Wj is a vector
of controls, and ²j is an orthogonal error term. The theory predicts that γ 2 should
be positive. In fact, from the log-linearization, we can derive a much more precise
                                       ³             ´
                                                  f
prediction, i.e. γ 2 = (1 − σ L ) σ L / 1 − σ L − β Z . This implies that the elasticity of
the share of intrafirm imports to the capital-labor ratio should not be lower than the
labor share in the economy. Furthermore, from the last statement in Proposition 2,
we should not expect γ 3 to be significantly diﬀerent from zero.
  36
      As pointed out by a referee, the smooth pattern in Figure 1 could also be the result of idio-
syncratic preferences by firms concerning the outsourcing decision. An explicit modelling of such
firm-level heterogeneity would, however, greatly complicate the general-equilibrium analysis.
                                                                                       ¯
   37                                                                             US,j ¯
      In particular, I log-linearize (26) around K j /Lj = K/L, and obtain ln Si−f     ¯ j j       '
                                                                                         K /L =K/L
                    ¡                    ¢
ln (µ) + (1−σL )σfL ln K j /Lj − ln K/L .
          1−σ L −β Z


                                                          38
       The third test I conduct consists in running a regression analogous to (31) but
with the log of total intrafirm imports (instead of its share in total imports) in the
left-hand side. In particular, I consider the specification:
                      ³           ´                 ¡       ¢        ¡ ¢
                           US,j
                 ln       Mi−f        = ω 1 + ω 2 ln K j /Lj + ω 3 ln Lj + Wj0 ω 4 + εj .                             (32)

In view of Lemma 4, both ω 2 and ω 3 should be positive. Furthermore, it is easy
to show that the model imposes the restrictions ω 2 > γ 2 and ω 3 = 1.38 In words,
the total volume of intrafirm imports should be more responsive to the capital-labor
ratio of the exporting country than its share in total imports, while its elasticity with
respect to the size of the exporting country should be one.

4.2        Data
Dependent Variables The left-hand side variables are constructed combining data
on intrafirm U.S. imports and on overall U.S. imports. Intrafirm U.S. imports in-
clude (i) imports shipped by overseas aﬃliates to their U.S. parents; and (ii) imports
shipped to U.S. aﬃliates by their foreign parent group. The series were obtained from
the direct investment dataset available from the Bureau of Economic Activity (BEA)
website. The BEA suppresses data cells in order to avoid disclosure of individual firm
data. This limits the scope for testing the hypotheses of the paper in a fully satis-
factory manner. For reasons discussed in Appendix A.4, I end up running equation
(30) for a panel consisting of 23 manufacturing industries and four years: 1987, 1989,
1992, and 1994. As for equations (31) and (32), data availability limits the analysis
to a cross-section of 28 countries in 1992 (see Appendix A.5 for a complete list of the
industries and countries included in the regressions).
       In the panel of industries, the share of intrafirm imports in total U.S. imports
ranges from a value slightly below 1% for textiles in 1987 to around 82% for drugs
in 1994, for an overall average of 21.2%. In the cross-section of countries, the share
                                                                               µ                     j
                                                                                                                    ¶
                                           US,j                            j       (1−βfZ )(1−σ L ) Kj −βfZ σ L K
  38
       Notice that (25) can be written as Mi−f  = sUS (rK + wL) LK                                  L           L
                                                                                                                     . Log-
                                                                                             βf −βf
                                                                                               Y    Z

linearizing this expression around K j /Lj = K/L yields:
                    ¯                                        (1 − σ L ) (1 − βf  ¡                   ¢
              U S,j ¯                                                         Z)
          ln Mi−f   ¯                 ' constant + ln Lj +                        ln K j /Lj − ln K/L .
                      K j /Lj =K/L                              1 − σ L − βf
                                                                           Z




                                                        39
ranges from an almost negligible 0.1% for Egypt up to 64.1% for Switzerland, for an
overall average of 22.4% (see Table 2).


               Table 2. Share of Intrafirm Imports in total U.S. Imports (%)
              by Industry (avg. 1987-94)                by Country (1992)
              DRU 65.5 FOO 13.9                      CHE 64.1 ESP 15.5
              OCH 40.9 PAP          12.7             SGP 55.4 AUS 15.5
              VEH 39.8 FME 12.6                      IRL    53.7 JPN 14.2
              ELE    37.3 STO 11.8                   CAN 45.1 ISR          12.4
              COM 36.7 INS          11.1             NDL 42.2 HKG 11.2
              CHE 35.9 TRA 10.7                      MEX 41.7 PHL          8.4
              CLE 35.7 PLA          9.1              PAN 35.8 ITA          8.1
              RUB 23.9 PRI          6.1              GBR 33.2 ARG 5.1
              AUD 23.8 LUM           4.1             DEU 31.9 COL 4.6
              OEL 18.9 OMA 2.6                       MYS 30.1 OAN 4.6
              IMA 17.3 TEX           2.3             BEL 27.3 VEN 1.4
              BEV 15.1                               BRA 25.9 CHL           1.3
                                                     FRA 21.6 IDN           1.3
                                                     SWE 16.8 EGY 0.1
              Note: see Appendix A.5 for a list of industries and countries.



Industry Variables Most right-hand side variables in the cross-industry regres-
sions are taken from the NBER Manufacturing Industry Productivity Database.39
Capital intensity is measured as the ratio of the total capital stock to total em-
ployment in the corresponding exporting industry.40 To control for other potential
determinants of internalization, I run equation (30) including other industry charac-
teristics one at a time. First, I allow for the possibility that the integration decision
might be determined by the human-capital intensity of the production process. To
the extent that final-good producers also contribute to their suppliers’ costs related
to the acquisition of human capital (e.g., by financing training programs), a model
identical to the one developed above with human capital H replacing K would in-
deed predict an eﬀect of human-capital intensity. Furthermore, if physical capital and
  39
     The SIC classification used in the NBER Manufacturing Database was converted to BEA in-
dustry categories using a concordance table available from the BEA and reproduced in Table A.1.
  40
     This presupposes that U.S. industry capital intensities are similar to those in the rest of the
world. In a world with factor price equalization this would naturally be the case. In a more general
set-up, the much weaker assumption of no factor intensity reversals is suﬃcient to ensure that the
same qualitative results would be obtained by using the source country factor intensity data.



                                                40
human-capital intensity are positively correlated, the patterns in Figure 1 would then
be overstating the eﬀect of capital intensity. I measure human-capital intensity as the
ratio of nonproduction workers to production workers in a given industry, as reported
in the NBER Manufacturing dataset. A completely analogous argument could be
used to defend the inclusion of some measure of the importance of R&D and adver-
tising in the production process. R&D intensity and advertising intensity are defined,
respectively, as the ratio of R&D expenditures to sales and advertising expenditures
to sales, and are obtained from a 1977 FTC survey.41 I also control for the possibility
that the integration decision may be driven by the size of scale economies at the plant
level, as measured by average capital stock per establishment.42 Finally, the decision
to integrate could also be related to the importance of suppliers’ production in the
overall value chain. A rough way of proxying for this is to control for the share of
value added in total industry sales, as reported in the NBER manufacturing dataset.


Country Variables The main right-hand side variables in equations (31) and (32),
including the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country and its total population,
are taken from the cross-section of country variables for the year 1988 constructed by
Hall and Jones (1999). In the present paper, I have adopted the view that capital
abundance is a crucial determinant of the amount of multinational activity in a given
country. Zhang and Markusen (2001) develop a model in which the volume of foreign
direct investment in a given country is instead crucially aﬀected by its skilled-labor
abundance. To control for these possible eﬀects, I include the measure of human
capital abundance reported in Hall and Jones (1999). Other authors have stressed
the importance of fiscal and institutional factors in determining the attractiveness of
foreign direct investment in a given country. Countries with relatively lower corporate
taxes and relatively better institutional environments should, in principle, be more
prone to hosting aﬃliates of U.S. firms. In the regressions below, I use data on
average corporate tax rates from a Price Waterhouse survey, as well as the index of
institutional quality for the year 1990 reported in Gwartney et alt. (2002). Within
  41
     This measure has been widely used in the literature (e.g., Cohen and Klepper, 1992, Brainard,
1997).
  42
     This variable was constructed combining the capital stock figures from the NBER dataset with
data on the number of establishments published by the U.S. Census Bureau in its County Business
Patterns series.


                                               41
the institutional factors, I also attempt to distinguish between the eﬀect of a country’s
degree of openness to FDI and that of its degree of openess to international trade.
Indices of openness to FDI and to trade are obtained from survey data reported in
the World Competitiveness Report (1992). Table 3 reports descriptive statistics for
all variables included in the regressions.

4.3    Results
Intrafirm Trade and Factor Intensity The top panel of Table 4 presents random
eﬀects estimates of equation (30). Column I includes no controls in the regression
and is therefore the econometric analog to Figure 1. The coeﬃcient on ln(K/L)m
is positive and significantly diﬀerent from zero at the 1%-significance level. The
estimated elasticity of the share of intrafirm imports with respect to the capital-
labor ratio in production implies that a 1% increase in K/L increases the share of
intrafirm imports by around 0.95%. Column II includes human-capital intensity in
the regression. As expected, this leads to a reduction of the estimate of θ2 , which,
however, remains highly significant. The coeﬃcient on ln(H/L)m is positive but not
statistically significant. In column III, the ratio of R&D expenditures to sales is also
included in the regression and is found to have a very significant eﬀect on the share
of intrafirm imports. The estimate of θ2 in column III is lower than that implied
by Figure 1, but it still implies that a 1% increase in K/L, should lead to a 0.78%
increase in the share of intrafirm imports. The inclusions of advertising intensity in
column IV, of the size of economies of scale in column V, and of value-added intensity
in column VI do not overturn any of the qualitative results. None of these variables
seems to aﬀect significantly the share of intrafirm imports, while capital intensity and
R&D intensity remain significant at the 1% level.




                                             42
                                          Table 3. Descriptive Statistics

                   ³              ´                  Obs    Mean        St. dev.    Min     Max
                        U S,ROW
              ln       Si−f                          92     -1.90         0.92      -4.74   -0.19
                                      m
              ln(K/L)m                               92     4.26          0.57       3.21   5.73
              ln(H/L)m                               92     -0.69         0.60      -1.78   0.60
              ln(R&D/Sales)m                         92     -4.20         1.00      -6.07   -2.47
              ln(ADV /Sales)m                        92     -4.27         1.10      -6.63   -2.24
              ln(Scale)m                             92     1.63          0.92       0.06   3.48
              ln(V
                 ³ AD/Sales)
                          ´  m                       92     -0.66         0.18      -1.13   -0.32
                    U S,j
              ln Si−f                                28     -2.08         1.44      -6.67   -0.45
              ln (K/L)j                              28     10.54         0.86       8.13   11.59
              ln (L)j                                28     16.03         1.20      13.63   18.16
              ln (H/L)j                              28     0.82          0.19       0.47    1.10
              CorpT axj                              28     0.32          0.08       0.15    0.44
              EconF reedomj                          28     6.36          1.22       4.19    8.24
              OpF DI                                 26     7.83          1.23       4.73    9.57
              OpT³ rade ´                            26     6.70          1.22       3.52    8.67
                  U S,j
              ln Mi−f                                28       6.36        2.64      -1.39   10.49


                                                                   US,ROW
                          Table 4. Factor Intensity and the Share Si−f
Dep.
  ³ var. is ´                                        Random Eﬀects Regressions
     U S,ROW
ln Si−f                                      I         II      III       IV                    V          VI
                   m
ln(K/L)m                                  0.947∗∗∗   0.861∗∗∗        0.780∗∗∗    0.776∗∗∗   0.703∗∗∗   0.723∗∗∗
                                          (0.187)    (0.190)         (0.160)     (0.162)    (0.249)    (0.253)
ln(H/L)m                                              0.369           -0.002      -0.038     -0.037     -0.081
                                                     (0.213)         (0.188)     (0.200)    (0.206)    (0.221)
ln(R&D/Sales)m                                                       0.451∗∗∗    0.470∗∗∗   0.452∗∗∗   0.421∗∗∗
                                                                     (0.107)     (0.114)    (0.128)    (0.140)
ln(ADV /Sales)m                                                                   0.055       0.059      0.035
                                                                                 (0.094)    (0.097)    (0.107)
ln(Scale)m                                                                                    0.068      0.100
                                             99                                             (0.179)    (0.190)
ln(V AD/Sales)m                                                                                          0.403
                                                                                                       (0.657)
R2                                          0.50       0.55           0.72         0.73       0.73       0.73
No. of obs.                                  92         92             92           92         92          92
                                                       Fixed Eﬀects Regressions
                                               I         II       III        IV                 V          VI
ln(K/L)m                                   0.599∗∗    0.610∗∗  0.610∗∗    0.610∗∗            0.943∗∗    1.058∗∗
                                          (0.299)    (0.300)   (0.300)   (0.300)            (0.412)    (0.410)
p-value Wu-Hausman test                      0.14       0.27     0.62       0.64               0.52       0.19
Note: Standard errors in parenthesis (*, **, and *** are 10, 5, and 1% significance levels)

                                                           43
       Consistency of the random eﬀects estimates requires the industry eﬀects to be un-
correlated with the other explanatory variables. One might worry that the omission
of some relevant industry variables might lead to biases in the random eﬀects esti-
mates. As a robustness check, the bottom panel of Table 4 reports the fixed eﬀects
estimates of θ2 together with the p-value of a Wu-Hausman test for exogeneity of
the industry eﬀects.43 The fixed eﬀects estimates of θ2 are all significantly diﬀerent
from zero at the 5%-significance level. Furthermore, the point estimates are not too
diﬀerent from their random eﬀects counterparts and the null hypothesis of exogeneity
of the industry eﬀects cannot be rejected at reasonable significance levels.


Intrafirm Trade and Factor Abundance Table 5 reports OLS estimates of equa-
tion (31) for the cross-section of 28 countries. The estimates in column I correspond
to the simple correlation depicted in Figure 2. The elasticity of the share of in-
trafirm imports with respect to the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country is
significantly diﬀerent from zero and, as predicted by the theory, the point estimate
of the elasticity is necessarily higher than any plausible labor share in the world.
Column II confirms the claim in Proposition 2 that, for a given K j /Lj , the size of
                                                  U S,j
the exporting country should not aﬀect the share Si−f   . The coeﬃcient of ln (L)j is
actually negative but statistically indistinguishable from zero. Column III introduces
the measure of human-capital abundance in the regression. Contrary to what might
have been expected (c.f., Zhang and Markusen, 2001), the estimated coeﬃcient on
ln (H/L)j is negative, although again insignificantly diﬀerent from zero. Conversely,
the eﬀect of physical-capital abundance remains significantly positive at the 1% level.
As shown in column IV and V, controlling for the average corporate tax rate and
the index of institutional quality does not overturn the results. The coeﬃcients on
both CorpT axj and on EconF reedomj are not significantly diﬀerent from zero, while
the estimate of γ 2 remains significantly positive at the 5% level. Finally, column VI
suggests that the insignificance of the institutional variable in column V might be
due to the counterbalancing eﬀects of diﬀerent policies. In particular, the share of
intrafirm trade is negatively aﬀected by the degree of openess to FDI but positively
  43
    The R&D and advertising intensity variables are purely cross-sectional and are thus dropped in
the estimation. This explains that the estimates in columns II, III and IV are all identical.



                                               44
(although insignificantly) aﬀected by the degree of openess to trade. Overall, the
significant eﬀect of the capital-labor ratio of the exporting country on the share of
intrafirm imports appears to be very robust.44
       Table 6 presents the OLS estimates of equation (32). Columns I and II confirm
that the theoretical predictions in Lemma 4 are borne by the data. Both the capital-
labor ratio of the exporting country and its size seem to have a significant positive
eﬀect on the volume of U.S. intrafirm imports. Consistently with the theory, the
               U S,j
elasticity of Mi−f   with respect to K j /Lj is estimated to be higher than the elasticity
    U S,j                                                           U S,j
of Si−f   with respect to K j /Lj . Furthermore, the elasticity of Mi−f   with respect
to Lj is, as predicted, not significantly diﬀerent from one. As reported in columns
III and IV, controlling for human capital abundance and for the average corporate
tax rate has a negligible eﬀect on the coeﬃcients. The inclusion of the institutional
index in column V leads to a substantial fall in the estimated elasticity of intrafirm
imports to the capital-labor ratio, but the eﬀect remains significant at the 5% level.
Finally, column VI includes separate measures of openess to FDI and openess to
trade. The results indicate that controlling for the capital-labor ratio of the exporting
country, intrafirm imports are negatively aﬀected by its openness to FDI. This may
seem puzzling, but the model can shed light on this finding. Recall from section 2.3
that the attractiveness of integration is decreasing in the share φ of ex-post surplus
accruing to final-good producers. If a higher openness to FDI corresponds to a larger
bargaining power for foreign final-good producers, then on this account the model is
consistent with the coeﬃcient on OpF DI being significantly negative.45 Importantly,
the eﬀect of the capital-labor in column VI continues to be significant at the 1% level,
while the eﬀect of size is only marginally insignificant at the 10% level.


  44
     Including OpF DI and OpT rade reduces the number of observation to 26, since no data on
these variables is available for Egypt and Panama. I re-ran the regressions in columns I, through V,
without these two countries and obtained very similar results.
  45
     Note, however, that this is not the only eﬀect of φ on the volume of intrafirm imports. From
equation (25), φ also aﬀects Mi−fUS,j
                                      through the terms in βf      f
                                                            Y and β Z which are increasing in φ, and
through σL , which is decreasing in φ. The overall eﬀect of φ is in general ambiguous.




                                                45
                                                             U S,j
                   Table 5. Factor Endowments and the Share Si−f
               ³       ´
                 U S,j
Dep. var. is ln Si−f        I        II       III       IV         V                VI
ln (K/L)j                1.141∗∗∗    1.110∗∗∗     1.244∗∗∗   1.239∗∗∗   1.097∗∗   1.119∗∗
                          (0.289)    (0.299)      (0.427)    (0.415)    (0.501)   (0.399)
ln (L)j                               -0.133       -0.159     -0.158     -0.142    0.017
                                     (0.168)      (0.164)    (0.167)    (0.170)   (0.220)
ln (H/L)j                                          -1.024     -0.890     -1.273    -0.822
                                                  (1.647)    (1.491)    (1.367)   (1.389)
CorpT axj                                                     -0.601     0.068     1.856
                                                             (3.158)    (3.823)   (2.932)
EconF reedomj                                                            0.214
                                                                        (0.213)
OpF DIj                                                                           -0.384∗
                                                                                  (0.218)
OpT radej                                                                          0.292
                                                                                  (0.273)
R2                         0.46       0.47          0.48      0.50       0.50       0.43
No. of obs.                 28         28            28        28         28         26
Note: Robust standard errors in parenthesis (*, **, and *** are 10, 5, and 1% sig. levels)



                                                             U S,j
                  Table 6. Factor Endowments and the volume Mi−f
               ³       ´
                 U S,j
Dep. var. is ln Mi−f         I        II      III        IV        V                 VI
ln (K/L)j                 2.048∗∗∗   2.192∗∗∗     2.188∗∗∗   2.154∗∗∗   1.650∗∗   2.096∗∗∗
                           (0.480)    (0.458)      (0.716)    (0.663)   (0.762)   (0.695)
ln (L)j                               0.607∗∗      0.608∗∗    0.614∗∗   0.670∗∗    0.700
                                      (0.229)      (0.268)    (0.271)   (0.243)   (0.419)
ln (H/L)j                                           0.031       0.953    -0.406    0.708
                                                   (3.289)    (3.316)   (2.992)   (3.052)
CorpT axj                                                      -4.135    -1.763    -0.647
                                                              (5.294)   (5.955)   (5.295)
EconF reedomj                                                             0.795
                                                                        (0.443)
OpF DIj                                                                           -1.006∗∗
                                                                                   (0.474)
OpT radej                                                                           0.674
                                                                                   (0.560)
R2                          0.44       0.52         0.52       0.53       0.60      0.49
No. of obs.                  28         28           28         28         28        26
Note: Robust standard errors in parenthesis (*, **, and *** are 10, 5, and 1% sig. levels))




                                             46
5        Conclusions
This paper began by unveiling two systematic patterns in the intrafirm component
of international trade. Traditional trade theory is silent on the boundaries of firms.
Existing contributions to the theory of the firm tend to be partial-equilibrium in
scope and have ignored the international dimensions of certain intrafirm transac-
tions. Building on two workhorse models in international trade and the theory of the
firm, I have developed a simple model that can account for the novel facts identified
in the introduction. By combining a Grossman-Hart-Moore view of the firm with
a Helpman-Krugman view of international trade, I have constructed a model that
determines both the pattern of international trade and the boundaries of firms in a
unified framework.
       Nevertheless, much remains to be done. Future empirical investigations are likely
to unveil new distinct features of the volume of intrafirm trade that cannot be ac-
counted for by the simple model developed here. On the one hand, the Grossman-
Hart-Moore theory enhances our understanding of only a subset of the determinants
of ownership structure. Holmström and Milgrom (1994) have emphasized that, in
many situations, issues related to job design and the cost of measuring performance
are more relevant when choosing between inside or outside procurement.46 It would
be interesting to investigate the implications of such a view of the firm for the volume
of intrafirm trade. On the other hand, in determining trade patterns, I have resorted
to a very simple trade model. Future work should help us to understand potential
channels by which technological diﬀerences, transport costs or international factor-
price diﬀerences can aﬀect the organization and location of international production.
In Antràs (2002), I have started to deal with some of these issues in a dynamic, Ri-
cardian model of North-South trade featuring endogenous product cycles as well as
endogenous organizational cycles. In particular, the model gives rise to a new version
of the product cycle, in which manufacturing is shifted to the South first within firm
boundaries, and only at a later stage to independent firms in the South.



  46
     Baker and Hubbard (2002) find that ownership patterns in the trucking industry reflect the
relevance of each of these two strands in the literature.

                                              47
References
 [1] Aghion, Philippe, Mathias Dewatripont and Patrick Rey (1994), “Renegotiation Design
     with Unverifiable Information,” Econometrica, 62:2, pp. 257-282.

 [2] Antràs, Pol (2002), “Incomplete Contracts and the Product Cycle,” mimeo Massa-
     chusetts Institute of Technology.

 [3] Aoki, Masahiko (1990), “Toward an Economic Model of the Japanese Firm,” Journal
     of Economic Literature, 28:1, pp. 1-27.

 [4] Baker, P. George and Thomas N. Hubbard (2002), “Make or Buy in Trucking: Asset
     Ownership, Job Design, and Information,” mimeo Chicago Business School.

 [5] Brainard, S. Lael (1997), “An Empirical Assessment of the Proximity-Concentration
     Trade-oﬀ Between Multinational Sales and Trade,” American Economic Review, 87:4,
     pp. 520-544.

 [6] Casson, Mark (1979), Alternatives to the Multinational Enterprise, London: Macmil-
     lan.

 [7] Caves, Richard E. (1996), Multinational Enterprise and Economic Analysis, Second
     Edition, Cambridge University Press.

 [8] Che, Yeon-Koo and Donald B. Hausch (1999), “Cooperative Investments and the Value
     of Contracting,” American Economic Review, 89:1, pp. 125-147.

 [9] Coase, Ronald H. (1937), “The Nature of the Firm,” Economica, 4:16, pp. 386-405.

[10] Cohen, Wesley M. and Steven Klepper (1992), “The Anatomy of Industry R&D Inten-
     sity Distributions,” American Economic Review, 82:4, pp. 773-799.

[11] Dunning, John H. (1993), Multinational Enterprises and the Global Economy, Addison
     Wesley Longman, Inc.

[12] Ethier, Wilfred J. (1986), “The Multinational Firm,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
     101:4, pp. 805-833.

[13] Ethier, Wilfred J. and James R. Markusen (1996), “Multinational Firms, Technology
     Diﬀusion and Trade,” Journal of International Economics, 41:1, pp. 1-28.

[14] Grossman, Sanford J. and Oliver D. Hart (1986), “The Costs and Benefits of Own-
     ership: A Theory of Vertical and Lateral Integration,” Journal of Political Economy,
     94:4, pp. 691-719.

[15] Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman (2002a), “Integration vs. Outsourcing in
     Industry Equilibrium,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 117:1, pp. 85-120.

[16] Gwartney, James D., with Chris Edwards, Robert Lawson, Walter Park, and Veronique
     De Rugy (2002), Economic Freedom of the World: 2002 Annual Report, Fraser Insti-
     tute.


                                           48
[17] Hall, Robert E. and Charles I. Jones (1999), “Why Do Some Countries Produce So
     Much More Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114:1,
     pp. 83-116.

[18] Hart, Oliver (1995), Firms, Contracts, and Financial Structure, Oxford: Clarendon
     Press.

[19] Hart, Oliver and John Moore (1990), “Property Rights and the Nature of the Firm,”
     Journal of Political Economy, 98:6, pp. 1119-1158.

[20] Helpman, Elhanan (1984), “A Simple Theory of International Trade with Multinational
     Corporations”, Journal of Political Economy, 92:3, pp. 451-471.

[21] Helpman, Elhanan and Paul R. Krugman (1985), Market Structure and Foreign Trade,
     Cambridge: MIT Press.

[22] Holmström Bengt and Paul Milgrom (1994), “The Firm as an Incentive System,”,
     American Economic Review, 84:4, pp. 972-991.

[23] McLaren, John (2000), “Globalization and Vertical Structure,” American Economic
     Review, 90:5, pp. 1239-1254.

[24] Marin, Dalia and Thierry Verdier (2001), “Power Inside the Firm and the Market: A
     General Equilibrium Approach,” mimeo University of Munich.

[25] Markusen, James R. (1984), “Multinationals, Multi-Plant Economies, and the Gains
     from Trade” Journal of International Economics, 16, pp. 205-226.

[26] Markusen, James R. (1995), “The Boundaries of Multinational Enterprises and the
     Theory of International Trade,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, 9:2, pp. 169-189.

[27] Markusen, James R. and Keith E. Maskus (2001), “General-Equilibrium Approaches to
     the Multinational Firm: A Review of Theory and Evidence,” forthcoming in Harrigan,
     James, ed. Handbook of International Trade, Basil Blackwell.

[28] Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts (1993), “Johnson Controls, Inc., Automotive Systems
     Group: The Georgetown, Kentucky Plant,” Stanford Graduate School of Business Case
     S-BE-9.

[29] Mundell, Robert A. (1957), “International Trade and Factor Mobility,” American Eco-
     nomic Review, 47:3, pp. 321-335.

[30] Nöldeke, Georg and Klaus M. Schmidt (1995), “Option Contracts and Renegotiation:
     A Solution to the Hold-up Problem,” RAND Journal of Economics, 26:2, pp. 163-179.

[31] Romalis, John (2002), “Factor Proportions and the Structure of Commodity Trade,”
     mimeo Chicago Graduate School of Business.

[32] Rugman, Alan M. (1981), Inside the Multinationals: The Economics of Internal Mar-
     kets, New York: Columbia University Press.

[33] Tirole, Jean (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization, Cambridge: MIT Press.

                                          49
[34] UNCTAD (2001), World Investment Report: Promoting Linkages, New York: United
     Nations.

[35] Whinston, Michael D. (2002), “On the Transaction Cost Determinants of Vertical
     Integration,” mimeo Northwestern University.

[36] Williamson, Oliver E. (1985), The Economic Institutions of Capitalism, Free Press.

[37] World Competitiveness Report (1992), World Economic Forum and International In-
     stitute for Management Development.

[38] World Trade Organization (2001), International Trade Statistics, Geneva.

[39] Young S., N. Hood and J. Hamill (1985), “Decision-Making in Foreign Owned Multi-
     national Subsidiaries in the U.K., ILO Working Paper No. 35. Geneva: International
     Labor Oﬃce.

[40] Zeile, William J. (1997), “U.S Intrafirm Trade in Goods,” Survey of Current Business,
     77:2, pp 23-38.

[41] Zhang, Kevin H. and James R. Markusen (2001), “Vertical Multinationals and Host-
     Country Characteristics,” Journal of Development Economics, 59:2, pp. 233-252.




                                           50
A      Appendix
A.1      Proof of Lemma 1
Combining equations (9) and (10), it follows that regardless of the level of demand AY the
final-good producer in a pair of stand-alone firms will decide to incur the capital expendi-
tures itself whenever:
                                               µ     ¶ αβ Y
                                                  φ    1−α
             (1 − α(1 − β Y ) + αφ(1 − 2β Y ))              > φ + (1 − α) (1 − φ),
                                                 1−φ
which holds whenever φ > 1/2. To see this, define the function
                                                 µ        ¶ αβY
                                             φ              1−α
         H(φ) = (1 − α(1 − β) + αφ(1 − 2β))                       − φ − (1 − α) (1 − φ),
                                            1−φ
and notice first that H(1/2) = 0. Next note that
              Ãµ       ¶ αβ     !      µ      ¶ αβ µ                             ¶
    0               φ    1−α               φ     1−α 1 − α(1 − β) + αφ(1 − 2β)
  H (φ) = α                  − 1 + αβ                                          −2 .
                  1−φ                    1−φ              (1 − α) (1 − φ) φ

                                                                               (1−α(1−β)+αφ(1−2β))
The first term is clearly positive when φ > 1/2. Furthermore, since                (1−α)(1−φ)φ
                                    (1−α(1−β)+αφ(1−2β))              1
increases with α, it follows that       (1−α)(1−φ)φ       −2 ≥    (1−φ)φ   − 2 > 0 and the second
term is also positive. Hence, H(φ) > 0 for all φ > 1/2. Since φ > φ, as long as φ > 1/2,
final-good producers in integrated pairs will also decide to rent the capital stock and hand
it to the supplier. QED.

A.2      Proof of Lemma 2
From simple diﬀerentiation of (11), it follows that ∂Θ(·)/∂β k > 0 if and only if
                               µ                  ¶
                                         δα
                     Ω(β k ) ln 1 +                 > (2 − α) (1 − α) (1 − φ) δ α
                                     φ (1 − δ α )
                  ¡                                 ¢
where Ω(β k ) = 1 − α(1 − φ) + αβ k (1 − 2φ) (1 − α(1 − φ) + αβ k (1 − 2φ)) and remember
that φ = δ α + φ(1 − δα ). Now notice that if φ > φ ≥ 1/2 then Ω0 (β k ) < 0 ∀β k ∈ [0, 1], and
                                                                                      00
if φ < φ ≤ 1/2, then Ω0 (β k ) > 0 ∀β k ∈ [0, 1]. Furthermore, if φ > 1/2 > φ, then Ω (β k ) < 0
∀β k ∈ [0, 1] . It thus follows that Ω(β k ) ≥ min {Ω(0), Ω(1)}. Without loss of generality,
assume that Ω(1) = (1 − αφ)(1 − α (φ + (1 − φ)δα ) < Ω(0) (the case Ω(1) > Ω(0) is entirely
symmetric). We need to show that ϑ (δ) > 0 for all δ ∈ (0, 1) where
                             µ                 ¶
                                      δα                (2 − α) (1 − α) (1 − φ) δ α
                 ϑ (δ) = ln 1 +                   −
                                  φ (1 − δ α )       (1 − αφ)(1 − α (φ + (1 − φ)δ α )
From simple diﬀerentiation of this expression, it follows that ϑ0 (δ) > 0 if and only if
(1 − αρ)2 − (2 − α) (1 − α) (1 − ρ) ρ > 0 for some ρ ∈ (0, 1). But it is simple to check that
this is in fact true all α, ρ ∈ (0, 1), and therefore ϑ (δ) > ϑ (0) = 0. Notice that Assumption
1 is not necessary for this result. QED.

                                              51
A.3      Proof of Proposition 1
From equation (11) and the definition of φ, note that we can write
                                                       µ         ¶ 1−α
                                                                    α
                                      1 − α(1 − φ)         1−φ
                            Θ(0, ·) =                                    <1
                                      1 − α(1 − φ)         1−φ
and                                                   µ ¶ 1−α
                                                           α
                                           1 − αφ      φ
                                 Θ(1, ·) =                    > 1.
                                           1 − αφ      φ
                                                                         α
The inequalities follow from φ > φ and the fact that (1 − αx)x 1−α is an increasing function
of x for α ∈ (0, 1) and x ∈ (0, 1). The rest of the Proposition is a direct implication of
Lemma 2. QED.

A.4      Data Appendix
This Appendix discusses in more detail the construction of the share of intrafirm imports
in total U.S. imports. Intrafirm imports were obtained from the “Financial and Operating
Data” on multinational firms downloadable from the BEA website. Since in the model
ownership is associated with control, I restricted the sample to majority-owned aﬃliates.
As discussed in the main text, the BEA suppresses data cells in order to avoid disclosure of
individual firm data. The unsuppressed data is only available to researchers aﬃliated to the
BEA. Unfortunately, one of the requirements for aﬃliation is being a U.S. citizen (which I
am not).
     To construct intrafirm imports by industry, I combine data from foreign aﬃliates of U.S.
firms and U.S. aﬃliates of foreign firms. Intrafirm imports comprise (i) imports shipped by
overseas aﬃliates to their U.S. parents, by industry of aﬃliate, and; (ii) imports shipped
to U.S. aﬃliates by their foreign parent group, by industry of aﬃliate.47,48 . The sum of
these two elements was constructed at the finest level of disaggregation available, focusing
on manufacturing industries and excluding natural-resource industries (in particular, pe-
troleum, ferrous metals and non-ferrous metals).49 I also restricted the sample to years in
which benchmark surveys were conducted. Overall, I end up with 23 industries and four
years: 1987, 1989, 1992 and 1994.
     To construct intrafirm imports by country, I add up (i) imports shipped by overseas af-
filiates to their U.S. parents, by country of origin, and (ii) imports shipped to U.S. aﬃliates
  47
     The BEA defines a foreign parent group as consisting of (1) the foreign parent, (2) any foreign
person, proceeding up the foreign parent’s ownership chain, that owns more than 50 percent of the
person below it, up to and including the ultimate beneficial owner, and (3) any foreign person,
proceeding down the ownership chain(s) of each of these members, that is owned more than 50
percent by the person above it.
  48
     The conceptually correct disaggregation for case (ii) would have been by the industry of the
exporter (i.e. of the foreign parent group). Unfortunately, these series are not available. Intrafirm
imports of type (i) constitute, however, more than two-thirds of all intrafirm imports. More im-
portantly, a similar pattern to that in Figure 1 emerges when the analysis is restricted to intrafirm
imports of type (i).
  49
     Patterns of ownership in natural-resource sectors are likely to be determined by factors, such as
national sovereignty, from which I abstract in the model.

                                                 52
by their foreign parent group, by country of origin. In both cases, I restrict the analysis to
manufacturing industries, although in this case it was impossible to remove those transac-
tions involving natural resources (this might explain why intrafirm imports from Chile and
Venezuela are lower than predicted in Figure 2). The BEA performs two types of manipu-
lations to the data. Apart from suppressing cells to avoid disclosure of data of individual
companies, it also assigns a unique symbol to trade flows inferior in value to $500,000. I
assign a value of $250,000 to these cells.50 Overall, I end up with a single cross-section
with 28 countries in 1992. All the other benchmark survey years lack at least one of the
components of intrafirm imports.
    Finally, in order to compute the share of intrafirm imports, I construct total U.S. imports
by industry and year, and then by country of origin, using data put together by Robert
Feenstra and available from the NBER website. Import figures correspond to their c.i.f.
values. Feenstra’s four-digit industry classification was matched to the 23 BEA industries
using a conversion table available from BEA and reproduced in Table A.1.
    As pointed out by a referee, a significant portion of intrafirm trade involves final goods
that are shipped from a manufacturing plant to an overseas wholesale aﬃliate which then
distributes the good in the foreign country. Unfortunately, the BEA dataset does not
distinguish between imports of intermediate inputs and imports of final goods, so that the
latter cannot be substracted from intrafirm imports. As pointed out by the same referee,
however, this is not necessarily a problem for the empirical work as an analogous theoretical
model can also be interpreted in the context of a supplier-distributor relationship.




  50
    This is only done for two observations. The results are robust to imputing alternative values
between 0 and $500,000.

                                               53
A.5   Additional Tables
                Table A.1. Industry Description and Classification
  Code   Description                                    Corresponding Industry
                                                        SIC Classification
  BEV    Beverages                                      208
  FOO    Other food and kindred products                201-207, 209
  CHE    Industrial chemicals and synthetics            281, 282, 286
  DRU    Drugs                                          283
  CLE    Soap, cleaners and toilet goods                284
  OCH    Other chemical products                        285, 287, 289
  FME    Fabricated metal products                      341-349
  COM    Computer and oﬃce equipment                    357
  IMA    Other industrial machinery and equipment       351-356, 358, 359
  AUD    Audio, video and communications equipment 365, 366
  ELE    Electronic components and accessories          367
  OEL    Other electronic and electrical machinery     361-364, 369
  TEX    Textile products and apparel                   221-229, 231-39
  LUM    Lumber, wood, furniture and fixtures           241-49, 251-59
  PAP    Paper and allied products                      261-263, 265, 267
  PRI    Printing and publishing                        271-279
  RUB    Rubber products                                301, 302, 305, 306
  PLA    Miscellaneous plastics products                308
  STO    Stone, clay, and glass product                 321-29
  VEH    Motor vehicles and equipment                   371
  TRA    Other transportation equipment                 372-376, 379
  INS    Instruments and related products               381, 382, 384-387
  OMA    Other manufacturing                            211-19, 311-19, 391-99


                           Table A.2. Country Codes
                 Code    Country            Code   Country
                 ARG     Argentina          IDN    Indonesia
                 AUS     Australia          IRL    Ireland
                 BEL     Belgium            ISR    Israel
                 BRA     Brazil             ITA    Italy
                 CAN     Canada             JPN    Japan
                 CHE     Switzerland        OAN    Taiwan
                 CHL     Chile              PAN    Panama
                 COL     Colombia           PHL    Philippines
                 DEU     Germany            MEX    Mexico
                 EGY     Egypt              MYS    Malaysia
                 ESP     Spain              NDL    Netherlands
                 FRA     France             SGP    Singapore
                 GBR     United Kingdom     SWE    Sweden
                 HKG     Hong Kong          VEN    Venezuela

                                       54
