                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       JUST AND REASONABLE TREATMENT:
                      RACIAL DIFFERENCES IN THE TERMS OF
                PAUPER APPRENTICESHIP IN ANTEBELLUM MARYLAND

                                          Howard Bodenhorn

                                          Working Paper 9752
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9752


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




I thank the National Science Foundation (SES 0109165) and the Earhart Foundation for financial support.
Farley Grubb, Gillian Hamilton, John Murray, Gregory Price, and Steve Whitman furnished many thoughtful
comments and suggestions. Pam Bodenhorn provided exceptional research assistance. The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Howard Bodenhorn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Just and Reasonable Treatment: Racial Treatment in the Terms of Pauper Apprenticeship in
Antebellum Maryland
Howard Bodenhorn
NBER Working Paper No. 9752
June 2003
JEL No. N31, J71, J24, J15

                                             ABSTRACT

This paper investigates the economics of pauper apprenticeship in antebellum Maryland and several
results emerge. Contrary to some earlier interpretations, the system did not arbitrarily indent poor
children. Court officials negotiated contracts that reflected an apprentice's productivity; officials did

not offer one-size-fits-all contracts to minimize the costs of indenting indigent children. Black and
white children received comparable compensation during the term of the indenture, but blacks were

promised and received substantially less education than whites. It was in the provision of education
that Maryland's system discriminated against blacks and undermined their ability to achieve long-run
economic independence.


Howard Bodenhorn
Department of Economics
Lafayette College
Easton, PA 18042
and NBER
bodenhoh@lafayette.edu
                                  Just and Reasonable Treatment:

      Racial Differences in the Terms of Pauper Apprenticeship in Antebellum Maryland



In the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, thousands of orphan and indigent children throughout the

United States were bound by county magistrates to be raised and trained in an occupation by

someone other than their parents (Herndon and Murray 2002). Unlike indentured servants and craft

apprentices, who were bound by themselves or their parents and negotiated their own terms, pauper

apprentices had little influence over the terms of their service. Pauper apprentices were bound out

by county magistrates whose principal objective was not necessarily to maximize the discounted

value of a child’s future earnings or utility, but rather to keep the child off the dole.

        Orphan and pauper apprentices were bound until they reached their majority to be taught a

trade so that they would become independent adults. Some pauper apprentices were bound to

masters who promised to instruct them in a skilled trade. For these indigent children, pauper

apprenticeship resembled craft apprenticeship. Young men and women emerged from these

indentures with the skills and education necessary to pursue a craft or trade. For others, American

pauper apprenticeship resembled English servitude-in-husbandry. Bound as farm laborers or house

servants, these children received little education and were prepared for nothing more than a life of

menial labor.

        Pauper apprenticeship was popular and durable but, given the involuntary nature of pauper

apprenticeship and the broad powers given county magistrates to remove indigent children from


                                                  -1-
their homes and place them with local masters, historians have tended to view the system as

potentially arbitrary and exploitive. Evidence from antebellum Maryland reveals that the system was

designed to maintain the status quo, but it does not appear to have been especially exploitive. Young

children were not taken from poor households and single mothers and involuntarily apprenticed in

large numbers. Most apprentices, whether craft or pauper apprentices, were in their teens when they

were placed with a master. Poor black children were more likely than whites to be apprenticed, but

this is consistent with the long-standing belief among historians that more blacks than whites lived

in poverty (see Berlin 1974). One purpose of the system was to keep indigent children off the dole,

so poor children, regardless of race, were the principal candidates for apprenticeship. High rates of

black poverty may be indicative of pervasive racial discrimination, but it is not obvious a priori

whether differential rates of pauper apprenticeship was a cause or a consequence.

       The empirical results reported here suggest that it was both. Black children and youth were

apprenticed at higher rates than whites and at younger ages. In this, the system did not necessarily

perpetuate a racialized social order. Other features did. Black children were apprenticed into less-

skilled trades and received significantly less education. On the other hand, black children received

wages and freedom dues comparable to those received by whites. Although the evidence illuminates

the operation of the system, it does not fully settle the question of whether it was used to subordinate

free blacks. Maryland’s legislators neither envisioned nor constructed a system that would treat all

children equally. It was designed to treat them equitably consistent with contemporary notions of

fairness, which was that indigent and orphan children were to receive the same types and amounts

of skill training and education that they would have received absent the misfortune of losing a parent

or being born into extreme poverty. The notion that the system would encourage upward


                                                  -2-
socioeconomic mobility was simply anathema to nineteenth-century Americans. Instead, it promised

to maintain a child’s current station.



Pauper Apprenticeship in Maryland

In 1793, Maryland enacted a law requiring county Orphans’ Courts to bind out any orphan child

whose estate was insufficient to provide for his or her support to a craftsman until the child attained

his or her majority (Kilty 1799). During the period of the indenture masters were expected to provide

apprentices with food, drink, lodging, clothing, and washing, as well as training and education

consistent with the child’s status. The act also directed the Orphans’ Courts or its agents (county

justices of the peace and trustees of the poor) to bind illegitimate and indigent children to a master

who would provide them with necessaries, training, and an appropriate education. If the parents were

living and could be brought before the court, their wishes as to whom the child should be bound

were to be respected so far as it seemed “just and reasonable”(Kilty 1818). Indeed, magistrates

regularly recorded in the indentures that an orphan or pauper child was bound with the consent of

his or her father or mother.

       In establishing this system, Maryland was drawing on a legacy dating back to the English

Statute of Artificers and Apprentices (1562), which codified the apprenticeship system and

supplemented the poor law by directing justices to bind out unemployed and indigent children as

apprentices in husbandry until they came of age (Hicks 1989, pp. 53-56). The 1793 act consolidated

several colonial statutes in that all orphans without estate, bastards, and indigent children were to

be bound out to a master who would educate them and teach them a trade. Whereas apprenticeship

had once represented a mechanism providing boys with skill training, by the beginning of the


                                                 -3-
nineteenth century it had largely reverted to its English roots where magistrates exchanged the

maintenance of youth for their unskilled labor on farms, in factories, or in the masters’ homes. The

system had, in many regards, reverted to apprenticeship in husbandry (Whitman 2002, 1-2).

       Orphan and indigent children were a concern for Maryland lawmakers dating back to the

earliest days of the colony, but in the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries a new social

concern appeared – a growing population of free blacks. While some viewed manumission as the

ultimate act of human charity, others viewed it as a serious threat to the existing social order and

sought ways to curtail or, at least, to control it. Laws were passed throughout the colonial and early

Federal period in Maryland and elsewhere to control various aspects of the lives of this burgeoning

population of free blacks, and the Orphans’ Courts were brought into the effort (Wright 1971;

Whitman book). An 1808 amendment extended the 1793 act by directing justices of the peace,

trustees of the poor, sheriffs, and Orphans’ Court justices to bind out as apprentices the “children

of lazy, indolent and worthless free negroes [sic]” (Kilty 1808, Chapter LIV). A supplementary law

of 1818 extended the law to mulattoes, and eliminated the education requirement for African-

American apprentices (Kilty 1818, Chapter CLXXXIX). In lieu of education, masters could pay an

apprentice $30 at the expiration of the indenture. Section 2 of an 1826 act concerning the arrest and

expulsion of vagrant free black and mulatto adults again directed magistrates to bind out indigent

African-American children consistent with the 1793 law and its amendments (Maryland General

Assembly 1826, Chapter 161).

       Zipf (2002) discusses comparable laws passed in North Carolina during this period,

contending that they were designed by a white patriarchy to further entrench its social and political

power. She finds that free black children were apprenticed at much higher rates than white children.


                                                 -4-
After 1830, even as apprenticeship was on the decline throughout most of North America, the

numbers and rates of free black pauper apprenticeship sharply increased in North Carolina. To Zipf,

pauper apprenticeship was a form of coercive socialization subject to wanton and indiscriminate

abuse of poor children, and a system that deprived single white women and free blacks of their rights

as parents.

       In this Zipf follows previous writers like Rorabaugh (1986) and Quimby (1985) who

compare black pauper apprenticeship as a way station between freedom and slavery and argue that

it “provided for an alternative form of social control for young blacks that ... reassured anxious white

opinion by maintaining white supremacy” (Rorabaugh 1986, 189-90). Similarly Hicks (1989, pp.

109-110) argues that later amendments to the 1793 act placed black children at a disadvantage

because the migration of whites left farmers and planters without sufficient labor. Facing this

shortage, politically powerful farmers pressured magistrates to indiscriminately indent black

children. Daniels (2001), on the other hand, contends that historians have infused masters, and the

white elite generally, with more power than they really had. She contends that servitude and

apprenticeship did not evolve into slavery or anything remotely close to it, and apprentices and

“servants should not be deprived of the agency they possessed in negotiating within the institution

of servitude” (Daniels 2001, p. 223).

       Nevertheless, it is indisputable that magistrates did not treat all children equally, and

Herndon and Murray (2002, p. 25) contend that the entire structure was permeated with distinctions

based on sex, race, age, and socioeconomic background. Indeed, the law directed masters to train

and educate their orphan and pauper apprentices in a manner consistent with their status. Some

magistrates, for example, determined that some children would not receive any education or literacy


                                                  -5-
training, while some children were taught to read. Some were taught to read and write; others were

taught to read, write, and cast up accounts; and still others were taught to read, write, and “cypher

to the rule of three.”1 The law never contemplated that all children would be treated equally. It

contemplated that they would be treated fairly, which implied treatment consistent with their

expected station in life had they not been orphaned or unlucky or both. Pauper apprenticeship was

not constructed as a mechanism to help children rise above their station. It was, in this way, a

conservative institution.

        Whitman (2002), Russo and Russo (2002) and Zipf (2002) document sharp gender

differences in apprenticeship terms and Table 1 reports racial differences in treatment for male youth

and children in two Maryland counties. The table groups apprentices by race, age cohort, date, and

county. Thus, the first entry (0.08%) reports the percentage of all white children in Anne Arundel

County under five years of age who were working under an indenture contract in 1840. Note that

these are not the percentages of children bound in a given year, they are the percentages of all

children previously bound and still serving their apprenticeship relative to the county population in

a cohort, a county, and racial group.

        The table suggests several tentative conclusions. First, crying babes were not snatched from

the arms of distraught mothers, as very few children under five years old were bound out. It appears

that so long as the parents could provide the barest maintenance for an infant or young child,

Maryland’s magistrates left them in the home. Pauper children, unless they were mired in extreme


        1
         The ability to cast up accounts originally meant basic bookkeeping consistent with owning
one’s own business, but evolved into knowing the four basic mathematical functions. Cyphering to rule of
three implied more extensive mathematical training in that it included an ability to manipulate ratios. It
was called the “rule of three” because students were given three facts and had to determine a fourth. An
example would be: If a family consumes a dozen eggs per fortnight, how many dozen will it consume in a
year? The answer would be stated as 26 is to 52 as 1 is to 2, and written as 26:52::1:2.

                                                   -6-
poverty, were not bound until they could contribute something toward their own maintenance. Fogel

and Engerman (1974a, 1974b) estimate that slaves on plantations became sufficiently productive to

pay their own way at about age eight and the increase in bindings after age eight or ten in

nineteenth-century Maryland is consistent with their finding. At older ages, the system became

more racialized, as the proportion of free black children serving under indenture was generally two

to four times or more that of whites. At the same time, however, the statistics reported in Table 1

demonstrate the danger of drawing sweeping conclusions about trends in the treatment of free black

children. Although Herndon and Murray (2002, p. 25) contend that the system was “increasingly

directed to harness the labor of people of color” and Zipf (2002) contends that it to provided a

measure of control over what whites believed was a potentially disruptive group, the data from Anne

Arundel and Frederick counties provides contradictory evidence. Between 1840 and 1860 the

proportion of free black boys between 15 and 20 years serving an apprenticeship doubled in Anne

Arundel County; in Frederick County it declined by 72 percent. Other than the fact that older boys

were more likely to be apprenticed than younger ones and blacks were more likely to be apprenticed

than whites, no clear pattern emerges in this sample. More work needs to be done before we can

draw generalizations about how racial differences in treatment evolved through time. In reviewing

the evidence, the only thing that seems clear is that there was significant variation from state to state,

even from county to county within a state, in the use of pauper apprenticeship. The system expanded

and became more racialized in some places; it contracted and became less so in others. We now turn

to a more detailed treatment of the terms under which white and black children were bound out in

six Maryland counties to see if there were any discernible commonalities across time and space.




                                                   -7-
The Economics of Craft and Pauper Apprenticeship

Hamilton (1996) contends that the market for apprentices in North America was competitive. There

were no unions, no craft guilds, and no formal certification or licensing procedures creating

significant barriers to becoming a master or an apprentice. Thus to the extent that markets were

competitive, apprentice compensation mirrored productivity. But apprentice contracts were long-

term contracts, over the life of which the apprentice’s productivity changed. A five-year-old boy,

for example, probably added relatively little toward the output of a blacksmith’s shop because he

had developed neither the skills nor the strength to withstand the daily rigors of the work. He may

have stoked the fire or pumped the bellows, but he was not fashioning hot iron with hammer and

anvil. The same boy at sixteen, on the other hand, could put in a full day’s work. Despite the relative

unproductiveness of youngsters, masters could be induced to take in the five-year-old so long as

discounted sum of wage payments and freedom dues paid during the term of the indenture were

equal to or less than the discounted value of the stream of output produced less training and

maintenance costs.

             Equilibrium in the apprentice market can be stated mathematically as:




           Wagest FreedomDuesT                    ValueofOutputt     T Ma int enanceCostst
∑                                      ∑                         − ∑ t =1
    T                                      T
                      +            =
    t =1
           (1 + r ) t   (1 + r ) T         t =1
                                                      (1 + r ) t
                                                                             (1 + r ) t




where T is the length of the contract and r is the relevant discount rate.

             The first term on the left-hand side is the stream of future wage payments promised by the

master to the apprentice. Promises of wages were extremely rare in rural counties, and relatively



                                                             -8-
uncommon in urban counties. Children bound to engage in farm labor rarely received cash payments

from their masters, though some negotiated to be released from their apprenticeship for a week or

two during the harvest to hire themselves out as day laborers to earn some cash. Boys and youth

bound to craftsmen and manufacturers in Baltimore were more likely than boys elsewhere to receive

regular cash payments. When wages were promised, they tended to increase with the length of

service and were generally paid only late in an apprenticeship, typically after the age of 16 or 17.

       The second left-hand side term -- freedom dues -- represents a sort of severance pay or

nonvested pension (Grubb 1997, p. 44). Nearly every apprenticeship agreement included the promise

of a terminal payment at the end of the contract. It was common for dues to be paid in-kind, often

in the form of clothing, typically as one or two complete suits of clothes. It was less common, but

not unheard of, for carpenters’ coopers’, and cabinetmakers’ apprentices to be given saws, hammers,

and planes. Some blacksmiths’ and bricklayers’ apprentices also received tools at the expiration of

their contracts. Freedom dues, however, were most commonly paid in cash or clothing.

       For years, economists argued that freedom dues were paid to reduce the incidence of

runaways; historians argue that they kept recently released servants and apprentices from becoming

charges on the county dole. Grubb (2000) argues that neither explanation gets at the heart of the

issue, which is contractual incompleteness. Contracts with end payments will not necessarily deter

running away, especially when most of the payment from master to servant occurs at contract

inception, as was the case with indentured servants who received their transatlantic passage prior

to starting work. Indeed, the promise of a large payment at the end of the contract period created

incentives for the master, not the apprentice, to breach the contract (Grubb 1997, p. 44). But unlike

indentured servants, pauper apprentices did not receive the largest part of their compensation at the


                                                -9-
beginning of the contract or at the end, but during the contract term. As is discussed below, they

were given food, clothing, shelter, job training, and sometimes, formal education. So what purpose

did freedom dues serve in the case of pauper apprentices?

       Grubb (2000) argues that freedom dues became compulsory because, operating under an

incomplete contract, masters faced incentives to act strategically in the final days or months of the

contract. Incomplete contracts were efficient because there were simply too many margins over

which to negotiate and substitute. Apprentices could shirk or labor diligently depending on the

master’s provision of basic consumption goods and vice versa. But this incompleteness left open the

possibility of hold-up or other types of strategic behavior by the master.

       The flow of daily consumables (food, water, shelter) was less prone to hold-up than the flow

of semi-durables (apparel, shoes, etc.), especially late in the contract. By withholding food, masters

reduced labor performance and both parties suffered. But by withholding semi-durables late in the

contract, masters increased their utility at the expense of their servants and apprentices. Apprentices

could not easily determine whether the master’s withholding of clothes was deliberate strategic

behavior aimed at transferring wealth or whether the master was shopping around to maximize the

quantity or quality of clothes for a given contractually agreed-upon nominal expenditure. Thus, the

servant would not be able to accurately adjust his or her productivity based on the master’s actions.

Reputational sanctions were too weak a mechanism to mitigate strategic behavior by the master so

the law mandated the payment of freedom dues (Grubb 2000, pp. 55-57).

       The first term on the right-hand side is relatively self-explanatory. Apprentices were

expected to work and contribute to the output of the master’s shop or farm. Masters built

expectations of the future stream of marginal revenue product based on experience and on the


                                                 -10-
apprentice’s characteristics (only some of which made their way into the historical record). In

economic terminology, this term is the discounted value of the future stream of an apprentice’s

expected marginal revenue product.

       Maintenance costs, the second term on the right-hand side, took several forms. Maryland’s

1793 apprenticeship act required masters to provide apprentices with “good and sufficient cloathing,

meat, drink, washing, and lodging,” as well as training and, generally, some education (Kilty 1793,

Chapter XLV). Economists believe that all parties to a contract maximize across several margins,

and that was the case for apprentice contracts. Except for a small number of cases of Baltimore

masters who paid their apprentice’s parents in return for having the boy continue living at home, all

masters were expected to provide their apprentices with basic maintenance. Of course, these margins

were still negotiable. Masters could provide more or less food, drink or clothing in accordance with

implicit understandings, informal agreements, or according to their own discretion. Masters who

failed to meet generally accepted standards of treatment could be, and were, sued by their

apprentices or by county magistrates who believed that their responsibilities to pauper apprentices

continued long after they had negotiated an indenture and delivered the boy. The law directed

justices to make annual inquiries into the condition of orphan apprentices and Carr (1977, p. 46)

believes that the courts took their responsibilities toward these children seriously. In addition to

maintenance costs, masters were expected to provide apprentices with sufficient job training to allow

them to practice a craft or trade at the end of the indenture. Training a boy in a skill represented an

opportunity cost to the master in that at least part of the time spent teaching was time not doing.

       One of the larger costs to the master, perhaps the largest, was providing an apprentice with

an education. Not only would formal instruction involve a direct outlay to a school or a tutor, the


                                                 -11-
opportunity cost of the boy’s time lost to schooling could be substantial. It is not surprising, then,

that education was apparently the most negotiable margin. Some indentures included agreements

to provide a boy with a certain number of months or weeks of school. Further, some of these

indentures specified whether the schooling was to be day school, night school, Catholic school, or

schooling in German. Some contracts included agreements to teach the boy to read; others agreed

to reading and writing; and others to some variant of the 3R’s.

       In his study of German indentured servants, Grubb (1992b) interpreted agreements to teach

servants to read and write to mean that the masters themselves or, perhaps, their wives would

provide literacy training directly instead of sending the servants to school. It is likely that Maryland

masters also took on much of the literacy training, especially in rural areas without easy access to

a school. Some contracts included an agreement to teach a boy to read and write, but included the

curious phrase “so far as he is able to learn.” Did this phraseology provide an escape clause for

masters who did not take their educational responsibilities seriously? Did it imply an ex ante

expectation that the boy was unteachable? The contracts themselves do not provide any clues.

Additional research needs to be done before we can answer these questions, but the inclusion of such

phraseology suggests implicit and informal adjustments at the margin between masters and

apprentices.2

       As previously noted, apprenticeship agreements were relational contracts, which arise when

complete state-contingent contracts are uneconomic and structure relationships that establish

expectations in general terms (Milgrom and Roberts 1992, pp. 132, 330-31). Employment



       2
          John Murray (private correspondence, December 2002) admits that the exact meaning of this
phrase eludes him as well.

                                                 -12-
agreements are classic relational contracts. Employees agree to use their minds and their muscles

to perform vaguely defined tasks. The employer agrees to compensate the worker, but retains

residual decision making authority because it is generally efficient to have a single decision maker,

because the employer provides the physical capital, and because the employer has a reputational

investment to protect. Courts, therefore, gave broad latitude to masters to determine the meaning of

such things as sufficient maintenance, adequate training, and the meaning of literacy consistent with

the pursuit of a given trade. If an apprentice felt a master was not abiding by the agreement, the law

gave him the right to seek the court’s intervention, a right apprentices were not reluctant to invoke.3

       There were good economic reasons for why relational contracts with a host of vague

promises predominated in the apprentice market. Apprenticeship was plagued by incomplete

information on both sides. When bargaining over skill training, term length, educational benefits,

and freedom dues, masters and the apprentice’s guardians had to form expectations about the boy’s

expected stream of future productivity and costs. Masters could not directly observe a boy’s work

habits, except after taking him in, nor could they accurately assess the boy’s personality, his aptitude

for the job, or his basic moral character. Similarly, boys and guardians could not always accurately

assess a craftsman’s occupational competence or his ability to pass those skills along to others. At

a more fundamental level, masters and boys might be linked for a decade or more and they could

not determine ex ante whether they would enjoy each other’s company. This is consistent with

Whitman’s (2002, pp. 31-33) finding that runaways did not ebb and flow with changes in economic

or political conditions. Running away was uncommon, but when it happened it was adolescents who



       3
           Daniels (2001) documents apprentices and servants suing masters who did not provide adequate
skill training, basic education, sufficient maintenance, or who imposed severe punishments.

                                                 -13-
ran. It seems likely that the cause was an occupational or personality mismatch between master and

apprentice.

         Economic theory holds that there are two methods of decreasing the likelihood of a

mismatch: signaling and screening. Signaling theory holds that so long as high-productivity workers

can credibly signal their capabilities, employers can offer workers contracts that align compensation

with productivity rather than one-size-fits-all contracts (Spence 1973, Ehrenberg and Smith 2001).

The issue is whether a credible signaling equilibrium can be achieved. An equilibrium depends on

two conditions. First, the signal must be sufficiently costly that low-productivity workers are

unwilling or unable to attain it. Second, the signal should accurately and consistently indicate higher

productivity. Hamilton (1996) develops a signaling model for the Montreal apprentice market, part

of which was the inclusion of a probationary indenture. About one-third of indentures included

probationary periods that averaged about 12 weeks during which apprentices and masters generated

observable signals about abilities, intelligence, and temperament. At the end of the probationary

period, masters and boys decided if the relationship would continue. But probationary periods still

provided a noisy signal. Fifteen percent of all contracts were annulled, most within the first three

years.

         There were few probationary periods recorded in the Orphans’ Court records of six

Maryland counties and even fewer annulments. It seems unlikely that masters and apprentices were

better matched in Maryland than Montreal, particularly given the predominance of pauper children

in the Maryland sample. Annulments may have been granted by an authority other than the Orphans’

Court, which seems improbable, or it may have been that the court was not as diligent in recording

annulments as indentures, though this too seem improbable given the detailed nature of the records.


                                                 -14-
The most likely explanation is that many masters who took on pauper apprentices did so less from

purely economic motives than from a sense of community responsibility to the indigent and simply

made the best of the situation. Secondarily, many pauper apprentices were bound to farmers where,

given the range of unskilled and rudimentary tasks inherent in agriculture, the costs of a mismatch

to the master were lower than in highly skilled or technical occupations. Furthermore, Grubb’s

(1997, 2000) explanation implies that runaway apprentices, unlike runaway indentured servants,

imposed relatively small costs on the master. Thus, not much effort was made to retrieve runaway

apprentices.

       Screening is the second method for minimizing mismatches, and it assumes that one party

to a negotiation has greater information about his or her actual and potential productivity than the

other so that one side has private information not known to the other (Milgrom and Roberts 1992,

p. 157). Screening refers to actions taken by a party without private information in order to separate

different types of the informed party. Typically, the uninformed party offers a menu of alternatives

to the informed parties and the informed parties’ choices reveal their private information. A classic

screening situation is one where employers wish to reduce costly labor turnover. One method is to

offer employees below-market compensation early in the employment relationship and above-market

compensation late in the relationship. A positively sloped age-wage profile screens out workers with

a proclivity to move, because it is more attractive to workers who intend to stay with the firm for

an extended period.

       On their face, apprentice indentures offered a comparatively flat to slightly negatively sloped

age-wage profile. In-kind payments (maintenance costs) rose as boys matured (15 years olds ate

more than 5 year olds), but young boys typically produced less than they received in maintenance,


                                                -15-
whereas teenagers were potentially more productive. Masters could compensate for the perverse

incentives created by this implicit wage structure through several methods: by delaying substantial

skill training until late in the indenture; by delaying the provision of schooling or literacy training

until late in the indenture; or by offering a large share of the total compensation package until late

in the indenture.4 Boys willing to accept any or all of these conditions signaled their willingness to

remain; those with a predisposition to desert would not accept these conditions and were screened

out.

        Because the market for apprentices was competitive, masters and apprentices (or their fathers

or guardians) were able to offer an array variable contract terms to attract suitable matches. For

example, F. Marston took on four apprentices into his Baltimore glass factory between April and

September 1835. A 17-year-old boy apprenticed by his father, was promised 6 months schooling and

no freedom dues. A 16-year-old apprenticed by his father was promised three months schooling and

one suit as freedom dues; a second 16-year-old apprenticed by his mother was promised three

months schooling, one suit as freedom dues, plus $20 per annum in clothing allowance in lieu of

having the master supply the apparel. A 15-year-old apprenticed by an unspecified guardian was

promised literacy training (3Rs) and $25 in freedom dues. Clearly, there were several negotiable

margins, and masters tailored contracts to attract labor and screen applicants.

        What about pauper apprentices? Could they or their guardians negotiate across margins as

effectively? Murray and Herndon (2002) are skeptical. They characterize the pauper apprentice

market as a pseudo-market. Although masters sought labor on profitable terms, a boy generally


        4
          Of those boys who were promised wages during their indenture, payments invariably rose with
age and experience. Indeed, wages were seemingly well below competitive levels in the first year or two
of the contract.

                                                  -16-
entered this exchange involuntarily and was subject to the vagaries of labor negotiations between

a self-interested master and a magistrate whose loyalty was divided between his own interests, the

boy’s interests, and the taxpayers’ interests. Compared to parents, magistrates faced muted

incentives to ensure that a boy would be paid the full value of his marginal product.

       Such an interpretation is consistent with a textbook characterization of a single-mindedly

self-interested economic man but, as previously noted, Carr (1977) points out that it may

misrepresent the actions of county justices. Magistrates operated in loco parentis, and many

negotiated indentures comparable to those negotiated by those with familial and personal

connections to an apprentice. In July 1830, for example, R. Dutton took on two apprentice

cabinetmakers. A 16-year-old apprenticed by two of Baltimore’s justices was promised literacy

training (3Rs) and $20 in freedom dues. An 11-year-old apprenticed in the same month by his father

was promised nine months of schooling and a freedom suit (about $25). In this instance the justices

may have negotiated a more lucrative contract than the father. It seems unlikely that a student could

learn reading, writing and arithmetic in just 9 months, and $20 payable in 5 years is worth more than

$25 payable in 10, given any reasonable discount rate.

       A single example, however, does not prove that county magistrates spent much time or

expended much energy in placing indigent children, but Table 2 suggests that magistrates negotiated

and did not rid themselves of boys with minimum effort. The table provides statistics on contract

terms negotiated by family members and county magistrates in six Maryland counties between 1822

and 1860. Parents were more likely to negotiate a specific term of schooling, but when they did they

actually negotiated fewer months, on average, than justices who negotiated specific terms.

Magistrates, on the other hand, were significantly more likely to include literacy and numeracy


                                                -17-
training (i.e., 3R’s). This difference may have reflected a parent’s better knowledge of a boy’s

current level of literacy and their desire to augment or maintain it. It may also reflect a higher level

of literacy among boys from intact households. Despite the magistrates’ greater insistence on a

master’s responsibility to provide their charges with a basic education, they were also far more

willing than parents to trade education for a cash stipend at the expiration of the indenture. This

reflects the larger proportion of free black children bound out by magistrates than by parents. Parents

were more likely to negotiate release time at harvest so that their boys could earn some money

during peak labor demand periods. In negotiating freedom dues, magistrates were more likely to

contract for freedom suits and cash, though differences in the amount of cash agreed to by parents

and magistrates, when they negotiated for cash, were insignificant. Thus the evidence is mixed. It

is not clear whether parents negotiated better deals than magistrates. What is clear, however, is that

the market functioned as we would expect. Boys of differing productivity received different terms.

An issue that this data can also address is the extent to which race influenced the choice of contract

terms. The next section discusses the data and empirical methodology, we then turn to empirical

tests of the differences.



Racial Differences in Wages and Freedom Dues

To investigate the operation of the market for apprentices, we estimate the following specification:

(Real Discounted Compensation)jw = "0k + Xjk $k + Yjk (k + ejk

where the left-hand side represents all direct cash and in-kind payments made during or at the end

of the indenture, excluding clothing, food, and lodging. Further, j indexes individual boys and youth,

k indexes race, so that Xjw represents a vector of variables that proxy for the expected productivity


                                                 -18-
of white boys and youth, Yjw represents a vector of variables that proxy for expected costs of training

and educating white boys and youth, and ejw is the error term. The estimating equation is estimated

using ordinary least squares (OLS) and Tobit procedures because there are a nontrivial number of

observations where apprentices were promised neither wages nor freedom dues (i.e., real discounted

compensation = 0).5

        The apprentice indentures provide information on the principal left-hand variables, namely,

promised wage payments, promised freedom dues, and the contract term. Table 3 reports summary

statistics for the information commonly found in an apprenticeship indenture. Indentures recorded

the name of the apprentice and his parent, guardian or the county magistrate(s), and the master. They

recorded the apprentice’s current age and the age at which he or she would be released from the

indenture. They recorded the occupation in which the apprentice would be trained, whether the

apprentice would receive any schooling or literacy training and, if so, how much. If the apprentice

was to attend school, indentures recorded the agreed-upon number of months of schooling and

whether it was night or day school. If the apprentice was promised literacy training, the indenture

recorded the skills the apprentice was expected to master, such as reading, writing and cyphering

or the ‘casting up’ of accounts. Some apprentices were promised release time, up to two weeks,

during the harvest to work on their own account. Indentures were also very specific in the agreed-

upon freedom dues. Some apprentices were promised clothing; others tools; still others, a cash

payment in lieu of clothes, tools, or schooling. Finally, every indenture included a clause instructing

the master to clothe, feed, and house the apprentice in an acceptable manner and most included a


        5
         The occurrence of a large number of zeros in the dependent variable does not result from classic
‘censoring’ where every observation below some critical value is assigned a common value. These are
simply zeros, no censoring is occurring.

                                                  -19-
clause instructing apprentices to avoid gambling, drinking, and fornication.

       The discount rate was assumed constant at 6 percent per annum. Bodenhorn (2000) found

that nominal interest rates throughout the antebellum era fluctuated around six percent between 1820

and 1860. All values were converted to constant dollars using the Benzason Philadelphia wholesale

price index (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1976, Series E 97-111). There is no published price index

for antebellum Maryland, but price levels and movements from neighboring Pennsylvania should

be broadly indicative of long-run price movements in Maryland.

       While we have variables that correspond to those given on the left-hand side of equation 1,

we do not observe the actual (or expected) marginal product or the actual costs borne by the master

in supporting, training, and educating an apprentice. We must rely on proxies that reflect the

expected productivity and costs associated with a given apprentice. Those variables that should

reflect on the expected productivity of an apprentice include the apprentice’s age; an occupational

index; whether the boy was apprenticed by a father, other family member, or county magistrate; and

the county population, as well as the rate of population growth over the current decade. Variables

that proxy for expected costs include the number of siblings apprenticed to a single master at one

time; the quantity or type of education promised; release time at harvest; and whether freedom dues

included a freedom suit, tools, or a lump-sum payment in lieu of providing an education. Table 3

provides summary statistics for each of these variables, plus a time trend and dummy variables for

the county of indenture and the quarter in which the indenture was signed.

       An apprentice’s age is included because we would expect older boys to be more productive

than younger boys in many trades, particularly those involving potentially heavy labor (blacksmiths,

bricklayers, brickmakers, butchers, and so forth). But the age advantage may decline as the boy


                                               -20-
passes a certain age because the boy will not achieve a proficiency early enough in the term of the

indenture to fully compensate the master for maintenance outlays. While a just-indented 19-year-old,

for example, may have the strength and stamina needed to put in a hard day’s work in a

cabinetmakers shop, he was unlikely to become as accomplished a craftsman in two years as a 15-

year-old would become in six. Thus the 15-year-old may be promised more compensation than the

19-year-old.

       A second proxy for expected productivity is an occupational skill index based on the widely

used socioeconomic index constructed by Otis Duncan (Reiss, et al. 1961, Appendix B). Training

in more highly skilled trades was more likely to increase the value of an apprentice’s labor faster

and to a greater extent than training in low-skill occupations, such as farming and house servants.

Masters in skilled trades could, therefore, expect to receive more revenues from an apprentice late

in the apprenticeship and offer higher wages or dues in return.

       In addition to age and an occupational control, the other controls for expected productivity

include a series of dummy variables indicating by whom a boy was indentured. A boy apprenticed

by his father may have had higher expected productivity because boys living in intact households

were healthier, better clothed and fed, more disciplined, or better educated when they arrived at the

apprenticeship. Moreover, as previously mentioned, a father’s and son’s interests may have been

more closely aligned than a magistrate’s and a pauper child’s, so that a father may have negotiated

more generous compensation. Separate dummy variables are included for each of the different

magistrate’s with the responsibility to bind orphan and pauper children to determine if different

types of magistrates negotiated different terms.

       Finally, the regressions include annual county populations interpolated from the federal


                                                -21-
censuses, as well as the average annual rate of county population growth. These are included to

capture potential changes in the demand for skilled craftsmen. Changes in population may have

worked to the benefit or detriment of skilled craftsmen. A larger and faster growing population

would typically imply an increasing demand for most of the goods and services supplies by

craftsmen and artisans. But if industrialization was increasing with population, as it was in

Baltimore, factory production may have displaced craftsmen as the principal suppliers of many

manufactured goods. Similarly, the demand for farm labor in urbanizing, rapidly growing Baltimore

County was probably lower and declining relative to less populated, slower growing rural counties.

       When a master took in an apprentice he faced several costs, including an agreement to

provide food, meat, drink, clothing, washing and lodging over the term of the indenture. Because

we have little information on the costs of these items, indentures that made unusual arrangements

for any of these features (usually clothing, sometimes lodging) were dropped. Education, whether

formal schooling or a promise to provide basic literacy training, was probably the largest financial

liability (other than maintenance) taken on by masters. Payments for schooling or tutoring involved

a direct outlay as well as an opportunity cost for time lost from work. Basic literacy training

provided by the master involved an opportunity cost in that both the master’s and the boy’s

attentions were on something other than work. But education was a double-edged sword. On one

hand, it represented a direct or indirect outlay. On the other, literacy represented an investment in

general human capital and may have raised an apprentice’s productivity in many trades; it may have

been essential to others, such as printing or bookkeeping.

       Two additional costs included release time during the harvest and the form of freedom dues.

About 5 percent of all apprentices were promised time off during the harvest, the cost of which was


                                                -22-
time lost in the master’s shop. The average apprentice was granted about 3 days off per year, but

those who actually negotiated harvest time generally were typically released for 14 days. Finally,

masters could pay freedom dues in cash, in-kind, or in some combination. Dummy variables are

included in the regressions if all or part of the terminal payment was paid in clothing, tools, or if the

masters promised an additional payment in lieu of education in addition to the regular freedom dues.

        The summary statistics in Table 3 reveal some apparent racial disparities. Although black

and white apprentices were promised nearly the same freedom dues, on average, blacks were almost

3 years younger at the time of the indenture, which implies that they served about three years longer

as apprentices. Blacks were more likely than whites to be apprenticed along with a sibling to the

same master; they were apprenticed into lower status occupations; received far less schooling and

other literacy training than whites, but were more likely to receive an additional stipend at the end

of the indenture in lieu of an education. Blacks were less likely to receive time off during the

harvest; they were far less likely to be apprenticed by their fathers or another family member; were

more likely than whites to be apprenticed in Anne Arundel, Somerset, and Talbot counties, but less

likely to be apprenticed in Baltimore and Frederick counties. Finally, blacks were more likely to be

paid their freedom dues in apparel than whites. The system appears to have been racialized.

        Table 4 reports OLS estimates of the basic model for the white subsample, the black

subsample, and the entire sample. Table 5 reports the Tobit estimates. Most of the coefficients take

on the expected sign and many are statistically significant. The regressions are also reasonably well

specified, explaining about 22 percent of the overall variance.

        In both the OLS and Tobit regressions, pay increased at a decreasing rate with age. Pay

reached a maximum, holding all else constant, when a boy was indented between age 16 and 18. Ex


                                                  -23-
ante, we would expect older boys to have been more attractive to masters. They were likely to have

already completed their education, they had passed through early adolescence, and were physically

mature enough to put in a hard day’s work. Pay increased with the value of the occupational index,

but not significantly so. An intriguing result is that white fathers and other relatives negotiated lower

freedom dues than county magistrates. The Orphans’ Courts and Baltimore’s House of Refuge

negotiated somewhat more than justices of the peace (the excluded category), but the differences

are barely significant at normal levels.

        Why would fathers and other kin negotiate for lower freedom dues, ceteris paribus? Neither

the indentures nor the regression provide much insight, so we are left to speculate. Perhaps fathers

had less experience in negotiating indentures than magistrates, were less well informed about current

market conditions, and received much harder terms from masters than experienced magistrates. Even

the patriarch of the largest family would negotiate no more than a half-dozen indentures in as many

years. Magistrates negotiated that many in a single day in Baltimore or in a month in some of the

outlying counties, so they were much more attuned to changes in the market. Only further research

will reveal the underlying explanation for this difference.

        County population and population growth had a significant influence on apprentice

agreements, but influenced the contracts for whites and blacks differently. Whites apprenticed in

larger and more rapidly growing economies received less pay and freedom dues. Black children and

youth received less pay in more populous counties, but more pay in faster growing counties. The

latter effect is driven by conditions in Baltimore, where both the white and black population grew

rapidly between 1800 and 1860. The city’s expanding economy provided employment and

apprenticeship opportunities that slow-growing counties did not. Finally, there was a modest


                                                  -24-
upward trend in the real value of dues paid in the antebellum era.

        Although release time at harvest and keeping siblings together were expected to impose costs

on masters, neither diminished an apprentice’s compensation. The interesting result is that the

provision of education or literacy training was associated with higher pay. Children who were

promised either a specified term of schooling or a variant of the 3R’s also received significantly

more in wages and freedom dues. This suggests two possibilities: (1) education raised productivity,

implying that general and specific human capital were complements in most production functions;

or (2) guardians of boys with a higher expected productivity negotiated more education and higher

wages and dues for their charges, thereby extracting more of the rents these boys were likely to

generate. Finally, boys who were received in-kind transfers in full or in partial payment of their

freedom dues negotiated for larger effective payments than those who negotiated cash payments.

Economic theory suggests that this would occur because generalized purchasing power typically

raises utility more than in-kind transfers. To ensure that they reached a target utility level,

apprentices or their guardians made masters promise greater in-kind payments than masters offering

a cash payoff.

        The issue is whether there were racial differences in contract terms. It is straightforward to

test whether the coefficients in the white and black equations in Table 4 are the same. The resulting

test statistic (F(24, 2748)) is just 0.38. The critical value is approximately 1.50 for 5 percent significance.

We cannot reject the hypothesis that the coefficient vectors are the same for the two races. This is

confirmed by the statistically insignificant coefficient on the Black dummy variable in the full-

sample regression. Similarly, the black dummy variable in Table 5 is insignificant. After controlling

for a number of personal and locational characteristics and for a number of margins over which


                                                     -25-
contracts could be negotiated, black apprentices did not receive significantly lower wages and dues

than white apprentices. Nevertheless, we know that blacks and whites received different terms,

mostly in the amount and type of education promised in the indenture. It is to differences in

educational promises that we now turn.



Racial Differences in Education

Using data from the same sample used to estimate the earnings equations, we can estimate the

determinants of education. Table 6 reports the results of probit regressions where the dependent

variable equals 1 if the indenture promised educational training of any amount or type. The

dependent variables include the apprentice’s age and its square; a time trend; the occupational status

index; a dummy variable for each of the principal types of guardians; the number of siblings

indented at the same time to the same master; a series of county dummy variables; and the log of the

real discounted value of wages and freedom dues.

        The regressions are well specified, explaining between one-quarter and one-third of the

overall variance in the data. Table 6 reports the marginal effects rather than the regression

coefficients to facilitate interpretation of the results. It is apparent that educational promises, unlike

wages and freedom dues, were racialized. The marginal effects for many of the independent

variables (hence, the underlying coefficients) in the black subsample are generally very different

from those in the white sample. If, for example, age increased by one standard deviation, the

likelihood that a white apprentice would receive schooling increased by nearly 30 percent. The

marginal effect for blacks was effectively nil.

        On the other hand, if an apprentice of either race was apprenticed into a higher-status


                                                  -26-
occupation, they were more likely to receive some education, implying a positive correlation

between general and specific human capital in more highly esteemed occupations. Economic

independence required basic literacy and numeracy and occupational training in trades more likely

to generate economic independence was bundled with education. Evaluated at the mean, a one

standard deviation increase in occupational status increased the likelihood that a white apprentice

negotiated an education promise by 5 percent; it increased the probability that a black apprentice

negotiated a promise by just 2 percent. Even if a black and a white was apprenticed into similar

occupations, blacks were less likely to receive an education which would have reduced their

effectiveness in many occupations.

       Thus, to the extent that education complemented skill training, by denying blacks an

education, the system undermined black occupational advancement. This result is, of course,

consistent with the 1818 law allowing, but not requiring, masters to pay black apprentices $30 in

freedom dues in lieu of an education. In this, Maryland was more enlightened than Virginia, which

prohibited educating free blacks at all, and many Maryland masters still promised to educate their

black charges even after the law excused them from doing so (Guild 1969).

       Just as fathers negotiated lower wages and freedom dues than magistrates, white fathers were

also 21 percent less likely than county justices of the peace to negotiate an education for their sons.

Black fathers were 3 percent less likely. Related guardians other than fathers were also less likely

to include an education clause in an apprentice indenture. Why would family members demand

significantly less education for their children than Orphans’ Courts demanded for pauper children?

There are at least three potential answers. First, children from intact households may have already

received some or most of their desired education prior to entering into an apprenticeship. When


                                                 -27-
fathers and relatives negotiated educational agreements, they sought to maintain or enhance prior

achievement rather than capture new skills. Pauper and orphan children, on the other hand, may have

been less likely to have basic literacy skills, so magistrates felt obliged to include an educational

requirement. Second, as previously discussed, because fathers were less experienced negotiators or

less informed parties to a negotiation, they may not have pressed for as much as more experienced

bargainers. Third, some parents may not have understood the value of or placed much emphasis on

education.

       White boys bound with a sibling to the same master were also less likely to receive an

education. Courts often attempted to maintain whatever semblance of family they could within the

institution of pauper apprenticeship, so it was not uncommon to find brothers and sisters bound to

the same master. Certainly not every sibling was expected to be equally productive, indeed it is easy

to envision some degree of bundling taking place where a master would have agreed to take on a

potentially unproductive child only if he could have a potentially more productive one. Such

transactions imposed costs on masters, who were reluctant to further increase their costs by offering

a jointly-bound sibling an education.

       There were also differences in treatment across counties. Compared to Baltimore (the

excluded category), Anne Arundel children of either race were less likely to receive an education,

as were children in Somerset and Talbot counties. In Frederick County, on the other hand, white

children were about 16% more likely than Baltimore children to receive an education, but black

children were about 4 percent less likely. County-level differences could arise from a number of

factors, including proximity to schools. Baltimore was a large city with a number of public and

private schools; Frederick was a modest town with few schools. The cost of schooling and educating


                                                -28-
youth in Baltimore and Frederick was lower than in less urban environments and masters were more

willing to provide it.

        Finally, it appears that, so far as education is concerned, Maryland’s system of pauper

apprenticeship was racialized. After controlling for a number of other factors that clearly influenced

the provision of an education, black children were 51 percent less likely to receive education or

literacy training in any quantity or quality. White magistrates and white masters maintained control

over a growing black population by consistently denying them basic literacy and numeracy. Without

a basic ability to read and write, blacks were effectively excluded from a number of relatively high-

status occupations that required basic literacy (printing, bookkeeping, and so forth). More

importantly, by denying blacks basic literacy and numeracy, white magistrates effectively barred

blacks from independent production even in rudimentary crafts. Blacksmiths and carpenters needed

to calculate ratios, sign contracts, and keep and settle accounts to do their jobs effectively. By

denying them an education, white magistrates and masters effectively kept blacks dependent and

poor.



Concluding Remarks

The evidence on pauper apprenticeship in antebellum Maryland points toward a conservative,

racialized system designed to maintain the status quo. Black children were routinely denied access

to high-skill, high-esteem, and high-paying trades. They were partly compensated for the lack of

skill training to the extent that magistrates negotiated higher freedom dues than fathers and other kin.

By denying them access to better occupations, however, magistrates perpetuated a cycle of poverty,

or near-poverty, and dependency among the state’s free blacks. A more insidious aspect of the


                                                 -29-
system was how it undermined potential black progress by denying black apprentices access to

literacy and numeracy training, the bedrock of economic independence in a market-oriented social

order.

         Data on apprenticeships alone misses an important piece of the puzzle. Pauper apprenticeship

was designed to provide maintenance, training, and education to children and youth whose parents

could not provide these things. It may have been, and probably was, the case that poverty rates were

higher among free blacks than whites. If so, we should observe higher rates of pauper apprenticeship

among blacks. And this may have occurred without the apprenticeship system per se becoming more

racialized. Relatively high poverty rates among blacks may reflect a deeper socioeconomic racism

that is reflected in, but not attributable to, the system of pauper apprenticeship. Resolving this

requires a more comprehensive study of the economic condition of free African-Americans in

antebellum Maryland and elsewhere.



References

Berlin, Ira. (1974). Slaves Without Masters: The Free Negro in the Antebellum South. New York:

         Pantheon Books.

Bodenhorn, Howard. (2000). A History of Banking in Antebellum America: Financial Markets and

         Economic Development in an Age of Nation Building. New York: Cambridge University

         Press.

Carr, Lois Green. (1977). “The Development of the Maryland Orphans’ Court, 1654-1715.” In Law,

         Society, and Politics in Early Maryland, pp. 41-62. Edited by Aubrey C. Land, Lois Green

         Carr, and Edward C. Papenfuse. Baltimore and London: Johns Hopkins University Press.


                                                 -30-
Daniels, Christine. (2001). “ ‘Liberty to Complaine’: Servant Petitions in Maryland, 1652-1797.”

       In The Many Legalities of Early America, pp. 219-49. Edited by Christopher L. Tomlins and

       Bruce H. Mann. Chapel Hill and London: University of North Carolina Press for the

       Omohundro Institute of Early American History and Culture, Williamsburg, Virginia.

Ehrenberg, Ronald G. and Robert S. Smith. (2001). Modern Labor Economics: Theory and Public

       Policy. 7th edition. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.

Fogel. Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman. (1974a). “Philanthropy at Bargain Prices: Notes on the

       Economics of Gradual Emancipation.” Journal of Legal Studies 3, 377-401.

Fogel, Robert W. and Stanley L. Engerman. (1974b). Time on the Cross: The Economics of

       American Negro Slavery. Boston: Little, Brown.

Grubb, Farley. (1992a). “Fatherless and Friendless: Factors Influencing the Flow of English

       Emigrant Servants.” Journal of Economic History 52:1 (March), 85-108.

Grubb, Farley. (1992b). “Educational Choice in the Era before Free Public Schooling: Evidence

       from German Immigrant Children in Pennsylvania, 1771-1817.” Journal of Economic

       History 52:2 (June), 363-75.

Grubb, Farley. (1997). “Does Bound Labor Have to be Coerced Labor?: The Case of Colonial

       Immigrant Servitude versus Craft Apprenticeship and Life-Cycle Servitude-in-Husbandry.”

       Itinerario 21:1, 28-51.

Grubb, Farley. (2000). “The Statutory Regulation of Colonial Servitude: An Incomplete-Contract

       Approach.” Explorations in Economic History 37:1 (January), 42-75.

Guild, J. P. (1969). Black Laws of Virginia. New York: Negro Universities Press.

Hamilton, Gillian. (1996).       “The Market for Montreal Apprentices: Contract Length and


                                              -31-
       Information.” Explorations in Economic History 33, 496-523.

Hamilton, Gillian. (2000). “The Decline of Apprenticeship in North America: Evidence from

       Montreal.” Journal of Economic History 60:3 (September), 627-664.

Herndon, Ruth Wallis and John E. Murray.(2002). “‘Proper and Instructive Education’: Children

       Bound to Labor in Early America – Introductory Essay.” Paper presented at McNeill Center

       Conference, University of Pennsylvania, November.

Hicks, Helena Sorrell. (1989). The Black Apprentice in Maryland Court Records from 1661 to 1865.

       Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, University of Maryland – College Park.

Kilty, William. (1799-1818). Laws of Maryland, 1692-1818. 7 vols. Annapolis: Frederick Green.

Maryland General Assembly. (1826). Laws Made and Passed by the General Assembly of the State

       of Maryland. Chapter 161 (March). Annapolis: J. Hughes.

Maryland State Archives. Anne Arundel County. Register of Wills (Indentures), 1822-1858.

Maryland State Archives. Baltimore County. Register of Wills (Indentures), 1825, 1830, 1835,

       1845, 1851, 1855, 1860.

Maryland State Archives. Frederick County. Register of Wills (Indentures), 1827-1860.

Maryland State Archives. Prince George’s County. Register of Wills (Indentures), 1845-1852.

Maryland State Archives. Somerset County. Register of Wills (Indentures), 1853-1860.

Maryland State Archives. Talbot County. Register of Wills (Indentures), 1853-1860.

Milgrom, Paul and John Roberts. (1992). Economics, Organization and Management. Upper Saddle

       River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.

Murray, John E. and Ruth Wallis Herndon. (2002). “Markets for Children in Early America: A

       Political Economy of Pauper Apprenticeship.” Journal of Economic History 62:2 (June),


                                             -32-
Quimby, Ian M. G. (1985). Apprenticeship in Colonial Philadelphia. New York and London:

       Garland Publishing, Inc.

Reiss, Albert J., Jr., with Otis Dudley Duncan, Paul K. Hatt, and Cecil C. North. (1961).

       Occupations and Social Status. New York: The Free Press.

Rorabaugh, W. J. (1986). The Craft Apprentice: From Franklin to the Machine Age in America.

       New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press.

Russo, Jean B. and J. Elliott Russo. (2002). “To Each According to His Estate: Care of Orphans and

       Indigent Children in Colonial Maryland.” Paper presented at McNeill Center Conference,

       University of Pennsylvania, November.

Spence, Michael. (1973). “Job Market Signaling.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 87 (August),

       355-74.

U.S. Bureau of the Census. (1976). Historical Statistics of the United States: Bicentennial Edition.

       Washington, D.C. Series E97-111.

U.S. Census Office. (1853). Seventh Census. The Seventh Census of the United States: 1850.

       Washington, D.C.: Robert Armstrong.

U.S. Census Office. (1864). Eighth Census. Population of the United States in 1860. Washington,

       D.C.: GPO.

U.S. Department of State. (1841). Sixth Census. Compendium of the Enumeration of the Inhabitants

       and Statistics of the United States. Washington, D.C.: Thomas Allen.

Whitman, T. Stephen. (1997). The Price of Freedom: Slavery and Manumission in Baltimore and

       Early National Maryland. Lexington: University of Kentucky Press.

Whitman, T. Stephen. (2002) “Orphans in City and Countryside in Nineteenth Century Maryland.”


                                               -33-
       Paper presented at McNeill Center Conference, University of Pennsylvania, November.

Wright, James M. (1971). The Free Negro in Maryland, 1634-1860. New York: Octagon Books.

Zipf, Karin. (2002). “Orphans, Bastards, and Free Black Children: North Carolina Apprenticeship,

       1715-1860.” Paper presented at McNeill Center Conference, University of Pennsylvania,

       November.




                                             -34-
Table 1: Bound Pauper and Orphan Apprentices by Race, Cohort, County, and Year

                                                  Age Cohort
                           1#x<5a            5#x<10       10#x<15                15#x<20

                                          Panel A: Anne Arundel County
1840 Whites                0.08%            0.21%           2.50%                 5.73%
1840 Blacksb               0.00             1.89            5.44                 11.11

1850 Whites                0.42              3.28              3.68               5.33
1850 Blacks                0.37              6.27              8.23              16.05

1860 Whitesc               0.69              2.20              5.31               5.48
1860 Blacksc               0.00              7.06              8.56              19.42


                                            Panel B: Frederick County
1840 Whites                0.00%             0.25%           1.12%                2.55%
1840 Blacksb               0.39              3.82            7.65                13.10

1850 Whites                0.00              0.17              0.55               1.42
1850 Blacks                0.00              0.84              5.19              11.26

1860 Whites                0.00              0.04              0.38               0.41
1860 Blacks                0.00              0.59              3.18               3.66

Notes: a 1840 census reports cohort as “under 5,” which is a combination of “under 1" and “1 & under 5" reported in
1850 and 1860. b 1840 census reports black cohorts as “Under 10,” and “10 & under 24.” It was assumed that the
distribution of blacks by cohort was the same as the white distribution to generate comparable cohorts. C Anne Arundel
1860 numbers are for 1858. Population by cohort and race for 1858 was interpolated from continuously compounded
growth rate of population by age and race between 1850 and 1860 census benchmarks. Percentages were calculated by
determining age of all previously bound apprentices in given census year. In 1840, for example, age of each previously
bound apprentice was calculated as 1840-year bound+age. Apprentices were then matched to their respective census
cohorts to determine total number of apprentices and percentages of youth in each cohort for each census year.

Sources: Anne Arundel County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1822-1858; Frederick County, Register of Wills
(Indentures), 1827-1860; U.S. Department of State, Sixth Census, Compendium of the Enumeration of the Inhabitants
and Statistics of the United States (Washington, D.C.: Thomas Allen, 1841); U.S. Census Office, Seventh Census, The
Seventh Census of the United States: 1850 (Washington, D.C.: Robert Armstrong, 1853); U.S. Census Office, Eighth
Census, Population of the United States in 1860 (Washington, D.C.: GPO, 1864).




                                                        -35-
Table 2: Comparison of Contract Terms Negotiated by Family Members and County Magistrates
(percent of all contracts containing specified feature)

Contract Term                      Boys              Boys              Z-statistic
                                   Indented by       Indented by       for
                                   Parents and       County            Differences
                                   Family            Magistrates       in Means

Schooling (incidence)              33.8%             11.2%             12.6*
 (Average number of months)        (7.1 months)      (8.4 months)      -6.6*
Reading only                        0.6               0.9              -0.8
Read and write                      1.0               0.9                0.2
3Rs                                15.0              32.3              -10.5*
Dues in lieu of school              1.0               5.5              -7.2*
Time off at harvest                 6.2               2.3                4.3*
Freedom suit                       35.9              50.2              -7.1*
Freedom tools                       3.5               0.9               3.9*
Cash dues (incidence)              40.7              62.4              -10.7*
 (Average value of cash dues)      ($27.58)          ($28.13)          -0.8

Number of registrants              819               1,954

Notes: * implies statistically significant differences at 1% level
Sources: Ann Arundel County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1822-1858; Baltimore County, Register of Wills
(Indentures), 1825, 1830, 1835, 1845, 1851, 1855, 1860; Frederick County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1827-1860;
Prince George’s County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1845-1852; Somerset County, Register of Wills (Indentures),
1853-1860; Talbot County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1853-1860.




                                                       -36-
Table 3: Summary Statistics for Maryland’s Male Apprentices, 1822-1860
(standard errors in parentheses)

Variable Name                    Entire Sample             White Sample          Black Sample
                                 (n=2772)                  (n=1955)              (n=817)

Freedom Dues                     27.74                     28.72                 25.39
                                 (44.19)                   (50.11)               (24.70)
Log (Dues)                       2.52                      2.46                  2.67
                                 (2.13)                    (2.26)                (1.75)
Age                              12.88                     13.73                 10.84
                                 (4.34)                    (4.05)                (4.33)
Year                             42.78                     41.11                 46.76
                                 (10.83)                   (10.65)               (10.21)
Siblings                         0.19                      0.14                  0.32
                                 (0.73)                    (0.61)                (0.94)
Occupation Index/100             0.139                     0.163                 0.083
                                 (0.102)                   (0.107)               (0.058)
School (mos)                     1.37                      1.91                  0.07
                                 (3.57)                    (4.11)                (0.74)
Reading                  0.01                     0.01                    0.02
                                 (0.09)                    (0.07)                (0.13)
Read/Write                       0.01                      0.01                  0.02
                                 (0.10)                    (0.08)                (0.13)
Three-R’s                        0.27                      0.37                  0.04
                                 (0.44)                    (0.48)                (0.20)
Harvest (weeks)                  0.41                      0.58                  0.02
                                 (2.31)                    (2.71)                (0.51)
Suit as dues                     0.46                      0.42                  0.56
                                 (0.50)                    (0.49)                (0.50)
Tools as dues                    0.02                      0.02                  0.01
                                 (0.13)                    (0.14)                (0.09)
Dues in lieu of                  0.04                      0.01                  0.12
 School                          (0.20)                    (0.10)                (0.32)
Quarter 1                        0.29                      0.29                  0.30
                                 (0.46)                    (0.45)                (0.46)
Quarter 2                        0.27                      0.27                  0.29
                                 (0.45)                    (0.44)                (0.45)
Quarter 3                        0.21                      0.22                  0.19
                                 (0.41)                    (0.41)                (0.39)
Quarter 4                        0.22                      0.22                  0.22
                                 (0.42)                    (0.42)                (0.42)
Bound by father                  0.24                      0.30                  0.11
                                 (0.43)                    (0.46)                (0.31)
Bound by other family            0.05                      0.06                  0.04
                                 (0.22)                    (0.23)                (0.19)
Bound by Justice                 0.45                      0.41                  0.57
of Peace                         (0.50)                    (0.49)                (0.50)

Bound by Orphan’s                0.21                      0.18                  0.28
Court                            (0.41)                    (0.38)                (0.45)

Table 3: Continued


                                                    -37-
Bound by Trustees                     0.02                        0.03                         0.01
of Poor                               (0.15)                      (0.18)                       (0.08)

Bound by House                        0.02                        0.03                          --
of Refuge                             (0.13)                      (0.16)                        –

County Population                     151.68                      159.00                       134.14
(Thousands)                           (126.61)                    (125.21)                     (128.28)
Population Growth                     0.01                        0.01                         0.00
                                      (0.02)                      (0.02)                       (0.02)
Anne Arundel                          0.29                        0.25                         0.40
                                      (0.45)                      (0.43)                       (0.49)
Baltimore                             0.38                        0.43                         0.25
                                      (0.48)                      (0.49)                       (0.44)
Frederick                             0.25                        0.28                         0.18
                                      (0.43)                      (0.45)                       (0.38)
Prince George’s                       0.01                        0.00                         0.01
                                      (0.08)                      (0.06)                       (0.12)
Somerset                              0.05                        0.03                         0.10
                                      (0.21)                      (0.16)                       (0.30)
Talbot                                0.03                        0.02                         0.05
                                      (0.17)                      (0.13)                       (0.22)

Notes: Log (Dues) is the real discounted value of freedom dues and wages paid over the term of the apprenticeship.
Values were discounted using a constant 6% interest rate. Bodenhorn (2000) shows that interest rates over the antebellum
era fluctuated around a relatively constant 6% nominal interest rate. Dues were converted to constant dollars using the
Benzason Index (U.S. Census Bureau 1976, Series E 97-111) and year indenture recorded. Year is year indenture signed
less 1800. Thus 42.78 in the first column implies that the mean indenture was recorded about 10 September 1842.
Siblings equals number of siblings indented to the same master at the same time. SEI Index is based on Duncan Index
(Reiss, et al. 1961 ). School equals the number of months master promised to send apprentice to school during term of
indenture. Suit as dues equals one if all or part of an apprentice’s freedom dues were to be paid in-kind in clothing. Tools
equals one if part of an apprentice’s freedom dues were to be paid in tools. Dues in lieu of school equals one if apprentice
was to be paid a cash payment at the termination of the apprenticeship in lieu of sending that apprentice to school.
Harvest equals the number of weeks an apprentice was released to work during harvest for his own benefit. Bound by
other family members includes mothers, brothers, uncles, grandfathers, grandmothers, and stepfathers. County population
in 1,000's. County-level population growth rates reported in percent, interpolated from decadal census values (U.S.
Census Office 1872).

Sources: Anne Arundel County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1822-1858; Baltimore County, Register of Wills
(Indentures), 1825, 1830, 1835, 1845, 1851, 1855, 1860; Frederick County, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1827-1860;
Prince George’s, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1845-1852; Somerset, Register of Wills (Indentures), 1853-1859; Talbot,
Register of Wills (Indentures), 1853-1860.




                                                           -38-
Table 4: Determinants of Freedom Dues for Black and White Apprentices; Ordinary Least Squares Estimates (dependent
variable is natural log of real discounted value of wages and freedom dues)

Independent               White                     Blacks                    Full Sample
Variables                 Coefficients              Coefficients              Coefficients
                          (t-stat)                  (t-stat)                  (t-stat)

Age                       0.177***                  0.127**                   0.147***
                          (2.97)                    (2.20)                    (3.48)
Age squared               -0.004*                   -0.004                    -0.004**
                          (-1.75)                   (-1.37)                   (-2.11)
Siblings                  0.102                     -0.077                    -0.005
                          (1.25)                    (-1.30)                   (-0.09)
Occupation Index          0.347                     1.618                     0.442
                          (0.74)                    (1.59)                    (1.07)
School specified          0.071***                  0.058                     0.065***
                          (5.29)                    (0.76)                    (5.28)
Reading only              1.083*                    0.727                     0.993**
                          (1.75)                    (1.58)                    (2.53)
Read/write                0.088                     0.962**                   0.613*
                          (0.16)                    (2.15)                    (1.62)
3-R’s                     0.574***                  0.550*                    0.577***
                          (4.73)                    (1.88)                    (5.51)
Dues in lieu of school    0.929**                   1.053***                  0.954***
                          (2.07)                    (5.85)                    (5.04)
Harvest Time              0.025                     0.061                     0.025
                          (1.42)                    (0.55)                    (1.48)
Freedom suit              1.324***                  1.201***                  1.228***
                          (13.30)                   (10.07)                   (15.80)
Tools                     1.023***                  0.926                     1.062***
                          (3.15)                    (1.42)                    (3.74)
Bound by father           -0.823***                 -0.109                    -0.718***
                          (-6.77)                   (-0.58)                   (-7.11)
Bound by other            -1.205***                 -1.381***                 -1.268***
 family member            (-5.72)                   (-4.65)                   (-7.34)
Orphan’s Court            0.225*                    0.214*                    0.189*
                          (1.63)                    (1.66)                    (1.91)
Trustees of Poor          -0.379                    0.354                     -0.388
                          (-1.36)                   (0.50)                    (-1.57)
House of Refuge           0.431                       —                       0.755**
                          (1.20)                                              (2.33)
Population                -0.002***                 -0.004***                 -0.003***
                          (-3.88)                   (-6.25)                   (-6.33)
Population growth         -7.504**                  6.74*                     -1.338
                          (-2.03)                   (1.75)                    (-0.48)
Time trend                0.054***                  0.033***                  0.047***
                          (10.16)                   (5.59)                    (11.62)
Black                       —                         —                       -0.068
                                                                              (-0.68)
Constant                  0.487                     1.140***                  0.873***
                          (1.35)                    (3.49)                    (3.43)
Table 4: continued



                                                      -39-
Observations              1,955                     817                       2,722

F-statistic               23.79***                  11.49***                  31.45***
Adj R2                    0.22                      0.22                      0.22

Notes: All regressions include unreported quarter dummies. Time trend is year indentured minus 1840.

Sources: see Table 3.




                                                      -40-
Table 5: Determinants of Freedom Dues for Black and White Apprentices; Tobit Estimates
(dependent variable is natural log of real discounted value of wages and freedom dues)

Independent              White                     Blacks                   Full Sample
Variables                Coefficients              Coefficients             Coefficients
                         (t-stat)                  (t-stat)                 (t-stat)

Age                      0.186***                  0.128**                  0.152***
                         (2.89)                    (2.15)                   (3.35)
Age squared              -0.005*                   -0.004                   -0.004**
                         (-1.73)                   (-1.36)                  (-2.08)
Siblings                 0.116                     -0.085                   -0.006
                         (1.31)                    (-1.36)                  (-0.10)
Occupation Index         0.366                     1.694                    0.463
                         (0.71)                    (1.61)                   (1.04)
School specified         0.078***                  0.061                    0.070***
                         (5.35)                    (0.77)                   (5.33)
Reading only             1.196*                    0.751                    1.069**
                         (1.78)                    (1.58)                   (2.54)
Read/write               0.090                     1.006**                  0.658*
                         (0.15)                    (2.18)                   (1.62)
3-R’s                    0.636***                  0.575*                   0.628***
                         (4.82)                    (1.90)                   (5.57)
Dues in lieu of school   0.971**                   1.073***                 0.984***
                         (2.00)                    (5.77)                   (4.85)
Harvest Time             0.028                     0.061                    0.027
                         (1.43)                    (0.53)                   (1.49)
Freedom suit             1.433***                  1.244***                 1.309***
                         (13.24)                   (10.09)                  (15.67)
Tools                    1.120***                  0.958                    1.148***
                         (3.18)                    (1.42)                   (3.77)
Bound by father          -0.908***                 -0.135                   -0.790***
                         (-6.86)                   (-0.69)                  (-7.26)
Bound by other           -1.332***                 -1.474***                -1.388***
 family member           (-5.77)                   (-4.77)                  (-7.42)
Orphan’s Court           0.254*                    0.225*                   0.209**
                         (1.70)                    (1.69)                   (1.97)
Trustees of Poor         -0.400                    0.373                    -0.411
                         (-1.33)                   (0.51)                   (-1.55)
House of Refuge          0.346                       —                      0.706**
                         (0.89)                                             (2.03)
Population               -0.002***                 -0.004***                -0.003***
                         (-3.88)                   (-6.23)                  (-6.25)
Population growth        -8.203**                  6.853*                   -1.517
                         (-2.04)                   (1.72)                   (-0.51)
Time trend               0.058***                  0.034***                 0.049***
                         (9.99)                    (5.50)                   (11.36)
Black                      —                         —                      -0.067
                                                                            (-0.62)
Constant                 0.324                     1.106***                 0.774***
                         (0.83)                    (3.28)                   (2.83)
Table 5: continued



                                                     -41-
Log-likelihood             -4186.14                   -1537.61                   -5789.52
Pseudo R2                  0.054                      0.067                      0.054

Notes: Regressions include unreported quarter dummies. In the White sample there are 169 left-censored observations;
in the Black sample there are 38; and 207 in the full sample. Time trend is defined as year of indenture minus 1840. *
signifies significance at 10%; ** at 5%; *** at 1% for two-tailed tests.
Sources: see Table 3.




                                                        -42-
Table 6: Determinants of Education Clauses in Apprentice Indentures, Probit Estimates
(dependent variable =1 if indenture specified any form of education,
table reports marginal effects rather than coefficient estimates)

Independent                        Whites           Blacks            Full Sample
Variables                          dF/dx            dF/dx             dF/dx
                                   (z-stat)         (z-stat)          (z-stat)

Age                                0.103***         0.001             0.095***
                                   (6.13)           (0.11)            (6.00)
Age Squared                        -0.004***        0.000             -0.004***
                                   (-6.33)          (0.17)            (-6.06)
Time Trend                         -0.013***        -0.004***         -0.014***
                                   (-9.82)          (-6.05)           (-11.05)
Occupation Index                   0.517***         0.341***          0.663***
                                   (4.13)           (4.20)            (5.29)
Bound by Father                    -0.213***        -0.030*           -0.219***
                                   (-6.90)          (-1.94)           (-7.79)
Bound by Other Family              -0.084           -0.003            -0.103**
                                   (-1.54)          (-0.11)           (-2.02)
Orphans Court                      0.211***         -0.045***         0.149***
                                   (6.35)           (-2.78)           (4.29)
Trustees of Poor                   0.329***         0.175             0.459***
                                   (4.55)           (1.56)            (4.80)
House of Refuge                    0.348***           —               0.537***
                                   (6.07)                             (5.87)
Siblings                           -0.091***        -0.011            -0.094***
                                   (-3.16)          (-0.84)           (-3.40)
Anne Arundel                       -0.295***        -0.085***         -0.293***
                                   (-8.35)          (-4.70)           (-9.70)
Frederick                          0.164***         -0.037***         0.107***
                                   (5.59)           (-2.82)           (3.56)
Somerset                           -0.315***          —               -0.298***
                                   (-3.52)                            (-4.28)
Talbot                             -0.344***        -0.016            -0.260***
                                   (-3.44)          (-0.51)           (-3.44)
Black                                —                —               -0.510***
                                                                      (-19.01)
Log (NPV Real Dues)                -0.0004**        -0.00001          -0.0006**
                                   (-1.97)          (-0.33)           (-2.47)

Log likelihood                     -981.27          -163.84           -1177.09
Observations                       1,955             738              2,754
Pseudo R2                          0.24             0.28              0.38

Notes and Sources: See Table 3.




                                                      -43-
