                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 THE LABOR DEMAND CURVE IS DOWNWARD SLOPING:
                    REEXAMINING THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION
                             ON THE LABOR MARKET

                                            George J. Borjas

                                          Working Paper 9755
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9755


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by George J. Borjas. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may
be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
The Labor Demand Curve is Downward Sloping: Reexamining the Impact of Immigration on the
Labor Market
George J. Borjas
NBER Working Paper No. 9755
June 2003
JEL No. J1, J6

                                           ABSTRACT

Immigration is not evenly balanced across groups of workers that have the same education but differ
in their work experience, and the nature of the supply imbalance changes over time. This paper
develops a new approach for estimating the labor market impact of immigration by exploiting this

variation in supply shifts across education-experience groups. I assume that similarly educated
workers with different levels of experience participate in a national labor market and are not perfect

substitutes. The analysis indicates that immigration lowers the wage of competing workers: a 10
percent increase in supply reduces wages by 3 to 4 percent.


George J. Borjas
Kennedy School of Government
Harvard University
79 JFK Street
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
gborjas@harvard.edu
                                                         2


           THE LABOR DEMAND CURVE IS DOWNWARD SLOPING:
     REEXAMINING THE IMPACT OF IMMIGRATION ON THE LABOR MARKET*

                                              George J. Borjas


         “After World War I, laws were passed severely limiting immigration. Only a
         trickle of immigrants has been admitted since then. . .By keeping labor supply
         down, immigration policy tends to keep wages high”
                                                      Paul Samuelson, Economics [1964]

                                       I. Introduction
         Do immigrants harm or improve the employment opportunities of native workers? As

Paul Samuelson’s assertion suggests, the textbook model of a competitive labor market predicts

that an immigrant influx should lower the wage of competing factors.1

         Despite the intuitive appeal of this theoretical implication and despite the large number of

careful studies in the literature, the existing evidence provides a mixed and confusing set of

results. The measured impact of immigration on the wage of native workers fluctuates widely

from study to study (and sometimes even within the same study), but seems to cluster around

zero. A widely cited survey by Friedberg and Hunt [1995, p. 42] concludes that “the effect of

immigration on the labor market outcomes of natives is small.” Similarly, the 1997 National

Academy of Sciences report on the economic impact of immigration argues that “the weight of

the empirical evidence suggests that the impact of immigration on the wages of competing native

workers is small” [Smith and Edmonston 1997, p. 220]. These conclusions are potentially

inconsistent with the textbook model because the immigrant supply shock in recent decades has



         *I am grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Joshua Angrist, David Autor, Richard Freeman, Daniel Hamermesh,
Lawrence Katz, Michael Kremer, Casey Mulligan, Stephen Trejo, and a referee for helpful comments and
suggestions, and to the Smith-Richardson Foundation for financial support.

         1 The historical context of Samuelson’s [1964, p. 552] assertion is interesting. He was writing just before
the enactment of the 1965 Amendments to the Immigration and Nationality Act, the major policy shift that initiated
the resurgence of large-scale immigration.
                                                  3

been very large, and most studies of labor demand (outside the immigration context) conclude

that the labor demand curve is not perfectly elastic [Hamermesh 1993].

       This paper presents a new approach for thinking about and estimating the labor market

impact of immigration. Most existing studies exploit the geographic clustering of immigrants and

use differences across local labor markets to identify the impact of immigration. This framework

has been troublesome because it ignores the strong currents that tend to equalize economic

conditions across cities and regions. In this paper, I argue that by paying closer attention to the

characteristics that define a skill group—and, in particular, by using the insight that both

schooling and work experience play a role in defining a skill group—one can make substantial

progress in determining whether immigration influences the employment opportunities of native

workers.

       My analysis uses data drawn from the 1960-1990 U.S. Decennial Censuses, as well as the

1998-2001 Current Population Surveys, and assumes that workers with the same education but

different levels of work experience participate in a national labor market and are not perfect

substitutes. It turns out that immigration—even within a particular schooling group—is not

balanced evenly across all experience cells in that group, and the nature of the supply imbalance

changes over time. This fact generates a great deal of variation—across schooling groups,

experience cells, and over time—that helps to identify the impact of immigration on the labor

market. Most importantly, the size of the native workforce in each of the skill groups is relatively

fixed, so that there is less potential for native flows to contaminate the comparison of outcomes

across skill groups. In contrast to the confusing array of results that now permeate the literature,

the evidence consistently suggests that immigration has indeed harmed the employment

opportunities of competing native workers.
                                                          4


                    II. Measuring the Labor Market Impact of Immigration

         The laws of supply and demand have unambiguous implications for how immigration

should affect labor market conditions in the short run. The shift in supply lowers the real wage of

competing native workers. Further, as long as the native supply curve is upward sloping,

immigration should also reduce the amount of labor supplied by the native workforce.

         If one could observe a number of closed labor markets that immigrants penetrate

randomly, one could then relate the change in the wage of workers in a particular skill group to

the immigrant share in the relevant population. A negative correlation (i.e., native wages are

lower in those markets penetrated by immigrants) would indicate that immigrants worsen the

employment opportunities of competing native workers.

         In the United States, immigrants cluster in a small number of geographic areas. In 1990,

for example, 32.5 percent of the immigrant population lived in only three metropolitan areas

(Los Angeles, New York, and Miami). In contrast, only 11.6 percent of the native population

clustered in the three largest metropolitan areas housing natives (New York, Los Angeles, and

Chicago). Practically all empirical studies in the literature, beginning with Grossman [1982],

exploit this demographic feature to identify the labor market impact of immigration. The typical

study defines a metropolitan area as the labor market that is being penetrated by immigrants. The

study then goes on to calculate a “spatial correlation” measuring the relation between the native

wage in a locality and the relative number of immigrants in that locality. These correlations are

usually negative, but very weak.2 The best known spatial correlations are reported in Card’s


         2  Representative studies include Altonji and Card [1991], Borjas [1987], LaLonde and Topel [1991],
Pischke and Velling [1997], and Schoeni [1997]. Friedberg [2001] presents a rare study that uses the supply shock in
an occupation to identify the labor market impact of immigration in the Israeli labor market. Although the raw
Israeli data suggest a substantial negative impact, correcting for the endogeneity of occupational choice leads to the
usual result that immigration has little impact on the wage structure. Card [2001] uses data on occupation and
metropolitan area to define skill groups and finds that immigration has a slight negative effect.
                                                         5

[1990] influential study of the Mariel flow. Card compared labor market conditions in Miami

and in other cities before and after the Marielitos increased Miami’s workforce by 7 percent.

Card’s difference-in-differences estimate of the spatial correlation indicated that this sudden and

unexpected immigrant influx did not have a discernable effect on employment and wages in

Miami’s labor market.3

        Recent studies have raised two questions about the validity of interpreting weak spatial

correlations as evidence that immigration has no labor market impact. First, immigrants may not

be randomly distributed across labor markets. If immigrants endogenously cluster in cities with

thriving economies, there would be a spurious positive correlation between immigration and

wages.4 Second, natives may respond to the wage impact of immigration on a local labor market

by moving their labor or capital to other cities. These factor flows would re-equilibrate the

market. As a result, a comparison of the economic opportunities facing native workers in

different cities would show little or no difference because, in the end, immigration affected every

city, not just the ones that actually received immigrants.5

        Because the local labor market may adjust to immigration, Borjas, Freeman, and Katz

[1997] suggested changing the unit of analysis to the national level. If the aggregate technology

can be described by a CES production function with two skill groups, the relative wage of the two


          3 Angrist and Krueger [1999] replicate Card’s study using an alternative time period, and find that a
“phantom” influx of immigrants (in the sense that had it not been for a policy intervention, many immigrants would
likely have arrived) had a sizable adverse effect on Miami’s labor market. This result suggests that many other
factors influence labor market conditions in Miami and comparison cities. At the least, one should be cautious when
interpreting the spatial correlations estimated from comparisons of specific localities.

        4   Borjas [2001] presents evidence indicating that new immigrants belonging to a particular schooling group
tend to settle in those regions that offer the highest return for their skills.

        5  Borjas, Freeman, and Katz [1997] and Card [2001] provide the first attempts to jointly analyze labor
market outcomes and native migration decisions. The two studies reach different conclusions. Card reports a slight
positive correlation between the 1985-90 rate of growth in the native population and the immigrant supply shock by
                                                         6

groups depends linearly on their relative quantities. By restricting the analysis to two skill groups,

the “factor proportions approach” precludes the estimation of the impact of immigration—there is

only one observation at any point in time (usually a Census year), giving relative wages and relative

employment. As a result, the typical application of this approach compares the actual supplies of

workers in particular skill groups to those that would have been observed in the absence of

immigration, and then uses outside information on labor demand elasticities to simulate the

consequences of immigration. The immigrant flow to the United States in the 1980s and 1990s was

relatively low-skill. Not surprisingly, the Borjas-Freeman-Katz [1997] simulation finds that

immigration worsened the relative economic status of low-skill workers.

        Despite all of the confusion in the literature, the available evidence teaches two important

lessons. First, the study of the geographic dispersion in native employment opportunities is not

an effective way for measuring the economic impact of immigration; the local labor market can

adjust in far too many ways to provide a reasonable analogue to the “closed market” economy

that underlies the textbook supply-and-demand framework. Second, the factor proportions

approach is ultimately unsatisfactory. It departs from the valuable tradition of empirical research in

labor economics that attempts to estimate the impact of labor market shocks by directly observing

how those shocks affect some workers and not others. For a given elasticity of substitution, the

approach mechanically predicts the relative wage consequences of supply shifts.

        Ideally, one would want to estimate directly how immigration alters the employment

opportunities of a particular skill group. As noted above, by aggregating workers into groups

based on educational attainment, there is just too little variation to examine how supply shocks

affect relative wages. However, the human capital literature emphasizes that schooling is not the


metropolitan area, while Borjas, Freeman, and Katz report a negative correlation between native net migration in
1970-90 and immigration by state—once one standardizes for the pre-existing migration trends.
                                                  7

only—and perhaps not even the most important—determinant of a worker’s skills. The seminal

work of Becker [1975] and Mincer [1974] stressed that skills are acquired both before and after a

person enters the labor market. I will assume that workers who have the same schooling, but who

have different levels of experience, are imperfect substitutes in production. As a result, a skill

group should be defined in terms of both schooling and labor market experience.

       To see how this insight can provide a fruitful approach to the empirical analysis of the

labor market impact of immigration, consider the following example. Recent immigration has

increased the relative supply of high school dropouts substantially. The labor market

implications of this supply shock clearly depend on how the distribution of work experience in

the immigrant population contrasts with that of natives. After all, one particular set of native high

school dropouts would likely be affected if all of the new low-skill immigrants were very young,

and a very different set would be affected if the immigrants were near retirement age.

       It is unlikely that similarly educated workers with very different levels of work

experience are perfect substitutes [Welch 1979; Card and Lemieux 2001]. The definition of a

skill group in terms of both education and experience provides a great deal more independent

variation in the immigrant supply shock that can be used to identify how immigration alters the

economic opportunities facing particular groups of native workers.




                                              III. Data

       The empirical analysis uses data drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1980, and 1990 Public Use

Microdata Samples (PUMS) of the Decennial Census, and the 1999, 2000, and 2001 Annual

Demographic Supplement of the Current Population Surveys (CPS). I pool all three of the CPS

surveys and refer to these pooled data as the “2000” cross-section. The analysis is restricted to
                                                  8

men aged 18-64 who participate in the civilian labor force. A person is defined to be an

immigrant if he was born abroad and is either a non-citizen or a naturalized citizen; all other

persons are classified as natives. Appendix 1 provides a detailed description of the construction

of the data extracts and of the variables used in the analysis.

       As noted above, I use both educational attainment and work experience to sort workers

into particular skill groups. In particular, I classify the men into four distinct education groups:

persons who are high school dropouts (i.e., they have less than twelve years of completed

schooling), high school graduates (they have exactly twelve years of schooling), persons who

have some college (they have between thirteen and fifteen years of schooling), and college

graduates (they have at least sixteen years of schooling).

       The classification of workers into experience groups is bound to be imprecise because the

Census does not provide any measure of labor market experience or of the age at which a worker

first enters the labor market. I initially define work experience as the number of years that have

elapsed since the person completed school. This approximation is reasonably accurate for most

native men, but would surely contain serious measurement errors if the calculations were also

conducted for women, particularly in the earlier cross-sections when the female labor force

participation rate was much lower.

       Equally important, this measure of experience is also likely to mis-measure “effective”

experience in the sample of immigrants—i.e., the number of years of work experience that are

valued by an American employer. After all, a variable that roughly approximates “Age –

Education – 6” does not differentiate between experience acquired in the source country and

experience acquired in the United States. I address this problem in Section VI below.

       I assume that the age of entry into the labor market is 17 for the typical high school

dropout, 19 for the typical high school graduate, 21 for the typical person with some college, and
                                                   9

23 for the typical college graduate. Let AT be the assumed entry age for workers in a particular

schooling group. The measure of work experience is then given by (Age – AT). I restrict the

analysis to persons who have between 1 and 40 years of experience.

        As noted in Welch’s [1979] study of the impact of cohort size on the earnings of baby

boomers, workers in adjacent experience cells are more likely to influence each other’s labor

market opportunities than workers in cells that are further apart. Throughout much of the

analysis, I will capture the similarity across workers with roughly similar years of experience by

aggregating the data into five-year experience intervals, indicating if the worker has 1 to 5 years

of experience, 6 to 10 years, and so on.

        Consider a group of workers who have educational attainment i, experience level j, and

are observed in calendar year t. The (i, j, t) cell defines a skill group at a point in time. The

measure of the immigrant supply shock for this skill group is defined by



                              M ijt
(1)             pijt =                       ,
                         ( M ijt + N ijt )



where Mijt gives the number of immigrants in cell (i, j, t), and Nijt gives the corresponding

number of natives. The variable pijt measures the foreign-born share of the labor force in a

particular skill group.

        The various panels of Figure I illustrate the supply shocks experienced by the different

skill groups between 1960 and 2000 (Appendix 2 reports the underlying data). There is a great

deal of dispersion in these shocks even within schooling categories. It is well known, for

instance, that immigration greatly increased the supply of high school dropouts in recent

decades. What is less well known, however, is that this supply shift did not affect equally all
                                                10

experience groups within the population of high school dropouts. Moreover, the imbalance in the

supply shock changes over time. As Panel A of the figure shows, immigrants made up half of all

high school dropouts with 10 to 20 years of experience in 2000, but only 20 percent of those with

less than 5 years. In 1960, however, the immigration of high school dropouts increased the

supply of the most experienced workers the most. Similarly, Panel D shows that the immigrant

supply shock for college graduates in 1990 was reasonably balanced across all experience

groups, generally increasing supply by around 10 percent. But the supply shock for college

graduates in 1960 was larger for the most experienced groups, while in 2000 it was largest for

the groups with 5 to 20 years of experience.

       The earnings data used in the paper are drawn from the sample of persons who worked in

the year prior to the survey and reported positive annual earnings, are not enrolled in school, and

are employed in the wage and salary sector. Earnings are deflated to 1999 dollars by using the

CPI-U series. Table I summarizes the trends in log weekly wages for the various native groups.

Not surprisingly, there is a great deal of dispersion in the rate of decadal wage growth by

education and experience. Consider, for instance, the sample of college graduates. In the 1970s,

wage growth was steepest for college graduates with 31-35 years of experience. In the 1990s,

however, the wage of college graduates grew fastest for workers with 11-20 years of experience.

In sum, the data reveal substantial variation in both the immigrant supply shock and native labor

market outcomes across skill groups.

       Before proceeding to a formal analysis, it is instructive to document the strong link that

exists between log weekly wages and the immigrant share within schooling-experience cells. In

particular, I use the data reported in Table I to calculate the decadal change in log weekly wages

for each skill group, and the data summarized in the various panels of Figure I (and reported in

Appendix 2) to calculate the decadal change in the group’s immigrant share. Figure II presents
                                                         11

the scatter diagram relating these decadal changes after removing decade effects from the

differenced data. The plot clearly illustrates a negative relation between wage growth and

immigrant penetration into particular skill groups, and suggests that the regression line is not

being driven by any particular outliers. Put simply, the raw data show that weekly wages grew

fastest for workers in those education-experience groups that were least affected by immigration.

       Finally, the validity of the empirical exercise reported below hinges on the assumption

that similarly educated workers who have different levels of experience are not perfect

substitutes. Studies that examine this question, including Welch [1979] and Card and Lemieux

[2001], find less than perfect substitutability across experience groups. Nevertheless, it is of

interest to document that (for given education) immigrants and natives with similar levels of

experience are closer substitutes than immigrants and natives who differ in their experience.

       I use Welch’s [1999] index of congruence to measure the degree of similarity in the

occupation distributions of immigrants and natives. The index for any two skill groups k and A is


defined by



                               ∑ (q  kc   − qc )(qAc − qc ) / qc
(2)            Gk A =           c
                                                                        ,
                                                                 
                         ∑ (qkc − qc ) / qc   ∑ (qAc − qc ) / qc 
                                       2                      2

                         c                   c                   



where qhc gives the fraction of group h (h = k, A) employed in occupation c, and qc gives the


fraction of the entire workforce employed in that occupation. The index GkA, which is similar to a

correlation coefficient, equals one when the two groups have identical occupation distributions

and minus one when the two groups are clustered in completely different occupations.
                                                    12

        I calculate the index of congruence in the 1990 Census. I use the three-digit Census

Occupation Codes to classify male workers into the various occupations, and restrict the analysis

to workers in non-military occupations. To minimize the problem of having many occupation-

experience cells with few observations, I aggregate workers into 10-year experience bands. Table

II reports the calculated indices for each of the education groups. The occupation distributions of

immigrants and natives with the same experience are generally more similar than the

distributions of immigrants and natives with different levels of experience. Moreover, the

congruence index falls the larger the disparity in work experience between the two groups.

        Consider the group of native workers who are high school dropouts and have 11 to 20

years of experience. The index of congruence with immigrants who have the same experience is

0.63. This index falls to 0.53 for immigrants who have 1 to 10 years of experience, and to 0.59

for immigrants with 31 to 40 years. Similarly, consider the native workers who are college

graduates and have fewer than 10 years of experience. The index of congruence with immigrants

who have the same experience is 0.76, but this index falls to 0.71 for immigrants who have 11 to

20 years of experience, to 0.64 for immigrants who have 21 to 30 years, and to 0.53 for

immigrants who have more than 30 years. In sum, the occupation distributions of immigrants and

natives (for a given level of education) are most similar when one compares workers who have

roughly the same level of work experience.




                                          IV. Basic Results

        Let yijt denote the mean value of a particular labor market outcome for native men who

have education i (i = 1, . . . , 4), experience j (j = 1, . . . , 8), and are observed at time t (t=1960,
                                                          13

1970, 1980, 1990, 2000). Much of the empirical analysis reported in this paper stacks these data

across skill groups and calendar years and estimates the model:6



(3)               yijt = θ pijt + si + xj + πt + (si × xj) + (si × πt) + (xj × πt) + ϕijt,



where si is a vector of fixed effects indicating the group’s educational attainment; xj is a vector of

fixed effects indicating the group’s work experience; and πt is a vector of fixed effects indicating

the time period. The linear fixed effects in equation (3) control for differences in labor market

outcomes across schooling groups, experience groups, and over time. The interactions (si × πt)

and (xj × πt) control for the possibility that the impact of education and experience changed over

time, and the interaction (si × xj) controls for the fact that the experience profile for a particular

labor market outcome differs across schooling groups.

         The dependent variables are the mean of log annual earnings, the mean of log weekly

earnings, and the mean of fraction of time worked (defined as weeks worked divided by 52 in the

sample of all persons, including non-workers). Unless otherwise specified, the regressions are

weighted by the sample size used to calculate yijt. The presence of the education-experience


         6   The generic regression of wages on some measure of immigrant penetration is used frequently in the
literature. Suppose the labor demand function in the pre-immigration period is log wkt = Dkt + ε log Nkt + ϕ, where k
is a skill group. The wage change resulting from an exogenous influx of immigrants is

         ∆ log wkt = ∆Dkt + ε log [(Nkt (1 + nkt) + Mkt)/Nkt] + ξ ≈ ∆Dkt + ε (nkt + mkt) + ξ,

where nkt gives the percent change in the number of natives, and mkt = Mkt/Nkt. The rate of change nkt is determined
by the labor supply function, nkt = Skt + σ ∆ log wkt + µ. The reduced-form wage equation is

         ∆ log wkt = Xkt + ε* mkt + ξ*,

where Xkt = (∆Dkt + εSkt)/(1 − εσ) and ε* = ε/(1 − εσ). Equation (3) is a transformation of this reduced-form
equation that approximately uses log mkt, rather than mkt, as the measure of immigrant penetration. In particular, log
m ≈ (M – N)/(0.5(M + N)) = 2 (2p – 1). I opted for the immigrant share specification because the relation between
wages and m is nonlinear and m has a large variance both over time and across groups.
                                                         14

interactions in (3) implies that the impact of immigration on labor market outcomes is identified

from changes that occur within education-experience cells over time. The standard errors are

clustered by education-experience cells to adjust for possible serial correlation.

         The first row of Table III presents the basic estimates of the adjustment coefficient θ.

Consider initially the results when the dependent variable is the log of weekly earnings of native

workers. The coefficient is -0.572, with a standard error of 0.162. It is easier to interpret this

coefficient by converting it to an elasticity that gives the percent change in wages associated with

a percent change in labor supply. Let mijt = Mijt/Nijt, or the percentage increase in the labor supply

of group (i, j, t) attributable to immigration. Define the “wage elasticity” as7



                  ∂ log wijt            θ
(4)                            =                 .
                     ∂mijt         (1 + mijt ) 2



By 2000, immigration had increased the number of men in the labor force by 16.8 percent.

Equation (4) implies that the wage elasticity—evaluated at the mean value of the immigrant

supply increase—can be obtained by multiplying θ by approximately 0.7. The wage elasticity for

weekly earnings is then -0.40 (or -0.572 × 0.7). Put differently, a 10 percent supply shock (i.e.,

an immigrant flow that increases the number of workers in the skill group by 10 percent) reduces

weekly earnings by about 4 percent.

         Table III indicates that immigration has an even stronger effect on annual earnings,

suggesting that immigration reduces the labor supply of native male workers. A 10 percent


         7 As noted above, the immigrant share approximates log m. Because there are no cells with zero immigrants
in the data used in Table III, the results are virtually identical (once properly interpreted) if log m is used as the
regressor. In the next section, however, where I categorize workers by state of residence, education, and experience,
15.7 percent of the cells have no immigrants, and using log m would create a serious selection problem.
                                                          15

supply shock reduces annual earnings by 6.4 percent and the fraction of time worked by 3.7

percentage points. Note that the difference in the coefficients from the log annual earnings and

the log weekly earnings regressions gives the coefficient from a log weeks worked specification.

A simple supply-demand framework implies that the labor supply elasticity for workers can be

estimated from the ratio of the immigration effect on log weeks worked and log weekly earnings.

The point estimate for this ratio is 0.6. This estimate lies above the range reported by Juhn,

Murphy, and Topel [1991], who report labor supply elasticities between 0.1 and 0.4.8

         The remaining rows of Table III conduct a variety of specification tests to determine the

sensitivity of the results. The coefficients reported in the second row, for example, indicate that

the results are similar when the regressions are not weighted by the sample size of the skill

group. In the third row, the regression redefines the measure of the immigrant share pijt to include

both male and female labor force participants. Despite the misclassification of many women into

the various experience groups, the adjustment coefficients remain negative and significant, and

have similar values to those reported in the first row. The last row of the table addresses the

interpretation problem that arises because a rise in pijt can represent either an increase in the

number of immigrants or a decline in the number of native workers in that skill group (e.g., the

secular decline in the number of natives who are high school dropouts). Row 4 of the table

reports the adjustment coefficient when the regression adds the log of the size of the native

workforce in cell (i, j, t) as a regressor. The wage elasticity for log weekly earnings is -0.39 and



         8  The variable pijt gives the immigrant share among labor force participants. The labor force participation
decision may introduce some endogeneity in this variable. The problem can be addressed by using an instrument
given by the immigrant share in the population of all men in cell (i, j, t). The IV estimates of θ (and standard errors)
are -0.803 (0.586) for log annual earnings, -0.541 (0.153) for log weekly earnings, and -0.493 (0.125) for the
fraction of time worked. These coefficients are similar to those reported in the first row of Table III. The immigrant
share may also be endogenous in a different sense. Suppose the labor market attracts foreign workers mainly in
those skill cells where wages are relatively high. There would be a spurious positive correlation between pijt and the
wage. The results in Table III should then be interpreted as lower bounds of the true impact of immigration.
                                                         16


significant. In short, the parameter θ in equation (3) is indeed capturing the impact of an increase

in the size of the immigrant population on native labor market outcomes.9

         I also estimated the regression model within schooling groups to determine if the results

are being driven by particular groups, such as the large influx of foreign-born high school

dropouts. With only one exception, Table IV shows that the impact of immigration on the

weekly earnings of particular schooling groups is negative and significant. The exception is the

group of college graduates, where the adjustment coefficient is positive and has a large standard

error. Note, however, that the regression estimated within a schooling group cannot include

experience-period interactions to control for secular changes in the shape of the experience-

earnings profile. As a result, the coefficient of the immigrant share variable may be measuring a

spurious correlation between immigration and factors that changed the wage structure

differentially within schooling groups. It is probably not coincidental that the adjustment

coefficient is positive for college graduates, the group that experienced perhaps the most striking

change in the wage structure in recent decades.10

         Finally, the last column of Table IV estimates the regressions using only the groups of

natives with at least a high school education. The coefficients generally suggest that the sample

of high school dropouts is not the group that is driving much of the analysis. Although the



         9 The results would be roughly similar if the regressions were estimated separately using each set of two
adjacent cross-sections, so that the regression models would be differencing the data over a decade. The adjustment
coefficients (and standard errors) for log weekly earnings are: -1.042 (0.484) in 1960-1970, -0.427 (0.561) in 1970-
1980, -0.277 (0.480) in 1980-1990, and -0.285 (0.270) in 1990-2000. This rough similarity contrasts with the
inability of the spatial correlation approach to generate parameter estimates that even have the same sign over time;
see Borjas, Freeman, and Katz [1997] and Schoeni [1997].

         10 I also estimated the regression model within experience groups. The adjustment coefficients (and
standard errors) for log weekly earnings were: 1-5 years of experience, -0.403 (0.470); 6-10 years, -0.358 (0.286);
11-15 years; -0.475 (0.285); 16-20 years, -0.555 (0.244); 21-25 years, -0.568 (0.244); 26-30 years, -0.634 (0.193);
31-35 years, -0.495 (0.288); and 36-40 years, -0.147 (0.228). Although these regressions only have 20 observations,
the point estimate of θ is negative and significant for many groups.
                                                         17

adjustment coefficients remain negative for all the dependent variables, it is insignificant for log

weekly earnings. In the case of log annual earnings, however, the wage elasticity is around -0.8,

suggesting that immigration had an adverse impact on native workers even when the regression

ignores the information provided by the workers who experienced the largest supply shock in the

past few decades.11




                   V. A Comparison with the Spatial Correlation Approach

         In contrast to the studies that calculate spatial correlations between wages in local labor

markets and measures of immigrant penetration, the evidence presented in the previous section

indicates that immigrants have a sizable adverse effect on the wage of competing workers. This

discrepancy suggests that it might be instructive to examine how the results of the generic spatial

correlation regression would change if that analysis defined skill groups in terms of both

education and experience.

         Suppose that the relevant labor market for a typical worker is determined by his state of

residence (r), education, and experience.12 I use the 1960-2000 Census and CPS files to calculate

both the immigrant share and the mean labor market outcomes for cell (r, i, j, t). I then use these




          11 It is of interest to use the labor market outcomes of immigrants as the dependent variable. I used the
sample of immigrants with fewer than 30 years of experience because there are relatively few observations in the
cells for older workers in 1970 and 2000; and did not use data from the 1960 Census because that survey does not
provide information on the immigrant’s year of entry into the United States. The estimates are imprecise, but the
results resemble those found for native workers once I control for cohort and assimilation effects. If the regression
is estimated on the sample of immigrants who have been in the United States for fewer than 10 years, the adjustment
coefficients (and standard errors) are -0.506 (0.398) for log annual earnings, -0.290 (0.350) for log weekly earnings,
and -0.192 (0.105) for the fraction of time worked.

         12 I use states to define the geographic boundary of the labor market because a worker’s state of residence
is the only geographic variable that is consistently coded across the entire 1960-2000 span. The 1960 Census does
not report the person’s metropolitan area of residence, and the metropolitan area identifiers for the 1970 Census
differ substantially from those reported in later surveys.
                                                  18

aggregate data to estimate regressions similar to those presented above, but the unit of analysis is

now a state-education-experience group at a particular point in time.

       Table V reports the estimated coefficient of the immigrant share variable from this

regression framework. The first column of the table presents the coefficient from the simplest

specification, which includes the state, education, experience, and period fixed effects, as well as

interactions between the state, education, and experience fixed effects with the vector of period

fixed effects, and interactions between the state and education fixed effects. This regression, in

effect, estimates the impact of immigration on the change in labor market outcomes experienced

by a particular education group in a particular state. The adjustment coefficients for the various

dependent variables are negative and mostly significant. The adjustment coefficient in the log

weekly earnings regression is -0.124, with a standard error of 0.042. Note that the implied

adverse impact of immigration resulting from this specification is far smaller than the effects

reported in the previous section.

       The second column of Table V adds a three-way interaction between the state, education,

and experience fixed effects. This specification, therefore, examines the impact of immigration

on the wage growth experienced by a particular education-experience group living in a particular

state. The adjustment coefficients are more negative (-0.217 in the log weekly wage

specification) and statistically significant. In short, defining a skill group in terms of both

education and experience implies that immigration has a more adverse impact than a

specification that ignores the experience component.

       The third column of the table further expands the model by allowing for period effects to

vary across education-experience cells, while the fourth column presents the full specification of

the regression that allows for all possible three-way interactions between the state, education,

experience, and period fixed effects. This regression specification effectively identifies the wage
                                                           19


impact by using only variation in immigration at the (state × education × experience × period)

level. The coefficient is negative and significant (-0.183 in the log weekly wage specification),

and it is numerically much smaller than the coefficients reported in the previous section.

         In fact, it is instructive to contrast the difference in the results reported in the last column

of Table V with the evidence reported in Table III. The key difference between the two sets of

estimates is the assumption made about the geographic boundary of the labor market. The

estimated wage elasticity for log weekly earnings is -0.13 when a state’s geographic boundary

limits the size of the market, and -0.40 when the worker participates in a national market. One

interesting interpretation of this discrepancy is that there is sufficient spatial arbitrage—perhaps

due to interstate flows of labor and capital—that tends to equalize opportunities for workers of

given skills across regions. The spatial arbitrage effectively cuts the national estimate of the

impact of immigration by two-thirds.13 Put differently, even though immigration has a sizable

adverse effect on the wage of competing workers at the national level, the analysis of wage

differentials across regional labor markets conceals much of the impact.




                                   VI. Refining the Definition of Skills

A. Measuring Effective Experience



         13  The smaller wage effects estimated at the state level could also be due to attenuation bias from the
measurement error that arises when I calculate the immigrant supply shock at such a detailed level of
disaggregation. I reestimated the model using the nine Census regions (rather than states) as the geographic unit. The
region-level regression coefficients corresponding to the last column of Table V are -.346 (.096) in the log annual
earnings regression; -.289 (.070) in the log weekly earnings regression; and -.057 (.023) in the fraction of time
worked regression. Even though the coefficients in the annual and weekly earnings regressions are numerically
larger than those obtained in the state-level analysis, the coefficient in the log weekly earnings regression is still only
half the size of the one reported in Table III. Moreover, it is unclear if the relatively larger effects estimated at the
region level result from the partial elimination of attenuation bias or from the possibility that some of the native
flows induced by immigration are intra-regional, and hence the region is a slightly better conceptual representation
of the “closed market” required for measuring the local impact of immigration; see Borjas, Freeman, and Katz
[1996] for related evidence.
                                                       20

       Up to this point, labor market experience has been defined as the time elapsed since entry

into the labor market for both immigrants and natives. The evidence indicates that U.S. firms

attach different values to experience acquired abroad and experience acquired in the United

States [Chiswick 1978]. These findings suggest that one should use the “effective experience” of

an immigrant worker before assigning that worker to a particular schooling-experience group,

where effective experience measures the years of work exposure that are valued in the U.S. labor

market. Let A denote age, Am the age of entry into the United States, and AT the age of entry into

the labor market. The years of effective experience for an immigrant worker are given by



                   α ( AM − AT ) + β ( A − Am ),       if Am > AT
(5)            X =
                   γ ( A − AT ),                       if Am ≤ AT ,




where α translates a year of source country experience acquired by immigrants who migrated as

adults (i.e., Am > AT) into the equivalent value of experience acquired by a native worker; β

rescales the value of a year of U.S. experience acquired by these adult immigrants; and γ rescales

the experience acquired by immigrants who migrated as children (i.e., Am ≤ AT).

       The parameters α, β, and γ can be estimated by using the standard model of immigrant

assimilation, a model that also accounts for differences in immigrant “quality” across cohorts

[Borjas 1985]. Suppose we pool data for native and immigrant workers in two separate cross-

sections (such as the 1980 and 1990 Censuses). A generic regression model that can identify all

of the relevant parameters is



               log w = si + φC I C + φ D I D + λ N N ( A − AT ) + λ C I C ( A − AT )
(6)
                      + λ D 0 I D ( Am − AT ) + λ D1 I D ( A − Am ) + κ Y + ρπ + ϕ,
                                                  21




where w gives the weekly wage of a worker observed in a particular cross-section; si gives a

vector of education fixed effects; IC indicates if the immigrant entered the country as a child; ID

indicates if the immigrant entered as an adult; N indicates if the worker is native-born (N = 1 –

IC – ID); Y gives the calendar year of entry into the United States (set to zero for natives); and π

indicates if the observation is drawn from the 1990 Census.

       The coefficient λN gives the market value of a year of experience acquired by a native

worker; λC gives the value of a year of experience acquired in the United States by a “child

immigrant”; and λD0 and λD1 give the value of a year of source country experience and of U.S.

experience acquired by an adult immigrant, respectively. The weights that define an immigrant’s

effective experience are



                     λ D0          λ D1     λ
(7)             α=        ,   β=        , γ= C.
                     λN            λN       λN



       Although the generic regression model in (6) is pedagogically useful, it ignores the

curvature of the experience-earnings profile, and also ignores the possibility that the returns to

education differ among the various groups. Further, it is preferable to define the calendar year of

an immigrant’s arrival as a vector of dummy variables indicating the year of arrival, rather than

as a linear time trend. I estimated this more general model using the pooled 1980 and 1990 data.

Table VI reports the relevant coefficients from this regression.

       The experience coefficients for natives and for immigrants who migrated as children have

almost identical numerical values, so that a marginal year of experience is valued at the same

rate by employers (although the tiny numerical difference is statistically significant). This
                                                          22


implies that the weight γ is estimated to be 1.0. In contrast, the value of an additional year of

source country experience for adult immigrants (evaluated at the mean years of source country

experience) is 0.006, while the value of an additional year of U.S. experience for these

immigrants is 0.024. The value of a year of experience for a comparable native worker is 0.015.

The implied weights are α = 0.4 and β = 1.6.

         I used these weights to calculate the effective experience of each immigrant, and then

reclassified them into the schooling-experience cells using the predicted measure of effective

experience.14 The top row of Table VII reports the estimated adjustment coefficients. The effects

are roughly similar to those reported in the previous section. For example, the weekly earnings

regression implies that the wage elasticity is -.30, and the effect is statistically significant.



B. Measuring Effective Skills

         The notion of effective experience raises a more general question about the overall

comparability of the skills of immigrants and natives. The U.S. labor market differentiates the

value of human capital embodied in immigrants and natives along many dimensions. For

example, the value that firms attach to schooling will probably differ between the two groups, as

well as among immigrants originating in different countries. It is of interest, therefore, to devise

a simple way of summarizing the differences in “effective skills” that exist between immigrants

and natives within a schooling category. It seems sensible to assume that similarly educated

workers who fall in the same general location of the wage distribution have roughly the same




         14 Neither the Census nor the CPS report the exact year in which immigrants entered the United States, but
instead report the year of entry within particular intervals (e.g., 1980-84). I used a uniform distribution to randomly
assign workers in each interval to each year in the interval. Because the immigrant’s year of arrival is not reported in
the 1960 Census, the analysis is restricted to data drawn from the 1970 through 2000 cross-sections.
                                                        23

number of efficiency units because employers attach the same value to the entire package of

skills embodied in these workers.

        To conduct this classification of workers into skill groups, I restrict the analysis to

workers who have valid wage data. In each cross-section and for each of the four schooling

groups, I sliced the weekly wage distribution of native workers into 20 quantiles. By

construction, five percent of natives in each schooling group fall into each of the quantiles. I then

calculated how many of the immigrant workers in each schooling group fall into each of the 20

quantiles. The immigrant supply shock is defined by



                                  M ikt
(8)               pˆ ikt =                     ,
                             ( M ikt + N ikt )



where Mikt and Nikt give the number of foreign-born and native-born workers in schooling group

i, quantile k (k = 1, . . . , 20), at time t.

        Consider the regression model:



(9)              yikt = θ pˆ ikt + si + qk + πt + (qk × si) + (si × πt) + (qk × πt) + ϕikt,



where qk is a vector of fixed effects indicating the quantile of the cell. The second row of Table

VII reports the adjustment coefficients estimated from this specification of the model. Despite

the very different methodological approach employed to define the skill groups, the estimated

coefficient in the log weekly earnings regression is similar to those reported above. The estimate

of θ is -0.606 (with a standard error of 0.158), implying a wage elasticity of -0.42. In sum, the

evidence suggests that the clustering of immigrants into particular segments of the wage
                                                          24

distribution worsened the wage outcomes of native workers who happened to reside in those

regions of the wage distribution.15




               VII. A Structural Approach to Immigration and Factor Demand

A. Theory and Evidence

         Up to this point, I have not imposed any economic structure in the estimation of the wage

effects of immigration. As in most of the studies in the spatial correlation literature, I have

instead attempted to calculate the correlation that indicates if an increase in the number of

immigrants lowers the wage of competing native workers.

         An alternative approach would impose more structure by specifying the technology of the

aggregate production function.16 This structural approach would make it possible to estimate not

only the effect of a particular immigrant influx on the wage of competing native workers, but

also the cross-effects on the wage of other natives. An empirically useful approach assumes that

the aggregate production function can be represented in terms of a three-level CES technology:

Similarly educated workers with different levels of work experience are aggregated to form the




         15  The fraction of time worked variable used in the regression reported in the second row of Table VII has a
different definition than elsewhere in this paper. To simplify the sorting of persons into the quantiles of the wage
distribution, I restricted the analysis to working men. One could classify non-workers into the various quantiles by
using a first-stage regression that predicts earnings based on a person’s educational attainment, experience, and other
variables. For native men, this approach leads to results that are similar to those reported in the text.

         16  Early empirical studies of the labor market impact of immigration [Grossman 1982; Borjas 1987]
actually imposed a structure on the technology of the local labor market, such as the translog or the Generalized
Leontief, and used the resulting estimates to calculate the various substitution elasticities. Although this approach
fell out of favor in the early 1990s, the evidence reported by Card [2001] and the results presented in this section
suggest that the structural approach may be due for a timely comeback.
                                                           25

effective supply of an education group; and workers across education groups are then aggregated

to form the national workforce.17

        Suppose the aggregate production function for the national economy at time t is



                                 v            v 1/ v
(10)              Qt =  λ Kt K t + λ Lt Lt         ,




where Q is output, K is capital, L denotes the aggregate labor input; and v = 1 – 1/σKL, with σKL

being the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor (–∞ < v ≤ 1). The vector λ gives

time-variant technology parameters that shift the production frontier, with λKt + λLt = 1. The

aggregate Lt incorporates the contributions of workers who differ in both education and

experience. Let



                                       1/ ρ
                               ρ
(11)              Lt =  ∑ θit Lit           ,
                        i         



where Lit gives the number of workers with education i at time t, and ρ = 1 – 1/σE, with σE being

the elasticity of substitution across these education aggregates (–∞ < ρ ≤ 1). The θit give time-

variant technology parameters that shift the relative productivity of education groups, with Σi θit

= 1. Finally, the supply of workers in each education group is itself given by an aggregation of

the contribution of similarly educated workers with different experience. In particular,




         17 The three-level CES technology slightly generalizes the two-level approach used in the labor demand
context by Bowles [1970] and Card and Lemieux [2001].
                                                               26

                                        1/ η
                               η 
(12)            Lit =  ∑ α ij Lijt           ,
                       j           



where Lijt gives the number of workers in education group i and experience group j at time t; and

η = 1 – 1/σX, with σX being the elasticity of substitution across experience classes within an

education group (–∞ < η ≤ 1). Equation (12) incorporates an important identifying assumption:

the technology coefficients αij are constant over time, with Σj αij = 1.

       The marginal productivity condition implies that the wage for skill group (i, j, t) is



(13)           log wijt = log λLt + (1 – v) log Qt + (v – ρ) log Lt + log θit + (ρ – η) log Lit

                         + log αij + (η – 1) log Lijt .



       As Card and Lemieux [2001] show in their recent study of the link between the wage

structure and cohort size, it is straightforward to implement this approach empirically. In

particular, note that the marginal productivity condition in (13) can be rewritten as



                                                    1
(14)            log wijt = δt + δit + δij −           log Lijt ,
                                                   σX



where δt = log λLt + (1 – v) log Qt + (v – ρ) log Lt, and is absorbed by period fixed effects; δit =

log θit + (ρ – η) log Lit, and is absorbed by interactions between the education fixed effects and

the period fixed effects; and δij = log αij, and is absorbed by interactions between education fixed
                                                                 27

effects and experience fixed effects. The regression model in (14), therefore, identifies the

elasticity of substitution across experience groups.

       Moreover, the coefficients of the education-experience interactions in (14) identify the

parameters log αij. I impose the restriction that Σj αij = 1 when I estimate the αij from the fixed

effect coefficients.18 As indicated by equation (12), the estimates of αij and σX permit the

calculation of Lit, the CES-weighted labor aggregate for education group i. I can then move up

one level in the CES technology, and recover an additional unknown parameter. Let log wit be

the mean log wage paid to the average worker in education group i at time t. The marginal

productivity condition determining the wage for this group is



                                                1
(15)               log wit = δt + log θit −        log Lit .
                                                σE



This equation is closely related to the model estimated by Katz and Murphy [1992, p. 69] that

examines how the wage differential between college and high school graduates varies with

relative supplies. Note that σE cannot be identified if the regression included interactions of

education-period fixed effects to capture the term log θit. There would be 20 such interaction

terms, but there are only 20 observations in the regression (four education groups observed at

five different points in time). To identify σE, I adopt the Katz-Murphy assumption that the

technology shifters can be approximated by a linear trend that varies across education groups.

       It is important to note that ordinary least squares regressions of equations (14) and (15)

may lead to biased estimates of σX and σË because the supply of workers to the various education


       18          ˆ ij is an estimated fixed effect coefficient, then αˆ ij = exp(log αˆ ij ) / ∑ j exp(log αˆ ij ).
            If log α
                                                          28

groups is likely to be endogenous over the 40-year period spanned by the data. The economic

question at the core of this paper, however, suggests an instrument for the size of the workforce

in each skill group: the number of immigrants in that group. In other words, the immigrant influx

into particular skill groups provides the supply shifter required to identify the labor demand

function. This instrument would be valid if the immigrant influx into particular skill groups were

independent of the relative wages offered to the various skill categories. It is likely, however,

that the number of immigrants in a skill group responds to shifts in the wage structure. Income-

maximizing behavior on the part of potential immigrants would generate larger flows into those

skill cells that had relatively high wages. This behavioral response would tend to build in a

positive correlation between the size of the labor force and wages in a skill group. The

regression coefficients, therefore, understate the negative wage impact of a relative supply

increase.19

         The three-level CES technology offers a crucial advantage for estimating the impact of

immigration within a structural system of factor demand. My analysis defines 33 factors of

production: 32 education-experience skill groups plus capital. A general specification of the

technology, such as the translog, would require the estimation of 561 different parameters (or

n(n+1)/2). The three-level CES approach drastically reduces the size of the parameter space; the

technology can be summarized in terms of three elasticities of substitution. Obviously, this

simplification comes at a cost: the CES specification restricts the types of substitution that can


         19   Consider the regression model given by log w = β log L + u. The IV estimate of β has the property:

                                    cov(log M , u )
                    plim βˆ = β +                    ,
                                  cov(log M , log L)

where log M is the instrument. The total number of workers in a skill group is, in fact, positively correlated with the
number of immigrants in that group, so that cov(log M, log L) > 0. Further, cov(log M, u) > 0 because skill cells with
                                                         29

exist among the various factors. The elasticity of substitution across experience groups takes on

the same value for workers in adjacent experience categories as for workers who differ greatly in

their experience; the elasticity of substitution between high school dropouts and high school

graduates is the same as that between high school dropouts and college graduates; and the

elasticity of substitution between capital and labor is the same for all the different types of

workers.

         Finally, note that the empirical implementation of the three-level CES technology

described above does not use any data on the aggregate capital stock, making it difficult to

separately identify the value of σKL.20 I will discuss below a plausible assumption that can be

made about this parameter to simulate the impact of immigration on the labor market.

         The first step in the empirical application of the model is to estimate equation (14) using

the sample of 160 (i, j, t) cells. The IV estimate of this regression equation is21



(16)              log wijt= δt + δit + δij – 0.288 log Lijt .
                                            (0.115)




favorable demand shocks will probably attract larger numbers of income-maximizing immigrants. The IV regression
coefficient then provides a lower bound for the wage reduction resulting from a supply increase.

         20 In principle, the elasticity σKL could be estimated even without direct information on the aggregate
capital stock by going up an additional level in the CES hierarchy. This exercise yields the marginal productivity
condition for the average worker at time t. This marginal productivity condition depends on a time fixed effect and
on Lt, the CES-weighted aggregate of the workforce. The coefficient of Lt identifies −1/σKL. However, this
regression would only have five observations in my data, and I would need to find a variable that could proxy for the
movements in the period fixed effects.

         21  The instrument is log Mijt and the standard errors are clustered by education-experience group. To avoid
introducing errors due to composition effects, the regressions reported in this section use the mean log weekly wage
of native workers as the dependent variable. The results would be very similar if the mean log wage was calculated
in the pooled sample of natives and immigrants. The relevant coefficients (and standard errors) in equations (16),
(17), and (17′) would be -0.281 (0.059), -0.676 (0.518), and -0.680 (0.462), respectively. The regressions estimated
in this section are weighted by the size of the sample used to calculate the cell mean on the left-hand-side.
                                                               30


The implied elasticity of substitution across experience groups is 3.5. This estimate of σX is

similar to the Card-Lemieux [2001] estimate of the elasticity of substitution across age groups.

The Card-Lemieux estimates for U.S. data range from 3.8 to 4.9.

          I use the implied estimate of the elasticity of substitution and the (transformed)

coefficients of the education-experience fixed effects to calculate the size of the CES-weighted

labor aggregate for each education group. I then estimate the marginal productivity condition for

the education group given by (15). The IV regression estimate is22



(17)                 log wit = δt + linear trend interacted with education fixed effects – 0.741 log Lit .
                                                                                         (0.646)



Alternatively, I can bypass the calculation of the CES-weighted labor aggregate for each

education group, and simply use the actual number of workers in the group ( L*it ). The IV

regression estimate is



(17′)                log wit = δt + linear trend interacted with education fixed effects – 0.759 log L*it .
                                                                                         (0.582)



Both specifications imply that σE is around 1.3. The regressions reported in (17) and (17′) have

only 20 observations (four education groups observed at five different points in time), so that the

elasticity of substitution is not measured precisely. Nevertheless, the implied elasticity is similar


          22   The “linear trend interacted with education fixed effects” vector includes the linear trend and education
fixed effects, as well as the interactions. The instrument in (17) is log Mit, where M it = [   ∑   j
                                                                                                        α ij M ijtη ]1/ η . The
alternative specification in (17′) uses the instrument log M ijt* , where M it* = ∑ j M ijt .
                                                            31

to the Katz-Murphy [1992] estimate of 1.4, despite the different data and methodology.23 In sum,

the evidence indicates that workers within an experience group are not perfect substitutes, but

there is clearly more substitution among similarly educated workers who differ in their

experience than among workers with different levels of education.



B. Simulating the Wage Effects of Immigration

        Hamermesh [1993, p. 37] shows that the factor price elasticity giving the impact on the

wage of factor y of an increase in the supply of factor z is24



                             d log wy          Qyz Q
(18)                ε yz =              = sz           .
                             d log Lz          Qy Qz



where sz is the share of income accruing to factor z; and Qy = ∂Q/∂Ly, Qz = ∂Q/∂Lz, and Qyz =

∂2Q/∂Ly∂Lz.

        The three-level CES technology implies that the own factor price elasticity giving the

wage impact of an increase in the supply of workers with education i and experience j is



                                   1  1     1  sij  1    1         sij 1
(19)                εij ,ij = −      +    −     +      −           +       sij ,
                                  σ X  σ X σ E  si  σ E σ KL       sL σ KL




        23 Card and Lemieux [2001] estimate the elasticity of substitution between high school and college
equivalents to be between 1.1 and 3.1, depending on the sample composition.

        24   The factor price elasticity holds marginal cost and the quantities of other factors constant.
                                                             32

where sij gives the share of income accruing to group (i, j); si gives the share of income accruing

to education group i; and sL gives labor’s share of income. Similarly, the (within-branch) cross

factor price elasticity giving the impact on the wage of group (i, j) of an increase in the supply of

group (i, j′ ), with j ≠ j′, is



                              1    1  sij′     1    1  sij′  1
(20)              εij ,ij′ =     −           +    −      +       sij′ .
                              σ X σ E  si      σ E σ KL  sL σ KL



Finally, the (across-branch) cross factor price elasticity giving the impact on the wage of group

(i, j) of an increase in the supply of group (i′, j′ ), with i ≠ i′ and j′ = (1,. . ., j, . . .8), is



                               1    1  si′j′   1
(21)              εij ,i′j′ =     −          +   si′j′ .
                               σ E σ KL  sL σ KL



         The calculations of the factor price elasticities in (19)-(21) require information on the

factor shares. I assume that labor’s share of income is 0.7, and use the 1990 Census to calculate

the share of total annual earnings accruing to each education-experience cell. I use these total

annual earnings to apportion the labor shares accruing to the various groups.25 Based on the

coefficients estimated above, I set σX = 3.5 and σE = 1.3. Finally, the calculations require an



         25 My calculation of the cell’s income share uses all men and women who reported annual earnings in
1989. The estimated shares for the 8 experience groups within each education group are: high school dropouts
(0.003, 0.004, 0.006, 0.005, 0.005, 0.007, 0.007, 0.007); high school graduates (0.018, 0.030, 0.034, 0.030, 0.028,
0.026, 0.022, 0.017); some college (0.018, 0.030, 0.036, 0.036, 0.030, 0.022, 0.016, 0.011); and college graduates
(0.025, 0.039, 0.044, 0.049, 0.037, 0.025, 0.019, 0.013). These income shares, when aggregated to the level of the
education group, are similar to the shares reported by Autor, Katz, and Krueger [1998, p. 1209]. The share of
income accruing to high school dropouts is 4.5 percent; high school graduates, 20.5 percent; workers with some
college, 19.9 percent; and college graduates, 25.1 percent.
                                                          33


assumption about σKL. Hamermesh [1993, p. 92] concludes that the aggregate U.S. economy can

be reasonably described by a Cobb-Douglas production function, suggesting that σKL equals one.

I impose this restriction in the analysis.

         Table VIII reports the estimated elasticities. The own elasticity varies from -0.30 to -0.36,

with a weighted mean of -0.33 (where the weight is the size of the native labor force as of

2000).26 The table also reports the cross-elasticities within an education branch. Without

exception, these cross-elasticities are negative and their weighted mean is -0.05. Finally, the

table reports the cross-elasticities across education branches. These cross-elasticities are positive

and small, with a weighted mean of 0.02. It is worth noting that the cross-branch elasticities

reported for high school dropouts are very close to zero. This result follows from the definition

of the elasticity in equation (21). Because the share of income accruing to high school dropouts

is small, an influx of low-skill immigrants is bound to have only a tiny impact on the wage of

workers in other education groups.27 As an example, consider the wage effects of a 10 percent

increase in the number of college graduates who have 16-20 years of experience. The elasticities

calculated for this group indicate that their own wage would drop by 3.5 percent; that the wage

of other college graduates (with different levels of experience) would fall by -0.6 percent, and

that the wage of all workers without a college degree would rise by 0.3 percent.




         26  The own elasticities reported in Table VIII are not directly comparable to the “wage elasticities” reported
earlier. As noted in footnote 6, the regression model estimated in previous sections identifies the reduced-form effect
of immigration on wages. This reduced form effect is ε/(1 − εσ), where ε is the factor price elasticity and σ is the
labor supply elasticity. If ε = -0.33 and σ = 0.4, for example, the implied reduced-form effect estimated in this
section is -0.29, which is somewhat smaller than the estimates that do not use a structural approach.

         27Murphy and Welch [1992] report elasticities of complementarity (defined as QyzQ/QyQz) for a number
of education-experience groups. In the Murphy-Welch exercise, the cross-elasticities between high school graduates
and college graduates tend to be positive, but the within-branch elasticities for a given education group are not
always negative.
                                                                   34

         I use the elasticity estimates reported in Table VIII to calculate the wage impact of the

immigrant influx that entered the United States between 1980 and 2000. The marginal

productivity condition for the typical worker in education group s and experience group x can be

written as wsx = D(K, L11, . . . , L18, . . . , L41, . . . , L48). Assuming that the capital stock is

constant, the net impact of immigration on the log wage of group (s, x) is28



(22)              ∆ log wsx = ε sx , sx msx + ∑ ε sx , sj msj + ∑∑ ε sx ,ij mij ,
                                                  j≠x                   i≠s   j




where mij gives the percentage change in labor supply due to immigration in cell (i, j). Because

the size of the native labor force in each skill group is shifting over time, I define mij as



                                   M ij ,2000 − M ij ,1980
(23)              mij =                                                 ,
                          0.5( N ij ,1980 + N ij ,2000 ) + M ij ,1980



so that the baseline population used to calculate the percent increase in labor supply averages out

the size of the native workforce in the skill cell and treats the pre-existing immigrant population

as part of the “native” stock.

         Table IX summarizes the results of the simulation. The large immigrant influx of the

1980s and 1990s adversely affected the wage of most native workers, particularly those workers

at the bottom and top of the education distribution. The wage fell by 8.9 percent for high school

dropouts and by 4.9 percent for college graduates. In contrast, the wage of high school graduates


          28 The assumption of a constant capital stock implies that the resulting wage consequences should be
interpreted as short-run impacts. Over time, the changes in factor prices will fuel adjustments in the capital stock
that attenuate the wage effects.
                                                 35

fell by only 2.6 percent, while the wage of workers with some college was barely affected.

Overall, the immigrant influx reduced the wage of the average native worker by 3.2 percent.

       These predictions assume that the elasticity of substitution between capital and labor

equals one. Equations (19)-(21) imply that the adverse wage effects of immigration are larger if

there is less substitution between capital and labor than implied by the aggregate Cobb-Douglas

specification. For example, the predicted wage effect for each skill group is about one percentage

point lower (i.e., more negative) when σKL = 0.75, so that the wage of the average native worker

would then fall by 4.2 percent.




                                        VIII. Conclusion

       The concern over the adverse labor market impact of immigration has always played a

central role in the immigration debate. The resurgence of large-scale immigration in recent

decades stimulated a great deal of research that attempts to measure these labor market effects.

This research effort, based mainly on comparing native employment opportunities across

regions, has not been entirely successful. The weak spatial correlations typically estimated in

these studies, although often construed as showing that immigrants do not lower native wages,

are difficult to interpret. In fact, economic theory implies that the more that firms and workers

adjust to the immigrant supply shock, the smaller these cross-region correlations will be—

regardless of the true impact of immigration on the national economy.

       This paper introduces a new approach for estimating the labor market impact of

immigration. The analysis builds on the assumption that similarly educated workers who have

different levels of experience are not perfect substitutes. Defining skill groups in terms of

educational attainment and work experience introduces a great deal of variation in the data. In
                                                  36

some years, the influx of immigrant with a particular level of schooling mainly affects younger

workers, in other years it mainly affects older workers. In contrast to the existing literature, the

evidence reported in this paper consistently indicates that immigration reduces the wage and

labor supply of competing native workers, as suggested by the simplest textbook model of a

competitive labor market. Moreover, the evidence indicates that spatial correlations conceal

around two-thirds of the national impact of immigration on wages.

       My estimates of the own factor price elasticity cluster between -0.3 and -0.4. These

estimates, combined with the very large immigrant influx in recent decades, imply that

immigration has substantially worsened the labor market opportunities faced by many native

workers. Between 1980 and 2000, immigration increased the labor supply of working men by

11.0 percent. Even after accounting for the beneficial cross-effects of low-skill (high-skill)

immigration on the earnings of high-skill (low-skill) workers, my analysis implies that this

immigrant influx reduced the wage of the average native worker by 3.2 percent. The wage

impact differed dramatically across education groups, with the wage falling by 8.9 percent for

high school dropouts, 4.9 percent for college graduates, 2.6 percent for high school graduates,

and barely changing for workers with some college.

       Although the comparison of workers across narrowly defined skill classifications reveals

a sizable adverse effect of immigration on native employment opportunities, it is worth noting

that we still do not fully understand why the spatial correlation approach fails to find these

effects. I suspect that we can learn a great deal more about the labor market impact of

immigration by documenting the many adjustments that take place, by workers and firms, both

inside and outside the labor market, as immigration alters economic opportunities in many

sectors of the economy. For instance, my analysis ignored the long-run capital adjustments

induced by immigration, the role played by capital-skill complementarities, and the possibility
                                                37

that high-skill immigration (e.g., scientists and high-tech workers) is an important engine for

endogenous technological change.

       The adverse wage effects documented in this paper tell only part of the story of how the

U.S. economy responded to the resurgence of large-scale immigration. The interpretation and

policy implications of these findings require a more complete documentation and assessment of

the many other consequences, including the potential benefits that immigrants impart on a host

country.
                                                 38


                          APPENDIX 1: VARIABLE DEFINITIONS

       The data are drawn from the 1960, 1970, 1980, 1990 Public Use Microdata Samples of

the U.S. Census, and the pooled 1999, 2000, 2001 Annual Demographic Supplement of the

Current Population Surveys. In the 1960 and 1970 Censuses, the data extracts form a 1 percent

random sample of the population. In 1980 and 1990, the immigrant extracts form a 5 percent

random sample, and the native extracts form a 1 percent random sample. The analysis is

restricted to men aged 18-64. A person is classified as an immigrant if he was born abroad and is

either a non-citizen or a naturalized citizen; all other persons are classified as natives. Sampling

weights are used in all calculations involving the 1990 Census and the CPS.

       Definition of education and experience: I categorize workers into four education groups:

high school dropouts, high school graduates, persons with some college, and college graduates,

and use Jaeger’s [1997, p. 304] algorithm for reconciling differences in the coding of the

completed education variable across surveys. I assume that high school dropouts enter the labor

market at age 17, high school graduates at age 19, persons with some college at age 21, and

college graduates at age 23, and define work experience as the worker’s age at the time of the

survey minus the assumed age of entry into the labor market. I restrict the analysis to persons

who have between 1 and 40 years of experience. Throughout much of the paper, workers are

classified into one of 8 experience groups. The experience groups are defined in terms of five-

year intervals (1-5 years of experience, 6-10, 11-15, 16-20, 21-25, 26-30, 31-35, and 36-40).

       Counts of persons in education-experience groups: The counts are calculated in the

sample of men who do not reside in group quarters and participate in the civilian labor force

(according to the information provided by the labor force status variable for the reference week).

       Annual and weekly earnings: These variables are calculated in the sample of men who do

not reside in group quarters, are employed in the civilian labor force, are not enrolled in school,
                                                 39

report positive annual earnings, weeks worked, and weekly hours, and are not self-employed (as

determined by the class of worker variable). In the 1960, 1970, and 1980 Censuses, the top coded

annual salary is multiplied by 1.5. In the 1960 and 1970 Censuses, weeks worked in the calendar

year prior to the survey are reported as a categorical variable. I impute weeks worked for each

worker as follows: 6.5 weeks for 13 weeks or less, 20 for 14-26 weeks, 33 for 27-39 weeks, 43.5

for 40-47 weeks, 48.5 for 48-49 weeks, and 51 for 50-52 weeks. The average log annual earnings

or average log weekly earnings for a particular education-experience cell is defined as the mean

of log annual earnings or log weekly earnings over all workers in the relevant population.

       Fraction of time worked: This variable is calculated in the sample of men who do not

reside in group quarters, are not enrolled in school, and are not in the military (as indicated by

the labor force status variable for the reference week). The fraction of time worked for each

person is defined as the ratio of weeks worked (including zeros) to 52. The group mean used in

the analysis is the mean of this variable over the relevant population, which includes persons

with zero hours worked.
                                            40


   APPENDIX 2. PERCENT OF MALE LABOR FORCE THAT IS FOREIGN-BORN,
                BY EDUCATION AND EXPERIENCE, 1960-2000

                         Years of
Education                            1960        1970         1980   1990   2000
                        experience
High school dropouts       1-5        2.6        3.9           8.5   18.4   20.8
                           6-10       3.6        5.4          13.9   29.7   44.9
                          11-15       3.6        6.2          15.8   28.1   49.8
                          16-20       4.3        6.7          13.5   28.9   50.0
                          21-25       4.4        6.0          12.5   28.5   40.5
                          26-30       5.2        5.5          11.2   21.4   40.0
                          31-35       8.0        5.4           8.8   17.7   37.1
                          36-40      12.3        5.8           7.9   15.3   28.4

High school graduates      1-5        1.2        2.1           3.2    8.0   12.3
                          6-10        1.6        2.4           3.8    7.8   14.0
                          11-15       2.0        3.1           4.6    6.9   14.5
                          16-20       3.1        3.0           4.3    7.3   11.5
                          21-25       3.0        3.2           4.8    7.6    9.4
                          26-30       4.8        4.0           4.8    6.8    9.5
                          31-35       7.3        3.4           4.7    6.5   10.8
                          36-40      13.0        5.3           5.2    6.6    9.7

Some college               1-5        2.3         3.5          5.2    7.9    9.1
                          6-10        3.3         4.2          5.1    8.3   10.8
                          11-15       3.7         4.9          5.6    7.4   11.6
                          16-20       4.6         4.8          6.1    6.4    9.3
                          21-25       4.9         4.5          6.3    6.6    7.6
                          26-30       5.5         4.7          5.8    7.0    5.7
                          31-35       9.6         4.7          6.1    7.2    6.3
                          36-40      10.7         6.5          6.3    6.9    6.0

College graduates          1-5        3.4         4.1          5.0    9.0   12.4
                          6-10        4.3         7.2          6.9   10.8   15.4
                          11-15       4.8         6.5          8.5   10.3   17.5
                          16-20       5.0         5.8         10.5    9.5   14.6
                          21-25       6.4         5.6          8.5   10.2   11.5
                          26-30       7.8         5.7          7.6   11.6   10.8
                          31-35      10.0         6.9          7.2    9.6   12.4
                          36-40      12.5         9.0          7.2    9.1   14.5

Harvard University and National Bureau of Economic Research
                                              41


                                         References

Altonji, Joseph G., and David Card, “The Effects of Immigration on the Labor Market Outcomes
        of Less-Skilled Natives,” in John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration,
        Trade, and the Labor Market (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).

Angrist, Joshua D., and Alan B. Krueger, “Empirical Strategies in Labor Economics,” in Orley
       C. Ashenfelter and David Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. 3A
       (Amsterdam: Elsevier, 1999).

Autor, David H., Lawrence F. Katz, and Alan B. Krueger, “Computing Inequality: Have
       Computers Changed the Labor Market?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVII (1998),
       1169-1213.

Becker, Gary S., Human Capital, 2nd edition (New York: Columbia University Press, 1975).

Borjas, George J., “Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants,”
        Journal of Labor Economics, III (1985), 463-489.

Borjas, George J., “Immigrants, Minorities, and Labor Market Competition,” Industrial and
        Labor Relations Review, XL (1987), 382-392.

Borjas, George J., “Does Immigration Grease the Wheels of the Labor Market?” Brookings
        Papers on Economic Activity, 1 (2001), 69-119.

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “Searching for the Effect of
        Immigration on the Labor Market,” American Economic Review Papers and
        Proceedings, LXXXVI (1996), 246-251.

Borjas, George J., Richard B. Freeman, and Lawrence F. Katz, “How Much Do Immigration and
        Trade Affect Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 1
        (1997), 1-67.

Bowles, Samuel, “Aggregation of Labor Inputs in the Economics of Growth and Planning:
      Experiments with a Two-Level CES Function,” Journal of Political Economy, LXXVIII
      (1970), 68-81.

Card, David, “The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market,” Industrial and
       Labor Relations Review, XLIII (1990), 245-257.

Card, David, “Immigrant Inflows, Native Outflows, and the Local Labor Market Impacts of
       Higher Immigration,” Journal of Labor Economics, XIX (2001), 22-64.

Card, David, and Thomas Lemieux, “Can Falling Supply Explain the Rising Return to College
       for Younger Men? A Cohort-Based Analysis,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CXVI
       (2001), 705-746.
                                             42

Chiswick, Barry R., “The Effect of Americanization on the Earnings of Foreign-Born Men,”
      Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVI (1978), 897-921.

Friedberg, Rachel M., “The Impact of Mass Migration on the Israeli Labor Market,” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics, CXVI (2001), 1373-1408.

Friedberg, Rachel M., and Jennifer Hunt, “The Impact of Immigration on Host Country Wages,
       Employment and Growth,” Journal of Economic Perspectives, IX (1995), 23-44.

Grossman, Jean Baldwin, “The Substitutability of Natives and Immigrants in Production,”
      Review of Economics and Statistics, LIV (1982), 596-603.

Hamermesh, Daniel, Labor Demand (Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press, 1993).

Jaeger, David A., “Reconciling the Old and New Census Bureau Education Questions:
        Recommendations for Researchers,” Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, XV
        (1997), 300-309.

Juhn, Chinhui, Kevin M. Murphy, and Robert H. Topel, “Why Has the Natural Rate of
       Unemployment Increased Over Time?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, 2
       (1991), 75-126.

Katz, Lawrence F., and Kevin M. Murphy, “Changes in the Wage Structure, 1963-87: Supply
       and Demand Factors,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, CVII (1992), 35-78.

LaLonde, Robert J., and Robert H. Topel, “Labor Market Adjustments to Increased
      Immigration,” in John M. Abowd and Richard B. Freeman, eds., Immigration, Trade, and
      the Labor Market (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991).

Mincer, Jacob, Schooling, Experience, and Earnings (New York: Columbia University Press,
      1974).

Murphy, Kevin M., and Finis Welch, “The Structure of Wages,” Quarterly Journal of
      Economics, CVII (1992), 285-326.

Pischke, Jörn-Steffen, and Johannes Velling, “Employment Effects of Immigration to Germany:
       An Analysis Based on Local Labor Markets,” Review of Economics and Statistics,
       LXXIX (1997), 594-604.

Samuelson, Paul A., Economics, 6th Edition (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1964).

Schoeni, Robert F., “The Effect of Immigrants on the Employment and Wages of Native
      Workers: Evidence from the 1970s and 1980s,” The RAND Corporation, March 1997.

Smith, James P., and Barry Edmonston, eds., The New Americans: Economic, Demographic, and
       Fiscal Effects of Immigration (Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press, 1997).
                                             43

Welch, Finis, “Effects of Cohort Size on Earnings: The Baby Boom Babies’ Financial Bust,”
       Journal of Political Economy, LXXXVII (1979), S65-S97.

Welch, Finis, “In Defense of Inequality,” American Economic Review, LXXXIX (1990), 1-17.
                                                       44


                                         TABLE I
                      Log Weekly Wage of Male Native Workers, 1960-2000


                            Years of
Education                                     1960           1970          1980           1990          2000
                           experience
High school dropouts           1-5           5.535          5.758           5.722         5.494         5.418
                              6-10           5.920          6.157           6.021         5.839         5.751
                              11-15          6.111          6.305           6.166         6.006         5.932
                              16-20          6.188          6.360           6.286         6.087         5.989
                              21-25          6.201          6.413           6.364         6.180         6.034
                              26-30          6.212          6.439           6.368         6.268         6.036
                              31-35          6.187          6.407           6.419         6.295         6.086
                              36-40          6.175          6.377           6.418         6.295         6.168

High school graduates          1-5           5.940          6.132           6.090         5.837         5.773
                              6-10           6.257          6.476           6.343         6.159         6.140
                              11-15          6.392          6.587           6.497         6.309         6.273
                              16-20          6.459          6.639           6.609         6.415         6.323
                              21-25          6.487          6.664           6.638         6.495         6.406
                              26-30          6.478          6.677           6.662         6.576         6.414
                              31-35          6.450          6.674           6.667         6.572         6.493
                              36-40          6.435          6.622           6.657         6.548         6.460

Some college                   1-5           6.133          6.322           6.237         6.085         6.013
                              6-10           6.412          6.633           6.472         6.387         6.366
                              11-15          6.535          6.752           6.641         6.534         6.489
                              16-20          6.604          6.805           6.762         6.613         6.591
                              21-25          6.634          6.832           6.764         6.711         6.626
                              26-30          6.620          6.841           6.789         6.771         6.648
                              31-35          6.615          6.825           6.781         6.740         6.662
                              36-40          6.575          6.728           6.718         6.658         6.623

College graduates              1-5           6.354          6.612           6.432         6.459         6.458
                              6-10           6.625          6.891           6.702         6.766         6.747
                              11-15          6.760          7.032           6.923         6.908         6.943
                              16-20          6.852          7.109           7.043         7.005         7.046
                              21-25          6.876          7.158           7.087         7.112         7.051
                              26-30          6.881          7.146           7.085         7.122         7.084
                              31-35          6.867          7.095           7.079         7.095         7.074
                              36-40          6.821          7.070           6.985         6.950         6.944

        The table reports the mean of the log weekly wage of workers in each education-experience group. All
wages are deflated to 1999 dollars using the CPI-U series.
                                                        45


                                       TABLE II
      Index of Congruence in Occupation Distributions within Education Groups, 1990

                                                 Experience of corresponding immigrant group
Education-experience of
                                        1-10 years           11-20 years       21-30 years          31-40 years
native groups:
High school dropouts
   1-10 years                              0.709               0.714               0.671               0.619
   11-20 years                             0.525               0.631               0.628               0.585
   21-30 years                             0.410               0.527               0.567               0.566
   31-40 years                             0.311               0.435               0.496               0.518

High school graduates
  1-10 years                               0.682               0.611               0.498               0.405
  11-20 years                              0.279               0.379               0.387               0.338
  21-30 years                              0.030               0.184               0.297               0.272
  31-40 years                             -0.035               0.126               0.276               0.311

Some college
  1-10 years                               0.649               0.571               0.474               0.291
  11-20 years                              0.147               0.401               0.492               0.336
  21-30 years                             -0.052               0.230               0.432               0.407
  31-40 years                             -0.066               0.217               0.458               0.489

College graduates
  1-10 years                               0.756               0.710               0.639               0.531
  11-20 years                              0.561               0.673               0.674               0.593
  21-30 years                              0.430               0.597               0.661               0.619
  31-40 years                              0.422               0.599               0.688               0.691

       Equation (2) defines the index of congruence. The index is calculated separately for each pair of native and
immigrant groups.
                                                         46


                                           TABLE III
                      Impact of Immigrant Share on Labor Market Outcomes
                             of Native Education-Experience Groups

                                                                            Dependent variable
                                                              Log annual         Log weekly           Fraction of
Specification:
                                                               earnings           earnings           time worked
1. Basic estimates                                             -0.919              -0.572               -0.529
                                                               (0.582)             (0.162)              (0.132)
2. Unweighted regression                                       -0.725              -0.546               -0.382
                                                               (0.463)             (0.141)              (0.103)
3. Includes women in labor force counts                        -0.919              -0.637               -0.511
                                                               (0.661)             (0.159)              (0.148)
4. Includes log native labor force as regressor                -1.231              -0.552               -0.567
                                                               (0.384)             (0.204)              (0.116)

          The table reports the coefficient of the immigrant share variable from regressions where the dependent
variable is the mean labor market outcome for a native education-experience group at a particular point in time.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells. All
regressions have 160 observations and, except for those reported in row 2, are weighted by the sample size of the
education-experience-period cell. All regression models include education, experience, and period fixed effects, as
well as interactions between education and experience fixed effects, education and period fixed effects, and
experience and period fixed effects.
                                                         47


                                         TABLE IV
                 Impact of Immigrant Share on Native Labor Market Outcomes,
                                     by Education Group

                                   High school       High school         Some        College          At least high
Dependent variable:
                                    dropouts          graduates         college     graduates       school graduates
1. Log annual earnings              -1.416             -2.225           -0.567        1.134            -1.184
                                    (0.313)            (0.622)          (0.421)      (0.436)           (0.668)
2. Log weekly earnings              -0.947             -2.074           -1.096        0.610            -0.335
                                    (0.164)            (0.510)          (0.461)      (0.440)           (0.612)
3. Fraction of time worked          -0.086              0.393            0.567        0.300            -1.040
                                    (0.073)            (0.251)          (0.385)      (0.499)           (0.211)

         The table reports the coefficient of the immigrant share variable from regressions where the dependent
variable is the mean labor market outcome for a native education-experience group at a particular point in time.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within experience cell (in the first four
columns) and within education-experience cells (in the last column). All regression are weighted by the sample size
of the education-experience-period cell. The regressions reported in the first four columns have 40 observations and
include experience and period fixed effects. The regressions reported in the last column have 120 observations and
include education, experience, and period fixed effects, as well as interactions between education and experience
fixed effects, education and period fixed effects, and experience and period fixed effects.
                                                         48


                                            TABLE V
                      Impact of Immigrant Share on Labor Market Outcomes
                          of Native State-Education-Experience Groups


Dependent Variable:                                               (1)            (2)           (3)            (4)
 1. Log annual earnings                                         -0.115         -0.276         -.253         -.217
                                                                (0.079)        (0.053)        (.046)        (.068)
 2. Log weekly earnings                                         -0.124         -0.217         -.203         -.183
                                                                (0.042)        (0.039)        (.038)        (.050)
 3. Fraction of time worked                                     -0.038         -0.100         -.078         -.119
                                                                (0.030)        (0.015)        (.015)        (.021)
Controls for:
 (State × period), (education × period),                          Yes            Yes           Yes            Yes
    (experience × period), (state × education)
    fixed effects
 (State × education × experience) fixed effects                    No            Yes           Yes            Yes
 (Education × experience × period) fixed effects                   No             No           Yes            Yes
 (State × education × period), (state ×                            No             No            No            Yes
    experience × period) fixed effects

         The table reports the coefficient of the immigrant share variable from regressions where the dependent
variable is the mean labor market outcome for a native state-education-experience group at a particular point in time.
Standard errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within state-education-experience cells.
All regressions are weighted by the sample size of the state-education-experience-period cell and include state,
education, experience, and period fixed effects. The regressions on log annual earnings or log weekly earnings have
8,153 observations; the regressions on the fraction of time worked have 8,159 observations.
                                                         49


                                            TABLE VI
                     Impact of Different Types of Labor Market Experience on
                       the Log Weekly Earnings of Natives and Immigrants

                                                                                   Group
Coefficient of:                                         Natives       Child immigrants          Adult immigrants
  Source country experience                               ---                 ---                  0.012
                                                                                                  (0.001)
   Source country experience squared ÷ 10                   ---                  ---              -0.003
                                                                                                  (0.000)
   U.S. experience                                       0.056               0.058                 0.032
                                                        (0.000)             (0.001)               (0.002)
   U.S. experience squared ÷ 10                         -0.010              -0.010                -0.004
                                                        (0.001)             (0.000)               (0.001)

Mean value of:
  Source country experience                                 ---                 ---                    10.6
  U.S. experience                                          16.7               13.0                     10.8

Marginal value of an additional year of
experience for immigrants:
   Source country experience                                ---                  ---                 0.006
                                                                                                    (0.001)
   U.S. experience                                          ---             0.033                    0.024
                                                                           (0.001)                  (0.001)

Marginal value of an additional year of                     ---             0.031                    0.015
experience for natives, evaluated at mean                                  (0.000)                  (0.000)
value of relevant sample of immigrants

         Standard errors are reported in parentheses. The regression pools data from the 1980 and 1990 Census and
has 1,141,609 observations. The dependent variable is the log of weekly earnings. The regressors include: dummy
variables indicating if the worker is an adult immigrant or a child immigrant; a vector of variables indicating the
worker’s educational attainment, interacted with variables indicating if the worker is an adult or a child immigrant;
experience (and its squared) for native workers; experience (and its square) for immigrants who arrived as children;
source country experience (and its squared) for immigrants who arrived as adults; experience in the U.S. (and its
squared) for immigrants who arrived as adults; dummy variables indicating the calendar year in which the
immigrant arrived (1985-1989, 1980-1984, 1975-1979, 1970-1974, 1965-1969, 1960-1964, 1950-1959, and before
1950), and the interaction of this vector with a dummy variable indicating if the immigrant arrived as an adult; and a
dummy variable indicating if the observation was drawn from the 1990 Census.
                                                          50


                                       TABLE VII
       Impact of Immigrant Share on Labor Market Outcomes of Native Skill Groups,
                      Using Effective Experience and Effective Skills

                                                                               Dependent variable
                                                               Log annual        Log weekly         Fraction of time
Specification:
                                                                earnings          earnings              worked
1. Effective experience                                          -1.025            -0.422               -0.611
                                                                 (0.506)           (0.210)              (0.118)
2. Using quantiles of wage distribution                          -0.562            -0.606               -0.048
                                                                 (0.329)           (0.158)              (0.167)

          The table reports the coefficient of the immigrant share variable from regressions where the dependent
variable is the mean labor market outcome for a native skill group (defined in terms of education-experience in row
1 or education-quantile in row 2) at a particular point in time. The quantile definition of skill groups is based on the
worker’s placement in each of 20 quantiles of the (within-education) native weekly wage distribution. Standard
errors are reported in parentheses and are adjusted for clustering within education-experience cells (row 1) or within
education-quantile cells (row 2). All regressions are weighted by the sample size of the education-experience-period
cell (row 1) or the education-quantile-period cell (row 2). The regressions reported in row 1 have 128 observations;
those reported in row 2 have 400 observations. The models in row 1 include education, experience, and period fixed
effects, as well as interactions between education and experience fixed effects, education and period fixed effects,
and experience and period fixed effects. The models in row 2 include education, quantile, and period fixed effects,
as well as interactions between education and quantile fixed effects, education and period fixed effects, and quantile
and period fixed effects
                                                          51


                                           TABLE VIII
                         Estimated Factor Price Elasticities, By Skill Group

                              Years of         Own         Cross elasticity (within       Cross elasticity (across
Education
                             experience      elasticity      education branch)             education branches)
High school dropouts              1-5        -0.313                -0.028                         0.002
                                 6-10        -0.330                -0.044                         0.003
                                11-15        -0.344                -0.059                         0.004
                                16-20        -0.341                -0.056                         0.004
                                21-25        -0.339                -0.053                         0.004
                                26-30        -0.352                -0.066                         0.004
                                31-35        -0.358                -0.072                         0.005
                                36-40        -0.361                -0.076                         0.005

High school graduates             1-5        -0.316                -0.030                         0.012
                                 6-10        -0.335                -0.050                         0.020
                                11-15        -0.343                -0.057                         0.023
                                16-20        -0.337                -0.051                         0.020
                                21-25        -0.333                -0.047                         0.019
                                26-30        -0.330                -0.044                         0.017
                                31-35        -0.323                -0.037                         0.015
                                36-40        -0.315                -0.029                         0.012

Some college                      1-5        -0.318                -0.032                         0.012
                                 6-10        -0.339                -0.054                         0.020
                                11-15        -0.349                -0.063                         0.024
                                16-20        -0.348                -0.063                         0.024
                                21-25        -0.339                -0.054                         0.020
                                26-30        -0.324                -0.038                         0.015
                                31-35        -0.313                -0.028                         0.010
                                36-40        -0.305                -0.019                         0.007

College graduates                 1-5        -0.317                -0.031                         0.017
                                 6-10        -0.335                -0.049                         0.026
                                11-15        -0.341                -0.056                         0.030
                                16-20        -0.348                -0.062                         0.033
                                21-25        -0.332                -0.046                         0.025
                                26-30        -0.318                -0.032                         0.017
                                31-35        -0.309                -0.023                         0.013
                                36-40        -0.302                -0.016                         0.009

         Equations (19)-(21) define the factor price elasticities in the three-level CES framework. For a given
percent change in the numbers of workers of any specific group: The own factor price elasticity gives the percent
change in that group’s wage; the cross-elasticity within an education branch gives the percent change in the wage of
a group with the same education but with different experience; the cross-elasticity across education branches gives
the percent change in the wage of groups that have different educational attainment.
                                                        52


                                        TABLE IX
                 Wage Consequences of Immigrant Influx of the 1980s and 1990s
                           (Predicted change in log weekly wage)

                                                                        Education
                                         High school         High school     Some           College         All
Years of experience                       dropouts            graduates     college        graduates      workers
   1-5                                     -0.065               -0.021        0.004          -0.035        -0.024
   6-10                                    -0.101               -0.027        0.001          -0.042        -0.029
   11-15                                   -0.128               -0.036       -0.009          -0.059        -0.041
   16-20                                   -0.136               -0.033       -0.011          -0.055        -0.039
   21-25                                   -0.108               -0.025       -0.008          -0.049        -0.033
   26-30                                   -0.087               -0.023        0.000          -0.049        -0.029
   31-35                                   -0.066               -0.022        0.001          -0.050        -0.027
   36-40                                   -0.044               -0.013        0.008          -0.056        -0.022
All workers                                -0.089               -0.026       -0.003          -0.049        -0.032

         The simulation uses the factor price elasticities reported in Table VIII to predict the wage effects of the
immigrant influx that arrived between 1980 and 2000. The calculations assume that the capital stock is constant. The
variable measuring the group-specific immigrant supply shock is defined as the number of immigrants arriving
between 1980 and 2000 divided by a baseline population equal to the average size of the native workforce (over
1980-2000) plus the number of immigrants in 1980.
                                                                                                    53

        A. High School Dropouts                                                                                                   B. High School Graduates

                           0.6                                                                                             0.15
                                                             2000                                                                                              2000

                          0.45




                                                                                                         Immigrant share
        Immigrant share


                                                                                                                            0.1

                           0.3                                                                                                                        1990
                                                                            1990

                                            1980                                                                           0.05
                                                                                                                                       1980
                          0.15
                                                                                                                                                                                    1970
                                             1970
                                                                                                                                                         1960
                                                          1960
                            0                                                                                                 0
                                 0           10                  20                30          40                                 0              10                 20         30          40
                                                      Years of experience                                                                                Years of experience

        C. Some College                                                                                                           D. College Graduates

                          0.15                                                                                              0.2

                                                                                                                                                             2000
                                                      2000
                                                                                                                           0.15




                                                                                                     Immigrant share
        Immigrant share




                           0.1
                                                                                                                                              1990
                                                   1990
                                                                                                                            0.1
                                                                                                                                                       1980
                                     1980
                          0.05
                                                                                        1970                                                                                   1970
                                                                                                                           0.05
                                                   1960
                                                                                                                                          1960

                            0                                                                                                0
                                 0           10                  20                30          40                                 0              10                 20         30          40
                                                      Years of experience                                                                               Years of experience

                                                                                    Figure I
                                                                      The Immigrant Supply Shock, 1960-2000
        Note: Within each education group, workers are aggregated into experience groups defined in five-year intervals. The figures use the midpoint of each
experience interval to illustrate the trends.
                                                                             54




                                        0.2
    Decadal change in log weekly wage




                                        0.1



                                          0



                                        -0.1



                                        -0.2
                                               -0.1      -0.05        0           0.05     0.1       0.15     0.2
                                                                 Decadal change in immigrant share

                                                                           Figure II
                                                  Scatter Diagram Relating Wages and Immigration, 1960-2000

          Note: Each point in the scatter represents the decadal change in the log weekly wage and the immigrant
share for a native education-experience group. The data have been adjusted to remove decade effects. The regression
line in the figure weighs the data by (n0 n1)/(n0 + n1), where n0 is the sample size of the cell at the beginning of the
decade, and n1 the sample size at the end. The coefficient of the regression line is -.450, with a standard error of
.172.
