                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE REGULATION OF LABOR

                                              Juan Botero
                                            Simeon Djankov
                                             Rafael La Porta
                                       Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
                                             Andrei Shliefer

                                           Working Paper 9756
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9756


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




The authors are from Yale University, World Bank, Harvard University, Yale University, and Harvard
University, respectively. This research was supported by the World Bank, the Gildor Foundation, the National
Science Foundation, and the International Institute for Corporate Governance at Yale University. We
appreciate helpful comments from Daron Acemoglu, Gary Becker, Olivier Blanchard, Richard Freeman, Peter
Gourevitch, Simon Johnson, Lawrence Katz, Casey Mulligan, and Christopher Woodruff. The data for the
tables can be found at http://iicg.som.yale.edu//. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not
necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Andrei Shleifer, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, and Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes. All rights
reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission
provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
The Regulation of Labor
Andrei Shleifer, Simeon Djankov, Rafael La Porta, and Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes
NBER Working Paper No. 9756
June 2003
JEL No. J1, J6

                                           ABSTRACT

We investigate the regulation of labor markets through employment laws, collective bargaining
laws, and social security laws in 85 countries. We find that richer countries regulate labor less than
poorer countries do, although they have more generous social security systems. The political power
of the left is associated with more stringent labor regulations and more generous social security
systems. Socialist and French legal origin countries have sharply higher levels of labor regulation
than do common law countries, and the inclusion of legal origin wipes out the effect of the political
power of the left. Heavier regulation of labor is associated with a larger unofficial economy, lower
labor force participation, and higher unemployment, especially of the young. These results are
difficult to reconcile with efficiency and political power theories of institutional choice, but are
broadly consistent with legal theories, according to which countries have pervasive regulatory styles
inherited from the transplantation of legal systems.

Simeon Djankov                                                Rafael La Porta
The World Bank                                                Harvard University
1818 H Street, NW                                             M7 Littauer Center
Washington, DC 20433                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
sdjankov@worldbank.org                                        and NBER
                                                              Rafael_Laporta@harvard.edu

Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes                                    Andrei Shleifer
Yale School of Management                                     Harvard University
135 Prospect Street - P.O. Box 208200                         M9 Littauer Center
New Haven, CT, 06520                                          Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER                                                      and NBER
florencio.lopezdesilanes@yale.edu                             ashleifer@harvard.edu

Juan Botero
Yale University, International Institute
of Corporate Governance
135 Prospect Street - P.O. Box 208200
New Haven, CT, 06520
I. Introduction

       Every country in the world has established a complex system of laws and institutions

intended to protect the interests of workers and to guarantee a minimum standard of living to its

population. In most countries, this system encompasses three bodies of law: employment law,

industrial and collective relations law, and social security law. Employment laws govern the

individual employment contract. Industrial and collective relations laws regulate the bargaining,

adoption, and enforcement of collective agreements, the organization of trade unions, and the

industrial action by workers and employers. Social security laws govern the social response to

needs and conditions that have a significant impact on the quality of life, such as old age,

disability, death, unemployment, and maternity.

       In this paper, we examine these laws in 85 countries through the lens of three major

theories of institutional choice: the efficiency theory, the political power theory, and the legal

theory. The efficiency theory holds that institutions adjust to serve the needs of a given society

most efficiently. Each society chooses a system of social control of business that optimally

combines market forces, dispute resolution in court, government regulation, and corrective taxes

and subsidies. Under the political power theory, institutions are shaped by those in power to

benefit themselves at the expense of those out of power. Both voting and interest group politics

allow the winners to benefit at the expense of the losers, with checks and balances on the

government limiting the extent of redistribution. Finally, under the legal theory, a country’s

approach to regulation is shaped by its legal tradition. Common and civil law countries utilize

different strategies for dealing with market failure: the former relying on contract and private

litigation, the latter on direct supervision of markets by the government. Under this theory, the




                                                  2
historical origin of a country’s laws shapes its regulation of labor and other markets.2

       Our focus on labor laws might be particularly helpful in distinguishing the political

power theory from the legal theory. Roe (2000) and Pagano and Volpin (2000) have recently

argued that the political power of labor has been central to legal and regulatory design of the 20th

century (Roe 2000, Pagano and Volpin 2000). Using data on OECD countries, these authors

challenge the observation of La Porta et al. (1997, 1998) that the differences in financial

development among common and civil law countries are best understood in terms of legal

theories. Roe (2000) in particular argues that civil law is simply a proxy for social democracy.

An analysis of labor laws gives these political theories their best shot, for two reasons. First, we

expect leftist governments to focus on labor regulations as a top priority for benefitting their

supporters. Second, because labor laws are relatively recent, we would not necessarily expect a

profound influence of the commercial legal tradition on their structure.

       To assess these theories, we collect data on employment laws, collective bargaining laws,

and social security laws as of 1997 for the Djankov et al. (2002) sample of 85 countries, and

code these data to come up with a variety of measures of worker protection. We combine these

data with already existing (and some newly collected) information on economic development,

leftist orientation of governments, union power, political and economic constraints on

government action, and legal origins to examine the determinants of the regulation of labor. We

also examine data on the unofficial economy, labor force participation, unemployment, and

relative wages to consider who benefits and who loses from the regulation of labor.

       The available research on labor regulations is more extensive than that on most other

2
 In footnotes, we also consider the cultural theory, under which regulations are shaped by a
country’s cultural history, such as the dominance of particular religious groups. The data do not
support this theory, so we keep its discussion to a minimum.

                                                  3
laws. The Organization of Economic Cooperation and Development has sponsored the creation

of a database of labor regulations in member countries (Nicoletti, Scarpetta, and Boylaud 1999;

Nicoletti and Pryor 2001). The World Bank has assembled a data base of International Labor

Office certifications for 119 countries, which provide a partial view of the labor laws as well

(Forteza and Rama 2000). Heckman and Pages-Serra (2000) collect and examine an extensive

data set of job security regulation for Latin American and Carribean countries. Mulligan and

Sala-i-Martin (2000) assemble and analyze data on social security systems. What distinguishes

our data from the previous efforts is a combination of a significant coverage of countries and a

comprehensive approach to labor market regulations. 3

       In the next section, we briefly describe some of the principal theories of the determinants

of labor regulations and develop our hypotheses. In section III, we describe the data. In section

IV, we present the data on the regulation of labor, and describe some of its basic regularities. In

sections V and VI, we present the tests of alternative theories. Section VII concludes.



II. Hypotheses

Efficiency

       Demsetz (1967) and North (1981) propose that the choice of institutions is dictated

primarily by efficiency considerations. In their original form, these theories hold that there are

fixed costs of setting up institutions, and that it becomes socially efficient to set them up only

when the benefits cover the costs. More recently, research on efficient institutional choice has

focused on the idea that different institutional arrangements, ranging from reliance on unbridled

3
There is also an extensive literature on the consequences of regulation of labor, including
Lazear (1990), Besley and Burgess (2002), Fonseca, Lopez-Garcia, and Pissarides (2000),
Heckman and Pages-Serra (2000), and Ichniowski, Freeman, and Lauer (1989), among others.

                                                  4
market forces, to contract and private litigation, to government regulation, to subsidies and social

insurance, represent alternative modes of dealing with torts and market failures, which may be

appropriate in different circumstances.4 For example, different combinations of these strategies

may be efficient in developed and developing countries.

        Here we consider two versions of this theory. The first focuses on the distinction

between regulation and social insurance. Social insurance may be the relatively more efficient

way of dealing with market failures in countries with a lower social marginal cost of tax

revenues, which presumably are the richer countries (Brennan and Buchanan 1980, Becker and

Mulligan 2000). Poor countries must then regulate to protect workers from being fired or

mistreated by employers, whereas rich countries provide unemployment insurance, sick leave,

early retirement and so on because they can more cheaply raise taxes to finance such operations

(Blanchard 2002). A similar argument would maintain that rich countries can better rely on

courts and contracts to address potential market failures, including those in the labor market, and

so do not need as much regulation as do poor countries, where contracts cannot be enforced.

        The second version of the efficiency argument predicts exactly the opposite. It holds that

the principal cost of regulation, relative to other forms of social control of business, is its

potential for abuse of regulated firms by the government and its officials. Labor regulations can

be used to force firms to hire and keep excess labor, to empower unions friendly with the

government, etc. According to this argument, the rich and better governed countries have a

comparative advantage at regulation relative to other forms of social control of business because

their governments are less likely to abuse power. This view with respect to regulation in general



4
 This argument is developed in Glaeser and Shleifer (2002, 2003), Glaeser, Scheinkman and
Shleifer (2003), and Djankov et al. (2003b).

                                                   5
is described by Djankov et al. (2003b).

       The basic thrust of efficiency theories is that countries at different levels of economic

development should adopt different regulatory structures. The variation in patterns of

regulation can also suggest which efficiency forces, if any, shape the regulation of labor. We

note, however, that labor markets are not an ideal testing ground for efficiency theories, because

the basic assumption of market failure is not nearly as convincing in those markets as in some

others, and because there is no compelling argument that labor laws evolved toward efficiency

through a long period of testing and social negotiation.



Political Power

       According to political power theories, institutions are designed not to pursue efficiency,

but to transfer resources from those out of political power to those in power, as well as to

entrench those in political power at the helm (Marx 1872, Olson 1993, Finer 1997). According

to this view, institutions are not only generally inefficient, but are in fact designed to be so by

political leaders to help themselves and their favored groups.

       Political power theories come in two basic varieties. The first holds that the principal

mode of political decision making is elections, and therefore the parties that win elections get to

shape laws. The second variety, which applies to both democracies and dictatorships, holds that

laws are shaped by the influence of interest groups (Olson 1965, Becker 1983).

       Political power theories are by far the dominant explanation of the choice of labor

regulations. In the electoral version, they hold that regulations protecting workers (or at least

employed workers) are introduced by socialist, social-democratic, and more generally leftist

governments to benefit their political constituencies (Esping-Andersen 1999, Hicks 1999). In


                                                  6
the interest group version, these theories hold that labor regulations are a response to the

pressure from trade unions, and therefore should be more extensive when the unions are more

powerful, regardless of which government is in charge.

       Political theories also hold that the ability of those in power to use regulations to benefit

themselves is limited by checks and balances on the government, which can come either from

politics (Buchanan and Tullock 1962) or from markets. Dictatorships are less constrained that

democratically elected governments, and therefore will have more redistributive laws and

institutions. Constitutions, legislative constraints, and other forms of checks and balances are all

conducive to fewer regulations. This theory found some empirical support in our previous work

on the regulation of entry (Djankov et al. 2002). Likewise, economies open to trade may be less

likely to introduce expensive regulations, because competition makes it less lucrative for

governments to raise firms’ regulatory costs (Ades and DiTella 1999, Rajan and Zingales 2003).



Legal Theory

       Legal theory has received considerable attention in the discussions of institutional

evolution in the last several years. Two very distinct legal traditions evolved in Western Europe

since the 12th century: common law and civil law. Common law emerged in England and is

characterized most clearly by the importance of decision making by juries, independent judges,

and the emphasis on judicial discretion as opposed to codes. From England, common law was

transplanted to its colonies, including Ireland, U.S., Canada, Australia, New Zealand, India,

Pakistan and other countries in South and East Asia, East Africa and the Caribbean.

       Civil law evolved from Roman law in Western Europe through the middle ages, and was

incorporated into civil codes in France and Germany in the 19th century. Civil law is


                                                 7
characterized by less independent judiciaries, the relative unimportance of juries, and a greater

role of both substantive and procedural codes as opposed to judicial discretion. Through

Napoleonic conquest French civil law was transplanted throughout Western Europe, including

Spain, Portugal, Italy, Belgium, and Holland, and subsequently to the colonies in North and

West Africa, all of Latin America, and parts of Asia.

       The German code became accepted in Germanic Western Europe, but also was

transplanted to Japan and from there to China, Korea, and Taiwan. Socialist law was adopted in

countries that came under the influence of U.S.S.R., while an indigenous Scandinavian legal

tradition developed in Sweden, Norway, Denmark, Iceland and Finland.

       The legal theory holds that countries in different legal traditions utilize different

institutional technologies for social control of business (Djankov et al. 2003b). Common law

countries tend to rely more on markets and contracts, and civil law (and socialist) countries on

regulation (and state ownership).5 For the labor market, this implies that civil law countries and

socialist law countries should regulate labor markets more extensively than common law

countries. The legal theory would also predict that common law countries should have a less

generous social security system, because they are more likely to rely on markets to provide

insurance. Perhaps most importantly, the legal theory predicts that patterns of regulation of

different activities are correlated across countries. These predictions are tested below. 6



5
 Legal theories have been tested in other areas of law. Compared to civil law and particularly
French civil law countries, common law countries have better legal protection of shareholders
and creditors (La Porta et al. 1997, 1998), lighter regulation of entry (Djankov et al. 2002), less
formalized legal procedures for resolving disputes (Djankov et al. 2003a), and securities laws
more focused on private contracting than regulation (La Porta et al. 2003a).
6
 Because legal systems were transplanted largely through conquest and colonization, one can
argue that the influence of the legal origin is an exogenous determinant of institutional choice.

                                                  8
       Legal theories have been challenged by advocates of political power theories, such as

Roe (2000) and Pagano and Volpin (2000), who argue that at least in Western Europe, the civil

law tradition has often coincided with the political pressure to regulate, usually coming from the

left. By combining extensive data on political orientation and legal origins for a sample of 85

countries, we attempt to distinguish the pure political power from the pure legal theory. We

also argue, at the end of the paper, that reality is probably best described by a hybrid model.



III. Measures of Labor Regulation

       We construct a new data set describing the legal protection of workers in 85 countries in

1997. We gather data on the three components of the legal framework for worker protection: (i)

employment laws; (ii) industrial (collective) relations laws, and (iii) social security laws.

       To identify issues subject to statutory regulation in the area of employment and industrial

relations laws, we use the OECD Jobs Study (1994) and the International Encyclopaedia for

Labor Law and Industrial Relations. For social security laws, we follow the de-commodification

index of Esping-Andersen (1999), regarded as a leading empirical comparison of social security

systems among developed countries (Hicks, 1999, p. 249). We also rely on several cross-

country secondary sources, including the International Encyclopaedia for Labour Law and

Industrial Relations, the ILO’s Conditions of Work Digest (1994, 1995), and the U.S. Social

Security Administration’s Social Security Programs Throughout the World. For each law in

each country, we identify the government regulation of each specific area, and assign a higher

score when a regulation is more protective of a worker. We then construct indices for each area

of the law that aggregate these scores. Table I contains detailed definitions of all the variables

used in the paper.


                                                  9
       To ensure comparability and consistency across countries, we consider a “standardized”

male worker with the following characteristics: (i) he is a non-executive full-time employee

working in the same firm for 20 years;7 (ii) his salary plus benefits equals the country's GNP per

worker during the entire period of employment; (iii) he has a non-working wife and two

children, and the family has always resided in the country’s most populous city; (iv) he is a

lawful citizen who belongs to the same race and religion as the majority of the country’s

population; and (v) he is not a member of a labor union (unless membership is mandatory). For

social security, we also assume that the worker retires at the normal retirement age as defined by

the country's laws; sickness lasts for 2 months; and the unemployment spell lasts for one year.

We also assume a “standardized” employer with the following characteristics: (i) it is a

manufacturing company wholly owned by nationals; (ii) its legal domicile and main place of

business is the country’s most populous city; (iii) it has 201 workers; and (iv) it abides by every

law and regulation, but does not grant workers more prerogatives than are legally mandated.

Also, (i) when both a standard duration and a possible extended period of time are provided by

law, we choose the standard period; (ii) we use 30-day months and assume 22 working days per

month and 5 working days per week; and (iii) when we find complementary coverage

mechanisms, all applicable mechanisms are taken into account.




Employment laws

       Employment laws govern the individual employment relation, including the formation of

the individual labor contract, the mandatory minimum terms and conditions of such contract, and

7
 Results are similar for a worker with only three years of employment.

                                                 10
the termination of the contractual relation. Accordingly, we group the provisions of

employment laws into three broad areas: (i) alternative employment contracts; (ii) conditions of

employment; and (iii) job security. For each area, we collect several indicators and aggregate

them into sub-indices and then the overall index of employment laws. We follow the same

procedure for industrial relations and social security laws.

       The first broad area covers restrictions placed on alternative employment contracts. If the

regulation of alternative contracts is more flexible than that of regular contracts, the former will

be used to by-pass standard labor provisions. The three main alternatives to the standard

employment contract are part-time, fixed-term, and family members’ contracts. Workers hired

under such contracts are typically paid lower benefits and are subject to less onerous termination

rules. Our indicators in the alternative employment contracts sub-index cover both the

permissibility and the characteristics of these contracts.

       The second broad area covers the conditions of the employment contract. The legal

provisions here cover three areas: (i) flexibility on working time requirements (including

mandatory daily rest, maximum number of hours in a work week, premium for overtime, and

restrictions on work at night and on weekends); (ii) mandatory payment for non-working days

(including paid annual leave, holidays, and maternity leave); and (iii) minimum wage legislation.

       The third broad area is job security, or legal protection against dismissal, which

encompasses: (i) grounds for dismissal; (ii) procedures for dismissal; (iii) notice period; (iv)

severance payment; and (v) the constitutional principles covering protection against dismissal.

       The rules on grounds for dismissal range from ‘contract at will,’ where the employment

relation may be terminated by either party at any time and with no limitations other than those

contained in the agreement, to allowing the termination of employment contracts only under a

                                                 11
very narrow list of ‘fair’ causes that may not be contracted around by the parties, to refusing to

consider dismissal on economic necessity (redundancy) as a fair cause for firing employees. The

law may restrict the employer’s freedom to dismiss by requiring mandatory notification or even

the approval from unions, workers councils, the public employment service, a labor inspector, or

a judge. Some countries also require rehabilitative measures (retraining and allocation of

another job within the enterprise) prior to the dismissal, and establish priority rules for dismissal

or re-employment of redundant workers. Job security regulations also cover the timing and the

cost of dismissal. Some countries mandate a lengthy advance notice for termination, while

others leave this issue to the individual employment contract. Similarly, the termination of the

employment agreement sometimes carries no payment at all or a payment in lieu of notice.



Industrial relations laws

       Industrial relations laws aim at collectively protecting workers from employers.8 They

govern the balance of power between labor unions and other forms of organized work, and

employers and associations of employers. We aggregate industrial relations laws into three sub-

indices: (i) collective bargaining; (ii) workers’ participation in the company’s management; and

(iii) collective disputes (strikes and lockouts), and then aggregate those into an index.

       Collective bargaining covers several areas. First, some countries require employers to

bargain with organized workers (e.g., unions and workers’ councils), while others allow them to

refuse to do so. Second, in some countries collective agreements are extended to third parties as



8
  Some provisions aim to protect workers from other workers. For instance, “right-to-work” laws
in the U.S. protect workers from unions by prohibiting the exclusive hiring of union labor. Such
cases are rare and the bulk of industrial relations provisions directly protect workers from
employers.

                                                 12
a matter of public policy at the national or sectoral levels, whereas in others they only extend to

non-signatory workers at the plant level, or only bind the parties to the agreement. Third, the

laws of some countries include rules requiring the exclusive hiring of union labor in certain

industries or factories (closed shops).

       The second sub-index captures worker participation in management, which may take the

form of mandatory appointment of workers to the board of directors (the German model of co-

determination), or workers councils (the Swedish model). Most countries do not provide a

mechanism for worker participation. These two variables (and the presence of worker

participation in the constitution) form the sub-index of worker participation in management.

       The third sub-index covers the regulation of collective disputes. This area covers: (i)

legal strikes; (ii) procedural restrictions to strikes; (iii) employer defenses; (iv) compulsory

arbitration; and (v) the constitutional protection of the right to strike. A few nations have a

straight prohibition of strikes; others limit the types of lawful strikes. For example, solidarity

strikes (to support the claims of workers other than the striking workers), wildcat strikes (not

authorized by the labor union), political strikes, and sit-ins are often prohibited. Procedural

restrictions on the right to strike include majority voting, advance notice requirements,

prohibitions on strikes while a collective agreement is in force, and the obligation to go through

conciliation procedures before the strike may take place. Restrictions on employer defenses may

include bans on employers’ strikes (lock-outs) and on employers’ retribution against strikers,

such as the termination of employment of striking workers and the hiring of replacement labor

during a lawful strike. Importantly, in many countries, the employer or both of the parties may

be subject to arbitration against their will. Finally, the right to industrial action may be protected

by the constitution.


                                                  13
Social Security laws

       The bulk of social security expenditure across countries addresses old-age pensions,

sickness and healthcare coverage, and unemployment. Following the design of the de-

commodification index of Esping-Anderson9, our variables cover the risks of: (i) old age,

disability, and death, with an emphasis on old age; (ii) sickness and health, with an emphasis on

sickness; and (iii) unemployment. We code five variables for each one of these three risks. The

first is always a dummy measuring whether the laws of the country provide for a mandatory and

comprehensive social security system to cover the particular risk.

       For the sub-index of old age, disability and death, the other four indicators are created as

follows. First, the generosity of pension protection is calculated as the normalized difference

between the legal retirement age and the worker’s life expectancy. The second indicator is the

required time of contributions to access a pension. We measure the number of months of

contribution or of covered employment required by law to qualify for a standard pension. The

third indicator is the percentage of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law to cover old-

age, disability, and death benefits. Our last indicator of the level of protection of the pension

system is the “replacement rate,” calculated as the percentage of the pre-retirement salary

covered by the standard old-age cash-benefit pension.10 We use a similar methodology for the

sub-indices of sickness and health, and of unemployment.



9
  Esping-Anderson used the share of the relevant population covered as a weight for the variables
in his index for 18 developed countries. This information is not available for a large sample of
countries, so we present the un-weighted data. The correlation between the Esping-Anderson
index and our index of social security laws for the 18 countries in his sample is 0.47.
10
 Countries vary in the type of pension system they have, including lump-sum systems, private
systems, and systems that provide fixed benefits to everyone. Table I describes the details of
how the calculations are made depending on the type of the pension system.

                                                 14
Independent Variables

        We assemble data on a number of potential determinants of labor regulations, as well as

some labor market outcomes. We measure the level of development using the (logarithm of) per

capita income in 1997 – the same year as when the regulations are measured.

        To measure government orientation, we expand the World Bank data base, which records

the fraction of years between 1975 and 1995 that a chief executive and the largest party in the

legislature in each country was rightist, leftist, or centrist. We present results for three variables

measuring leftist government (these variables yield the strongest results in favor of the political

theory): (i) chief executive of left or center orientation; (ii) legislature of left or center

orientation; and (iii) chief executive AND legislature of left or center orientation. We rely on

union density and the percentage of the labor force covered by collective agreements as proxies

for the influence of labor interest groups.

        To measure political constraints, we take from Djankov et al. (2002) constraints on

executive power, effectiveness of legislature, and autocracy. To measure economic constraints,

we take from Frankel and Romer (1999) actual trade openness in 1985, geographic openness,

and factor accumulation openness. To test legal theories, we use the legal origin of commercial

laws from La Porta et al. (1999). Labor market outcomes include the size of the unofficial

economy, labor force participation, unemployment including that of the young, and a crude

measure of relative wages of protected and unprotected workers.



IV. A Look at the Data




                                                   15
       Table II presents the sub-indices and indices of employment protection and industrial

relation laws for each country in the sample. Countries are ordered by per capita income in

1997 and divided into the poorest quartile, the next 50 percent, and the richest quartile. We also

compare the means and the medians of the various sub-indices and indices across income groups.

Recall that all variables are coded so higher values mean more protection/regulation.

       A comparison of New Zealand and Portugal, two countries of roughly similar incomes

close to the top of the middle group, illustrates our indices. In the area of employment laws,

fixed term contracts can be entered in New Zealand for any reason, and there is no maximum

duration period provided by law. In Portugal, such contracts are allowed only for specific

situations (such as substitution for another worker or seasonal activity) and are temporary in

nature. The Portuguese Constitution regulates working times and leaves, remuneration, and

working conditions, matters that in New Zealand are normally regulated by collective bargaining

and individual employment contracts. Premium for overtime work in Portugal ranges from 50%

to 75%, there are restrictions on night work, and there are 24 days of paid annual leave. New

Zealand mandates no premium for overtime work, there are no restrictions on night work, and

paid annual leave is 15 days. New Zealand allows “contracts at will,” which can be terminated

with notice by either party without cause. Portugal has a public policy list of fair grounds for

termination and stringent procedural limitations on dismissal, such as mandatory notification of

the government and priority rules for re-employment of redundant workers. In New Zealand,

“reasonable notice” is required to dismiss a worker, in Portugal the length of such notice is

mandated by law. The employment laws index in Portugal is 2.36 (one of the highest in the

world); in New Zealand it is 1.06 (one of the lowest in the world).




                                                16
        In the area of industrial relations laws, the Portuguese Constitution includes the rights to

engage in collective bargaining and collective disputes, the right to form trade unions, and the

rights of such unions to participate in the management of individual companies and in greater

political issues and bodies. Employer defenses against strikes are prohibited by the Constitution.

Employers have a legal duty to bargain with unions, collective agreements are extended to third

parties by law, workers councils are mandatory, and employer lockouts are prohibited. In New

Zealand, none of these issues are covered in the Constitution, and most are not even regulated by

law. Employers have no legal obligation to bargain with unions, collective agreements are not

legally extended, labor participation in management is not mandatory, and employer lockouts are

allowed. Portugal’s collective relations laws index is 2.26, compared to 0.43 for New Zealand.

        Finally, although social security is regulated by the Constitution in Portugal but not in

New Zealand, both countries have similar – and generous – social security systems, with each

scoring 2.15. We show below that New Zealand and Portugal are representative of broader

patterns in the data.

        As Table II shows, most countries restrict alternative employment contracts, conditions

of employment, and job security. There is little evidence of any major difference in regulation

between the poorest and the middle income countries, but there is clear evidence that the richest

countries, if anything, protect employment less.

        With respect to industrial relations laws, collective bargaining mandates are extremely

common, but appear to be more so in middle income countries than in either the poorest or the

richest countries. Worker participation in management is uncommon everywhere. The

regulation of collective disputes is similar across income groups. For the overall index of




                                                 17
regulation of industrial relations, collective bargaining mandates dominate, and show the greatest

empowerment of collective bargaining in the middle income countries.

        Table III focuses on social security protections. Here the results are clear: richer

countries have more extensive social security protection in all areas, including old age, disability

and death, sickness, and unemployment. Indeed, few poor nations have social security programs

for sickness (54%) and unemployment (27%) as compared to the almost 100% availability of

these programs in the richest countries. The three sub-indices describing the scope of social

security benefits tell a similar story.

        Table IV presents the correlations among our variables. First, looking across countries,

the correlation between our index of employment laws and that of social security laws is 0.0746,

which argues against the view that regulation and social insurance are substitutes. Second,

leftism and legal origin are weakly correlated other than in socialist countries. This allows us to

empirically separate the role of leftist politics and legal traditions in shaping labor laws.



V. Testing the Theories

        In Table V, we examine the relationship between the protection of workers and legal

origin, holding income constant. We present the results for all three areas of law. The results

confirm our earlier finding that employment protection is generally weaker in richer countries,

regulation of industrial relations does not monotonically depend on income, and social security

protections increase sharply with income. The results further show that, relative to common law

countries, socialist and French legal origin countries mandate sharply higher employment

protection. German legal origin countries have somewhat higher employment protection than

do the common law countries (but not in the area of restricting employment contracts), while


                                                  18
Scandinavian countries are about the same as the common law countries. The magnitude of the

difference between common law and French civil law countries (holding GNP per capita

constant) is large: it is 1.25 times the difference between the richest and the poorest countries.

       In the area of industrial relations, we see a somewhat different pattern. As with worker

protection, socialist and French legal origin countries have sharply higher worker protection

through industrial relations laws than do the common law countries. But here, although the

evidence for the sub-indices is weak, German and Scandinavian law countries have more

protective collective relations laws than do the common law countries.

       In the area of social security, there is clear evidence of more generous regulation in the

socialist legal origin countries than in the common law countries (except in the area of old age

benefits). Next to the socialist countries, the Scandinavian countries have the most generous

social security systems relative to the common law countries. The difference between French

civil law and common law countries is less pronounced, and is the highest for sickness and

health benefits. There is no statistically significant difference between German legal origin and

common law countries in the generosity of social security schemes.

       Table V delivers a preliminary message. In the protection of workers through

employment and industrial relations laws, we see a repetition of a now well-documented result

that civil law countries, and especially French civil law countries, regulate markets more heavily

than do the common law countries (La Porta et al. 1999, Djankov et al. 2002). Perhaps the most

striking fact about these regressions is the high R2's: 52% for the employment laws index, 33%

for the industrial relations laws index, and 66% for of the social security laws index (where per

capita income has significant explanatory power).




                                                 19
       Table VI examines the effect of left political power on the protection of workers. First,

countries with longer histories of leftist or centrist governments between 1975 and 1995 have

heavier regulation of labor markets, as measured by either employment or industrial relations

laws. In addition, on any measure of leftist/centrist government, countries with a longer history

of such government have more generous social security laws.11 Second, a higher percentage of

the labor force covered by collective agreements is associated with more protective employment

and industrial relations laws, though not with more generous social security systems. In

contrast, union density is associated with more generous social security systems although it does

not influence labor laws significantly. Third, the explanatory power of the political variables is

sharply lower than that of legal origins in Table V. The bottom line of Table VI is that the

measures of leftism are associated with heavier labor regulation, although their explanatory

power is smaller than that of legal origin.

       Table VII presents the results of a horse race between legal origins and measures of

leftist government. We run these regressions without socialist countries, since law and politics

are nearly perfectly correlated among those countries. Except for social security laws, where

there is marginal evidence of greater generosity in more leftist countries, the effect of our

political variables on labor laws disappears. On the other hand, the effects of legal origins

remain highly statistically significant, and the coefficients hardly change. We conclude that the

11
  These results also hold, although at lower level of statistical significance, if we use the pure
leftist government variables (rather than the combination of leftist and centrist governments). As
an additional robustness check, on the theory that many labor laws were adopted before 1975,
we rerun these regressions using a new data set on political coloration of governments starting in
1928. For these longer horizon variables, there is no evidence that the fraction of years that the
leftist (or leftist/centrist) executives, or legislatures, or both, spent in office has influenced the
structure of employment and collective relations laws. All measures of leftist power continue to
be associated with more generous social security regimes, a fact that undermines the claim that
we have a poor measure of leftist power.

                                                 20
effects of legal origin on the regulation of labor are much larger and more pronounced than those

of politics.12

         Several findings emerge from this section. First, socialist and French legal origin

countries are more interventionist in their employment protection and industrial relations laws

than are common law countries. Second, leftist government and higher union influence are

associated with heavier regulation of labor markets, although these results are not consistent

across specifications and do not survive the inclusion of legal origin in the regression. The

evidence so far provides strong support for legal theories, is consistent with a particular version

of the efficiency theory, and does not lend much support for the political theory. Moreover, the

results (including the correlations) reject the view that legal origin and leftism are the same

thing.



VI. Further Tests

         In this section, we examine four additional pieces of evidence bearing on alternative

theories. First, we ask whether political and economic constraints on government reduce the

regulation of labor, as the political theory would predict. Second, we ask whether politics

matters for regulation within legal origin, which is a hybrid legal/political hypothesis. In

addition, we present some evidence bearing on the strong prediction of the legal theory, namely

that countries have regulatory styles, and that therefore there should be a strong correlation

across countries of the extent of regulation of different activities. Finally, we examine some of


12
  We also considered the effects of the religious composition of the population in 1900 -- our
proxy for culture -- on contemporary labor laws. There are a few statistically significant
coefficients indicating that catholic countries have more protective labor laws, but the evidence
is weak, and does not survive a horse race with legal origin.

                                                 21
the consequences of labor regulation with the twin goals of testing the efficiency theories and of

understanding who gains and loses from the regulation of labor.



Constraints on Government

       Under the political theory, a more constrained executive would pursue less aggressive

policies favoring his supporters at the expense of others, such as the regulation of labor.

Constraints can come from politics itself: autocrats are less constrained than elected officials,

effective legislatures can restrain the sovereign, constitutions may include checks and balances

(Brennan and Buchanan 1980, Henisz 2000, La Porta et al. 2003b). Alternatively, constraints

can come from markets, and in particular, openness to trade raises the cost of labor market

intervention and thus may reduce it (Ades and DiTella 1999, Rajan and Zingales 2003).13 The

prediction of the political theory is that such constraints would be associated with lower levels of

government regulation of labor, other things equal.

       Table VIII presents the correlations between our six measures of economic and political

constraints and other determinants of the regulation of labor. The three measures of political

constraints are strongly correlated with each other, as well as with the level of per capita income.

This fact presents a problem for testing political constraints theories, since the measures of

political constraints may just reflect some other country characteristic associated with

development. The three measures of trade openness are also highly correlated with each other,

but only factor accumulation openness is highly correlated with income. On the other hand,




13
 Openness to trade may be endogenous, but we follow Frankel and Romer (1999) in also using a
measure of “natural openness,” which is determined by a country’s geography.

                                                 22
except for the fact that governments in socialist countries face few economic and political

constraints, the constraint variables are not strongly correlated with legal origins.

       Table IX examines the effect of constraints on government on regulation. The table

shows that more constrained governments have lighter regulation of labor markets in both the

employment protection and industrial relations areas. The results hold as well if we exclude

socialist countries. Basically, every measure of constraints except factor accumulation openness

works. The constraints variables also eliminate the negative effect of development on

employment regulation. Put differently, that effect might have come from the fact that richer

countries have more constrained governments. Despite the statistical significance of the

coefficients, the explanatory power of these constraints is sharply lower than that of legal

origins. With respect to social security, the evidence is less consistent, but again shows that more

constrained governments have smaller systems.

       In Table X, we restrict the sample to non-socialist countries, and check whether these

effects of political and economic constraints remain significant once we control for legal origin.

The results for political constraints disappear, those for openness become a bit stronger. Legal

origin remains a very important determinant of the patterns of labor market regulation.



Regulation Within Legal Origin

       It may be possible to treat the legal and the political theories as complementary. The

former holds that civil law countries, particularly the French civil law countries, specialize in

regulation as a means of social control of business, whereas the common law countries specialize

in contracts and markets. Because of transplantation, these patterns of institutional

specialization are largely exogenous. One could further argue that, because of such


                                                 23
specialization, French civil law countries are more likely to respond to the increased political

demand for regulation by having more of it than do the common law countries, since the

marginal social cost of providing such regulation is lower. Put differently, civil law provides a

ready tool box for regulation, whereas common law is not nearly as user-friendly because of its

emphasis on contracts. This logic predicts that there should be a stronger positive association

between leftism and regulation in French civil law than in common law countries.

        Table XI shows that, indeed, within French civil law but not within common law

countries, leftism is associated with more protective employment and industrial relations laws.

The difference in slope coefficients on our measures of leftism between common and French

civil law countries is typically statistically significant. This result still puts the legal theory

center stage, and surely does not support the view that legal origin is a proxy for social

democracy. On the other hand, the result points to a hybrid view that within the institutional

technologies dictated by legal systems, politics indeed plays a role in regulatory choice.



Regulation Across Activities

        One of the strongest implications of the legal hypothesis is that societies have regulatory

styles shaped in part by their legal systems, and that therefore societies that regulate one activity

are also expected to regulate others, which might be totally unrelated. We have already shown

in earlier work that French civil law countries regulate entry of new firms, dispute resolution in

courts, and other activities more heavily than do common law countries (La Porta et al. 1999,

Djankov et al. 2002, 2003a). The findings of this paper are broadly consistent with this research.




                                                   24
          Table XII presents the correlations between our new measures of regulation of labor

markets and the measures of regulation of entry from Djankov et al. (2002) and measures of

legal formalism from Djankov et al. (2003a). The data show that all these aspects of regulation

go together, even though the methodologies of data collection differ tremendously across the

three studies. The correlation between the employment law index and the judicial formalism

index is 0.48 for one case, and 0.58 for the other. The correlation between the employment law

index and the logarithm of the number of steps required to start a business is 0.62. These

correlations fall by about 0.05 if we exclude socialist countries, but remain highly statistically

significant. Regulatory style is pervasive across activities -- a striking confirmation of the legal

theory.

          Combined with the previous findings of the interaction between legal origin and politics,

these results suggest that countries have regulatory styles, shaped primarily by transplantation of

legal systems. Politics plays a role within the general regulatory framework presented by these

styles, but it is neither as important as the styles themselves, nor is it a proxy for them.



Outcomes

          Finally, we consider some of the consequences of the regulation of labor. Theoretically,

this is of interest for two reasons. First, efficiency theories predict that heavier regulation of

labor markets should be associated with better, and certainly not worse, labor market outcomes.

This prediction has been contradicted by a variety of empirical studies from Lazear (1990) to

Besley and Burgess (2002), and here we confirm their findings. Second, if the regulation of

labor is damaging at least to some workers, then who benefits from it? Put differently, is there

political support for the heavier regulation of labor, or does legal origin simply provide a


                                                  25
politically unsupported “technology” for the social control of labor markets? Since, as we have

already shown, more leftist governments in French civil law countries regulate labor markets

more heavily, we expect to find some beneficiaries of such regulation.

       We look at several potential consequences of labor regulation. These include the size of

and the employment in the unofficial economy, male and female participation in the labor force,

and unemployment computed separately for everyone, and for male and female workers aged 20-

24. In addition, as a crude measure of relative wages of protected and unprotected workers, we

consider the average wage of machine operators relative to that of clerks and workers in craft

and related trades. All of these variables have related measurement problems, particularly for

the developing countries, where some employment is informal and is not recorded in official

statistics. Still, by looking at the various dimensions of the data, we hope to get a general picture.

       The results in Table XIII are consistent across specifications and reveal no evidence that

the regulation of labor is beneficial. An increase of the employment laws index by 1 point (from

New Zealand to Spain) raises the share of the unofficial economy in GDP by 6.72 percentage

points, the share of unofficial employment by 13.74 percentage points, and reduces labor force

participation of men and women by about 3 percentage points. It also raises the average

unemployment rate by nearly 3 percentage points, and that of young men by over 6 and young

women by nearly 10 percentage points. The adverse effects of regulation are only slightly

weaker for industrial relations laws, but are generally insignificant for social security laws.

       In addition to the especially large effects of the regulation of labor on the unofficial

economy and the unemployment of the young, Table XIII shows that heavier regulation is also

associated with higher wages of machine operators relative to those of clerks. These results

suggest indirectly that the older workers, employed in official sector and protected by the law,


                                                 26
are the likely beneficiaries of regulation. The costs of the regulation are borne

disproportionately by the younger workers, and those employed in the unofficial economy. The

heavier regulation of labor thus has its own political base: the older and better protected workers,

a finding broadly consistent with other research in labor economics (Blanchflower and Freeman

2000).

         Table XIV addresses the concern that labor laws are endogenous, and presents

instrumental variables regressions using legal origins as instruments. With the exception of the

results on the informal economy, which loose significance, the effect of employment laws on

outcomes becomes stronger. The fact that the exogenous component of labor laws reduces labor

force participation and raises unemployment is strong evidence against the efficiency theory.

         The results on outcomes point to a possible role of politics in shaping the patterns of

labor regulation. It remains the case that the most pervasive determinant of these patterns is the

origin of a country’s laws. But employment protection and industrial relations laws also appear

to affect different classes of workers differently, and as such may create a basis of political

support for the politicians who expand them. Our finding that leftist parties in French civil law

countries introduce more protective labor laws is consistent with this interpretation.



VII. Conclusion

         There are three broad theories of government regulation of labor. Efficiency theories

hold that regulations adjust to most efficiently address the problems of market failure. Political

theories hold that regulations are used by the political leaders to benefit themselves and their

allies. Legal theories hold that the patterns of regulation are shaped by each country’s legal




                                                  27
tradition, which is to a significant extent determined by transplantation of a few legal systems.

We examined the regulation of labor markets in 85 countries through the lens of these theories.

       The evidence is inconsistent with the efficiency theory since, contrary to its predictions,

poor countries regulate labor markets more than rich countries do, social security is not a

substitute for labor regulation, and such regulation has adverse consequences for unemployment,

labor force participation, and economic activity staying official. The evidence is also

inconsistent with a basic version of the political theory, which sees heavier regulation of labor as

a reflection of the political power of the left through either elected office or labor unions.

Although our measures of the power of the left, as well as our measures of political and

economic constraints on government, influence the patterns of regulation of labor, these effects

disappear once we control for the basic regulatory style determined by the legal tradition.

Finally, the evidence is broadly consistent with the legal theory, according to which patterns of

regulation across countries are shaped largely by their legal structure, which arrived to most

countries through transplantation of legal systems.

       These results do not mean that efficiency forces in regulation are unimportant, and indeed

our focus on labor markets and on a large sample of developing countries, which inherited their

regulatory styles, predisposes our findings against supporting the efficiency hypothesis. These

findings also do not mean that politics is unimportant, except to the extent that they reject the

view that civil law is nothing but a reflection of “social democracy”. Indeed, we show that

politics do influence the intensity of labor market regulation in French civil law countries, where

the basic regulatory style is vulnerable to political pressures. We also present some indirect

evidence that the older workers, and those more likely to be covered by the laws, are the likely




                                                  28
beneficiaries, and hence political supporters, of labor regulation. But politics plays the second

fiddle; the main determinant of the regulatory style is the historical origin of a country’s laws.

       This finding echoes our earlier results on the regulation of entry and on the formalism of

judicial procedures. These findings also showed that countries from different legal origins rely

on different institutional technologies for social control of business. A key result in the present

paper is the high correlation among our measures of regulation of different activities across

countries: countries that regulate entry also regulate labor markets and judicial proceedings. The

bottom line of this research is the centrality of institutional transplantation: countries have

regulatory styles that are pervasive across activities and shaped by the origin of their laws.




                                                  29
                                         References

Ades, Alberto, and Rafael Di Tella, 1999, “Rents, Competition, and Corruption,” American

       Economic Review 89, 982-993.

Beck, Thorsten, George Clarke, Alberto Groff, Philip Keefer, and Patrick Walsh, 2001, “New

      Tools and New Tests in Comparative Political Economy: The Database of Political

     Institutions,” World Bank Economic Review 15, 165-176.

Becker, Gary, 1983, “A Theory of Competition among Pressure Groups for Political Influence,”

       Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 371-400.

Becker, Gary, and Casey Mulligan, 2000, “Accounting for the Growth of Government,” Mimeo,

       University of Chicago Department of Economics.

Besley, Timothy, and Robin Burgess, 2002, “Can Labor Regulation Hinder Economic

       Performance? Evidence from India,” mimeo, London School of Economics.

Blanchard, Olivier, 2002, “Designing Labor Market Institutions,” mimeo, MIT.

Blanchflower, David, and Richard Freeman, eds., 2000, Youth Employment and Joblessness in

       Advanced Countries, Chicago: University of Chicago Press for the NBER.

Blanpain, Roger, Ed., 1977, International Encyclopaedia for Labour Law and Industrial

       Relations, Kluwer Law International: The Hague.

Brennan, Geoffrey, and James Buchanan, 1980, The Power to Tax: Analytical Foundations of

       the Fiscal Constitution. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.

Buchanan, James, and Gordon Tullock, 1962, The Calculus of Consent, Ann Arbor, MI:

       University of Michigan Press.

Chidzero, Anne-Marie, “Senegal” in Webster, Leila, and Peter Fidler, Editors, 1996, “The

       Informal Sector and Microfinance Institutions in West Africa,” The World Bank,


                                              30
       Washington DC.

Cihon, Patrick and James Castagnera 2001, Employment and Labor Law, South Western

       Educational Publishing.

Constitution of the Portuguese Republic. Found online at:

       <http://oncampus.richmond.edu/~jjones//confinder/const.htm>

Country Reports History. Found online at: <http://www.countryreports.org>

Demsetz, Harold 1967, “Toward a Theory of Property Rights,” American Economic Review

       Papers and Proceedings 57, 347-59.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2002, “The

       Regulation of Entry,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 117, 1-37.

Djankov, Simeon, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes and Andrei Shleifer, 2003a,

       “Courts,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 118, 457-522.

Djankov, Simeon, Edward Glaeser, Rafael La Porta, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei

       Shleifer, 2003b, “The New Comparative Economics,” Journal of Comparative

       Economics, forthcoming.

Esping-Anderson, Gøsta, 1990, The Three Worlds of Welfare Capitalism, Princeton, N.J.:

       Princeton University Press.

Esping-Anderson, Gøsta, 1999, Social Foundations of Postindustrial Economies, Oxford, U.K.:

       Oxford University Press.

Europa Year-Book, 1960-1974. London: Europa Pub. Co., Ltd.

Finer, Samuel, 1997, The History of Government, Vol. I-III. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge

       University Press.




                                              31
Fonseca, Raquel, Paloma Lopez-Garcia, and Christopher Pissarides, 2000, “Entrepreneurship,

       Start-up Costs and Employment,” European Economic Review 45, 692-705.

Forteza, Alvaro, and Martín Rama, 2000, “Labor Market “Rigidity” and the Success of

       Economic Reforms: Across more than One Hundred Countries,” mimeo, World Bank.

Frankel, Jeffrey and David Romer, 1999, “Does Trade Cause Growth,” American Economic

       Review 89, 379-399.

Freeman, Richard, and Remco Oostendorp, 2000, “Wages Around the World: Pay Across

       Occupations and Countries,” National Bureau of Economic Research, Working Paper

       8058.

Glaeser, Edward, Jose Scheinkman, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, “The Injustice of Inequality,”

       Journal of Monetary Economics: Carnegie-Rochester Series on Public Policy 50, 199-

       222.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer, 2002, “Legal Origins,” Quarterly Journal of Economics

       117, 1193-1230.

Glaeser, Edward, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003, “The Rise of the Regulatory State,” Journal of

       Economic Literature 41, 401-425.

Global Urban Indicator Database, 2000. Found online at:

       <http://www.urbanobservatory.org/indicators/database>

Hanami, Tadashi, 1985, Labor Laws and Industrial Relations in Japan, Boston: Kluwer Law and

       Taxation.

Heckman, James, and Carmen Pagés-Serra, 2000, “The Cost of Job Security Regulation:

       Evidence from Latin American Labor Markets,” Economia 2, 109-154

Henisz, Witold, 2000, “The Institutional Environment for Economic Growth,” Economic


                                              32
       and Politics 12, 1-31.

Hicks, Alex, 1999, Social Democracy and Welfare Capitalism, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.

Ichniowski, Casey, Richard Freeman, and Harrison Lauer, 1989, “Collective Bargaining Laws,

       Threat Effects, and the Determination of Police Compensation,” Journal of Labor

       Economics 7, 191-209.

International Labor Organization, 1999, Key Indicators of the Labor Market, Geneva,

       Switzerland.

International Labor Organization, 1994, 1995, Conditions of Work Digest, Geneva, Switzerland.

International Labor Organization, Laborsta. Found online at: <http://laborsta.ilo.org>

Jaggers, Keith and Monty G. Marshall, 2000. “Polity IV Project,” Center for International

       Development and Conflict Management, University of Maryland.

Kasnakoglu, Zehra, and Münür Yayla, 1999, “Unrecorded Economy in Turkey: A Monetary

       Approach,” in Tuncer Bulutay, ed., Informal Sector in Turkey (I), Ankara: SIS.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer, 2003a, “What Works in

       Securities Laws,” mimeo, Harvard University.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Christian Pop-Eleches, and Andrei Shleifer,

       2003b, “Judicial Checks and Balances,” mimeo, Harvard University.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1997, “Legal

       Determinants of External Finance,” Journal of Finance 52, 1131-1150.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1998, “Law

       and Finance,” Journal of Political Economy 106, 1113-55.

La Porta, Rafael, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny, 1999, “The

       Quality of Government,” Journal of Law, Economics, and Organization 15, 222-279.


                                               33
Lazear, Edward, 1990, “Job Security Provisions and Employment,” Quarterly Journal of

       Economics 105, 699-726.

Marx, Karl, 1974[1872], Das Kapital, London: Lawrence and Wishart.

Mulligan, Casey and Xavier Sala-I-Martin, 2000, “Measuring Aggregate Human Capital,”

       Journal of Economic Growth 5, 215-252.

Nicoletti, Giuseppe and Frederic Pryor, 2001, “Subjective and Objective Measures of the

       Extent of Governmental Regulations,” mimeo, OECD Economics Department.

Nicoletti, Giuseppe, Stefano Scarpetta, and Olivier Boylaud, 1999, “Summary Indicators of

       Product Market Regulation with and Extension to Employment Protection Legislation,”

       OECD Working Paper 226.

North, Douglass, 1981, Growth and Structural Change in Economic History, New York, NY:

       Norton.

OECD, 1994, Jobs Study, OECD, Paris, France.

Olson, Mancur, 1965, The Logic of Collective Action, Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press.

Olson, Mancur, 1993, “Dictatorship, Democracy, and Development,” American Political

       Science Review 87, 567-576.

Pagano, Marco and Paolo Volpin, 2000, “The Political Economy of Corporate Governance,”

       CSEF Working Paper 29.

Political Handbook of the World, 1928-1960 and 1963-1970. New York: Published for the

       Center for Comparative Political Research of the State University of New York at

       Binghamton and for the Council on Foreign Relations by McGraw-Hill Book Co.

Rajan, Raghuram and Luigi Zingales, 2003, “The Great Reversals: the Politics of Financial

       Development in the 20th Century,” Journal of Financial Economics, forthcoming.


                                              34
Roe, Mark, 2000, “Political Preconditions to Separating Ownership from Corporate Control,”

       Stanford Law Review 53, 539-606.

Sananikone, Ousa, “Burkina Faso” in Webster, Leila, and Peter Fidler, Eds., 1996, “The

       Informal Sector and Microfinance Institutions in West Africa,” The World Bank,

       Washington, DC.

Schneider, Friedrich, and Dominik Enste, 2000, “Shadow Economies: Size, Causes, and

       Consequences,” Journal of Economic Literature 38, 77-114.

Smith, Adam, 1976, [1776], An Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of

       Nations, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press.

Statesmen database. Found online at: <http://www.worldstatesmen.org>

The Cross-National Time-Series Data Archive. Found online at:

       <http://www.databanks.sitehosting.net/www/main.htm>

Turnham, David, Bernard Salome, and Antoine Schwartz, 1990, “The Informal Sector

       Revisited,” Paris, France: OECD.

United Nations, 1997, Human Development Report, New York : Oxford University Press.

U.S. Social Security Administration, 1999, Social Security Programs Throughout the World,

       SSA: Washington, DC. Found online at: http://www.ssa.gov/

World Bank, 2001, World Development Indicators, the World Bank: Washington, DC.




                                              35
                                                                  Table I
                                                        Description of the variables

The table describes the variables in the paper. Unless otherwise specified, the sources for the variables are the laws of each country.


             Variable                                                                Description

                                                                Employment laws
                                                        Alternative employment contracts
Part-time employment is            We define a ‘part-time worker’ as any employee working 20 hours per week. It includes people working 4
prohibited                         hours per day 5 days per week, and people working full time two and a half days per week. The second case
                                   is frequently known as a ‘temporary worker’. This variable equals one if part-time employment is prohibited
                                   by the labor laws. Equals zero if part-time work is expressly allowed or if labor laws are silent thereon.

Part-time workers are not exempt Equals one if a part-time worker working half the time of a full-time worker enjoys at least half of the benefits
from mandatory benefits of full- enjoyed by the full-time worker. The variable is also equal to one if part-time employment is prohibited by
time workers                     the labor laws. The variable equals zero if part-time workers are not entitled to: (i) at least half of the
                                 maximum hours of work, leaves, and overtime premiums; (ii) social security coverage (pensions, health,
                                 unemployment); or (iii) if there are entitlement thresholds of more than half the legally mandated regular work
                                 week for premiums, leaves, or social security coverage. In countries where there are minimum-earnings
                                 thresholds to obtain benefits (rather than time-based thresholds), the analysis is done considering a salary
                                 equal to half of the country's GNP per worker.
It is not easier or less costly to Equals one if part-time workers working half time enjoy at least half of the legal rights to advance notice and
terminate part-time workers than separation fees for the termination of the employment contract of full time workers. Equals zero otherwise.
full-time workers

Part-time contracts                Measures the protection of part-time workers in the labor law as the average of the preceding three variables.

Fixed-term contracts are only      The term ‘fixed-term contract’ refers to workers employed for fixed periods of weeks, months, or years. In
allowed for fixed-term tasks       many countries a person working for two or three days per week is considered a fixed-term, rather than a part-
                                   time, worker. This variable equals one if fixed-term contracts are allowed only: (i) for jobs that are temporary
                                   by nature; (ii)for temporary vacancies to replace a permanent worker in maternity or sickness leave; (iii)for
                                   training contracts; (iv) for seasonal work; and/or (v) if the law expressly states that the will of the parties
                                   involved in the contract is not a good enough reason for entering into a fixed-term contract. Equals zero
                                   otherwise.
Maximum duration of fixed-term Measures the maximum cumulative duration of fixed-term contracts. The variable is normalized from 0 to
contracts.                     1, where higher values mean lower allowed duration of fixed-term contracts (higher protection). If there is
                               no legally mandated ceiling or if fixed-term contracts may be renewed without limit, the variable equals zero.
                               The highest observation in our sample is 96 months and the lowest observation is 0 months.

Fixed-term contracts               Measures the protection of workers through limits set in the use of fixed-term contracts as the average of the
                                   preceding two variables.
The employment of family       Equals one if the employment of family members enjoys the protection of labor law, or if labor law is silent
members is not exempt from any regarding family members’ employment. Equals zero if the employment of family members is not subject to
aspect of the labor law        maximum hours of work, leaves, overtime premiums, advance notice and severance payment, social security
                               coverage, or non-salary benefits. This variable is coded without regard to our assumption on firm size.

Subindex: Alternative              Measures whether the law allows alternatives to the standard employment contract as the average score of:
employment contracts               (i) part-time contracts; (ii) fixed-term contracts; and (iii) the employment of family members is not exempt
                                   from any aspect of the labor law.

                                                           Conditions of employment
Mandatory minimum daily rest       Measures the mandatory minimum daily rest. This variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values
                                   mean higher duration of mandatory daily rest (higher protection). If there is no legally mandated ceiling, the
                                   variable equals zero. Legal limits may be defined either as mandatory minimum rest hours per day, or as
                                   mandatory maximum regular and overtime working hours per day. For the latter case, we subtract this number
                                   from 24 hours in a day to obtain the equivalent of the minimum of rest hours per day. The highest observation
                                   in our sample is 14 hours and the lowest observation is 5 hours, excluding the countries that have no limit.
             Variable                                                                Description

Maximum number of hours in a       Measures the maximum duration of the regular work week (excluding overtime). This variable is normalized
regular work week                  from 0 to 1, where higher values mean less hours of work (higher protection). If there is no legally mandated
                                   limit, the variable equals zero. The highest observation in our sample is 52 hours and the lowest observation
                                   is 37 hours.

Premium for overtime work          Measures the premium for overtime work, as defined by the law or mandatory collective agreement. This
                                   variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean higher premium (higher protection). If the law
                                   provides for a variable schedule of overtime premium, we code the basic premium for the first hour of
                                   overtime. The highest observation in our sample is 100% and the lowest observation is 0%.
There are restrictions on night    Equals one if by law or mandatory collective agreement: (i) there are restrictions on the maximum number
work                               of hours of work that can be performed at night; and/or (ii) if there are specific premiums for night-time work.
                                   Equals zero if night-time work is not subject to express limitations, i.e., if it is only subject to the general
                                   restrictions on the maximum length of the work day or work week, and the regular overtime premium. To
                                   code this variable we only consider specific regulations of night-time work and ignore regulations of work-
                                   shifts.

There are restrictions on "weekly Equals one if by law or mandatory collective agreement there are restrictions on work during the weekly
holiday" work                     holiday (Friday, Saturday, or Sunday, depending on the country). Restrictions include: (i) complete
                                  prohibition; (ii) express designation of a certain day of the week as weekly holiday, which the employer
                                  cannot change without workers' consent; (iii) specific maximum hours of work on such day; and (iv) special
                                  premiums for work on such day. Equals zero if work during the weekly holiday is: (i) allowed without
                                  restriction; or (ii) is only subject to the general limitations on the maximum length of the work week or work
                                  day and does not entail higher than regular overtime premiums.

Hours of work                      Measures the protection of the regulation of hours of work as the average of the preceding five variables.


Days of annual leave with pay in Measures the length of the annual paid leave in manufacturing after twenty years of employment. This
manufacturing                    variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean longer annual paid leave (higher protection).
                                 Equals zero if there is no minimum by law or mandatory collective agreement. If annual leave entails less
                                 than full pay, the number of days are discounted proportionally. The highest observation in our sample is 30
                                 days and the lowest is 0 days. We assume that 7 calendar days equal 5 working days.

Paid time-off for holidays is      Equals one if workers are granted paid time off for national or local holidays by law or mandatory collective
mandatory                          agreement. Equals zero otherwise.

Statutory duration of maternity    Measures the length of the statutory duration of maternity leave for normal delivery/birth of a normal child
leave with 100% earnings           with 100% of earnings. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean longer maternity
                                   leave (higher protection). Equals zero if maternity leave is unpaid. If payment is less than 100%, time is
                                   reduced proportionally. The highest observation in our sample is 12 months and the lowest observation is 0
                                   months. Source: ILO, Conditions of Work Digest, 1994.

Leaves                             Measures the protection of the regulation on leaves of absence as the average of the preceding three variables.


Mandatory minimum wage             Equals one if there is a mandatory minimum wage by law or mandatory collective agreement, and zero
                                   otherwise.
Conditions of employment in the Measures the degree to which the regulation of conditions of employment appears in the country's
constitution                    constitution. Equals one if a right to certain minimum conditions of employment is expressly granted by the
                                constitution. Equals 0.67 if the minimum conditions of employment are described as a matter of public policy
                                or public interest in the constitution (or mentioned within the chapter on rights). Equals 0.33 if conditions
                                of employment are otherwise mentioned in the constitution. Equals zero otherwise.

Subindex: Conditions of            Measures the protection in the law of conditions of employment as the average of: (i) hours of work; (ii)
employment                         leaves; (iii) mandatory minimum wage; and (iv) conditions of employment in the constitution.
             Variable                                                                  Description

                                                                   Job security
It is unfair to terminate the       Measures the parties' leeway to agree on the conditions of termination of the employment contract. Equals
employment contract without         one: (i) if the employer may not terminate the employment contract without cause; (ii) if the termination
cause                               without cause always entails a mandatory penalty; or (iii) if the law bans the parties to enter into employment
                                    contracts that may be terminated by either party entirely at will or with a simple advance notice without any
                                    mandatory penalty. Equals zero otherwise.

The law establishes a public        Equals one if the law establishes a public policy list of “fair” grounds for dismissal. Equals zero if there is no
policy list of “fair” grounds for   list of grounds for dismissal or if parties are allowed to contract out.
dismissal
Redundancy is not considered a      Equals one if redundancy (also known as retrenchment, termination for economic reasons, necessities of the
“fair” ground for dismissal         company, or objective causes) is not considered a “fair” ground for dismissal by law, or if such dismissal
                                    always entails a mandatory penalty. Equals zero otherwise.

Protection of grounds for           Measures the protection of the rules on grounds for dismissal as the average of the preceding three variables.
dismissal
The employer must notify a third Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, the employer must notify a third party (labor union,
party before dismissing a        workers' council or government agency) before dismissing a redundant worker. Equals zero if the employer
redundant employee               may dismiss a worker without notifying a third party, or if the employer may contract out of the prohibition.

The employer needs the approval Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, the employer needs the approval of a third party
of a third party to dismiss a   (labor union, workers' council or government agency) to dismiss a redundant worker. Equals zero if the
redundant worker                employer may dismiss a worker without the approval of a third party, or if the employer may contract out of
                                the prohibition.
The employer must notify a third Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, the employer must notify a third party (labor union,
party prior to a collective      workers' council, government agency) before dismissing more than one worker. Equals zero if the employer
dismissal                        may dismiss more than one worker without notifying a third party, or if the employer may contract out of the
                                 prohibition.
The employer needs the approval Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, the employer needs the approval of a third party
of a third party prior to a     (labor union, workers' council or government agency) prior to a collective (more than one worker) dismissal.
collective dismissal            Equals zero if the employer may dismiss more than one worker without third party approval, or if the
                                employer may contract out of the prohibition.
The law mandates retraining or      Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, the employer must provide relocation or retraining
replacement prior to dismissal      alternatives for redundant employees prior to dismissal. Equals zero otherwise.
There are priority rules applying Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, there are priority rules applying to dismissal or lay-
to dismissal or lay-offs          offs, i.e., in order to fire redundant employees, the employer must follow a specific order of seniority, marital
                                  status, number of dependants or other objective priority criteria. Equals zero otherwise.

There are priority rules applying Equals one if, by law or mandatory collective agreement, there are priority rules applying to re-employment.
to re-employment                  Equals zero if former redundant employees need not be considered for new positions (i.e. there are no priority
                                  rules for re-employment).

Protection of dismissal             Measures the protection of collective dismissal procedures as the average of the preceding seven variables.
procedures

Legally mandated notice period      Measures the length of the mandatory notice period for the dismissal of one redundant worker in
                                    manufacturing after twenty years of employment. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values
                                    mean longer notice (higher protection). Equals zero if there is no minimum notice period by law. The highest
                                    observation in our sample is 24 weeks and the lowest is 0 weeks.
Legally mandated severance          Measures the amount of mandatory severance payment (including mandatory indemnity) for the dismissal of
payment                             one redundant worker after twenty years of employment in manufacturing. The variable is normalized from
                                    0 to 1, where higher values mean higher amounts (higher protection). Equals zero if there is no severance
                                    payment by law. The highest observation in our sample is 28.5 months and the lowest is 0 months.
Notice and severance payment        Measures the protection of the notice period and the severance payment for the unilateral termination of the
                                    employment contract by the employer. This partial subindex is calculated as the average of the preceding two
                                    variables.
             Variable                                                                 Description

Right to job security in the        Measures the presence of rules on termination of the employment contract in the country's constitution.
constitution                        Equals one if a right to job security or to the stability in the employment relation is expressly granted by the
                                    constitution. Equals 0.67 if job security is described as a matter of public policy or public interest (or
                                    mentioned within the chapter on rights). Equals 0.33 if job security is otherwise mentioned in the constitution.
                                    Equals zero otherwise.

Subindex: Job security              Measures the protection of the rules governing the termination of the employment contract as the average of:
                                    (i) protection of grounds for dismissal; (ii) protection of dismissal procedures; (iii) notice and severance
                                    payment; and (iv) right to job security in the constitution.

Index: Employment laws              Measures the protection of labor and employment laws as the aggregate sum of the: (i) subindex of alternative
                                    employment contracts; (ii) subindex of conditions of employment; and (iii) subindex of job security.


                                                        Industrial (collective) relations laws

                                                          Collective bargaining
Employers have the legal duty to Equals one if employers have the legal duty to bargain and/or to reach an agreement with unions, workers
bargain with unions              councils or other organizations of workers. Equals zero if employers may lawfully refuse to bargain with
                                 workers. The variable only measures the duty to bargain, as opposed to the duty to bargain in good faith.

Collective contracts are extended Equals one if the law extends collective contracts to third parties at the national or sectoral level. Extensions
to third parties by law           may be automatic or subject to governmental approval. Equals zero if collective contracts may not be
                                  extended to non-signatory workers or unions, or if collective contracts may be extended only at the plant level.
                                  Mandatory administrative extensions of collective contracts are coded as equivalent to mandatory extensions
                                  by law.

Law allows closed shops             Equals one if the law allows closed shops, and zero otherwise. Closed shops are agreements providing for
                                    mandatory union membership, which are binding on non-signatory and new employees. Union security
                                    legislation in general includes the following measures: (1) pre-entry closed shops, where workers have to
                                    belong to a union prior to taking up a job; (2) post-entry closed shops (or union shops), where workers are
                                    forced to join a union after taking up a job; and (3) absolute preferences, where an employer has to give a job
                                    to a union member if equally qualified to another non-union candidate. We do not consider post-entry closed
                                    shops.

Labor union power                   Measures the statutory protection of unions as the average of the preceding three variables.


Right to unionization in the        Measures the protection of the right to form labor unions in the country's constitution. Equals one if a right
constitution                        to form labor unions is expressly granted by the constitution. Equals 0.67 if labor unions are described as a
                                    matter of public policy or public interest (or mentioned within the chapter on rights). Equals 0.33 if labor
                                    unions are otherwise mentioned in the constitution. Equals zero otherwise.

Right to collective bargaining in Measures the protection of the right to collective bargaining or the right to enter into collective labor contracts
the constitution                  in the country's constitution. Equals one if a right to collective bargaining is expressly granted by the
                                  constitution. Equals 0.67 if collective bargaining is described as a matter of public policy or public interest
                                  (or mentioned within the chapter on rights). Equals 0.33 if collective bargaining is otherwise mentioned in
                                  the constitution. Equals zero otherwise.

Subindex: Collective bargaining Measures the legal protection of the right to unionization and collective bargaining as the average of: (i) labor
                                union power; (ii) right to unionization in the constitution; and (iii) right to collective bargaining in the
                                constitution.




                                                       Worker participation in management
                Variable                                                                 Description

Workers and/or unions have a         Equals one if the law gives workers and/or unions the right to appoint members to the Boards of Directors of
right to appoint members to the      individual companies, and zero otherwise. This arrangement is usually associated with the “German” model
boards of directors                  of co-determination.

Workers councils are mandated        Equals one if workers councils, committees or equivalent bodies are mandated by law. Equals zero if workers
by law                               councils are not regulated by law or if their creation is voluntary for the employer. Workers councils are
                                     institutions of employers and workers created for the discussion of company's policies affecting workers at
                                     the company level. This arrangement is sometimes called the “Swedish” model. The employer still has the
                                     sole right to decide on the operations of the company, but must negotiate and decide all matters affecting
                                     workers within the framework of workers councils.

Worker participation by law          Measures the statutory rights of workers to participate in the management of the companies as the average of
                                     the preceding two variables.

Right to participation in            Measures the protection of the workers' right to participation in management in the country's constitution.
management in the constitution       Equals one if a right to participation in management is expressly granted by the constitution. Equals 0.67 if
                                     participation in management is described as a matter of public policy or public interest (or mentioned within
                                     the chapter on rights). Equals 0.33 if participation in management is otherwise mentioned in the constitution.
                                     Equals zero otherwise.

Subindex: Worker participation       Measures the legal rights of workers to participate in the management of companies as the average of: (i)
in management                        worker participation by law; and (ii) right to worker participation in management in the constitution.


                                                                  Collective disputes

Workers have the right to strike     Equals one if the laws grant workers the right or the freedom to strike, and zero otherwise.

Wildcat strikes are legal            Equals one if wildcat strikes are legal, and zero otherwise. Wildcat strikes are strikes not authorized by the
                                     labor union or the assembly of workers.

Political strikes are legal          Equals one if political strikes are legal, and zero otherwise. Political strikes are defined as strikes for political
                                     reasons or to protest government's policy, i.e., non work-related issues.
Sympathy / solidarity / secondary Equals one if the law allows sympathy, solidarity or secondary strikes used to force decisions affecting
strikes are legal                 workers other than those joining the strike, and zero otherwise. Sympathy or solidarity strikes are strikes by
                                  union members or workers who have no grievances against their employer, but who want to show solidarity
                                  with another union or workers. Secondary strikes are those against another employer who has business
                                  dealings with the employer involved in a dispute with the union or workers.

Legal strikes                        Measures the protection of the right to strike in the law as the average of the preceding four variables.


No mandatory waiting period or       Equals one if by law there is no mandatory waiting period or notification requirement before strikes can occur,
notification requirement before      and zero otherwise.
strikes can occur

A strike is not illegal even if there Equals one if a strike is not illegal even if there is a collective agreement in force, and zero otherwise.
is a collective agreement in force

Laws do not mandate                  Equals one if laws do not mandate conciliation procedures or other alternative-dispute-resolution mechanisms
conciliation procedures before       (other than binding arbitration) before the strike, and zero otherwise.
a strike

Procedural restrictions to strikes   Measures the absence of procedural restrictions to the right to strike in the law as the average of the preceding
                                     three variables.

Employer lockouts are not            Equals one if employers' lockouts (strikes by employers) are not allowed, and zero otherwise. Lockouts may
allowed                              be offensive (when they are not provoked by workers) or defensive.
             Variable                                                                   Description

Employers are not allowed to fire Equals one if the law prohibits employers to fire striking workers or to hire replacement labor to maintain the
or replace striking workers       plant in operation during a non-violent and non-political strike. Equals zero otherwise.
Employer defenses                   Measures the powers of employers during a collective dispute as the average of the preceding two variables.


Compulsory third party             Equals one if the parties to a labor dispute are legally required to seek third party arbitration or the government
arbitration during a labor dispute is always entitled to impose compulsory arbitration on them. Equals zero otherwise. The term ‘compulsory
is mandated by law                 arbitration’ refers to arbitration of private disputes against the will of the parties. It may protect workers by
                                   granting them an alternative to costly strikes in case of deadlocks in the negotiation process, but it may also
                                   limit the workers’ right to strike.

Right to industrial action in the   Measures the protection of the right to industrial action (i.e. strike, go-slow or work-to-rule) in the country's
constitution                        constitution. It equals one a right to industrial action is expressly granted by the constitution. Equals 0.67
                                    if strikes are described as a matter of public policy or public interest (or mentioned within the chapter on
                                    rights). Equals 0.33 if strikes are otherwise mentioned in the constitution. Equals zero otherwise.

Subindex: Collective disputes       Measures the protection of workers during a collective dispute as the average of: (i) legal strikes; (ii)
                                    procedural restrictions to strikes; (iii) employer defenses; (iv) compulsory third party arbitration during a labor
                                    dispute; and (v) right to industrial action in the constitution.

Index: Industrial (collective)      Measures the protection of industrial (collective) relations laws as the sum of the: (i) subindex of collective
relations laws                      bargaining; (ii) subindex of worker participation in management; and (iii) subindex of collective disputes.

                                                                 Social security laws

                                                       Old age, disability and death benefits

The Social Security system          Equals one if the social security system covers the risk of old age, disability and death, and zero otherwise.
covers the risk of old age,
disability and death
Difference between retirement       Measures the difference between the minimum legal age for normal retirement and the country's life
age and life expectancy             expectancy at birth. This variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean higher post-retirement
                                    life expectancy (higher protection). Normal retirement is the legally defined age for retirement with standard
                                    pension, and it excludes voluntary early or late retirement schemes. Equals zero if life expectancy is lower
                                    than retirement age. The highest observation in our sample is 23.8 years and the lowest is 0 years. Source:
                                    constructed using data from the laws of each country and the Human Development Report, 1997.

Months of contributions or     Measures the number of months of contributions or employment legally required for normal retirement. The
employment required for normal variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean less contribution (higher protection). The
retirement by law              highest observation in our sample is 540 months and the lowest is 0 months. Normal retirement is the legally
                               defined age for retirement with standard pension, and it excludes voluntary early or late retirement schemes.
                               If the law requires the worker to have a combination of certain number of months of work and a different
                               number of months of contributions, we use the higher of the two figures since this is the one that is binding.
                               Lump-sum and private pension systems do not define the number of months of contributions for normal
                               retirement by law. In such cases, the amount of the pension solely depends on the number of months of
                               contributions, thus we assume twenty years of contributions for normal retirement.

Percentage of the worker's          Measures the share of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law to cover old-age, disability, and death
monthly salary deducted by law      benefits. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean lower deductions (higher
to cover old-age and disability     protection). If the risk of disability and death is not included in the contribution for old-age pension, we add
benefits                            the individual components. The highest observation in our sample is 20% and the lowest is 0%. In some
                                    countries the social security contribution for old age, disability and death benefits also covers sickness and
                                    health benefits and/or unemployment benefits. In such cases, we calculate the share of contributions for each
                                    benefit for the average country in our sample, and apportion the total contribution among the several risks
                                    covered accordingly.
             Variable                                                               Description

Percentage of the pre-retirement   This variable is the equivalent to the "replacement rate", which is the percentage of the pre-retirement salary
salary covered by the old-age      covered by the average old-age cash-benefit pension. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher
cash-benefit pension               values mean higher percentage (higher protection). The highest observation in our sample is 90% and the
                                   lowest is 0%. For the countries that provide workers more than 12 pension payments a year, we add up the
                                   amount of all the payments and divided the total by 12 to get the equivalent "monthly" cash benefit pension.
                                   Where the pension plan provided for fixed monthly payments, rather than a percentage, the replacement rate
                                   is calculated using a pre-retirement salary equal to the country's GNP per worker. For lump-sum systems,
                                   where at the time of retirement a one-time payment is made equal to the worker's contributions plus accrued
                                   interest, the monthly old-age cash-benefit pension is calculated using the lump-sum payment divided by the
                                   difference between the average life expectancy and retirement age in months. As in the case of fixed monthly
                                   payment systems, the pre-retirement salary is calculated to be equal to the country's GNP per worker. The
                                   interest used in the calculation is the average monthly Libor rate over the previous ten years. The same
                                   methodology as in the lump-sum systems is applied to the private pension systems. If there are more than 12
                                   pension payments per year we adjust the percentage accordingly.

Subindex: Old age, disability      Measures the level of old age, disability and death benefits as the average of the preceding four variables.
and death benefits
                                                          Sickness and health benefits

The social security system         Equals one if the social security system covers the risk of sickness and zero otherwise.
covers the risk of sickness
Months of contributions or         Measures the number of months of contributions or employment legally required to qualify for sickness
employment required to qualify     benefits. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean less contribution (higher
for sickness benefits by law       protection). If the law requires the worker to have a combination of certain number of months of work and
                                   a different number of months of contributions, we use the higher of the two figures since this is the one that
                                   is binding. The highest observation in our sample is 12 months and the lowest is 0 months.

Percentage of the worker's         Measures the share of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law to cover sickness and health benefits. The
monthly salary deducted by law     variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean lower deductions (higher protection). If the risks
to cover sickness and health       of sickness and health demand separate contributions, we add the individual components. The highest
benefits                           observation in our sample is 11.8% and the lowest observation is 0%. In some countries the social security
                                   contribution for old age, disability and death benefits also covers sickness and health benefits and/or
                                   unemployment benefits. In such cases, we calculate the share of contributions for each benefit for the average
                                   country in our sample, and apportion the total contribution among the several risks covered accordingly.

Waiting period for sickness        Measures the waiting period for obtaining sickness cash benefits from the first day of sickness. The variable
benefits                           is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean lower waiting periods (higher protection). The waiting
                                   period is the number of days before a person is legally entitled to receive sickness benefits. The highest
                                   observation in our sample is 42 days and the lowest observation is 0 days.
Percentage of the salary covered Measures the percentage of the salary covered by the average sickness cash benefit for a two-month sickness
by sickness cash benefits for a  spell. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean higher percentage of salary covered
two-month sickness spell         (higher protection). If sickness benefits last less than 2 months, the percentage of the salary by sickness
                                 benefits is discounted proportionally. The highest observation in our sample is 100% and the lowest
                                 observation is 0%. Sickness cash benefits are defined in some countries as a fixed amount in local currency,
                                 rather than as a percentage. In such cases, the percentage of the salary covered is calculated based on a salary
                                 equal to the country's GNP per worker.
Subindex: Sickness and health      Measures the level of sickness and health benefit as the average of the preceding four variables.
benefits
                                                          Unemployment benefits
The Social Security system      Equals one if the social security system covers the risk of unemployment, and zero otherwise.
covers the risk of unemployment

Months of contributions or         Measures the number of months of contributions or employment legally required to qualify for unemployment
employment required to qualify     benefits. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean less contribution (higher
for unemployment benefits by       protection). If the law requires the worker to have a combination of certain number of months of work and
law                                a different number of months of contributions, we use the higher of the two figures since this is the one that
                                   is binding. The highest observation in our sample is 120 months and the lowest observation is 0 months.
             Variable                                                                 Description

Percentage of the worker's         Measures the share of the worker's monthly salary deducted by law to cover unemployment benefits. The
monthly salary deducted by         variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean lower deductions (higher protection). The
law to cover unemployment          highest observation in our sample is 6.1% and the lowest observation is 0%. In some countries the social
benefits                           security contribution for old age, disability and death benefits also covers sickness and health benefits and/or
                                   unemployment benefits. In such cases, we calculate the share of contributions for each benefit for the average
                                   country in our sample, and apportion the total contribution among the several risks covered.

Waiting period for                 Measures the waiting period for obtaining unemployment benefits from the first day of unemployment. The
unemployment benefits              variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean lower waiting periods (higher protection). The
                                   waiting period is the number of days before a person is legally entitled to receive unemployment benefits. The
                                   highest observation in our sample is 70 days and the lowest observation is 0 days.

Percentage of the salary covered   Measures the percentage of the salary covered by unemployment benefits for in case of a one-year
by unemployment benefits in        unemployment spell. The variable is normalized from 0 to 1, where higher values mean higher percentage
case of a one-year                 of salary (higher protection). If the maximum the duration of benefits is less than one year, the percentage
unemployment spell                 of the annual salary is discounted proportionally. The highest observation in our sample is 90% and the
                                   lowest observation is 2.78%. Unemployment benefits are defined in some countries as a fixed amount in local
                                   currency, rather than as a percentage. In such cases, the percentage of the salary covered is calculated based
                                   on a salary equal to the country's GNP per worker.

Subindex: Unemployment             Measures the level of unemployment benefits as the average of the preceding four variables.
benefits
Average of dummies on coverage Equals the average of the three dummy variables for the existence of coverage, namely: (i) social security
of old age, sickness and       system covers the risk of old age, disability and death; (ii) social security system covers the risk of sickness
unemployment                   and health; and (iii) social security system covers the risk of unemployment.

Index: Social security laws        Measures social security benefits as the sum of the: (i) subindex of old age, disability and death benefits; (ii)
                                   subindex of sickness and health benefits; and (iii) subindex of unemployment benefits.

                                                                    Left power

Chief Executive's party has left   Measures the percentage of years between 1975 and 1995 during which the party of the country's chief
or center political orientation    executive had left or center orientation. If the country was not independent in the initial year of the period,
                                   we calculate the variable for the number of years since it became independent. For the countries that were
                                   part of a larger country in the initial year of the period and subsequently broke-up, we consider the political
                                   orientation of the larger country until the breakup. In the case of military regimes, where political affiliations
                                   are unclear, we classify the regime based on its policies. Source: Authors’ calculations based on descriptions
                                   and classifications in: Political Handbook of the World, Europa Yearbook, Statesmen database
                                   <http://www.worldstatesmen.org>, Country Reports History <http://www.countryreports.org>, Beck, Clarke,
                                   Groff, Keefer and Walsh [2001], various regional and country sources.


Largest party in congress has      Measures the percentage of years between 1975 and 1995 during which the largest party in congress had left
left or center political           or center orientation. If the country was not independent in the initial year of the period, we calculate the
orientation                        variable for the number of years since it became independent. For the countries that were part of a larger
                                   country in the initial year of the period and subsequently broke-up, we consider the political orientation of
                                   the larger country until the breakup. In the case of military regimes, where political affiliations are unclear,
                                   we classify the regime based on its policies. Source: Authors’ calculations based on descriptions and
                                   classifications in: Political Handbook of the World, Europa Yearbook, Statesmen database
                                   <http://www.worldstatesmen.org>,Country Reports History <http://www.countryreports.org>, Beck, Clarke,
                                   Groff, Keefer and Walsh [2001], various regional and country sources.
             Variable                                                               Description

Chief Executive and largest      Measures the percentage of years between 1975 and 1995 during which both the party of the chief executive
party in congress have left or   and the largest party in congress had left or center orientation. If the country was not independent in the initial
center political orientation     year of the period, we calculate the variable for the number of years since it became independent. For the
                                 countries that were part of a larger country in the initial year of the period and subsequently broke-up, we
                                 consider the political orientation of the larger country until the breakup. In the case of military regimes, where
                                 political affiliations are unclear, we classify the regime based on its policies. Source: Authors’ calculations
                                 based on descriptions and classifications in: Political Handbook of the World, Europa Yearbook, Statesmen
                                 database <http://www.worldstatesmen.org>, Country Reports History <http://www.countryreports.org>,
                                 Beck, Clarke, Groff, Keefer and Walsh [2001], various regional and country sources.

Union density                    Measures the percentage of the total work force affiliated to labor unions. Source: ILO, Laborsta
                                 <http://laborsta.ilo.org>, and The World Bank.
Percentage of the labor force    Measures the percentage of the total labor force covered by collective agreements. Source: ILO, Laborsta
covered by collective agreements <http://laborsta.ilo.org>, and The World Bank.

                                                      Political and economic constrains
Constraints on executive power   Index of constraints on the executive power based on the number of effective veto points in a country. Veto
                                 points include: (i) an effective legislature (represents two veto points in the case of bicameral systems); (ii)
                                 an independent judiciary; and (iii) a strong federal system. Average of the years 1945 through 1998. Source:
                                 Henisz [2000].
Effectivenessof legislature      Index of the effectiveness of the legislature. Ascending scale from 1 to 4 (1=no legislature; 2=largely
                                 ineffective; 3=partly effective; 4=effective). Average of the years 1945 through 1998. Source: The Cross-
                                 National Time-Series Data Archive <http://www.databanks.sitehosting.net/www/main.htm>.

Autocracy                        The “general closedness of political institutions.” Scale from 0 to 10, with 0 being low in autocracy and 10
                                 being high in autocracy. Average of the years 1945 through 1998. Source: Jaggers and Marshall, [2000].

Actual openness                  Trade share as a proportion of GDP in 1985 calculated using bilateral trade data. Source: Frankel and Romer
                                 [1999].
Geographic openness              Trade share as a proportion of GDP in 1985 calculated using bilateral trade data and adjusted by the
                                 geographic component of each country’s overall trade share. The geographic component of a country’s trade
                                 is the sum of the estimated geographic components of its bilateral trade with the rest of the countries in the
                                 world. Source: Frankel and Romer [1999].
Factor accumulation openness     Trade share as a proportion of GDP in 1985 calculated using bilateral trade data and adjusted by the country’s
                                 rates of factor accumulation. Source: Frankel and Romer [1999].

                                                                Outcomes
Size of the unofficial economy   Size of the shadow economy as a percentage of GDP (varying time periods). Source: Authors’ calculations
                                 based on averaging all estimates reported in Schneider and Enste (2000) for any given country, as well as
                                 Sananikone [1996] for Burkina Faso, Chidzero [1996] for Senegal, Turnham and Schwartz [1990] for
                                 Indonesia and Pakistan, and Kasnakoglu and Yayla [2000] for Turkey.

Employment in the unofficial     Share of the total labor force employed in the unofficial economy in the capital city of each country as a
economy                          percent of the official labor force. Figures are based on surveys and, for some countries, on econometric
                                 estimates. Source: Schneider [2000] and the Global Urban Indicators Database [2000]
                                 <http://www.urbanobservatory.org/indicators/database>.

Male participation rate in the   Male participation rate as a percentage of the total male population aged 15 to 64. Based on population
labor force 1990-1994            censuses or household surveys. Source: Forteza and Rama [2000].
Female participation rate in     Female participation rate as a percentage of the total female population aged 15 to 64. Based on
the labor force 1990-1994        population censuses or household surveys. Source: Forteza and Rama [2000].
Unemployment rate 1991-2000      Average unemployment rate as a percentage of the total labor force during 1991-2000. Source: Laborsta
                                 <http://laborsta.ilo.org>.
               Variable                                                              Description

Unemployed males 20-24 years       Unemployed males aged 20 to 24 as a percentage of the total active male population of the same age during
old / active males 20-24 years     1991-2000 period. Source: Laborsta <http://laborsta.ilo.org>.
old 1991-2000
Unemployed females 20-24           Unemployed females aged 20 to 24 as a percentage of the total active female population of the same age
years old / active females 20-24   during 1991-2000. Source: Laborsta <http://laborsta.ilo.org>.
years old 1991-2000

Average wages of machine           Average wages of machine operators across industries over those of clerks and workers in craft and related
operators / wages of clerks and    trades for the period 1990 to 1999. We use all 12 types of machine operators in the database including: (1)
workers in craft and related       cloth weaver, (2) sewing-machine operator, (3) clicker cutter, (4) shoe sewer, (5) paper-making-machine
trades 1990-1999                   operator, (6) machine compositor, (7) bookbinder, (8) mixing- and blending-machine operator (manufacture
                                   of industrial chemicals), (9) mixing- and blending-machine operator (manufacture of other chemical products),
                                   (10) metal-working machine setter, (11) machinery fitter-assembler and (12) card- and tape-punching-
                                   machine operator. The clerks and workers in craft and related trades we use are: (1) butcher, (2) building
                                   electrician, (3) bricklayer, (4) automobile mechanic and (5) stenographic typist (wholesale trade). To
                                   construct the variable we: (1) calculate individual wage ratios for each pair of machine operators and workers
                                   in craft, related trades and clerks for each year; (2) average each of these ratios across the 1990-1999 period
                                   to obtain the average relative wages for each pair of professions during the decade; finally (3) calculate the
                                   country average across all pairs of professions where machine operators are always the numerator and workers
                                   in craft and related trades or clerks are the denominator. Source: Freeman and Oostendorp [2000].

                                                                   Other Variables
Log of GNP per capita              Logarithm of GNP per capita in 1997, Atlas method, expressed in current US dollars. Source: World
                                   Development Indicators.
Legal origin                       Identifies the legal origin of the company law or commercial code of each country (English, French, Socialist,
                                   German, Scandinavian). Source: La Porta et al. [1999].
Court formalism index for the      The index measures substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases at lower-level civil trial
eviction of a non-paying tenant    courts, and is formed by adding up the following indices: (i) professionals vs. laymen, (ii) written vs. oral
                                   elements, (iii) legal justification, (iv) statutory regulation of evidence, (v) control of superior review, (vi)
                                   engagement formalities, and (vii) independent procedural actions. The index ranges from 0 to 7, where 7
                                   means a higher level of control or intervention in the judicial process. Source: Djankov et al. [2003].
Court formalism index for the      The index measures substantive and procedural statutory intervention in judicial cases at lower-level civil trial
collection of a bounced check      courts, and is formed by adding up the following indices: (i) professionals vs. laymen, (ii) written vs. oral
                                   elements, (iii) legal justification, (iv) statutory regulation of evidence, (v) control of superior review, (vi)
                                   engagement formalities, and (vii) independent procedural actions. The index ranges from 0 to 7, where 7
                                   means a higher level of control or intervention in the judicial process. Source: Djankov et al. [2003].

Ln number of steps to start a      Logarithm of the number of different procedures that a start-up has to comply with in order to obtain a legal
business                           status, i.e. to start operating as a legal entity. Source: Djankov et al. [2002].
Ln number of days to start a       Logarithm of the time it takes to obtain legal status to operate a firm, in business days. A week has five
business                           business days and a month has twenty two. Source: Djankov et al. [2002].
Ln cost to start a business / GDP Logarithm of the cost of obtaining legal status to operate a firm as a share of per capita GDP in 1999. It
per capita                        includes all identifiable official expenses (fees, costs of procedures and forms, photocopies, fiscal stamps,
                                  legal and notary charges, etc). The company is assumed to have a start-up capital of ten times per capita GDP
                                  in 1999. Source: Djankov et al. [2002].
                                                          Table II
                         Employment laws and industrial (collective) relations laws by GNP per capita
The table classifies countries by GNP per capita and shows the Employment laws index, the Industrial (collective) relations laws index, and
their respective subindices. The components of each subindex are not included in the table but can be found at http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.
All the variables are described in Table I.

                                                              Employment laws                                      Industrial (collective) relations laws

                                                                                                                       Subindex:
                                           Subindex:                                                                                                    Industrial
 Countries                                                Subindex:                                   Subindex:         Worker          Subindex:
                                           Alternative                    Subindex:     Employment                                                     (collective)
                                                         Conditions of                                Collective      participation     Collective
                                          employment                     Job security    laws index                                                     relations
                                                         employment                                   bargaining            in           disputes
                                            contracts                                                                                                  laws index
                                                                                                                      management

 Bottom 25 percentile of GNP per capita
 Mozambique                                   0.72           0.79           0.71           2.23          0.44              0.00             0.80            1.24
 Malawi                                       0.56           0.73           0.44           1.72          0.44              0.00             0.25            0.69
 Tanzania                                     0.58           0.68           0.50           1.76          0.11              0.25             0.38            0.74
 Burkina Faso                                 0.68           0.75           0.23           1.65          0.56              0.00             0.77            1.32
 Madagascar                                   0.68           0.77           0.56           2.01          0.78              0.00             0.62            1.39
 Mali                                         0.68           0.83           0.21           1.72          0.44              0.00             0.70            1.14
 Nigeria                                      0.44           0.64           0.26           1.35          0.22              0.00             0.25            0.47
 Uganda                                       0.44           0.77           0.50           1.71          0.78              0.00             0.32            1.09
 Vietnam                                      0.66           0.75           0.43           1.83          0.33              0.75             0.62            1.70
 Kenya                                        0.56           0.48           0.17           1.21          0.44              0.00             0.30            0.74
 Zambia                                       0.56           0.59           0.00           1.15          0.22              0.25             0.22            0.69
 Ghana                                        0.22           0.75           0.16           1.13          0.89              0.25             0.35            1.49
 Mongolia                                     0.56           0.63           0.19           1.38          0.17              0.00             0.40            0.57
 India                                        0.48           0.63           0.19           1.30          0.00              0.58             0.50            1.08
 Kyrgyz Republic                              0.78           0.87           0.36           2.01          0.33              0.25             0.57            1.15
 Pakistan                                     0.32           0.68           0.18           1.17          0.11              0.25             0.45            0.81
 Armenia                                      0.66           0.83           0.40           1.88          0.44              0.00             0.75            1.19
 Senegal                                      0.64           0.74           0.29           1.66          0.78              0.00             0.63            1.41
 Georgia                                      0.66           0.63           0.51           1.80          0.44              0.25             0.68            1.38
 China                                        0.56           0.65           0.42           1.62          0.00              1.00             0.40            1.40
 Zimbabwe                                     0.56           0.11           0.20           0.87          0.44              0.25             0.52            1.21
 Sri Lanka                                    0.56           0.52           0.42           1.50          0.44              0.25             0.58            1.28
 Bolivia                                      0.39           0.87           0.57           1.82          0.44              0.00             0.67            1.11
 Ukraine                                      0.72           0.84           0.68           2.24          0.56              0.25             0.62            1.42
 Indonesia                                    0.83           0.50           0.43           1.75          0.22              0.00             0.57            0.79
 Bulgaria                                     0.55           0.88           0.31           1.74          0.44              0.25             0.55            1.24
 Mean                                         0.58           0.69           0.36           1.62          0.40              0.19             0.52            1.11
 Median                                       0.56           0.73           0.38           1.72          0.44              0.13             0.56            1.17

 Middle 50 percentile of GNP per capita
 Egypt, Arab Rep.                            0.56            0.77           0.46           1.78          0.44              1.00             0.30            1.74
 Philippines                                 0.39            0.65           0.57           1.61          0.89              0.50             0.65            2.04
 Morocco                                     0.56            0.61           0.11           1.28          0.33              0.00             0.88            1.22
 Kazakstan                                   0.66            0.81           0.59           2.07          0.78              0.25             0.83            1.86
 Romania                                     0.65            0.81           0.30           1.76          0.89              0.00             0.70            1.59
 Ecuador                                     0.57            0.62           0.67           1.86          0.78              0.00             0.83            1.61
 Jordan                                      0.39            0.52           0.55           1.46          0.56              0.00             0.45            1.01
 Dominican Rep.                              0.56            0.77           0.33           1.65          0.56              0.00             0.38            0.94
 Jamaica                                     0.56            0.48           0.13           1.16          0.44              0.00             0.15            0.59
 Tunisia                                     0.81            0.49           0.38           1.68          0.44              0.25             0.32            1.01
 Lithuania                                   0.62            0.85           0.34           1.81          0.44              0.00             0.65            1.09
 Latvia                                      0.56            0.81           0.41           1.77          0.67              0.25             0.70            1.62
 Peru                                        0.23            0.74           0.70           1.67          0.89              0.58             0.82            2.29
 Colombia                                    0.56            0.82           0.62           1.99          0.78              0.33             0.70            1.81
 Russian Federation                          0.78            0.75           0.68           2.21          0.78              0.25             0.62            1.64
 Thailand                                    0.74            0.62           0.43           1.78          0.67              0.00             0.32            0.98
 Panama                                      0.87            0.84           0.67           2.38          0.44              0.00             0.80            1.24
 Turkey                                      0.72            0.81           0.20           1.74          0.89              0.00             0.55            1.44
 Lebanon                                     0.35            0.45           0.40           1.20          0.22              0.00             0.53            0.76
 Venezuela                                   0.85            0.84           0.64           2.32          0.89              0.00             0.57            1.46
 Poland                                      0.56            0.89           0.46           1.90          0.89              0.25             0.50            1.64
                                                           Employment laws                                            Industrial (collective) relations laws

                                                                                                                          Subindex:
                                        Subindex:                                                                                                          Industrial
 Countries                                             Subindex:                                         Subindex:         Worker          Subindex:
                                        Alternative                      Subindex:        Employment                                                      (collective)
                                                      Conditions of                                      Collective      participation     Collective
                                       employment                       Job security       laws index                                                      relations
                                                      employment                                         bargaining            in           disputes
                                         contracts                                                                                                        laws index
                                                                                                                         management
 South Africa                              0.56           0.33               0.16                 1.04      0.89              0.25             0.60            1.74
 Mexico                                    0.53           0.77               0.71                 2.01      0.89              0.00             0.72            1.61
 Slovak Republic                           0.55           0.86               0.61                 2.02      0.89              0.00             0.45            1.34
 Croatia                                   0.83           0.88               0.42                 2.12      0.56              0.25             0.45            1.26
 Hungary                                   0.62           0.90               0.22                 1.74      0.89              0.25             0.60            1.74
 Malaysia                                  0.56           0.22               0.09                 0.87      0.00              0.00             0.42            0.42
 Brazil                                    0.85           0.86               0.69                 2.40      0.56              0.75             0.55            1.86
 Chile                                     0.70           0.55               0.31                 1.56      0.78              0.00             0.40            1.18
 Czech Republic                            0.33           0.63               0.35                 1.31      0.22              0.25             0.30            0.77
 Uruguay                                   0.72           0.52               0.03                 1.27      0.56              0.00             0.47            1.02
 Argentina                                 0.39           0.72               0.44                 1.55      0.89              0.33             0.72            1.94
 Slovenia                                  0.68           0.87               0.45                 2.00      0.44              0.75             0.57            1.76
 Taiwan                                    0.87           0.54               0.34                 1.75      0.33              0.42             0.35            1.10
 Portugal                                  0.83           0.84               0.70                 2.36      0.89              0.75             0.62            2.26
 Korea                                     0.35           0.75               0.26                 1.36      0.89              0.25             0.55            1.69
 Greece                                    0.83           0.78               0.29                 1.89      0.44              0.25             0.57            1.26
 Spain                                     0.83           0.85               0.50                 2.18      0.89              0.58             0.65            2.12
 New Zealand                               0.56           0.47               0.04                 1.06      0.00              0.00             0.43            0.43
 Israel                                    0.56           0.56               0.16                 1.28      0.22              0.00             0.32            0.54
 Ireland                                   0.56           0.36               0.12                 1.04      0.56              0.00             0.43            0.99
 Mean                                      0.61           0.69               0.40                 1.70      0.62              0.21             0.55            1.38
 Median                                    0.56           0.75               0.41                 1.75      0.67              0.25             0.55            1.44

 Top 25 percentile of GNP per capita
 Canada                                    0.56           0.49               0.17                 1.22      0.11              0.00             0.22            0.33
 Italy                                     0.76           0.51               0.24                 1.51      0.78              0.50             0.75            2.03
 United Kingdom                            0.56           0.26               0.20                 1.02      0.00              0.00             0.25            0.25
 Australia                                 0.22           0.55               0.14                 0.92      0.22              0.00             0.52            0.74
 Hong Kong                                 0.56           0.19               0.01                 0.76      0.44              0.00             0.60            1.04
 Finland                                   0.78           0.38               0.57                 1.73      0.44              0.25             0.25            0.94
 France                                    0.74           0.54               0.31                 1.59      0.78              0.75             0.60            2.13
 Belgium                                   0.72           0.82               0.22                 1.77      0.44              0.25             0.33            1.03
 Netherlands                               0.56           0.76               0.37                 1.68      0.22              0.58             0.47            1.27
 Singapore                                 0.56           0.19               0.11                 0.85      0.11              0.00             0.53            0.64
 Sweden                                    0.37           0.30               0.39                 1.05      0.67              0.25             0.52            1.43
 Austria                                   0.22           0.40               0.18                 0.80      0.11              0.50             0.23            0.84
 Germany                                   0.72           0.35               0.50                 1.57      0.78              0.50             0.48            1.76
 United States                             0.56           0.29               0.08                 0.92      0.11              0.00             0.25            0.36
 Denmark                                   0.56           0.27               0.12                 0.95      0.33              0.50             0.20            1.03
 Norway                                    0.61           0.37               0.30                 1.29      0.56              1.00             0.58            2.14
 Japan                                     0.59           0.64               0.19                 1.42      1.00              0.00             0.53            1.53
 Switzerland                               0.56           0.46               0.26                 1.28      0.33              0.00             0.43            0.77
 Mean                                      0.57           0.43               0.24                 1.24      0.41              0.28             0.43            1.13
 Median                                    0.56           0.39               0.21                 1.25      0.39              0.25             0.48            1.03

 Mean all countries                        0.59           0.63               0.35                 1.58      0.51              0.22             0.51            1.24
 Median all countries                      0.56           0.65               0.34                 1.66      0.44              0.25             0.53            1.24

                                                                       Tests of Means (t-stats)
 Bottom 25 vs Middle 50 percentile        -1.19           -0.88             -2.07b            -1.97c       -3.47a             -0.33           -1.33            -2.84a
 Bottom 25 vs Top 25 percentile            0.11           4.70a              2.28b            3.46a         0.12              -0.51            1.49             0.29
 Middle 50 vs Top 25 percentile            1.24           6.10a              4.43a            5.67a        3.38a              -0.30           3.16a            2.63b
                                                                      Tests of Medians (z-stats)
 Bottom 25 vs Middle 50 percentile        -1.06           -1.40             -1.97c            -1.99b       -3.33a             -0.54           -1.22            -2.62a
 Bottom 25 vs Top 25 percentile            0.10           3.95a             2.26b              3.06a        0.22              -0.32            1.44             0.80
 Middle 50 vs Top 25 percentile            1.10           4.70a             3.94a              4.67a       3.12a               0.00           3.04a            2.47b


a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                              Table III
                                              Social security laws by GNP per capita
The table classifies countries by GNP per capita and shows the social security laws index and its subindices. The components of each
subindex are not included in the table but can be found at http://iicg.som.yale.edu/. All the variables are described in Table I.

                                            The Social
                                                            Subindex:      The social                   The Social
                                             security                                    Subindex:                                    Social
                                                             Old age,        security                 security system   Subindex:
                                          system covers                                   Sickness                                   security
 Countries                                                  disability   system covers                covers the risk Unemployment
                                          the risk of old                                and health                                    laws
                                                            and death      the risk of                       of          benefits
                                          age, disability                                 benefits                                    index
                                                             benefits       sickness                  unemployment
                                            and death
 Bottom 25 percentile of GNP per capita
 Mozambique                                      1            0.00             1           0.69             0            0.00         0.69
 Malawi                                          0            0.00             0           0.00             0            0.00         0.00
 Tanzania                                        1            0.26             0           0.00             0            0.00         0.26
 Burkina Faso                                    1            0.43            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.43
 Madagascar                                      1            0.56             0           0.00             0            0.00         0.56
 Mali                                            1            0.49             0           0.00             0            0.00         0.49
 Nigeria                                        1             0.55            1            0.48            0             0.00         1.03
 Uganda                                          1            0.33            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.33
 Vietnam                                         1            0.62             1           0.94            0             0.00         1.55
 Kenya                                          1             0.33            1            0.61            0             0.00         0.93
 Zambia                                         1             0.32            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.32
 Ghana                                          1             0.47            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.47
 Mongolia                                        1            0.00             1           0.85             1            0.82         1.68
 India                                          1             0.43            1            0.77            0             0.00         1.20
 Kyrgyz Republic                                 1            0.57             1           0.97             1            0.82         2.36
 Pakistan                                        1            0.53             1           0.86             0            0.00         1.39
 Armenia                                        1             0.47            1            0.98            1             0.75         2.21
 Senegal                                         1            0.51             1           0.64            0             0.00         1.15
 Georgia                                        1             0.60            0            0.00            1             0.75         1.35
 China                                           1            0.56             1           0.96            1             0.72         2.24
 Zimbabwe                                       1             0.48            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.48
 Sri Lanka                                      1             0.59            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.59
 Bolivia                                         1            0.23             1           0.88             0            0.00         1.11
 Ukraine                                        1             0.57            1            1.00            1             0.91         2.48
 Indonesia                                       1            0.53             0           0.00            0             0.00         0.53
 Bulgaria                                        1            0.60             1           0.81             1            0.84         2.25
 Mean                                          0.96           0.42           0.54          0.44           0.27           0.22         1.08
 Median                                        1.00           0.49           1.00          0.55           0.00           0.00         0.98

 Middle 50 percentile of GNP per capita
 Egypt                                          1             0.56            1            0.85            1             0.80         2.22
 Philippines                                    1             0.62            1            0.87            0             0.00         1.49
 Morocco                                        1             0.68            1            0.87            0             0.00         1.54
 Kazakhstan                                     1             0.56            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.56
 Romania                                        1             0.52            1            0.75            1             0.82         2.09
 Ecuador                                        1             0.62            1            0.79            1             0.49         1.90
 Jordan                                         1             0.63            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.63
 Dominican Republic                             1             0.63            1            0.81            0             0.00         1.44
 Jamaica                                        1             0.50            0            0.00            0             0.00         0.50
 Tunisia                                        1             0.68            1            0.75            1             0.69         2.12
 Lithuania                                      1             0.48            1            0.96            1             0.74         2.18
 Latvia                                         1             0.51            1            0.80            1             0.80         2.11
 Peru                                           1             0.42            1            0.82            0             0.00         1.24
 Colombia                                       1             0.66            1            0.79            1             0.85         2.30
 Russia                                         1             0.57            1            1.00            1             0.90         2.47
 Thailand                                       1             0.62            1            0.79            0             0.00         1.41
 Panama                                         1             0.69            1            0.86            1             0.60         2.15
 Turkey                                         1             0.67            1            0.72            0             0.00         1.38
 Lebanon                                        1             0.56            1            0.62            0             0.00         1.18
 Venezuela                                      1             0.64            1            0.84            1             0.63         2.11
 Poland                                         1             0.33            1            0.74            1             0.83         1.90
 South Africa                                   1             0.34            1            0.61            1             0.73         1.69
                                           The Social
                                                           Subindex:      The social                    The Social
                                            security                                     Subindex:                                    Social
                                                            Old age,        security                  security system   Subindex:
                                         system covers                                    Sickness                                   security
 Countries                                                 disability   system covers                 covers the risk Unemployment
                                         the risk of old                                 and health                                    laws
                                                           and death      the risk of                        of          benefits
                                         age, disability                                  benefits                                    index
                                                            benefits       sickness                   unemployment
                                           and death
 Mexico                                         1            0.73             1            0.80            0             0.00         1.52
 Slovak Republic                                1            0.56             1            0.86             1            0.79         2.22
 Croatia                                        1            0.49            1             0.76            1             0.80         2.05
 Hungary                                        1            0.55             1            0.83             1            0.78         2.17
 Malaysia                                       1            0.57             0            0.00             0            0.00         0.57
 Brazil                                         1            0.51             1            0.58            1             0.56         1.65
 Chile                                          1            0.46            1             0.79            1             0.73         1.98
 Czech Republic                                 1            0.51             1            0.80             1            0.74         2.05
 Uruguay                                        1            0.48            1             0.75            1             0.76         1.98
 Argentina                                      1            0.37            1             0.94            1             0.85         2.15
 Slovenia                                       1            0.53            1             0.82            1             0.86         2.21
 Taiwan                                         1            0.67            1             0.75            1             0.67         2.09
 Portugal                                       1            0.59            1             0.70            1             0.85         2.15
 Korea                                          1            0.60            1             0.72            1             0.72         2.03
 Greece                                         1            0.71            1             0.78            1             0.80         2.28
 Spain                                          1            0.73            1             0.76            1             0.81         2.30
 New Zealand                                    1            0.84             1            0.75            1             0.56         2.15
 Israel                                         1            0.69            1             0.84            1             0.85         2.37
 Ireland                                        1            0.72            1             0.59            1             0.76         2.08
 Mean                                         1.00           0.58           0.90           0.71           0.71           0.53         1.82
 Median                                       1.00           0.57           1.00           0.79           1.00           0.73         2.05

 Top 25 percentile of GNP per capita
 Canada                                         1            0.74             1            0.89             1            0.70         2.33
 Italy                                         1             0.64            1             0.88            1             0.73         2.26
 United Kingdom                                 1            0.61             1            0.68             1            0.78         2.06
 Australia                                      1            0.75             1            0.72            1             0.79         2.25
 Hong Kong                                      1            0.81            1             0.91            1             0.72         2.44
 Finland                                       1             0.71            1             0.81            1             0.91         2.43
 France                                        1             0.83            1             0.65            1             0.82         2.29
 Belgium                                        1            0.50             1            0.55             1            0.86         1.91
 Netherlands                                    1            0.48            1             0.68            1             0.68         1.83
 Singapore                                     1             0.56            1             0.80            0             0.00         1.36
 Sweden                                        1             0.82            1             0.85            1             0.94         2.61
 Austria                                       1             0.54            1             0.90            1             0.63         2.06
 Germany                                       1             0.69             1            0.53             1            0.78         2.00
 United States                                  1            0.57             1            0.67             1            0.66         1.90
 Denmark                                       1             0.82            1             0.99            1             0.90         2.70
 Norway                                        1             0.74            1             0.94            1             0.82         2.50
 Japan                                          1            0.61             1            0.54             1            0.82         1.97
 Switzerland                                    1            0.65            1             0.86            1             0.74         2.26
 Mean                                         1.00           0.67           1.00           0.77           0.94           0.74         2.18
 Median                                       1.00           0.67           1.00           0.81           1.00           0.78         2.26

 Mean all countries                           0.99           0.55           0.81           0.64           0.62           0.48         1.67
 Median all countries                         1.00           0.56           1.00           0.76           1.00           0.70         1.98

                                                             Tests of Means (t-stats)
 Bottom 25 vs Middle 50 percentile           -1.39           -3.82a        -3.62a          -3.49a        -3.62a         -3.52a        -4.86a
                                                                  a
 Bottom 25 vs Top 25 percentile              -0.98           -5.51         -4.47a          -3.76a        -6.93a         -6.72a        -7.27a
 Middle 50 vs Top 25 percentile               n.a.           -4.15a        -1.66           -0.92         -2.60b         -2.62b        -3.06a

                                                            Tests of Medians (z-stats)
 Bottom 25 vs Middle 50 percentile           -1.38           -3.35a        -3.32a          -2.34b        -3.31a          -3.09a       -3.85a
                                                                  a
 Bottom 25 vs Top 25 percentile              -0.98           -4.72         -3.71a          -2.39b        -4.76a          -4.27a       -4.69a
                                                                  a
 Middle 50 vs Top 25 percentile               n.a.           -3.57         -1.63           -0.23         -2.49b          -1.91c       -2.76a

a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level; na=not applicable.
                                                                                  Table IV
                                                 Correlations between regulation of labor, income, left power and legal origin
This table presents the pairwise correlations between the measures of regulation of labor, income, left power, and legal origin for the whole sample. All the variables are described in
Table I.

                                                                                                                            Percentage of
                                           Industrial   Social            Chief                       Chief
                                                                 Log                Legislature                              labor force
                             Employment (collective) security           executive                executive and Union                        English      Socialist    French       German
                                                               GNP per                 left or                               covered by
                              laws index relations laws laws              left or                legislature left density                 legal origin legal origin legal origin legal origin
                                                                capita              center party                              collective
                                              index     index          center party              or center party
                                                                                                                             agreements
Industrial (collective)
                               0.5172a
relations laws index
Social security laws
                               0.0746        0.2309
index

Log GNP per capita             -0.2861       0.0456     0.6686a

Chief executive left or
                               0.3271        0.2532     0.0118 -0.3660a
center party
Legislature left or
                               0.2932        0.2398     0.0744    -0.2571   0.8704a
center party
Chief executive and
legislature left or center     0.3210        0.2333     0.0014 -0.3802b     0.9791a     0.9003a
party

Union density                  0.0443        0.0780     0.3882c   0.2775     0.2454     0.2908        0.2313

Percentage of labor
force covered by               0.1888        0.3718     0.4118    0.3885     0.3442     0.3789        0.3105      0.4541
collective agreements

English legal origin           -0.5851a     -0.5661a    -0.3727a -0.0843    -0.2096     -0.2374      -0.1869     -0.2138       -0.3640


Socialist legal origin         0.3560c       0.1607     0.2601    -0.2182   0.4329a     0.3728c      0.4400a      0.2594       -0.0136       -0.3365


French legal origin            0.3927b       0.3468     -0.0851 -0.0568     -0.1135     -0.1305      -0.1560     -0.2789       0.2269       -0.4874a     -0.4169a


German legal origin            -0.1469       0.0225     0.1579    0.3474    -0.1863     -0.1073      -0.1681     -0.0036       0.0461        -0.1729     -0.1479      -0.2141

Scandinavian legal
                               -0.1772       0.0665     0.2840    0.3180     0.0789     0.1996        0.0918     0.5708a       0.1960        -0.1394     -0.1192      -0.1727      -0.0612
origin
a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                              Table V
                                                Regulation of labor and legal origin
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross section of countries. The dependent variables are the Employment laws index, the
Industrial (collective) relations laws index, the Social security laws index and their respective components. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. All the variables are described in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.


                                   Log GNP          Socialist        French         German       Scandinavian                   N
 Dependent                                                                                                       Constant
                                   per capita     legal origin     legal origin   legal origin    legal origin                 [R2]
 variables:
                                                            Panel A: Employment laws and legal origin
 Employment                         -0.0496b         0.6318a       0.5937a     0.2754b        0.1807              1.5868a       85
 laws index                         (0.0110)        (0.0818)      (0.0789)    (0.1357)       (0.1679)            (0.1755)     [0.52]
 Alternative employment              0.0111          0.1193a          0.1228a       0.0098           0.0351       0.4296a       85
 contracts subindex                 (0.0092)        (0.0362)         (0.0388)      (0.0995)         (0.0832)     (0.0760)     [0.13]
 Conditions of employment           -0.0332a         0.2993a          0.2297a       0.1153c          -0.0688      0.7425a       85
 subindex                           (0.0108)        (0.0433)         (0.0418)      (0.0687)         (0.0481)     (0.0940)     [0.55]
                                    -0.0271b         0.2120a          0.2406a       0.1473a          0.2109b      0.4146a       85
 Job security subindex              (0.1119)        (0.0438)         (0.0439)      (0.0530)         (0.0870)     (0.1060)     [0.33]


                                                   Panel B: Industrial (collective) relation laws and legal origin
 Industrial (collective)          0.0094           0.5847a            0.6505a       0.4540b          0.5565b      0.7336a       85
 relations laws index            (0.0292)         (0.1114)           (0.1123)      (0.1995)         (0.2685)     (0.2331)     [0.33]

 Collective bargaining            0.0013           0.2070b            0.2928a       0.2424           0.1679c      0.3182c       85
 subindex                        (0.0189)         (0.0853)           (0.0705)      (0.1548)         (0.0966)     (0.1628)     [0.18]

 Worker participation in          0.0166           0.1864b            0.1328b       0.1430           0.3606b      -0.0329       85
 management subindex             (0.0185)         (0.0734)           (0.0638)      (0.1024)         (0.1658)     (0.1559)     [0.12]
 Collective disputes              -0.0085          0.1912a            0.2248a       0.0686           0.0279       0.4483a       85
 subindex                        (0.0105)         (0.0420)           (0.0401)      (0.0608)         (0.0948)     (0.0846)     [0.34]

                                                              Panel C: Social security laws and legal origin
                                          a               a
 Social security                  0.3179           0.8919             0.3065b       0.0979           0.5020a     -1.2269a       85
 laws index                      (0.0288)         (0.1438)           (0.1163)      (0.1368)         (0.1264)     (0.2417)     [0.66]

 Old age, disability and          0.0591a          0.0075             0.0273        -0.0304          0.0971b      0.0623        85
 death benefits subindex         (0.0131)         (0.0430)           (0.0375)      (0.0446)         (0.0455)     (0.1109)     [0.37]

 Sickness and health              0.0991a          0.3670a            0.1787b       0.0363           0.1898b      -0.3169       85
 benefits subindex               (0.0211)         (0.0938)           (0.0775)      (0.0904)         (0.0721)     (0.1954)     [0.31]

 Unemployment benefits            0.1600a          0.5166a            0.1019        0.0938           0.2153a     -0.9758a       85
 subindex                        (0.0149)         (0.0712)           (0.0665)      (0.0783)         (0.0806)     (0.0986)     [0.62]


a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
                                                              Table VI
                                                  Regulation of labor and left power
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries. The dependent variables are the Employment laws index, the
Industrial (collective) relations laws index and the Social security laws index. Robust standard errors are in parenthesis. All the
variables are described in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.

                                                Left or center party in power        Interest groups
                                                                                           Percentage of
                                                                  Chief
                                                                                             labor force
                        Log GNP per     Chief                   executive       Union                                           N
Dependent                                        Legislature                                 covered by    Constant
                            capita    executive                    and          density                                        [R2]
variables:                                                                                    collective
                                                               legislature
                                                                                             agreements
                                                      Panel A: Employment laws and left power
Employment                -0.0487c     0.2787b                                                              1.7974a              85
laws index                (0.0275)    (0.1232)                                                             (0.2602)            [0.14]
                                    b                      b
                          -0.0572                   0.2603                                                  1.8669a              85
                          (0.0271)                 (0.1105)                                                (0.2484)            [0.13]
                                                                        b
                          -0.0487   c
                                                                 0.2618                                     1.8143a              85
                          (0.0280)                              (0.1191)                                   (0.2602)            [0.13]
                                    a
                          -0.0826                                               0.2375                      2.1680a              70
                          (0.0305)                                             (0.2172)                    (0.2480)            [0.08]
                                    b                                                                  b
                          -0.1098                                                               0.4610      2.2012a              42
                          (0.0463)                                                             (0.2045)    (0.4180)            [0.16]
                                             Panel B: Industrial (collective) relation laws and left power
Industrial (collective)    0.0477      0.3990a                                                              0.6090c              85
relations laws index      (0.0365)    (0.1479)                                                             (0.3413)            [0.08]
                                                           b
                           0.0343                   0.3516                                                  0.7324b              85
                          (0.0361)                 (0.1500)                                                (0.3373)            [0.07]
                           0.0469                                0.3648b                                    0.6465c              85
                          (0.0371)                              (0.1399)                                   (0.3398)            [0.07]
                           0.0240                                               0.2189                      1.3999a              70
                          (0.0430)                                             (0.2464)                    (0.3277)            [0.01]
                           -0.0635                                                              0.7624a     1.4183b              42
                          (0.0618)                                                             (0.2648)    (0.5287)            [0.16]
                                                     Panel C: Social security laws and left power
                                   a          a
Social security laws       0.3357      0.5476                                                              -1.3678a              85
index                     (0.0313)    (0.1486)                                                             (0.3138)            [0.52]
                           0.3182a                  0.4972a                                                -1.2152a              85
                          (0.0320)                 (0.1479)                                                (0.3100)            [0.51]
                                   a                                    a
                           0.3379                                0.5371                                    -1.3450a              85
                          (0.0314)                              (0.1420)                                   (0.3079)            [0.52]
                              0.2348a                                                   0.6252b                      -0.3662     70
                             (0.0392)                                                  (0.2715)                     (0.3319)   [0.46]
                              0.2059a                                                                     0.3525     -0.0934     42
                             (0.0589)                                                                    (0.2341)   (0.5264)   [0.43]
a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
                                                            Table VII
                                         Regulation of labor, left power, and legal origin
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries, excluding socialist countries. The dependent variables are the
employment laws index, the Industrial (collective) relations laws index and the Social security laws index. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses. All the variables are described in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.

                            Log GNP                         French legal    German legal     Scandinavian                           N
 Dependent                                 Left power*                                                          Constant
                            per capita                         origin          origin         legal origin                         [R2]
 variables:
                                                          Panel A: Employment laws, left power and legal origin
 Employment laws             -0.0491c         0.1149           0.5855a          0.2891c         0.1496           1.5252a            66
 index                       (0.0260)        (0.1364)         (0.0779)         (0.1489)        (0.1713)         (0.2730)          [0.51]

                             -0.0492b         0.1376           0.5830a          0.2751c         0.1148           1.5112a            66
                             (0.0243)        (0.1151)         (0.0762)         (0.1512)        (0.1877)         (0.2480)          [0.51]

                             -0.0463c         0.1316           0.5884a          0.2840c         0.1362           1.4973a            66
                             (0.0270)        (0.1357)         (0.0774)         (0.1510)        (0.1727)         (0.2802)          [0.51]

                             -0.0487b         0.0438           0.6422a          0.3011b         0.1833           1.5386a            57
                             (0.0241)        (0.2425)         (0.0865)         (0.1371)        (0.2063)         (0.2059)          [0.52]

                             -0.0546b         0.0623           0.6995a          0.3669b         0.0987           1.5226a            38
                             (0.0228)        (0.1623)         (0.1157)         (0.1715)        (0.1224)         (0.2197)          [0.61]

                                                Panel B: Industrial (collective) relation laws, left power and legal origin
 Industrial (collective)      0.0220          0.2345           0.6326a          0.4558b         0.4636c          0.5172b            66
 relations laws index        (0.0344)        (0.1565)         (0.1099)         (0.2213)        (0.2852)         (0.3248)          [0.37]

                              0.0157          0.2010           0.6342a          0.4407b         0.4457           0.5783c            66
                             (0.0352)        (0.1618)         (0.1124)         (0.2180)        (0.2981)         (0.3293)          [0.37]

                              0.0246          0.2385           0.6400a          0.4486b         0.4523           0.4988             66
                             (0.0352)        (0.1535)         (0.1096)         (0.2225)        (0.2874)         (0.3278)          [0.38]

                             -0.0172         -0.1397           0.6947a          0.5106a         0.6934c          0.9884a            70
                             (0.0393)        (0.4065)         (0.1301)         (0.2029)        (0.3671)         (0.3203)          [0.01]

                             -0.0587          0.3752           0.7360a          0.4974b         0.7745b          1.1125b            38
                             (0.0606)        (0.2437)         (0.1513)         (0.2130)        (0.3130)         (0.5322)          [0.49]
                                                         Panel C: Social security laws, left power and legal origin
 Social security laws         0.3655a         0.2433           0.2844b          0.0221          0.3185b         -1.7207a            66
 index                       (0.0316)        (0.1549)         (0.1141)         (0.1501)        (0.1394)         (0.3110)          [0.74]

                              0.3592a         0.2119           0.2858b          0.0058          0.2976c         -1.6610a            66
                             (0.0324)        (0.1575)         (0.1149)         (0.1592)        (0.1540)         (0.3146)          [0.73]

                              0.3683a         0.2484c          0.2921b          0.0146          0.3062b         -1.7410a            66
                             (0.0321)        (0.1472)         (0.1133)         (0.1513)        (0.1419)         (0.3118)          [0.74]

                              0.3129a        -0.1584           0.2369c          0.0317          0.5199b         -1.0604a            57
                             (0.0377)        (0.3178)         (0.1301)         (0.1454)        (0.2097)         (0.3221)          [0.65]

                              0.2736a         0.0224           0.3736a          0.1035          0.5742a         -0.8298c            38
                             (0.0511)        (0.1985)         (0.1336)         (0.1638)        (0.1492)         (0.4148)          [0.69]

a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
* The rows in the Left power column consist of the values of: first row=chief executive left or center party; second row=legislature left or
center party; third row=chief executive and legislature left or center party; fourth row=union density; and fifth row= percentage of labor force
covered by collective agreements.
                                                                              Table VIII
                                               Correlations between political and economic constraints, and legal origin

This table shows the pairwise correlations between the measures political and economic constraints and legal origin for the whole sample. All the variables are described in Table I.

                                                                                                          Factor
                       Log GNP Constraints on Effectiveness                          Actual Geographic                English      Socialist    French       German
                                                                 Autocracy                             accumulation
                       per capita executive power of legislature                    openness openness               legal origin legal origin legal origin legal origin
                                                                                                         openness
 Constraints on
 executive power        0.6876a

 Effectiveness of
 legislature            0.7523a          0.9078a


 Autocracy              -0.6548a        -0.8844a          -0.8514a


 Actual openness         0.3465          0.1181           0.1484         -0.1050

 Geographic
 openness                0.3279          0.1361           0.1837         -0.0770     0.7103a

 Factor
 accumulation           0.6410a          0.4086b          0.4270b        -0.3318     0.6499a       0.8106a
 openness
 English legal
 origin                 -0.0843          0.1998           0.1462         -0.2324      0.1601       -0.0494        -0.1843

 Socialist legal
 origin                 -0.2182          -0.2927          -0.3236        0.5475a     -0.0650       -0.0209        0.1333         -0.3365

 French legal
 origin                 -0.0568          -0.1814          -0.1901        -0.0258     -0.1521       -0.0441        -0.1741       -0.4874a      -0.4169a

 German legal
 origin                 0.3474c          0.2008           0.2023         -0.1920      0.0356       0.0876         0.2344         -0.1729       -0.1479       -0.2141

 Scandinavian
 legal origin            0.3180          0.3274           0.3378         -0.2978      0.0462       0.1207         0.2927         -0.1394       -0.1192       -0.1727      -0.0612

a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                             Table IX
                                      Regulation of labor, political and economic constraints
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross section of countries. The dependent variables are the Employment laws index, the
Industrial (collective) relations laws index and the Social security laws index. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. All the
variables are described in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.

                                                   Political constraints                     Economic constraints
                                       Constraints                                                        Factor
                           Log GNP                 Effectiveness                Actual Geographic                                       N
 Dependent variables:                 on executive                Autocracy                            accumulation Constant
                           per capita              of legislature             openness openness                                        [R2]
                                         power                                                           openness
                                                       Panel A: Employment laws, and political and economic constraints
 Employment laws            0.0093      -0.0955a                                                                             1.9286a     84
 index                     (0.0385)     (0.0332)                                                                            (0.2144)   [0.17]
                            0.0260                       -0.2111b                                                            1.6971a     73
                           (0.0456)                      (0.0808)                                                           (0.2529)   [0.16]
                            0.0086                                          0.0695a                                          1.2793a     84
                           (0.0328)                                        (0.0190)                                         (0.3134)   [0.19]
                           -0.0370                                                    -0.0029a                               2.0098a     73
                           (0.0269)                                                   (0.0008)                              (0.2018)   [0.16]
                           -0.0526c                                                              -0.0044                     2.0340a     73
                           (0.0267)                                                              (0.0035)                   (0.2049)   [0.09]
                           -0.0490                                                                             -0.0021       1.9722a     73
                           (0.0348)                                                                            (0.0036)     (0.2321)   [0.07]
                                                       Panel B: Industrial relation laws, and political and economic constraints
 Industrial (collective)    0.0769c     -0.0775c                                                                             0.9639a     84
 relations laws index      (0.0455)     (0.0406)                                                                            (0.2667)   [0.04]
                            0.1111c                      -0.2347b                                                            0.7397b     73
                           (0.0575)                      (0.1074)                                                           (0.3218)   [0.07]
                            0.0734c                                         0.0536b                                          0.4704      84
                           (0.0414)                                        (0.0247)                                         (0.3839)   [0.05]
                            0.0543                                                    -0.0035a                               0.9996a     73
                           (0.0401)                                                   (0.0010)                              (0.2687)   [0.09]
                            0.0445                                                               -0.0092b                    1.0172a     73
                           (0.0411)                                                              (0.0046)                   (0.2718)   [0.05]
                            0.0501                                                                             -0.0041       0.8991b     73
                           (0.0558)                                                                            (0.0045)     (0.3566)   [0.02]
                                                         Panel C: Social security laws, and political and economic constraints
 Social security laws       0.3200a     -0.0415                                                                             -0.7202b     84
 index                     (0.0516)     (0.0463)                                                                            (0.3223)   [0.45]
                            0.3672a                      -0.1366                                                            -1.1107a     73
                           (0.0570)                      (0.1045)                                                           (0.3361)   [0.56]
                            0.3695a                                         0.0767b                                         -1.5639a     84
                           (0.0438)                                        (0.0298)                                         (0.4355)   [0.49]
                            0.3534a                                                   -0.0034a                              -1.0242a     73
                           (0.0323)                                                   (0.0012)                              (0.2666)   [0.61]
                            0.3397a                                                              -0.0073                    -1.0017a     73
                           (0.0311)                                                              (0.0046)                   (0.2643)   [0.58]
                            0.3268a                                                                            -0.0008      -1.0060a     73
                           (0.0427)                                                                            (0.0043)     (0.3192)   [0.57]
a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level
                                                               Table X
                              Regulation of labor, political and economic constraints, and legal origin
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross section of countries, excluding all socialist countries. The dependent variables are the
Employment laws index in Panel A, the Industrial (collective) relations laws index in Panel B, and the Social security laws index in Panel C.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses. All the variables are described in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.
                                                             Political and                                                                          N
                                        Log GNP per                             French legal    German legal      Scandinavian
 Dependent Variables                                          economic                                                               Constant      [R2]
                                           capita                                  origin          origin          legal origin
                                                             constraints*
                                                         Panel A: Employment laws, political and economic constraints, and legal origin
                                          -0.0457              -0.0107             0.5679a          0.2602c          0.1791           1.6242a        65
 Employment laws index
                                          (0.0325)             (0.0283)           (0.0851)         (0.1456)         (0.1706)         (0.1854)      [0.49]
                                          -0.0417              -0.0327             0.5704a          0.2561c          0.1805           1.6034a        64
                                          (0.0398)             (0.0740)           (0.0893)         (0.1506)         (0.1713)         (0.2090)      [0.49]
                                          -0.0452               0.0090             0.5706a          0.2586c          0.1779           1.5449a        65
                                          (0.0322)             (0.0236)           (0.0819)         (0.1438)         (0.1709)         (0.2993)      (0.49)

                                          -0.0404c             -0.0015b            0.5831a          0.2472c          0.1551           1.6291a        65
                                          (0.0227)             (0.0006)           (0.0778)         (0.1442)         (0.1682)         (0.1792)      [0.55]

                                          -0.0482b             -0.0041c            0.6132a          0.2917b          0.2078           1.6441a        65
                                          (0.0223)             (0.0024)           (0.0781)         (0.1288)         (0.1677)         (0.1849)      [0.54]

                                          -0.0394              -0.0029             0.6147a          0.3084b          0.2340           1.5543a        65
                                          (0.0280)             (0.0024)           (0.0787)         (0.1249)         (0.1676)         (0.2114)      [0.54]

                                                     Panel B: Industrial (collective) laws, political and economic constraints, and legal origin

 Industrial (collective) relations        -0.0166               0.0158             0.6814a          0.5131b          0.6012b          0.8473a        65
 laws index                               (0.0417)             (0.0353)           (0.1085)         (0.2091)         (0.2756)         (0.2564)      [0.35]

                                           0.0118              -0.0420             0.6595a          0.4749b          0.6040b          0.7871a        64
                                          (0.0516)             (0.1012)           (0.1134)         (0.2104)         (0.2746)         (0.2833)      [0.36]

                                          -0.0108              -0.0069             0.6702a          0.5053b          0.6017b          0.8977b        65
                                          (0.0455)             (0.0289)           (0.1154)         (0.2157)         (0.2757)         (0.4083)      [0.35]

                                           0.0228              -0.0018c            0.6389a          0.4149b          0.5197c          0.7611a        65
                                          (0.0365)             (0.0010)           (0.1175)         (0.2130)         (0.2932)         (0.2409)      [0.39]

                                           0.0254              -0.0094a            0.6741a          0.4618b          0.5851b          0.7623a        65
                                          (0.0361)             (0.0031)           (0.1123)         (0.1887)         (0.2736)         (0.2456)      [0.42]
                                           0.0453              -0.0066c            0.6773a          0.4994a          0.6442b          0.5599c        65
                                          (0.0457)             (0.0034)           (0.1134)         (0.1871)         (0.2630)         (0.3001)      [0.40]

                                                        Panel C: Social security laws, political and economic constraints, and legal origin

                                           0.3244a              0.0147             0.3395a          0.0912           0.4735a         -1.3682a        65
 Social security laws index
                                          (0.0485)             (0.0458)           (0.1246)         (0.1531)         (0.1307)         (0.2627)      [0.72]

                                           0.3538a             -0.0878             0.2919b          0.0360           0.4579a         -1.3777a        64
                                          (0.0370)             (0.1293)           (0.1230)         (0.1418)         (0.1323)         (0.2582)      [0.72]

                                           0.3268a             -0.0093             0.3324a          0.0885           0.4745a         -1.2914a        65
                                          (0.0485)             (0.0357)           (0.1169)         (0.1525)         (0.1315)         (0.4660)      [0.72]

                                           0.3786a             -0.0029a            0.2624b         -0.0532           0.3438a         -1.4854a        65
                                          (0.0276)             (0.0010)           (0.1093)         (0.1502)         (0.1133)         (0.2297)      [0.76]

                                           0.3642a             -0.0080c            0.3197a          0.0310           0.4438a         -1.4574a        65
                                          (0.0265)             (0.0043)           (0.1130)         (0.1467)         (0.1322)         (0.2335)      [0.75]

                                           0.3913a             -0.0071b            0.3231a          0.0694           0.5098a         -1.6844a        65
                                          (0.0334)             (0.0033)           (0.1135)         (0.1548)         (0.1421)         (0.2595)      [0.74]
a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
* The rows in the Political and economic constraints column consist of the values of: first row=constraints on executive power; second row=
effectiveness of legislature; third row= autocracy; fourth row= actual openness; fifth row= geographic openness; sixth row= factor
accumulation openness.
                                                    Table XI
        Interactions between legal origin and left political orientation: French vs English legal origins
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross section of countries, excluding all socialist countries. The dependent variables are: (i)
Employment laws in Panel A, and (ii) Industrial relation laws in Panel B. Each regression is separately run for French legal origin and
English legal origin countries. For each pair of regressions, we run a Chow test of the equality of the estimated coefficients for French
and English legal origins. Robust standard errors are shown in parentheses. All the variables are described in Table I and the data can
be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.

                                                     Left or center party in power
                                                                                                                 Chow test of
                                                                           Chief                                the equality of
                                   Log GNP         Chief                                                 N
                                                           Legislature executive and Constant                     coefficients
                                   per capita    executive                                              [R2]
                                                                        legislature

                                                Panel A: The dependent variable is the employment laws index

         French legal origin        0.0189        0.3107c                                   1.4614a   32        F(1,50)=3.00
         countries                 (0.0375)      (0.1600)                                  (0.3413) [0.14]      Prob>F=0.09

         English legal origin      -0.1083a       -0.1116                                   2.1012a   24
         countries                 (0.0280)      (0.1847)                                  (0.3066) [0.38]

         French legal origin        0.0195                     0.3920b                      1.3970a   32        F(1,50)=5.11
         countries                 (0.0361)                   (0.1471)                     (0.3232) [0.20]      Prob>F=0.03

         English legal origin      -0.1017a                    -0.0590                      2.0241a   24
         countries                 (0.0243)                   (0.1350)                     (0.2503) [0.37]

         French legal origin        0.0242                                    0.3411b       1.4183a   32        F(1,50)=3.91
         countries                 (0.0376)                                  (0.1548)      (0.3366) [0.18]      Prob>F=0.05

         English legal origin      -0.1110a                                   -0.1245       2.1262a   24
         countries                 (0.0285)                                  (0.1782)      (0.3056) [0.38]

                                     Panel B: The dependent variable is the industrial (collective) relation laws index
         French legal origin        0.1304a       0.4378b                                   0.1775    32        F(1,50)=1.14
         countries                 (0.0406)      (0.1882)                                  (0.3946) [0.24]      Prob>F=0.29
         English legal origin       -0.0592       0.0873                                    1.2251b   24
         countries                 (0.0442)      (0.2708)                                  (0.4731) [0.13]

         French legal origin        0.1255b                    0.4586b                      0.1888    32        F(1,50)=2.02
         countries                 (0.0468)                   (0.2089)                     (0.4477) [0.24]      Prob>F=0.16

         English legal origin       -0.0700                    -0.0105                      1.3588a   24
         countries                 (0.0430)                   (0.2569)                     (0.4606) [0.12]

         French legal origin        0.1359a                                   0.4566b       0.1453    32        F(1,50)=1.56
         countries                 (0.0413)                                  (0.1773)      (0.3851) [0.26]      Prob>F=0.22

         English legal origin       -0.0621                                   0.0566        1.2641b   24
         countries                 (0.0466)                                  (0.2686)      (0.4905) [0.12]
        a=significant at 1% level; b=significant at 5% level; c=significant at 10% level.
                                                                                    Table XII
                                                                    Correlations between regulation indices
The table shows the pairwise correlations between various indices of regulation for the cross section of 85 countries. All the variables are described in Table I.

                                                             Industrial                  Court formalism Court formalism
                                                                                                                           Ln num. of                                 Ln num. of
                                           Employment laws (collective) Social security    index for the   index for the
                                                                                                                         steps to start                              days to start
                                                index      relations laws laws index      eviction of the  collection of
                                                                                                                           a business                                 a business
                                                               index                    non-paying tenant bounced check

 Industrial (collective) relations
                                                  0.5172a
 laws index

 Social security laws index                       0.0746               0.2309

 Court formalism index for the
                                                  0.4825a              0.4736a            0.0987
 eviction of the non-paying tenant

 Court formalism index for the
                                                  0.5839a              0.4257a            0.0200             0.8505a
 collection of bounced check

 Ln number of steps to start a
                                                  0.6184a              0.4795a            -0.2416            0.5036a               0.5675a
 business

 Ln number of days to start a
                                                  0.5343a              0.4509a            -0.3113            0.5274a               0.5525a              0.8263a
 business

 Ln cost to start a business/GDP
                                                  0.3324c              0.1712            -0.4755a            0.3667b               0.4309a              0.6354a        0.6147a
 per capita
 a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
                                                               Table XIII
                                                    Regulation of labor and outcomes
Ordinary least squares regressions of the cross-section of countries. Robust standard errors are in parentheses. All the variables are described
in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.
                                        Log GNP per Employment laws Industrial (collective)              Social security                  N
         Dependent Variable                                                                                                Constant
                                           capita        index       relations laws index                 laws index                     [R2]
 Size of the unofficial economy            -5.3282a            6.7188b                                                     63.6364a       85
                                           (0.7384)           (3.0029)                                                     (9.5765)     [0.45]
                                           -5.8784a                                     4.5755b                            72.9882a       85
                                           (0.6747)                                    (2.1254)                            (6.6536)     [0.44]
                                           -5.7587a                                                         -0.1979        78.0462a       85
                                           (1.0823)                                                         (2.4501)       (6.7360)     [0.42]
 Employment in the unofficial              -5.7691a           13.7367b                                                      61.6865a      46
 economy                                   (1.2592)           (5.3313)                                                     (16.4533)    [0.41]
                                           -7.4709a                                     11.579a                             81.5947a      46
                                           (1.0255)                                    (4.2348)                             (9.4134)    [0.42]
                                           -6.4801a                                                          0.0124         89.3573a      46
                                           (2.1811)                                                         (4.5390)       (11.7923)    [0.33]
 Male participation rate in the labor      -1.3425a           -2.9938a                                                      99.0597a      78
 force 1990-1994                           (0.2968)           (0.9826)                                                      (3.1063)    [0.26]
                                           -1.1249a                                    -2.1552a                             95.3124a      78
                                           (0.2959)                                    (0.6719)                             (2.4506)    [0.24]
                                           -0.6121                                                          -1.8810b        91.6207a      78
                                           (0.4005)                                                         (0.8820)        (2.4779)    [0.23]
 Female participation rate in the          -2.2087c           -3.5546                                                       79.3615a      78
 labor force 1990-1994                     (1.1291)           (4.0892)                                                     (12.3587)    [0.04]
                                           -1.9450c                                    -3.0660                              75.5102a      78
                                           (1.1362)                                    (3.7015)                            (10.2537)    [0.04]
                                           -2.3802c                                                          1.4190        72.7617a       78
                                           (1.3811)                                                         (3.6338)       (9.5206)     [0.03]
 Unemployment rate 1991-2000               -0.4357             2.7761b                                                      8.2037        65
                                           (0.4562)           (1.3931)                                                     (5.7803)     [0.13]
                                           -0.7536c                                     1.0562                             13.9484a       65
                                           (0.3848)                                    (1.0029)                            (4.2089)     [0.08]
                                           -1.0708b                                                          1.5824        15.0201a       65
                                           (0.4373)                                                         (1.2082)       (3.5625)     [0.09]
 Unemployed males 20-24 years             -0.2235              6.3782b                                                      6.7976        52
 old / active males 20-24 years old        (0.9109)           (2.6693)                                                     (11.1265)    [0.15]
 1991-2000                                -1.0123                                       3.0877c                            19.6986b     52
                                           (0.8021)                                    (1.8155)                              (8.6119) [0.09]
                                          -2.1224b                                                           6.2780b        21.1194b      52
                                           (0.8299)                                                         (2.9503)        (8.2515)    [0.14]
 Unemployed females 20-24 years           -1.3496              9.9943b                                                      14.1402       52
 old / active females 20-24 years          (1.3337)           (3.7255)                                                     (16.2348)    [0.21]
 old 1991-2000                            -2.5754b                                      5.1375c                             33.8676b      52
                                           (1.1289)                                    (2.7286)                            (12.6670)    [0.15]
                                          -3.3478a                                                          3.7219          40.1010a      52
                                           (1.1885)                                                         (4.6208)       (12.0999)    [0.11]
 Average wages of machine                   0.0215b            0.1040c                                                       0.6298a      53
 operators / wages of clerks and           (0.0103)           (0.0600)                                                      (0.1391)    [0.07]
 workers in craft and related trades        0.0129                                      0.0433                              0.8097a       53
 1990-1999                                 (0.0109)                                    (0.0409)                            (0.1010)     [0.03]
                                            -0.0124                                                          0.0899c        0.9163a       53
                                           (0.0182)                                                         (0.0481)       (0.1016)     [0.09]
a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
                                                      Table XIV
                         Regulation of labor and outcomes (instrumental variables regressions)
Instrumental variables regressions for the cross-section of countries using legal origin dummies as instruments for the employment
laws index, the industrial (collective) laws index and the social security laws index. Errors are shown in parenthesis. All variables are
described in Table I and the data can be found in http://iicg.som.yale.edu/.

                                     Log GNP Employment laws Industrial (collective)                Social security
Dependent Variable                                                                                                    Constant      N
                                      per capita          index           relations laws index         laws index
Size of the unofficial economy         -5.6140a          2.7803                                                        72.1584a    85
                                       (0.7158)         (4.2001)                                                      (10.3888)
                                       -5.8579a                                   3.0764                               74.6875a    85
                                       (0.6752)                                 (4.0152)                               (7.3931)
                                       -5.4954a                                                          -1.1091       77.4555a    85
                                       (1.5176)                                                         (3.9874)       (7.4541)
Employment in the unofficial           -5.8747a         11.6837                                                        65.8202a    46
economy                                (1.2083)         (7.1306)                                                      (16.8673)
                                       -7.9954a                                 17.6829b                               77.5093a    46
                                       (1.0937)                                 (6.9587)                              (10.1388)
                                       -5.6832c                                                          -2.3049       87.0109a    46
                                       (3.2218)                                                         (8.0633)      (13.9918)
Male participation rate in the         -1.4984a         -5.3804a                                                      104.0734a    78
labor force 1990-1994                  (0.3087)         (1.4355)                                                       (3.9808)
                                       -1.1064a                                  -3.9469a                              97.4255a    78
                                       (0.2962)                                 (1.2706)                               (2.7837)
                                        0.3670                                                           5.3238a       89.5162a    78
                                       (0.5571)                                                         (1.5187)       (2.7715)
Female participation rate in the       -2.5327b         -8.5166                                                        89.7852a    78
labor force 1990-1994                  (1.1788)         (6.4455)                                                      (16.3302)
                                       -1.9027                                   -7.1619                               80.3408a    78
                                       (1.1510)                                 (6.5154)                              (12.4055)
                                       -5.9054a                                                         13.8134b       80.3381a    78
                                       (1.5397)                                                         (5.2706)      (10.0290)
Unemployment rate 1991-2000            -0.2420          4.2867b                                                         4.1597     65
                                       (0.4585)         (1.9782)                                                       (6.5087)
                                               c
                                       -0.6847                                   2.9791c                               10.8772b    65
                                       (0.3768)                                 (1.7814)                               (4.4487)
                                       -1.3735b                                                          3.2970        14.3533a    65
                                       (0.5570)                                                         (2.3026)       (3.9298)
Unemployed males 20-24 years           -0.0389           7.6928c                                                        3.1012     52
old / active males 20-24 years old (1.0329)             (3.9735)                                                      (14.3822)
1991-2000                              -1.0110                                    3.1269                               19.6347b    52
                                       (0.8073)                                 (2.7761)                               (9.3442)
                                       -2.9941b                                                         11.7323b       17.9806c    52
                                       (1.1630)                                                         (5.3564)       (9.1533)
                                                                b
Unemployed females 20-24 years -0.7234                  14.4540                                                         1.6001     52
old / active females 20-24 years       (1.6419)         (6.4273)                                                      (23.3581)
old 1991-2000                          -2.4236b                                  9.5276b                               26.7108b    52
                                       (1.0812)                                 (4.1883)                              (12.0794)
                                       -3.3250b                                                          3.5791        40.1832a    52
                                       (1.4426)                                                         (6.7401)      (12.3809)
Average wages of machine                0.0325b          0.2338a                                                        0.3337c    53
operators / wages of clerks and        (0.0125)         (0.0841)                                                       (0.1972)
workers in craft and related            0.0137                                   0.1614c                                0.6532a    53
trades 1990-1999                       (0.0116)                                 (0.0823)                               (0.1208)
                                       -0.0164                                                           0.1040c        0.9240a    53
                                       (0.0222)                                                         (0.0609)       (0.1066)
a=significant at 1 percent level; b=significant at 5 percent level; c=significant at 10 percent level.
