                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        DIFFERENTIATION STRATEGY AND
                            MARKET DEREGULATION:
               LOCAL TELECOMMUNICATION ENTRY IN THE LATE 1990s

                                           Shane Greenstein
                                           Michael Mazzeo

                                         Working Paper 9761
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9761


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




We thank the Searle Foundation and Kellogg School of Management for funding. We thank Greg Rosston,
Bill Rogerson, Glenn Woroch and Dennis Yao for many useful remarks, as well as seminar participants at
Carnegie-Mellon, Cornell, Syracuse and Washington Universities, the NBER IO Winter 2003 meetings and
the Conference on Management Strategy and the Business Environment at the Harvard Business School. Avi
Goldfarb provided excellent research assistance. We are grateful to Greg Rosston and Brad Wimmer for
providing us data on ILECs. All errors are our responsibility. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Shane Greenstein and Michael Mazzeo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.
Differentiation Strategy and Market Deregulation:
Local Telecommunication Entry in the Late 1990s
Shane Greenstein and Michael Mazzeo
NBER Working Paper No. 9761
June 2003
JEL No. L5, L9

                                            ABSTRACT

The authors examine the role of differentiation strategies for entry behavior in markets for local
telecommunication services in the late 1990s. Whereas the prior literature has used models of
interaction among homogenous firms, this research is motivated by the claim of entrants that they

differ substantially in their product offerings and business strategies. Exploiting a new, detailed data
set of Competitive Local Exchange Carriers (CLECs) entry into over 700 U.S. cities, the authors

take advantage of recent developments in the analysis of entry and competition among differentiated
firms. They test and reject the null hypothesis of homogeneous competitors. They also find strong
evidence that CLECs account for both potential market demand and the business strategies of
competitors when making their entry decisions. This suggests that firms' incentives to differentiate

their services should shape the policy debate for competitive local telecommunications.



Shane Greenstein                                       Michael Mazzeo
J.L. Kellogg School of Management                      J.L. Kellogg School of Management
Northwestern University                                Northwestern University
2001 Sheridan Road                                     2001 Sheridan Road
Evanston, IL 60208-2013                                Evanston, IL 60208-2013
and NBER                                               mazzeo@kellogg.northwestern.edu
greenstein@kellogg.northwestern.edu
                                                 I. Introduction


         By the end of 1990s many cities in the United States had experience with
competitive local telephony. In many locales Competitive Local Exchange Carriers
(CLECs) entered into competition with each other and with the Incumbent Local
Exchange Carrier (ILEC). In 1999, CLECs accounted for over $20 billion in annual
revenue (New Paradigm Resources Group 2000). Despite their considerable size and
their comparative novelty, only a few economics studies have analyzed the competitive
behavior of these firms.
         In this paper we consider the extent to which incentives to offer differentiated
services affected the entry strategies of CLECs. We reject the null hypothesis that entry
behavior is unrelated to the types of services offered by firms (i.e., we reject
homogeneous competitors). Although regulators and market participants suspected that
opportunities for product differentiation could arise, previous analyses have not measured
differentiation explicitly nor considered its importance in market development.                          We
argue, however, that it is central for understanding the economic and regulatory factors
shaping competitive local telephony in this time period. Our analysis also sheds light on
the umbrella national policy for competitive telephony, as embodied in Federal
Communications Commission (FCC) rule making for the Telecommunications Act of
1996.

I.i Motivation
        We consider two alternative motivations for introducing competition into
industries such as local telephony.              We label the first motivation scale-exceeding
efficiencies. It is the predominant framework used by standard analysis (Woroch 2001)
and, as far as we know, motivates all empirical models of CLEC entry to date.1 It frames


1
 This literature preceded the 1996 Act. Woroch (2001) provides a comprehensive review of the literature
with strong emphasis on scale-exceeding efficiencies. Another variant looks at price behavior, where these
prices may (or may not) reflect the ability of new entrants to price underneath regulated (i.e., artificially)
high prices to business customers (e.g., Rosston and Wimmer 2001). Another variant estimates a model of
market share and assumes the ILEC is first mover in a Stackleberg game with CLECs (Abel 2002).
Crandall's (2001) or Crandall and Sidek's (2002)analysis is more explicit about the role of differentiation.
Yet, their models of empirical revenue only partly employ insights about differentiation.



                                                      1
analysis in terms of the costs of providing similar services in either one or more
organizations. The CLEC’s prospects depend on its ability to lower costs — lower than
an incumbent monopolist currently achieves—with its advantages of scale and/or scope
economies. As in any standard model of price competition between otherwise
homogeneous services, prices fall when entrants can achieve a level of efficiency
exceeding that of the incumbent.
       An alternative motivation for competition is something we label customer-
targeted differentiation. This alternative is not reflected in existing empirical or most
theoretical models. According to industry analysts and participants, CLECs have the
entrepreneurial ability to identify market opportunities otherwise unmet by the ILEC.
These initiatives may reflect different visions about customer needs for service or the
ability of entrants to offer innovative services without the obligations (e.g., universal
service and reliability) imposed on ILECs by local regulators. It may also reflect the
ability of a CLEC to offer a national product on a uniform basis, something expressly
impossible for many ILECs to do at this time (Shiman and Rosenworcel 2002). Price
competition arises in the context of the willingness of customers to pay for the
heterogeneous services. Competitive entry increases the variety available: CLECs do not
pursue the same strategies, and their services are often not the same as those offered by
the ILEC.
       Pointed disagreements between these alternative views account for sharp
differences in policy recommendations and assessment. The scale-exceeding efficiencies
view would emphasize only the number of firms that have entered, that is, policy is based
on simple counts of competitors. The customer-targeted differentiation view argues that
models of homogenous consumers and mere counts of firms provide misleading
implications about how entrants can differ and how and where consumers would value
variety. Therefore, a more appropriate checklist for measuring local competition would
also incorporate the types of services offered by each of the CLECs. While both views
favor interconnection policies that give entrants a market test, the latter view also
encourages CLEC strategies that differ from each other and those of the ILEC.




                                           2
I.ii Synopsis of Model, Data, and Results
        We build on the empirical literature that analyzes entry in concentrated markets
and competition among differentiated firms.              As did Zolnierek, Eisner, and Burton
(2001), we examine cross-sectional differences associated with the number of CLECs
operating in an area. As in that study, we evaluate the impact of economic factors, such
as demand and cost differences across markets, economies of geographic scope, and
regulatory stringency. Unlike previous research, we tailor our estimation to small and
medium-sized cities. We do this for three reasons. First, many large cities had already
experienced competitive entry by the early 1990s, but it was new to medium- sized cities
after the passage of the 1996 Telecommunications Act. Second, prior studies that used
broader geographic market definitions provide potentially misleading insight about the
extent of competition.2        Third, this focus allows us to isolate the role of product
differentiation, which is difficult to measure unambiguously in large cities.
        To focus the analysis on differentiated entrants, we employ an empirical
framework found in Mazzeo’s (2002) study that evaluates market structure in terms of
both the number of firms and the types of (potentially differentiated) products that firms
offer. Parameters in the model measure whether entrants behave as if competition from a
similar type of firm is expected to hurt profits more than competition from one that is
different. These parameters statistically test a null hypothesis of homogeneous
competitors against an alternative that incorporates the differential impact of
heterogeneous competitors. Applying this statistical test to the market for CLECs is the
central contribution of our study.
        The econometric model requires finely grained data. We employ a data set
derived from the New Paradigm Resources Group (NPRG), which publishes an annual
census on CLEC activity. The NPRG (2000) report tracks CLEC entry at the city level,
which is the appropriate market definition, since CLECs often compete by block to-block
in geographically focused areas. The NPRG report also documents differences between

2
 Zolneirek, Eisner, and Burton (2001) count the number of firms in each local area transport area (LATA),
a wide geographic area that typically contains several cities large enough to support entry of individual
CLECs. Two CLECs operating in different cities within the same LATA would not be competitors in our
data. Recent FCC reports count entrants at the zip code, but they do not differentiate between type of
entrant (Federal Communications Commission, 2000, 2001).



                                                   3
the strategies of the various CLECs.          This provides the data for studying the
differentiation and competition hypothesis described above. The differences used in our
study are simple to measure and use in policy evaluation, so we will place emphasis on
demonstrating their feasibility and meaningfulness.        This demonstration is another
contribution of our analysis.
       We use data from 1999, the last year of unambiguously optimistic growth
prospects for CLECs. By 1999 there was no question that most major cities could
support some CLECs in addition to the ILEC. Yet, even by the end of the 1990s
competition was not widespread in many small and medium-sized cities. Because
competition arose in some of these cities and not in others, data from this year expose the
factors that facilitate the advance of competition in local telephony.
       Our results are stark. We reject the null hypothesis of homogenous product
competition. We also find that the motivation to provide heterogeneous services is
comparable to other demographic and regulatory factors in terms of its contribution to
observed market structure. We argue that these results support a change in the analysis
and evaluation of competitive behavior and interconnection in local telephony, which
elevates differentiation to a level of much greater importance. This framing also provides
a number of new insights about the local demographic and regulatory factors making
entry more or less attractive, details that we explore below.



                        II. The Economics of CLEC Market Structure.

       An empirical analysis of CLEC entry that is motivated by scale-exceeding
efficiencies has three basic elements: (1) the size of local market demand, (2) the costs of
entering and operating, including potential economies of scope across markets, and (3)
how demand and costs (elements 1 and 2) interact with the regulatory setting. A model
of customer-targeted differentiation has those same elements, plus more. In this section,
we describe the implications of each approach. Because differentiation has not been
addressed explicitly in prior empirical CLEC studies, we explain why it is an important
consideration, while drawing connections with previous work (e.g., Crandall 2001,
Crandall and Sidek 2001, Zolnierek, Eisner and Burton 2001, Abel 2002).


                                              4
II.i. Local Market Demand for Vertically Disintegrated Firms
        In traditional analyses, CLEC entry behavior is shaped by the presence of fixed
costs in the provision of local telephone service. Whether they build their own facilities
or lease part of their network from the ILEC, CLECs incur costs to set up and maintain
the infrastructure needed to offer services. These fixed costs range from engineering
costs to marketing expenses to costs associated with negotiating interconnection
agreements. While some of these expenses may vary with the long-term size of the
revenue stream, every CLEC incurs substantial fixed costs associated with initiating a
previously unknown firm and maintaining operations of an ongoing business.
           Zolnierek, Eisner and Burton (2001), following the spirit of the New Empirical
Industrial Organization (NEIO) on entry (Bresnahan and Reiss (1991), Berry (1992)),
hypothesize that the need to cover these fixed costs limits the number of entrants in
individual markets. That is, because of the presence of fixed costs in each location where
they provide services, CLECs require a sufficient level of variable profits — quantity of
customers times operating margins —to cover their fixed expenses. Cities vary most
notably in their size, which affects the demand for CLEC services. Operating margins
may also be different across markets, particularly in cases where variable cost rates are
established by local regulators. The level of competition within markets may affect
operating margins as well. As a result of all of these differences, we expect the number
of CLECs operating to vary across cities.
           Using our data set of CLECs in Table 1, we illustrate a key part of this logic..
Among the 718 cities where CLECs have entered or made plans to enter,3 over 400 have
just one CLEC and over 600 have fewer than five; on the other hand only 55 cities have
ten or more CLECs and only 18 have twenty or more. As expected, cities with larger
populations have the largest number of potential entrants. whereas smaller cities have the
fewest.4 We will augment our market size measures beyond residential population in the
empirical analysis.

3
 Including CLECs that are planning service in particular cities constitutes the most optimistic assessment
of CLEC entry possible (we precisely define "planned" below).
4
    In Table 1 average population size is calculated over all the cities within a category,that is, it includes all


                                                          5
Table 1: Sample of Cities with Specific Number of CLECs Operating or Planned
    Number    Number                         Representative                         Average Population
       of        of                              Cities                                   Size
    CLECs      Cities
      20 +       18            New York, Dallas, Chicago, Atlanta                          1,438,877
     10-19       38           Cleveland, St. Louis, Tucson, Norfolk                         573,492
     5-10        54           Little Rock, Fresno, Madison, Omaha,                          226,935
      3-4        77            Bakersfield, Reno, Gainesville, Waco                         158,211
       2         91            Biloxi, Fargo, Kalamazoo, Naperville                          84,260
       1        441           Bangor, Bismark, Champaign, Yonkers                            43,640
     Total      718                          ————                                           137,143

         We also investigate differences across cities in the costs of providing CLEC
services, including both fixed and operating costs. One source of such differences may
relate to economies of scope. If two neighboring cities share economic infrastructure or
have similar telecommunications demand, costs incurred by a CLEC entrant may be
shared between the neighboring markets. For example, medium-sized cities near large
metropolitan areas may experience more entry than do similar markets located further
from a major urban hub.
         More direct differences in costs may result from the regulatory environments in
which CLECs enter and operate. Although the 1996 Telecommunications Act prescribed
pro-competitive regulatory rules designed to foster market-oriented decision making for
investment in local data and voice services, individual markets varied in how
implementation of the rules affected local entrants. For example, Mini (2001) carefully
documents that CLECs had distinct experiences depending on whether they were
interconnecting with (1) Regional Bell Operating Companies (RBOCs), (2) GTE
(renamed Verizon after its merger), or (3) another independent telecommunications firm.5
To the extent that such differences create different entry costs for CLECs, a location may
be more or less attractive to CLECs.


18 cities with twenty or more entrants, all 38 with between ten and nineteen, and so on.
5
 RBOCs developed interconnection with entrants as part of a quid-pro-quo with the FCC, which sought to
disallow entry into the long-distance market until RBOCs complied with a series of tests for opening their
local markets (Shiman and Rosenwercel 2002). In contrast, the non-RBOC incumbents simply made deals
under the guidance of their local state regulators.



                                                     6
       There is also considerable evidence of differences in the way state regulators
enforced prescriptions in the 1996 Telecommunications Act, which induced differences
in costs across localities. For example, policies for re-averaging prices between high
business and low residential rates affected the attractiveness of providing services to
business (Rosston and Wimmer 2001). Similarly, state agencies set varying wholesale
prices within and across states that affected variable costs of interconnection (Gregg
2002). Other state regulatory agencies made it easy or difficult to become a seller or
value-added reseller of services related to DSL. We work with the hypothesis that a state
regulatory agency can make entry in particular cities more or less attractive for CLECs
by affecting the fixed costs of entry as well as the variable costs of operating.


II. ii Entry, Competition and Product Differentiation
        The discussion above highlights a series of market conditions that potentially
influence CLEC entry, either through market size or by raising or lowering costs. If
CLECs choose to enter by judging whether they expect variable profits to exceed entry
costs, prices must come into play as well. Standard models predict prices will be lower
in markets with more competitors — this suggests that the market size (quantity)
necessary to support additional CLECs will increase as the number of operating firms
increases. Bresnahan and Reiss (1991) find such a pattern between entry and market size
in their study of several homogeneous service industries.
       If CLECs follow a model of customer-targeted differentiation, however, the
competitive effects of additional entry may be somewhat mitigated. Prices will not fall as
quickly with additional entry if CLECs offer differentiated products and if customers
value the differences enough to pay more to the firm that more closely serves their
particular needs. As such, the success of these strategies depends on how much a
consumer values variety. To be clear, we focuse on measuring firm behavior affiliated
with providing variety and not on measuring user valuation of the variety once it is
provided.




                                              7
Table 1b: Sample of Differentiation Strategies
Source of           Description
Differentiation
Build out          Facilities may be built out to enhance reliability; to ease servicing
                   big clients in specific locales; or to customize service to specific
                   users needs, such as large data transfers.
Geographic         Scope of offerings may be tailored to multi-establishment users or to
coverage           users in many different locations.
Vision of services Services are tailored to bring value from new technology of
                   combination of services (e.g., Cable television, Internet, DSL).
Service quality     The CLEC provides superior after-sale services or related services
                   in network maintenance activities, such as single contracts for
                   network emergencies or contracts for bundles of voice and nonvoice
                   services.
Non-price norms The CLEC may employ receptionists who smile, repair people who
                   hustle, and accounts receivable employees who quickly correct
                   billing errors.

       In Table 1b, we provide examples of types of customer-targeted differentiation
strategies commonly discussed in the trade press during the late 1990s (see NPRG 2000
for a summary). To be sure, no matter how it is deployed, every CLEC offers telephone
and related data carrier services. In spite of these fundamental commonalities, CLECs
and industry analysts cite particular features of firms that produce value for certain end
users. The data in Table 1b suggest ways that CLEC services might be tailored to
customer needs.
       We are not interested in evaluating the veracity of the detailed service claims
made by any CLEC in any particular city. Our concern here is whether the firms’ entry
behavior suggests that the asserted differences affect subsequent competition. The ability
to successfully differentiate may increase the likelihood of CLEC entry, since a targeted
firm would earn higher revenues serving the same number of customers. As a result, two
differentiated firms may be willing to enter a market that would not be attractive to two
identical firms.
       The differentiation between business and residential customers illustrates this
general principle. By 1999, the CLEC industry had expanded beyond solely voice into
services affiliated with carrying data traffic. These latter services were potentially
valuable to business customers, but of more limited value to residential customers. The



                                            8
CLECs could vary their portfolio of services to target these distinct sets of customers. To
the extent that these chosen services generate higher willingness to pay from their
targeted customers, the differentiated CLECs would earn higher revenues. This in turn
could affect market structure — there might be enough demand to support one CLEC
aimed at business users and another aimed at residential users in a small city that could
not support two identical CLECs that do not target a particular set of customers.
         Product heterogeneity also opens questions about the asymmetric influence of
demand, costs, and the regulatory setting on differentiated CLECs. For example, different
components of total market size may provide demand to one type of CLEC over another.
Depending on their preferences, regulatory agencies might pass rules that result in lower
costs or better opportunities for some CLEC types.6


II.iii Inferences about Competition and Entry in a Period of Growing Demand
         We will infer the importance of differentiation from entry behavior that is
consistent with it. To be sure, entry behavior is also sensitive to industry-wide
perceptions about the current state of demand and expectations for the near future by
contemporary actors. A few years after the millennium it became apparent that some
CLECs had been “optimistic.” More precisely, some CLECs did not realize revenues
sufficient to cover the debts incurred in building their facilities and marketing their new
services. The trade press dates the beginning of the decline of optimism at the spring of
2000, when financial support for dot.coms collapsed. It reached a nadir in fall 2001, after
the September 11 terrorist attack shook business confidence in long-term investments.
This low continued as the WorldCom financial scandal became publicized in the spring
of 2002. Consequently, some CLECs curtailed expansion plans they announced in 1999
and previous years. Others left the market altogether.

6
  Regulatory agencies could use the introduction of competition to undo cross-subsidies, thereby
encouraging new entrants to price underneath regulated (i.e., artificially) high prices to business customers
(e.g., Rosston and Wimmer 2001). Such a regulatory environment would comparatively favor CLECs with
a business focus, but not necessarily those with a residential focus. As another example, the passage of the
1996 Telecommunications Act altered the regulatory framework for dispute resolution between ILEC and
CLEC, particularly by shifting responsibility for documenting ILEC competitive (mis)behavior to state
regulators. It is an open question as to what firm this change comparatively favored — a local firm having
business or political connections with the state regulator or national firms with larger in-house legal
experience in regulatory proceedings.



                                                     9
       This plays a role in our analysis of 1999 in some ways and not in others. We
operate with the premise that expectations about demand growth beyond 1999 were
optimistic, but only in retrospect were they too optimistic. We presume that
contemporary actors made entry decisions on the basis of the best available information,
and we ask whether their behavior is consistent with the importance of scale-exceeding
efficiencies or customer-targeted differentiation. We acknowledge that deviations from a
common perception about the anticipated growth of the level of demand could alter the
number of CLECs a city can support. Conceivably, realized deviations from a common
perception about the anticipated success of CLECs that pursue particular forms of
differentiation could influence the CLEC types that survive in any market structure. In
the empirical work, we assume and condition on the presence of such common
perceptions.   Note that, in particular, perceptions cannot be systematically different
across areas of the country, since our identification strategy is based on cross-sectional
differences in market structure. Our framework will focus on measuring the incentive to
differentiate from a rival in the same location, as perceived at the time.


                                              III. Data

   Our modeling approach uses three types of information:
       1. We require cross-sectional information about CLEC entry. A census of CLEC
           firms operating in cities across the United States come from the 1999 CLEC
           Report, provided by NPRG (2000).
       2. We also require cross-sectional information about the economic conditions at
           specific localities. Information about the economic conditions in cities comes
           from the most recent U.S. Census data.
       3. Finally, we require cross-sectional information about the regulatory
           environment of specific localities.         Information about the regulatory
           environment comes from Abel and Clements’ (2001) study.


III.i Sample Construction
    We analyze product differentiation and competition among CLECs by studying the
structure of a cross-section of markets. We attempt to distinguish between as many


                                             10
different local markets as we can, while taking care to define markets in such a way that
the set of firms in the market all compete with each other (at least to some extent) and
that no firms outside the defined market are competitors.
    For CLECs, the most appropriate geographic market definition is at the level of
individual cities. Although jurisdictional boundaries for cities do not always correspond
with economic market boundaries in many industries, cities best approximate markets for
CLECs. The services CLECs provide are inherently locally focused — the firm must
establish a presence in a city in order to connect customers or businesses residing there.
This makes most small and medium-sized cities geographically distinct market areas,
even when they are suburbs in large metropolitan areas. We avoid the potential concern
of distinct submarkets within cities because we do not include larger cities in our
analysis. This difficulty is most serious in places such as Los Angeles or New York
City.7
    Similarly, the total size of the sample involved some trade-offs. We constructed a
sample of every city in the United States with at least one actual CLEC entrant as of
1999, while dropping a few cities due to for incomplete information. We also wanted to
include cities that are candidates for entry but that have not yet experienced it, because it
helps identify the margin between any entry and none. For this purpose, we also included
every city in the Untied States in which any CLEC expressed any announced plan to
enter, even when these plans were several years in the future. This approach yielded over
260 cities with no actual entrants as of 1999. Also, this provided us with a convenient
stopping rule, since there is little statistical benefit from including each of the thousands
of small isolated cities in the United States with little economic base for supporting
CLEC entry.8



7
  Our data set reflects this issue directly; for example, some CLECs reported operating in "New York City"
while others said they offered services in "Manhattan." From these descriptions, it was impossible to
discern whether the firms were competitors. Cities with potentially overlapping submarkets were removed
from the final data set.
8
  This does, however, preclude us from estimating a threshold between cities where entry is at least planned
and those with no CLEC activity at all. This threshold may also be of some policy interest, but is beyond
the scope of this paper.



                                                    11
      In Table 2, we summarize the firm counts in the 718 cities where at least one CLEC
was operating, or was planning to begin operations, as of 1999. The number in each box
in Table 2 indicates the number of cities that have the corresponding number of operating
and planned CLECs. Of the 718 cities, all but 260 had at least one firm operating as of
1999. A total of 261 cities had just one firm operating, with the numbers getting smaller
through ten or more firms operating. In the planned category, no new CLECs were
planning to enter in 250 cities, while 316 had one planned entrant (most of these were
among the 260 cities with no operating CLECs). Again, the number of cities with
CLECs in the planned category decreases rapidly across the table. There is considerable
planned entry in markets of all sizes; however, the markets with the largest number of
operating firms also have the largest number of planned entrants.


Table 2: Histogram of Cities: Number of Operating and Planned CLECs in the Market

                                                           Planned
Operating           0         1         2         3           4       5        6-9      10+      Total
        0         ––––       238       17         4           1       0         0         0       260
        1          203       38        14         5           0       0         0         0       261
        2           36       21        13         5           2       1         0         0        78
        3           6         9        12         4           2       0         2         0        35
        4           4         6         1         2           1       5         2         1        22
        5           1         1         1         1           2       0         4         1        11
      6-9           0         3         0         1           5       5        10         4        28
      10+           0         0         1         0           0       1        10        11        23
     Total         250       316       59        22          13      12        29        17       718



III.iii Firm Characteristics and the Endogenous Variable
    We classify firms into discrete categories on the basis of their business strategies and
product offerings.9 First, CLECs vary in the geographic extent of their operations. Some


9
    Those analysts who do acknowledge CLEC differentiation draw these distinctions similarly. Crandall and


                                                      12
CLECs have ambitions to be providers of telecommunication services in cities across the
country, whereas others focus on a more limited geographic region. Local firms may
better respond to the needs of consumers in particular markets, while national CLECs
may have scale economies in building reputation and can potentially offer consumers
located in multiple cities a common telecommunications vendor. The NPRG (2000) data
lists the complete set of cities into which each CLEC has entered. We labeled CLECs as
"local/regional" if they operate completely within one city or a small number of
contiguous states. Those operating in cities from multiple regions of the country are
labeled “national.”
    In Table 3, we present the breakdown between national CLECs and the local/regional
firms in each of the individual markets in the data set (note that this table only includes
the cities with at least one operating firm). Here we see that the cities with fewer
operating CLECs typically contain predominately local/regional firms — for example,
among the markets with one firm operating, that firm is a local/regional CLEC in nearly
80% of the cases. As the total number of firms increases, however, there is a greater
tendency for cities to be differentiated, with the same or close number of each type of
firms as opposed to all or almost all of one type. Nearly half of the two-CLEC markets
have one local/regional firm and one national firm. This general pattern holds in markets
with 3 or 4 CLECs as well. Over all, this table strongly hints at the presence of
differentiated entry.
        From the NPRG (2000) data, we also observe that individual CLECs
differentiated themselves by tailoring their service offerings to appeal to particular
groups of customers. The most distinct division was between business and residential
customers. Although every CLEC provided service to some business customers, we could
distinguish between those that also targeted residential users and those that focused on
business consumers only. Table 4 displays our markets for CLECs broken down between
these two customer focus categories. Again, we observe markets that are differentiated.


Sidek (2001), for example, emphasize the differences between a focus on business and residential
customers, as do we. Crandall (2001) also emphasizes the difference between building facilities and relying
on rental of unbundled network elements; however, we were not able to obtain comprehensive data on
these strategies and do not analyze them here.



                                                    13
Of the 78 two-CLEC cities, 58 have one firm that targets its offerings to businesses and
one firm that also serves residential customers. These raw data strongly suggest some
underlying pattern of entry in which differentiation is optimal — if the business-only and
some-residential CLECs were equally likely to enter the market under all circumstances,
we would expect as many as 52 of 78 markets to have exactly one firm of each type only
0.1% of the time. These patterns continue in markets with a larger total number of
CLECs as well.


           Table 3: Number of National and Local/Regional CLECs per City
                                             National CLECs
Local/Regiona          0              1               2             3             4+
  l CLECs
      0               N/A            69               5             3              1
       1              214            35              10             3              2
       2               38            11               9             3              1
       3               12             6               4             1              5
      4+               4              2               8             6              2




     Table 4: Number of Business Only and Some Residential CLECs per City
                                                Business Only
   Some
 Residential          0               1              2              3             4+
      0              N/A             144             15             5              6
       1              139            52              21             8              7
       2              11              8              8              4              7
       3               2              2              1              2              4
      4+               1              1              1              3              3


       Before leaving our discussion of product differentiation and the definition of the
dependent variable, we investigate the relationship between the two dimensions of



                                           14
heterogeneity. In Table 5, we summarize the pair of characteristics for the individual
CLECs operating in 1999. We found no apparent correlation between the customer focus
and the geographic scope of individual CLECs. In other words, a national CLEC was as
likely to maintain a business versus a residential focus as was a local/regional CLEC.
Had we found a correlation, we would have tried to assess both aspects of product
differentiation simultaneously. Since we do not, we analyze each axis of differentiation
separately.10


            Table 5: Number of Business Only and Some Residential CLECs
                                   Business only             Some                  Total
                                                          residential
            Local/Regional                31                  44                     75
                National                  16                   13                    29
                  Total                   47                   57                   104


The tables in this section show how CLECs with different classifications sort themselves
into markets of various sizes. The basic empirical fact in these tables portend our main
findings:    The CLECs acted as if differentiating their services provided additional
profitability and facilitated entry into local markets in the late 1990s. A pair of CLECs in
the same market most likely was distinguished by differentiated service offerings.


III.iii Economic Data about Localities
    Cities will differ in their ability to generate the necessary demand to make CLEC
entry attractive. To account for these differences, we collected demographic data from
each city. Market "size" was the most important of these characteristics — here, we are
interested in both the resident population and measures of business activity, since CLEC
services are often particularly valuable to business customers. Population is each city's
population and per capita income represents the average income of the city's residents.

10
  Even if we found a correlation, it is not clear that we even have sufficient data to identify
complementarity or substitutability. Athey and Stern (1998) detail the strict data requirements necessary to
identify complementarities in a cross-sectional study such as this. Even if complementarities were assumed
to be zero, a very large data set would be required in the case in which competing firms could choose
among four potential options (one of each type from two categories) simultaneously.



                                                    15
The variable payroll measures the annual payroll of workers employed in the city; as
such it combines both the overall level of business activity and the wages earned by
workers. Summary statistics for all of the explanatory variables are included in Table 6.
     As described above, we hypothesize that CLECs are able to share costs (such as
marketing, administration, and initial costs associated with interconnection) among
nearby cities (even if separate facilities are built). It is possible, therefore, that a small
city within a larger Metropolitan statistical area (MSA) may be less expensive for a firm
to serve than a more isolated city of equal size. We include the dummy variable city in a
top-10 MSA to represent those cities that are within the boundaries of one of the ten
largest urban areas in the United States. We confirm that the dummies were plausibly
related to our proposed interpretation of scope economies by inspecting the CLECs that
entered the city in a top-10 MSA. Of the 381 CLEC observations in such cities, 333 of
them also operated in the MSAs corresponding central city. 11
     We also examine cost differences across markets that relate to the local regulatory
environment. Abel and Clements’ (2001) study provides us with                           a time-series of
regulatory rules that states have used on ILECs under their jurisdiction.12 For each
state/ILEC combination, we counted the number of years (of the previous sixteen) that
either a rate freeze or price cap had been imposed. Our summary measure of regulatory
stringency is a collapsed version of this year count — regulatory stringency equals 0 in
areas where these alternatives had never been used, 1 if they had been tried for between
one and four years, and 2 if a freeze or cap was in place for more than five years. We
hypothesize that a higher value of regulatory stringency indicates a regulatory
environment that would be friendlier (i.e., be lower in cost) to an entering CLEC.


11
   We explored several other demographic variables as well. Because the facilities-based CLECs must
make capital investments in equipment to link their customers, cities with more geographically
concentrated residential neighborhoods and business centers may provide CLECs with customers that are
less expensive to serve. However, the density measures that we calculated (both residential and for
businesses) did not provide additional explanatory power. It may be that density differences affect where
CLECs operate within cities but not entry decisions across cities.
12
  Regulators often have different rules for each incumbent carrier within its state. These rules apply to all
the areas within that state where the particular incumbent operates. Therefore, it was necessary to match
each market to both its incumbent and its state regulator to determine the status of the incumbent
competitor.



                                                     16
Table 6: Explanatory Variables — Summary Statistics
                                                                 Small/Medium-Sized
                                        All Cities (n = 718)       Cities (n = 675)
                                                    Standard                  Standard
Label              Definition           Mean        Deviation     Mean       Deviation
Population       City population       137,143       357,890     85,270       110,244
Payroll      Annual payroll of city 2,196,817      6,544,441    1,247,663     1,802,501
                    employees
Per Capita    Per capita income of   14,542          5,376        14,517        5,518
Income             city residents
City in      Dummy Variable = 1       0.252          0.434         0.244        0.430
Top-10        if city within Top 10
MSA                    MSAs
Incumbent    Dummy variable = 1 if    0.726          0.447         0.720        0.449
= RBOC          ILEC is an RBOC
Regulatory   Regulatory stringency    1.152          0.687         1.147        0.687
Stringency   variable (described in
                        text)
Inter-        Interconnection rate    16.22           6.24         16.44         6.30
connection   set by state regulatory
rate                  agency

   Specific provisions in the 1996 Telecommunications Act require incumbents to
provide interconnection access to CLEC competitors; however, RBOC firms that wanted
to enter the market for long-distance services were precluded from doing so until
regulators were satisfied that they had been sufficiently cooperative with CLECs
attempting to interconnect and provide service in their local areas. Incumbents that were
not RBOCs did not have this incentive to facilitate CLEC entry. Following on the results
of Mini (2001), we included an RBOC dummy variable to control for the differing
incumbent incentives across the markets in the data set. In addition, local regulators
prescribed the costs that CLECs were required to pay ILECs for interconnection. These
rates vary by and within each state; typically they were set lower in more densely
populated areas. Using data from Gregg’s (2002) and Rosston and Wimmer’s (2001)
studies, we created the variable interconnection rate to capture the cross-sectional




                                           17
differences in interconnection costs for CLECs entering across cities in the data set.13
While entry costs for a CLEC depend on regulated rates for a variety of unbundled
elements, most of these rates are correlated with each other in the cross section. Hence,
one variable alone captures the biggest differences between locations.14


                                 IV. Empirical Models of CLEC Entry

     The empirical modeling approach that we utilize fits into the series of "multiple-agent
qualitative-response" frameworks introduced into industrial organization literature to
evaluate entry strategies and market competition. Using a cross-section of markets as
data, the econometrician infers the economic factors that contribute to the generation of
the observed market structure. Firms' strategies can be represented by discrete decisions
(e.g., enter/do not enter a particular market) that are made by evaluating the potential
alternatives. Estimation is complicated by the fact that the decisions of competing firms
may affect potential alternatives — for example, entry may be less attractive if other
firms also have entered the market. A game-theoretic behavioral model is used to infer
the factors influencing individual firm decisions from an observed market structure
outcome, which is determined by the choices made by interacting agents.


IV.i Entry Models Assuming Homogeneity
    Much of the industrial organization literature, as well as previous empirical papers on
CLEC entry, have estimated straightforward limited dependent variable models of market
structure. The simplest of these analyses are probits that predict the likelihood of entry
across markets; other studies estimate ordered probits with the number of firms as the
dependent variable. The market factors that determine entry are inferred from a profit
function that underlies the entry decision, such as

13
   Specifically, we use the unbundled network element (UNE) loop rate to proxy for the cost of
interconnection, as this represents the bulk of network connection costs. The CLECs may differ in the
particular UNEs that they need from the incumbent; however, these differences are orthogonal to the
product types that we are examining here.
14
   We also explored specifications for cross-sectional differences in the margins between regulated
telephony prices and regulated costs, as estimated by Gregg (2002). We found that the estimate of margins
and the estimate of interconnection rate were highly correlated, so we only included one in the final
specification.


                                                   18
                                 π m = X m β − Z mγ − N mθ + ε m
where m denotes the geographic market in question. Markets may differ in the cross-
section in X-characteristics affecting demand for the firms' products or in Z-
characteristics that affect the firms' market-specific costs. Nm represents the number of
firms that have entered the market; θ indicates the extent to which additional market
participants makes entry less attractive. The εm term represents the components of firm
profits that are unobserved to the econometrician.
        The parameters of this function can be estimated using a cross-section of market
structure observations. For example, we may observe two firms operating in market m.
This implies the following inequalities in market m:
                            π m = X m β − Z mγ − (2) *θ + ε m > 0

                            π m = X m β − Z mγ − (3) *θ + ε m < 0

The parameters are determined by maximizing the likelihood that the inequalities implied
by the observed market structures (assuming a distribution for the market level error
term) hold.


IV.ii   Extensions to Heterogeneous Markets
        This approach can be extended to analyze firms in heterogeneous markets as well.
Suppose that each market could have firms of two types, label them A and B. Now,
market structure is represented by an ordered pair (NA, NB) indicating the number of
observed firms of each type. In addition, there will be type-specific profit functions for
these firms:
                        π Tm = X m β T − Z mγ T − N Tmθ T − N −Tmθ −T + ε Tm ,
where the cost and demand effects can be type-specific and where we can allow the
effects of competitors to vary on the basis of whether they offer the same or different
product types. NTm indicates the number of same-type firms in the market, and N-Tm is the
number of firms of the other type. Therefore, the difference between the estimated θT
and θ-T parameters captures the extent to which product differentiation may limit the
effects of additional competitors on firm entry of each type. The unobserved part of
profits, εTm, is assumed to be different for each product type at a given market.


                                                 19
       With multiple product types, the set of inequalities that corresponds to each
market outcome is necessarily more complex. A market observed with a structure of
(A,B) implies that the following inequalities hold:
        π A ( A, B) > 0        π A ( A + 1, B ) < 0    π A ( A, B) > π B ( A − 1, B + 1)
        π B ( A, B) > 0        π B ( A, B + 1) < 0     π B ( A, B) > π A ( A + 1, B − 1)
Again, we estimate the parameters by maximizing the likelihood that the inequalities
corresponding to each observed outcome hold across the markets in the data set. (For
further details, see Mazzeo’s 2002 study.)


IV.iii Identification and Testing
    Using cross-sectional differences in observed market structure, thisthe following
approach identifies parameters describing the attractiveness of entry.. It is best suited for
analysis of small and medium-sized cities, because with many firms the marginal effect
of additional competitors is likely to be very small.           Consequently, we focus on
measuring the key differences between cities that may become substantially more
competitive with additional entry — places such as Buffalo, Little Rock, and Fresno. We
believe that for policy purposes, these markets are most interesting; after all, larger cities
will likely be competitive under almost any set of local and national regulations for
CLECs (Woroch 2001).
   Intuitively speaking, identification of differentiation comes from comparing
otherwise similar markets with different structures or, conversely, different markets with
otherwise similar structures. Two markets with the same number of firms may not be
otherwise equal — if the firms are more heterogeneous in one market, their
differentiation may accompany a smaller population.               A particular market with
insufficient demand to support two homogeneous firms may have enough demand for
two firms that differentiate. Recall that we conceptualize the function that underlies the
market structure observations as a profit function, even though firms may have
uncertainty about whether variable profits will exceed their costs of entry. To the extent
that markets are not in equilibrium at the times of our analysis, we are more precisely
measuring firms’ expectations about profitability and how these expectations are affected
by competition and differentiation. We assume common perceptions about profitability


                                                20
and assume that any potential deviation between perceptions and subsequent realizations
are not correlated across markets or product types.
        Finally, it is appropriate to think of our classification as a maintained assumption.
The framework does not measure whether our classification of differentiation
corresponds with success at executing the strategies identified in Table 1b, nor do we
measure how highly users valued particular types of CLECs. Our null hypothesis is that
firms enter without regard to the product type of their competitors, using the business
versus residential and local/regional versus national classifications from the previous
section. If we fail to reject the null hypothesis, we do so either because firms do not
differentiate from their local competitors or because we have inappropriately classified
the dimensions in which they differentiate. Such a failure to reject could arise, for
example, if differentiation between resale and facilities-based CLECs is actually what
matters and it is orthogonal to the classifications we do analyze. If we reject the null
hypothesis, then we accept the alternative hypothesis that CLECs enter local markets in
such a way as to differentiate along the dimensions we classify.


                                       V. Empirical Results

     To provide a comparison with earlier work, we begin our empirical analysis by
estimating probits predicting CLEC entry and ordered probits whose dependent variables
are the numbers of operating CLECs.                The explanatory variables highlight the
foundations of scale-exceeding efficiencies — local market demand, geographic scope,
and regulatory environment. Unlike the previous analysis of CLEC entry, however, we
examine city-level markets.15 The finely grained data should yield insight about the
precise relationship between local economic factors and entry levels. These estimates
also provide a useful benchmark against our later estimates that account for
differentiation.
     Tables 7 and 8 present the results from two estimations — in the first the dependent
variable is AOPERATE, a dummy variable that equals one if any CLECs are currently

15
  As was previously mentioned, prior studies of CLEC entry used individual LATAs as the unit of
observation. Each LATA may contain several individual city markets, as defined in our data set.



                                              21
operating within that market.16 We also present an ordered probit estimation, where the
dependent variable OPERATE is a count of the number of CLECs doing business in the
market.
     Table 7: Probit of CLEC Entry — Dependent Variable = AOPERATE
                       Small/Medium Sized Cities                                All Cities
                  Coefficient Standard                Z         Coefficient Standard                Z
                                Error                                         Error
Constant           –0.635       0.316               –2.01        –0.627       0.316               –1.98
Population          3.29e-6         1.48e-6         2.23           3.31e-6        1.48e-6          2.24
Payroll             3.17e-7         1.13e-7         2.81           3.23e-7        1.13e-7          2.85
Per Capita          2.56e-5         1.54e-5         1.67           2.55e-5        1.54e-5          1.66
Income
City in Top-          0.254          0.168          1.51            0.250          0.168           1.48
10 MSA
Incumbent             0.288          0.126          2.30            0.283          0.125           2.26
= RBOC
Regulatory            0.302          0.087          3.47            0.300          0.087           3.44
Stringency
Inter-               –0.033          0.010          –3.43          –0.033          0.010          –3.44
connection
rate
Note: For an easier comparison with the following analysis, cities with seven or more operating CLECs
were excluded from the left-hand panel. There are 675 observations, with 718 in the full data set of cities.

     All three demographic variables are positively correlated with CLEC entry, with
population and payroll being particularly significant. Entry is positively affected by both
the demand generated by consumers that live in the city and by businesses that operate
within the city. Interestingly, these two variables have somewhat greater predictive value
in the OPERATE ordered probit. This suggests that AOPERATE is a relatively coarse
measure, at least as far as approximating CLEC demand. We also see that the city in a
top-10 MSA dummy is positive in both estimations, but more significant in the
AOPERATE probit.              There appears to be some (albeit weak) evidence of scope

16
   Our set of markets that have zero operating firms, by construction, have at least one CLEC that is
planning to enter. This method of sample construction results in a wide array of cities – many with
populations under 50,000 and some in otherwise low-density rural areas. Still, this is a fully random
sample in the exogenous variables, so this method will bias the coefficients in Table 7 slightly downward,
as compared to a sample that also includes even tinier cities in which no CLECs had plans to enter.



                                                    22
economies, since CLEC entry is more common in small and medium-sized cities within
larger MSAs, all else being equal.
     The regulatory variables RBOC, regulatory stringency and interconnection rate are
all significant and have the expected sign. It appears easier for CLECs to enter in areas
where RBOCs are the incumbent local service providers; this is consistent with the
prediction that the regulatory incentives would make areas with RBOCs less hostile
toward potential entrants.17 The CLECs are also more common in areas where the
regulators had experimented away from traditional rate-of-return systems for longer
periods of time and where interconnection rates are set lower. These results suggest that
the regulatory environment can have both a long- and short-term effect on markets.

Table 8: Ordered Probit of CLEC Firm Counts — Dependent Variable = OPERATE
                       Small/Medium Sized Cities                                All Cities
                  Coefficient      Standard              Z      Coefficient       Standard           Z
                                     Error                                          Error
Population          4.40e-6         7.75e-7          5.68          1.65e-6         5.23e-7         3.15
Payroll             1.55e-7          4.79e-8         3.24          2.08e-7         3.29e-8         6.32
Per Capita          1.70e-5          9.55e-6         1.78          1.40e-5         9.22e-6         1.52
Income
City in Top-          0.138           0.117          1.18           0.059           0.112          0.53
10 MSA
Incumbent             0.206           0.102          2.02           0.253           0.098          2.58
= RBOC
Regulatory            0.160           0.068          2.34           0.172           0.066          2.62
Stringency
Inter-               -0.029           0.008          -3.56         -0.035           0.008          -4.35
connection
rate
Note: For an easier comparison with the following analysis, cities with seven or more operating CLECs
were excluded from the left-hand panel. There are 675 observations, with 718 in the full data set of cities.




17
  We also tried dummy variables for individual RBOCs; however, when averaged over all the cities where
the incumbents operate, the effect of individual RBOCs could not be distinguished from their aggregate
impact relative to non-RBOC incumbents.



                                                    23
V.i Product Heterogeneity Estimates
       In the heterogeneous products analysis, we allow for up to three firms of each
product type in the market — therefore, the endogenous market structure variable can
take on one of sixteen possible values. The information in Tables 3 and 4 capture the
variation in the dependent variable across all the markets in the data set.18 For each firm
type and market configuration, a set of dummy variables is defined, and the
corresponding θ-parameters represent the incremental effects of additional competitors
on the profits of firms in the market. For example, in the comparison between the
business-only and some-residential CLECs, we have 19
         θRR1 = effect of first some-residential competitor on some-residential CLECs,
         θRR2 = effect of second some-residential competitor on some-residential CLECs,
         θRB = effect of business-only competitors on some-residential CLECs,
         θBB1 = effect of first business-only competitor on business-only CLECs,
         θBB2 = effect of second business-only competitor on business-only CLECs, and
         θBR = effect of some-residential competitors on business-only CLECs.
The estimated parameters can be used to evaluate the null hypothesis of homogeneous
competition. A strict test of that property is |θRR1| = |θRB| and |θBB1| = |θBR|. We can reject
the null in favor of a model of differentiated competition if we find |θRR1| > |θRB| and |θBB1|
> |θBR|. There are similar tests for homogeneity and differentiation with respect to the
national versus local/regional classifications. Notice that in the absence of within-type
heterogeneity, we would expect to find |θRR1| > |θRR2| and |θBB1| > |θBB2|.
         As in the probit estimations, the appropriate X-variables to include are either
correlated with CLEC demand or entry costs in each market.                       The specification also
allows the effects associated with the X-variables to vary by product type. To ease
estimation, the data for the X-variables are transformed to the log of the actual value for


18
  For example, there are eleven markets whose dependent variable is (2,1) in the geographical ambition
model — two local operating CLECs and one national operating CLEC (cf. Table 3). Cities with more
than three firms in either category are treated as if they have exactly three in that category.
19
  The goal is to make the specification of the competitive effects as flexible as possible, while maintaining
estimation feasibility. More flexible parameterizations of these effects did not yield further economic
distinctions.



                                                     24
that market divided by the sample mean of that X-variable across all the markets in the
data set. Consequently, a value of X equal to the sample mean becomes zero, a value
above the mean becomes positive and a value below the mean becomes negative.20 This
also eases interpretation because it puts all variables on the same scale and allows for a
quick comparison of the economic importance of competing variables. For example, we
can say that differentiation is “economically important” if it is as large as the variance in
other exogenous variables, such as city size and income, which are known to shape the
number of overall entrants.
        We present the results from the heterogeneous products analysis below, with the
local/regional versus national classification in Table 9 and residential versus business
classification in Table 10. In each table, the estimated parameters indicate the impact on
entry of each type of CLEC depending on market conditions and the competitors they
face. For example, the relative value of the constants indicates the relative baseline
attractiveness of entry for each type. Table 9 indicates that, all else being equal, a
national CLEC would be more likely to enter before a local/regional CLEC, since CN =
0.8695 > CL = 0.4961.21 The advantage is less clear in Table 10, where the constant for
some-residential, CR = 0.2466, is only slightly greater than that for business-only,
namely, CB = 0.1463.
        Factoring in market conditions can change this relationship.                     For example,
consider the payroll variable — the parameter estimate for both product types is positive,
indicating that greater business activity attracts CLECs of either type. However, the
estimated parameter is higher for the national CLEC than that for the local/regional
CLEC. This indicates that as the payroll in a city increases, the relative attractiveness of
entry for national CLECs increases as well. To illustrate how this can change market
structure, suppose that in market m, payroll is half the sample mean, city in a top-10
MSA, RBOC and regulatory stringency are set to zero, and the other X-variables are at

20
 The transformation is done solely to facilitate estimation of the model. The estimation routine converges
more easily if the ranges of the independent variables are similar to each other.
21
  All the figures presented in this section represent predicted values. The comparisons between product
types assume that values of the unobservables for both types are at their mean — zero. Directly evaluating
the probability that one type’s entry is more likely than the other’s requires the standard errors of the
parameters, as well as an assumption about the variance of the errors for each type.



                                                   25
their sample means. With no competitors, operating a local/regional CLEC is now more
attractive [πL = 0.4961 + (-0.693) *(0.2430) = 0.328] than a national CLEC [πN = 0.8695
+ (–0.693)*(0.8943) = 0.250].22 This combination helps explain why the one-CLEC
markets in the data set are more skewed toward local/regional CLECs (see Table 3) —
small cities have less business activity and their lower business activity offsets the
relative value of the constants.
     The key result in the two tables comes from the estimated competitive effects on
CLEC type, as captured by the θ-parameters. The estimates indicate that the effects of
competitors come predominately from same-type CLECs. In Table 9, we observe that
the presence of a similar competitor makes entry quite unattractive (θLL1 = -–1.18; θNN1 =
–0.81). as compared to the presence of competitors of the other product type (θLN = -
0.00; θNL = -0.06). The estimates are similar in Table 10 for the some-residential CLECs
(θRR1 = –1.17; θRB = –0.00), though not quite as strong for the business-only firms (θBB1 =
–1.24; θBR = –1.12). This comparison accords with economic intuition. Recall that the
classification scheme here is between CLECs that are targeted just to businesses
(business-only) and CLECs that serve residential customers as well as businesses (some-
residential). By construction, firms are targeting overlapping customer bases. Hence, it is
not surprising that some-residential CLECs have a measurable competitive effect on the
business-only firms.23 In contrast, national firms target customers that differ from the
local firms, so each type of firm pursues strategies more distinct from each other.




22
  With payroll half the sample mean, the parameter estimate for income is multiplied by ln(0.5) = (-0.693),
to compute the prediction. The transformed value of an X-variable at its sample mean is zero; therefore,
the other variables do not contribute to the prediction.
23
   The customer overlap is not symmetric, as the presence of business-only competitors does not have an
effect on the some-residential CLECs. This may be because a business-only CLEC is not a relevant
alternative for part of the some-residential CLEC’s customer base, whereas the some-residential CLEC
would potentially be an alternative for all of a business-only CLEC’s customers.


                                                    26
   Table 9 — Profit Function Estimates from Two-Type Product Choice Model
                     "National" and "Local/Regional" CLECs
  Parameter                                        Estimate  Standard Error
  Effect on Local/Regional CLECs
  Constant                         CL              0.4961*       0.1385
  Local/Regional Competitor #1     θLL1           –1.1809*       0.1010
  Local/Regional Competitor #2     θLL2           –0.8523*       0.1141
  # of National Competitors        θLN             –0.0001       0.0043
  Population                       βL-POP          0.0518*       0.0110
  Payroll                          βL-PAY          0.2430*       0.0456
  Per-Capita Income                βL-INC          –0.3306       0.2802
  City in a Top-10 MSA             βL-MSA          –0.3192       0.2228
  Incumbent = RBOC                 βL-RBOC        –0.3340*       0.1489
  Regulatory Stringency            βL-REGEXP        0.0139       0.1127
  Interconnection Rate             βL-LOOPRATE    –0.9084*       0.3208
  Effect on National CLECs
  Constant                         CN              0.8695*       0.1910
  National Competitor #1           θNN1           –0.8062*       0.0744
  National Competitor #2           θNN2           –0.9518*       0.0965
  # of Local/Regional Competitors θNL             –0.0642*       0.0054
  Population                       βN-POP         –0.0338*       0.0047
  Payroll                          βN-PAY          0.8943*       0.1205
  Per Capita Income                βN-INC         –1.0413*       0.3416
  City in a Top-10 MSA             βN-MSA          0.7591*       0.2434
  Incumbent = RBOC                 βN-RBOC        –0.7921*       0.2000
  Regulatory Stringency            βN-REGEXP      –0.6350*       0.1673
  Interconnection Rate             βN-LOOPRATE     –0.0618       0.4445
   * Denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.



   These results provide strong evidence that CLECs enter markets in a pattern
consistent with substantial returns to product differentiation — customer-targeted
differentiation appears to insulate CLECs from lower margins that typically result form
reduced competition in homogeneous product markets.              While the differences across
product types is generally quite stark, substantial heterogeneity within types likely
remains. The effect of additional same-type competitors is about the same as the effect
of the first same-type competitor.             Remaining differences within product types is
consistent with lower prospects for entrants that face competition, but not low enough to
deter entry entirely.



                                                     27
   Table 10 — Profit Function Estimates from Two-Type Product Choice Model
               "Some-Residential" and "Business-Only" CLECs

  Parameter                                                   Estimate   Standard Error
  Effect on Some-Residential CLECs
  Constant                                      CR            0.2466*        0.1046
  Some-Residential Competitor #1                θRR1          –1.1676*       0.1113
  Some-Residential Competitor #2                θRR2          –1.7414*       0.2179
  # of Business-Only Competitors                θRB            –0.0000       0.0000
  Population                                    βR-POP         0.0541*       0.0107
  Payroll                                       βR-PAY        0.1794*        0.0426
  Per Capita Income                             βR-INC         0.7306*       0.2325
  City in a Top-10 MSA                          βR-MSA         0.5561*       0.2051
  Incumbent = RBOC                              βR-RBOC       –0.0003        0.0015
  Regulatory Stringency                         βR-REGEXP       0.0029       0.0034
  Interconnection Rate                          βR-LOOPRATE   –0.9246*       0.3096
  Effect on Business-Only CLECs
  Constant                                      CB             0.1463*       0.1055
  Business-Only Competitor #1                   θBB1          –1.2443*       0.0799
  Business-Only Competitor #2                   θBB2          –1.1097*       0.1125
  # of Some-Residential Competitors             θBR           –1.1234*       0.0944
  Population                                    βB-POP         0.0377*       0.0102
  Payroll                                       βB-PAY        0.3606*        0.0625
  Per Capita Income                             βB-INC          0.1280       0.2280
  City in a Top-10 MSA                          βB-MSA         –0.1156       0.2230
  Incumbent = RBOC                              βB-RBOC        –0.0893       0.0999
  Regulatory Stringency                         βB-REGEXP       0.0977       0.1080
  Interconnection Rate                          βB-LOOPRATE   –1.0268*       0.3381
   * Denotes statistical significance at the 1% level.


   Comparing the β-parameters between the upper and lower panels of the two Tables
illustrates how certain demographic variables and market conditions support one CLEC
type more or less than the other. As illustration, consider the market demand hypothesis
that was evaluated using the per capita income variable. The probit estimates indicates
that cities with higher per capita income were more attractive for entry; the differentiated
products analysis in Table 9 suggests that the some-residential CLECs find entry in such
areas relatively more attractive (βR-INC = 0.73) than the business-only CLECs (βB-INC =
0.13). The effect of the regulatory environment can also differ by product type, as the


                                                     28
local/regional CLECs get a positive boost in areas where the regulators have set lower
interconnection rates (βL-LOOPRATE = –0.91). The national CLECs appear to have entry
strategies that are largely independent of local cost conditions (βN-LOOPRATE = –0.06),
which suggests that the incentive to build a wide geographic base of operations is more
powerful that the effect of interconnection costs at individual markets.
   The differences in the βcoefficients provide further evidence of the merits of
modeling differentiation. All the coefficients between national and regional/local CLECs
are statistically different from each other, which indicates that the two types of firms are
attracted to much different locations. The same is not so for the coefficients on the
estimates for business-only and some-residential CLECs. Some of the coefficients differ,
principally payroll, per capita income, and city in top-10 MSA. As with our earlier
findings, this indicates that business-only and some-residential firms differ from each
other, but not as much. For example, the interconnection rate has the same effect on both
types.
   Taken together, these results strongly suggest that the differentiation strategies of
CLECs up through 1999 precipitated entry in many local markets.             The estimated
parameters are consistent with the notion that entry was more attractive for differentiated
CLECs than for CLECs whose service offerings were homogenous, thereby explaining
the market structure patterns displayed in Tables 3 and 4. Thus, we conclude that the
diffusion of CLECs into local markets throughout the United States operated through
economic forces beyond scale-exceeding efficiencies. We reject the hypothesis that
CLECs entry behavior is consistent with the presence of homogenous product
competition. Instead, we find strong evidence consistent with the presence of customer-
targeted differentiation. Also, the size of the parameter estimates suggests that the motive
to differentiation is economically important. Finally, different types of CLECs display
distinctly different degrees of sensitivity to certain local economic conditions and to the
local regulatory environment. This suggests a strong role for policy-making in shaping
the development of local telecommunications markets and the services provided by the
CLECs that enter.




                                            29
                                         VI. Conclusion

       The empirical results presented here demonstrate a striking pattern of product
differentiation among CLEC entrants through the late 1990s. Whether measured on the
basis of target customers or geographic scope, CLECs followed entry strategies that
resulted in markets that are almost evenly split between product types, as opposed to
dominated by firms of one type of another. This pattern suggests that CLECs were
concerned about competing with each other and that tailoring products to meet the needs
of consumers was an important business strategy for them. As such, we reject the
hypothesis that deregulation was driven exclusively by the logic of scale-exceeding
efficiencies. Instead, we argue that differentiated behavior shaped firm entry behavior as
much as differences in local economic and regulatory conditions.
       We conclude that the literature on competitive local telephony should begin to
investigate the many issues raised by this shift of views. The results demonstrate the role
that product differentiation can play in expanding competition in previously regulated
industries. For a variety of reasons, it may be difficult for a monopolist to effectively
serve all types of heterogeneous customers equally well. By opening such markets up to
competition, firms targeting underserved customers may enter — as they did for CLECs.
       Policy makers should account for consumer welfare gains that result from better
product targeting as well as from lower prices. While all pro-competitive policies for
local telephony support putting entrants through a market test, our results identify what
ignoring differentiation can miss. Policy making should not presume it knows the
formula for commercial success solely on the basis of observing ILECs and counting the
number of incumbent CLECs. Instead policy should identify CLEC strategies that differ
from those of the ILEC and other CLECs, with the intent of encouraging firms that let
consumers choose among an expanded array of options.




                                            30
References
Abel, Jaison. 2002. “Entry into Regulated Monopoly Markets: The Development of a
        Competitive Fringe in the Local Telephone Industry.” Journal of Law and Economics 45,
        289–316.

———and Matthew Clements. 2001. “Entry Under Asymmetric Regulation.” Review of
    Industrial Organization 19 (2), 227–42.


Athey, Susan and Scott Stern. 1998. "An Empirical Framework for Testing Theories About
        Complementarities in Organizational Design," mimeo.

Berry, Steven T. 1992. “Estimation of a Model of Entry in the Airline Industry.” Econometrica 60
        (4), 889–917.

Bresnahan, Timothy F. and Peter C. Reiss. 1991. “Entry and Competition in Concentrated
       Markets.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (5) 977–1009.

Crandall, Roberts W. 2001. "An Assessment of the Competitive Local Exchange Carriers five
       Years After the Passage of the Telecommunications Act" A Report for the USTA by
       Criterion Economics, LLC.

———and J. Gregory Sidek (2002), “Is Structural Separation of Incumbent Local Exchange
    Carriers Necessary for Competition?” Yale Journal on Regulation, 19(2), 1-75.

Federal Communication Commission. 2000. “Local Telephone Competition: Status as of June 30,
        2000,” Industry Analysis Division, Common Carrier Bureau, available at
        http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Common_Carrier/Reports/FCC-State_Link/recent.html

———. 2001. “Local Telephone Competition: Status as of June 30, 2001,” Industry Analysis
    Division, Common Carrier Bureau, available at
    http://www.fcc.gov/Bureaus/Common_Carrier/Reports/FCC-State_Link/recent.html

Gregg, Billy Jack. 2002. “A Survey of Unbundled Network Element Prices in the United States,”
       Public Service Commission of West Virginia, mimeo.

Mazzeo, Michael J. 2002. “Product Choice and Oligopoly Market Structure.” Rand Journal of
      Economics 33 (2), 221–42.

Mini, Federico. 2001. “The Role of Incentives for Opening Monopoly Markets: Comparing GTE
        and BOC Cooperation with Local Entrants.” Journal of Industrial Economics 49 (3),
        379–413.

New Resources Paradigm Group (2000), 1999 CLEC Report, 11th edition.

Rosston, Greg, and Brad Wimmer. 2001. ’From C to Shining C’ Competition and Cross-Subsidy
       in Communications. In Communications Policy in Transition: The Internet and Beyond,
       edited by Benjamin Compaine and Shane Greenstein. Cambridge, MA:MIT Press.




                                              31
Shiman, Daniel, and Jessica Rosenworcel (2002), “Assessing the Effectiveness of Section 271
       Five Years After the Telecommunications Act of 1996.” In Communications Policy and
       Information Technology: Promises, Problems and Prospects, edited by Benjamin
       Compaine and Shane Greenstein. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.

Woroch, Glenn. 2001. Local Network Competition In Handbook of Telecommunications
      Economics, edited by Martin Cave, Sumit Majumdar, and Ingo Vogelsang. Elsevier
      Publishing.

Zolnierek, James, James Eisner and Eller Burton. 2001. "An Empirical Examination of Entry
        Patterns in Local Telephone Markets." Journal of Regulatory Economics 19 (2), 143–59.




                                             32
