NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTICE:
ENDOGENOUS TECHNOLOGICAL CHANGE IN
THE DICE MODEL OF GLOBAL WARMING
David Popp
Working Paper 9762
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9762
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003

The author thanks William Nordhaus, Charles Kolstad, Larry Goulder, Ian Sue Wing, and two anonymous
referees for helpful discussions concerning this paper. Yixin Dai provided excellent research assistance.
Financial support for this work was provided by the National Science Foundation under grant number SES0001679. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by David Popp. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming
David Popp
NBER Working Paper No. 9762
June 2003
JEL No. O33, O41, Q43, Q48
ABSTRACT
Despite growing empirical evidence of the link between environmental policy and innovation, most
economic models of environmental policy treat technology as exogenous. For long-term problems
such as climate change, this omission can be significant. In this paper, I modify the DICE model of
climate change (Nordhaus 1994, Nordhaus and Boyer 2000) to allow for induced innovation in the
energy sector. Ignoring induced technological change overstates the welfare costs of an optimal
carbon tax policy by 8.3 percent. However, cost-savings, rather than increased environmental
benefits, appear to drive the welfare gains, as the effect of induced innovation on emissions and
mean global temperature is small. Sensitivity analysis shows that potential crowding out of other
R&D and market failures in the R&D sector are the most important limiting factors to the potential
of induced innovation. Differences in these key assumptions explain much of the variation in the
findings of other similar models.

David Popp
Department of Public Administration
Syracuse University
The Maxwell School
Syracuse University
400 Eggers Hall
Syracuse, NY 13244-1090
and NBER
dcpopp@maxwell.syr.edu

When studying solutions to long-term environmental problems such as climate change, it
is important to consider the role that technological change may play.

Nonetheless, most

economic models of climate change treat technology as exogenous. Since policies adopted to
combat climate change are likely to have a large impact on the pace and direction of
technological change, these models miss the important link between policy and innovation. In
this paper, I make use of empirical results on technological change in the energy industry (Popp
2002, 2001, 1998, 1997) to incorporate endogenous technological change into the DICE model
of climate change (Nordhaus 1994). In the model, technological change that enhances energy
efficiency is stimulated by changes in the price of energy, including carbon taxes. I use the new
model, named the ENTICE model (for ENdogenous Technological change), to compare the
overall global welfare costs of carbon policy to the results of models in which technological
change is exogenous. I show that ignoring induced innovation overstates the welfare cost of
reducing carbon emissions. However, cost-savings appear to drive the welfare gains, as the
effect of induced innovation on emissions and mean global temperature is small. Sensitivity
analysis reveals that market imperfections and potential crowding out effects limit the overall
effect of endogenous technological change.
To date, few models of climate change include endogenous technological change that
affects carbon emissions. The most prominent examples of models with endogenous
technological change are Goulder and Schneider (1999), Nordhaus (2002), and Buonanno et al.
(2003). However, none of the existing models make use of empirical estimates on the nature of
technological change to calibrate the model. I use the estimates obtained in previous work to
guide the development and calibration of a model of endogenous technological change that is
supported by empirical evidence.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

2

Although the DICE model is a greatly simplified macroecomic representation of the
global economy and the environment, its use offers two advantages for this work. First, because
of its relative transparency, sensitivity analysis of key assumptions is straightforward. Existing
models of technological change and the environment include differing assumptions about
features such as imperfect research markets and the potential crowding out effects of energy
R&D.

I use the ENTICE framework to provide a detailed sensitivity analysis of these

assumptions. Second, since the DICE model framework explicitly models both the costs and
benefits of greenhouse gas reduction, I hope to provide a better understanding of how
consideration of endogenous technological change affects the optimal policy decision. One can
imagine two offsetting effects of endogenizing R&D. Increased innovation allows a given
abatement target to be achieved more easily, thus lowering the carbon tax needed to meet a given
emission target. At the same time, lower abatement costs make greater emissions reductions
feasible, offsetting the desire to lower the carbon tax.1 Using the DICE model framework, I
solve for the optimal path of carbon taxes with and without endogenous technological change.
The paper begins with a review of the literature on induced innovation and the
environment.

A discussion of existing climate models with induced technological change

follows. Section II presents the modifications to the DICE model necessary to endogenize
technological change in the energy sector. Two policy simulations are presented in section III:
one representing an optimal policy, in which the marginal benefits and marginal costs of carbon
emission abatement are equal, and one restricting global emissions to 1995 levels. Section IV
includes sensitivity analysis on key assumptions, and uses this analysis to contrast the results of

1

In a theoretical model, Goulder and Mathai (2000) find that the first effect dominates, justifying a lower carbon tax
when innovation is considered. Parry (1995) offers a similar conclusion.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

3

ENTICE and other climate change models with endogenous technological change. Section V
concludes.

I. Literature Review
A. Induced Innovation and Environmental Policy
In this paper, I endogenize technological change by including policy-induced innovation
in the energy sector. The notion of induced innovation was first introduced by Hicks (1932),
who noted that changes in factor prices would lead to innovation to economize on usage of the
more expensive factor. In the environmental literature, the relationship between innovation and
policy has been explored under two broad themes.2 Papers such as Magat (1978), Milliman and
Prince (1989), and Fisher et al. (1998) use theoretical models to compare the effects of various
environmental policy mechanisms (e.g. command and control regulation, emissions taxes, or
tradable permits) on environmentally-friendly innovation. In general, these papers predict that
market-based policies, such as a tax or tradable permit, will induce more environmentallyfriendly innovation than a command and control policy.
Recently, empirical economists have begun to estimate the effects that prices and
environmental policies have on environmentally-friendly innovation. Both Lanjouw and Mody
(1996) and Jaffe and Palmer (1997) find correlations between pollution abatement expenditures
and measures of environmental innovation. Jaffe and Palmer (1997) estimate a positive elasticity
of pollution control R&D with respect to pollution control expenditures of 0.15.
Other papers use energy prices and related regulations as the mechanism that induces
innovation. Although the observed price changes might not be policy-related, the results can be

2

A comprehensive survey of the literature on technological change and the environment may be found in Jaffe,
Newell, and Stavins (2003).

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

4

applied to situations where policy affects prices, such as a carbon tax. Using hedonic techniques
to study the effect of energy prices and energy efficiency regulations on air conditioners and
natural gas water heaters, Newell et al. (1999) find energy prices to have the largest technology
inducement effect. However, they do not estimate a price elasticity. Popp (2002) uses patent
data from 1970-1994 to estimate a long run price elasticity between energy prices and energy
patents of 0.35. Important for long-term modeling, Popp also finds evidence of diminishing
returns to this R&D, so that the effect of a carbon tax on R&D will be smaller in the long run.
Finally, Popp (2001) uses the same patent data to estimate the industrial energy savings resulting
from new energy patents. The average patent generates approximately 7.9 million dollars over
the life of a patent. To put this figure in perspective, consider that an average of 2.25 million
dollars of R&D is spent per patent in these energy fields.

B. Induced Innovation in Climate Change Models
Despite the growing evidence that environmental policy influences the direction of
technological change, few climate change models directly incorporate links between policy and
technology.3 Those that do typically model innovation in one of two ways. Bottom-up models
include a detailed specification of energy systems. These models typically do not include
detailed modeling of the overall macroeconomy, and typically model induced technological
change in a learning-by-doing framework, in which the costs of various technologies decrease
with experience. Examples include Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2003), Manne and Richels

3

The results of Chakravorty, Roumasset, and Tse (1997) show why considering the link between policy and
technological change is important. They present a simulation showing that the development of alternative fuels
lowers the projected temperature increases caused by global warming from 3-6 degrees centigrade to just 1-2
degrees centigrade. Unfortunately, they do not model the development of such technologies, but rather assume that
they continue to develop at historical rates. Since much of the development of alternatives such as solar energy
occurred during the period of high energy prices during the late 1970s, assuming that historical rate of technological
progress will continue without policy stimulation is unrealistic, and may lead to overly optimistic results.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

5

(2002), Grübler and Messner (1998), and Messner (1997). Top-down models focus on the links
between environmental policy and macroeconomic performance. Endogenous technological
change in these models typically comes through accumulated investment in research and
development (R&D). Recent models of this nature include Goulder and Schneider (1999),
Nordhaus (2002), and Buonanno et al. (2003). The ENTICE model builds on the work of the
top-down models.
Goulder and Schneider’s model is a computable general equilibrium (CGE) model
including both a carbon-based energy sector and an alternative energy sector. They find induced
R&D lowers the cost of achieving a given abatement target, but also increases the gross costs
(costs before accounting for environmental benefits) of the carbon tax, as the economy now
responds more elastically to the tax. They do conclude that the net benefits of a carbon tax are
larger when induced innovation is considered—the cost of achieving any given level of
abatement is lower when induced innovation is included in the model.4
Nordhaus (2002) introduces the R&DICE model, a variant of the global DICE model
using a fixed proportions production function to model induced technological change. R&D is
modeled as shifting the minimum level of carbon/energy inputs required for production. Factor
substitution is not allowed in the model. As a result, Nordhaus is able to compare the role of
induced innovation to the role of factor substitution in reducing greenhouse emissions.
However, he is not able to combine the two effects to show how the optimal carbon tax is
affected. Nordhaus concludes that induced innovation is less important than factor substitution
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

In comparison, Buonanno et al. (2003) introduce

technological change to the RICE model, which is a regional version of the DICE model. They

4

These cost savings can be significant. For example, the cost of achieving a 30% reduction in cumulative emissions
falls by nearly 25% using their central case parameter values.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

6

find that technological change is able to significantly lower abatement costs in this model,
although the exact magnitude varies by region and whether or not trading of emissions rights is
allowed.
One key difference in the approaches used by Nordhaus and Buonanno et al. is the
assumption each makes about the potential opportunity costs of R&D. Nordhaus assumes that
there is a fixed amount of total R&D spending in the economy. Thus, any increases in energy
sector R&D must come at the expense of R&D aimed at increasing the overall level of
productivity.

In contrast, Buonanno et al. model a single R&D stock, which accumulates

endogenously. The accumulated stock of R&D has two effects: it increases total factor
productivity and decreases the carbon intensity of the economy. Thus, rather than policyinduced R&D crowding out other research efforts, in their model policy-induced R&D actually
enhances overall productivity as well!
A look at recent data suggests that neither assumption is correct. Figure 1 presents data
on energy R&D and non-energy R&D performed by U.S. industries from 1972-1998. The data
are normalized so that 1982 = 100. Although increases in energy R&D do lead to decreases in
non-energy R&D, there is no evidence of a dollar for dollar tradeoff.5 Rather, the data suggest
only partial crowding out occurs.
To improve upon the results of these papers, my model includes a specification of
production that allows for both endogenous technological change and factor substitution. As
such, I am able to study how endogenous technological change affects the optimal policy

5

Further evidence can be found by regressing non-energy R&D on energy R&D. Complete crowding out results in
a coefficient of –1 on energy R&D. Using data from 1972-1998, and correcting for autocorrelation, I obtain the
following regression results (standard errors in parenthesis):
non-energy R&D = -9320.351478 –0.41energy R&D + 19.82GDP + ε
(4762.59) (1.09)
(0.73)

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

7

decision. In addition, the model will be calibrated based on empirical estimates of energy-saving
R&D derived in previous work. These studies show that the reaction of R&D to changes in
energy prices is quick, but that it may not be long-lasting, as there are diminishing returns to
R&D over time. Finally, the model is set up to allow straightforward sensitivity analysis of the
opportunity cost of energy R&D. The results show that assumptions on this opportunity cost
have a significant effect on the magnitude of the welfare gains possible from induced innovation.

II. The Model
I begin by modifying the latest version of Nordhaus’ DICE model (Nordhaus 2000) to
accommodate induced technological change. The DICE model (Nordhaus 1994, 2000) is a
dynamic growth model of the global economy that includes links between economic activity,
carbon emissions, and the climate. A related model, the RICE model, extends the DICE model to
include 13 regions of the world. Documentation of the most recent modifications of the model
(RICE-99 and DICE-99) can be found in Nordhaus and Boyer (2000).6
My model, the ENTICE model (for ENdogenous Technological change), combines
features of both models. In particular, following the RICE-99 framework, I model carbon-based
energy sources as an input to production, rather than a by-product requiring control. However, I
use the global framework of the DICE model, rather than the regional framework of the RICE
model. This offers a couple of advantages. Most importantly, a particular goal of this research is
to calibrate technological change in a way that is consistent with existing empirical studies.
Calibrating a regional model would not only require estimates of induced innovation that varied
by region, but also information on flows of knowledge across regions. Given the limited

6

This publication is available on the Internet at: http://www.econ.yale.edu/~nordhaus/homepage/dicemodels.htm.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

8

empirical evidence available, calibrating a regional model is left for future research. In addition,
the DICE model is simpler in structure, and thus is more accurate for long-time frames
(Nordhaus and Boyer 2000). Because of the long-term nature of technological change, trading
off regional detail for greater long-term accuracy seems worthwhile.
In both the DICE and ENTICE models, the goal of the model is to maximize per capita
utility, equation (1), subject to the economic constraints below [equations (2)-(10)].7
T

(1)

max V = ∑ U t [ct , Lt ]Rt
t =0

In this equation, Ut represents utility at time t, ct is per capita consumption, Lt represents
population, and is also the measure of labor inputs. Rt is a discount factor to represent the rate of
time preference.8
The objective function, (1), is maximized subject to the following constraints. First,
production is defined. The ENTICE model follows the RICE model by including emissions as
an input to the production process. Below, Qt represents output produced at time t. Overall
technological progress comes through changes in total factor productivity, At. In addition to
labor, other inputs are the physical capital stock, Kt, and Ft, which represents the level of fossil
fuels used at time t. The cost of these fuels is pF. Et is a measure of effective energy units that

7

Environmental equations remain unchanged from the DICE model, and are not presented here. They are included
in an appendix available from the author.
8
As many economists have recently noted, discount rates that seem appropriate for single-generation projects may
be inappropriate for long term projects that span several generations. Although there is no consensus on how to deal
with this problem, a constantly declining discount factor is consistent with suggestions that a lower discount rate
should be used for the distant future. Thus, following Nordhaus, the pure rate of social time preference, R, declines
over time to capture uncertainty over future conditions, and is given by R (t ) =

10

∏ [1 + R e ]
t

0

− grt

, where gR is a

v =0

parameter defining the growth of R over time. Portney and Weyant (1999) provide a good review of the current
debate on discounting for long-term environmental projects.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

9

accounts for both fossil fuel inputs and technological change in the energy sector. The cost of
these fossil fuels are subtracted from total output in the ENTICE model:9
(2)

Qt = At K tγ L1t−γ − β Etβ − p F Ft
Labor is determined by exogenous population growth. The capital stock, Kt, equals the

sum of current investment, It, and the previous capital stock, adjusted for depreciation, δ:
(3)

Kt = It – δKt-1.

In equilibrium all output must go to either consumption or investment, so that:
(4)

Qt = Ct + It.
To begin, consider the case of exogenous technological change only. Following the

RICE model, exogenous technological improvement comes through changes in the ratio of
carbon emissions per unit of carbon services, Φt. Φt increases over time as defined below, where

gtz is the growth rate of Φt per decade, and δz is the rate of decline of this growth rate. Given
this, actual carbon emissions are represented in the model as:
(5)

Et =

Ft
, where
Φt

 g z
Φ t = exp  tz
 δ


 1 − exp − δ z t


(

(

))


The parameters defining Φt are calibrated to match the emissions path of the DICE model.
Since the ENTICE model includes carbon-based energy as an input to production, it is
necessary to include a cost for this input. Following the RICE model, the price of carbon is the
sum of the marginal cost of carbon extraction, qF, and a markup that captures the difference

9

Energy consumption, represented by fossil fuel usage, F, is measured in tons of carbon. The price of fossil fuels is
thus the price per ton of carbon.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

10

between consumer prices and the marginal costs of extraction. Nordhaus notes that this markup
includes transportation costs, distribution costs, and current taxes.
(6)

PF = qF + markup

In the RICE model, the markup varies by region. To adopt this parameter for the global
ENTICE model, I use a weighted average of regional markups from RICE, weighting by each
region’s share of total carbon consumption in the base year. This value equals 163.29.
Following Nordhaus, the marginal cost function, qF, takes the following form:
(7)

q F = 113 + 700[CumC t / CumC*] 4

CumCt represents cumulative carbon extraction up to year t, and CumC* represents the
maximum possible extraction. In this equation, the marginal cost independent of exhaustion is
$113 per ton. Marginal costs increase as extractin increases. Note that the price equation is
extremely convex – the carbon price equation is relatively elastic in the short run.10
Having added carbon fuels as an input to production in the DICE model, the next step is
to add induced technological change to the ENTICE model. For this, I create a stock of
knowledge that relates to energy efficiency. Similar to a physical capital stock, this knowledge
capital stock is created by the accumulation of previous research and development (R&D) in the
manner described below.
(8)

H E ,t = h( RE ,t ) + (1 − δ H ) ⋅ H E ,t −1 ,

i = A,E

Equation (8) states that the stock of knowledge, HE,t, increases due to increases in R&D
net depreciation of old knowledge. The function h(RE,t) is the innovation possibility frontier. It
models the process by which energy R&D, RE,t, creates new knowledge. The parameter δH
allows for the possibility of knowledge decay over time.
10

A more detailed discussion of the derivation of these parameters can be found in Nordhaus and Boyer (2000).

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

11

As noted earlier, empirical work suggests that there are diminishing returns to energy
research over time. The assumption here is that, since energy R&D is specialized within a given
field, it becomes more and more difficult to find new inventions as the knowledge frontier moves
out. Thus, any functional form for the innovation possibility frontier must have the following
properties. First, the derivative of h with respect to R should be positive, but the second
derivative should be negative, so that there are diminishing returns to research at any given time.
In addition, the derivative ∂2H/∂R∂H should be negative, so that there are diminishing returns to
research over time. One functional form that satisfies these assumptions is a constant elasticity
relationship between research and knowledge:
(9)

h(RE,t) = aRbE,tHφE,t

A similar innovation possibilities frontier is often used in the endogenous growth literature.11
Equation (9) satisfies the two assumptions regarding diminishing returns to R&D as long as both

b and φ are between 0 and 1.
Having defined this stock of knowledge, total energy use is now modeled as a
combination of carbon-based fossil fuels and energy-related human capital.

Energy-based

human capital can be thought of as knowledge that allows output to be produced with less carbon
emissions, either because of increased energy efficiency or more effective emissions control:

(10)

11


 Ft
E t = α H H Eρ,t + 

 αΦΦt





ρ

1


 ,

ρ

ρ≤1

See, for example, Jones (1995) and Porter and Stern (2000). Romer’s (1990) original specification of the
endogenous growth model is a special case of this where φ = 1. By setting φ = 1, Romer generates increasing
returns to knowledge over time. While this may be appropriate for macro-level R&D, for more specific R&D in a
given field, it is reasonable to assume that the returns fall over time as the pool of potential ideas in the field dries up
[see, for example, Griliches (1989 p. 317)]. Popp (2002) uses energy patent citations to provide evidence of
diminishing returns to energy R&D.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

12

Equation (10) states that the total energy requirements for production must be met either
by the use of fossil fuel or by technological advances that substitute for fossil fuels. The
technological advances may be thought of as improvements in the energy efficiency of existing
production processes, as fuels that are substitutes for fossil fuels, or as improvements in
emissions control technology. In this equation, ρ represents the ease of substitution between
fossil fuels and knowledge.

The case of perfect substitution is ρ = 1. The elasticity of

substitution between them is 1/(1–ρ). αH is a scaling factor that determines the level of energy
savings resulting from new energy knowledge.

αΦ is a scaling factor for any remaining

exogenous reductions in carbon intensity.
The scaling factor αΦ is included to allow for other potential exogenous changes that may
lower carbon intensity (the carbon/output ratio). The R&D modeled through the innovation
possibilities frontier captures purposeful short-term efforts to improve energy efficiency or
otherwise reduce carbon emissions. However, such R&D is not the only way in which carbon
intensity falls over time. Examples of other potential influences on carbon intensity include
changes in consumption patterns and switching to less carbon intensive fuels (e.g. from coal to
oil to natural gas) over time.

Because the DICE model and its variants are a one-sector

macroeconomic growth model, such changes are not explicitly modeled. As Nordhaus calibrates
exogenous technological change based on historical rates of decarbonization, it is impossible to
separate out these effects from the effects of R&D in his rate of exogenous technological change.
Removing these exogenous influences from the model completely would not only remove the
results of any energy R&D included in Nordhaus’ calibration, but also would remove the effect

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

13

of these other long-term changes in carbon intensity. As a result, long-run emissions simulated
without any exogenous decline in carbon-intensity are unrealistically high.12
Because of the public goods nature of knowledge, the role of market failures in R&D
must be considerd. Virtually all empirical studies of R&D find that the social returns to R&D
are greater than the private returns to R&D.13 Since firms will invest until the private rates of
return to R&D are equal to the rates of returns on other investments, underinvestment in R&D
will occur. To model the positive externalities that result from the creation of new knowledge,
the private return on R&D investment is constrained to be four times that of investment in
physical capital.14
Finally, we need to account for the opportunity cost of R&D. First, equation (4) is
modified to include R&D:
(4’)

Qt = Ct + It + RE,t

Second, the potential effects of crowding out must be considered. The opportunity cost of a
dollar of energy R&D is that one less dollar is available for any of three possible activities:
consumption, physical investment, or investment in other R&D. The opportunity costs of the
first two are simply valued at one dollar. However, since the social rate of return on R&D is four
times higher that of other investment, losing a dollar of other R&D has the same effect as losing
four dollars of other investment. Thus, the price of any research that crowds out other research is
four dollars.

12

Fortunately, sensitivity analysis suggests that the percentage of exogenous technological change remaining does
not affect the net economic impact of induced technological change. The intuition is that it is the level of R&D
induced between an exogenous and endogenous R&D simulation that affects this difference. Changing the scaling
factor only changes the level of emissions in each simulation, but not the difference between them. This is discussed
more thoroughly in the sensitivity analysis presented in section IV.
13
There is a large body of empirical work that verifies the social returns to R&D are greater than the private returns.
Examples include Mansfield (1977, 1996), Pakes (1985), Jaffe (1986), and Hall (1995).
14
This is done by calculating the marginal products of physical capital investment and energy R&D, and
constraining the latter to be four times higher than the former.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

14

To implement this, four dollars of private investment are subtracted from the physical
capital stock for each dollar of R&D crowded out by energy R&D, so that the net capital stock
is:
(3’)

Kt = (It – 4*crowdout*RE,t)– δKt-1,

where crowdout represents the percentage of other R&D crowded out by energy R&D. The base
ENTICE model assumes 50% crowding out.
To calibrate the R&D sector of the ENTICE model, several new parameter values are
needed. These include:

• the initial value of energy research, RE0. This value is 10 billion dollars.15
• ρ, the substitution parameter in equation (10),
• parameters in the invention possibilities frontier (9): a, b, and φ, and
• the initial level of energy human capital, HE0,16
• αΗ , the scaling factor for the effect of this human capital, and
• αΦ , the percentage of exogenous reductions in carbon intensity remaining.
I calibrate these parameters to yield results consistent with empirical work on induced
innovation in the energy sector. I focus on several key results:

• Estimates of the elasticity of energy R&D with respect to changes in energy prices
suggest that the response is inelastic. Using a distributed lag model, Popp (2002) finds
a long run elasticity of 0.35. In a similar study, Jaffe and Palmer (1997) estimate an

15

To get this value, I begin with an estimated level of total global spending on R&D of $500 billion. This figure is
based largely on data from OECD countries. Energy R&D data is not available on a global basis. However, it is
available for the United States. In the U.S., two percent of R&D spending in 1995 went to energy-related R&D.
The $10 billion figure used in this paper is simply two percent of the global level of R&D. This figure is also close
to the initial value of R&D used by Nordhaus (1999).
16
Note that, since human capital enters the invention possibilities frontier multiplicatively, the initial value cannot
be zero.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

15

elasticity of pollution control R&D with respect to pollution control expenditures of
0.15.

• There are diminishing returns to energy R&D. Although energy prices peaked in
1982, patenting activity in these energy-related technologies began to drop during the
late 1970s. Popp (2002) provides evidence that this decline can be explained by
diminishing returns to R&D over time. Thus, the inducement effect of energy prices
will fall over time.

• Energy R&D has a significant impact on energy consumption. Using energy patent
data from 13 energy-intensive industries, Popp (2001) finds that each new energy
patent leads to 8 million dollars of energy savings. To put this figure in perspective,
consider that an average of 2 million dollars of R&D is spent per patent in these
energy fields – suggesting a 4:1 ratio of energy savings to energy R&D.17 This ratio is
consistent with other empirical studies, such as those cited in footnote 13.

• Both the response of energy R&D to price changes and the energy savings resulting
from these new technologies occur quickly.

Using the lag parameter from a

distributed lag regression, Popp (2002) finds that mean lag for the effect of energy
prices on energy patenting is 3.7 years, and the median lag is 4.9. In addition, the
energy savings resulting from new patents occur quickly. Popp (2001) estimates rates
of decay and diffusion for the knowledge embodied in new patents in 13 industries. It
takes just three years for an invention represented by a patent application to have its
maximum effect on energy consumption. Since the responses are fairly quick, and

17

Popp (2001) is a micro-level study focusing on specific industries and technologies. Since the industries included
are energy-intensive industries, the total impact of energy R&D on the global economy may be somewhat smaller.
As a result, the sensitivity analysis includes results of simulations using a 2:1 ratio of energy savings to energy
R&D.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

16

since each time period in the ENTICE model represents one decade, I assume that the
full effects of price changes on energy R&D occur within each decade.
Table 1 lists the parameter values used for both the base case simulations, as well as for
various alternate scenarios considered in section IV. A complete discussion of the steps required
for calibration is available in an appendix.

III. Policy Simulations

With the completed ENTICE model in hand, I proceed to simulate the results of imposing
a carbon emissions policy on the global economy. The goal in each simulation is to compare the
results of imposing a policy under exogenous technological change to the results of imposing a
policy under endogenous technological change in the energy sector. I simulate exogenous
technological change by restricting energy R&D to equal the levels found in a base-case no
policy simulation. In each, a carbon tax will be used as the policy instrument to achieve reduced
emissions.18 I calculate the net economic impact of a policy as the present value of consumption
under the policy minus the present value of consumption in the base case, in which carbon
emissions are uncontrolled. Two policy options are considered: an optimal policy in which the
marginal costs of carbon abatement equal the marginal environmental benefits of reduced carbon
emissions, and restricting emissions to 1995 levels. The more restrictive policy is included

18

Of course, other policy instruments, such as international permit trading, have received more attention in recent
climate negotiations. In a global model such as ENTICE, trading among countries is not possible. Nonetheless,
since a successful permit market would equate marginal abatement costs across countries, a carbon tax set at the
marginal cost of abatement can also be thought to represent the price of a permit that would result. One difference is
that, under permit trading, new innovations would result in cost savings, but not in emissions reductions, since the
number of permits is fixed. A discussion of such a simulation follows.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

17

because most climate policies proposed in the policy arena aim for far greater restrictions than
called for in an optimizing economic model.19

A. Optimal Policy
Because the DICE model and its variants incorporate environmental damages into the
model, it is possible to calculate an optimal carbon policy, in which the marginal costs of carbon
abatement equal the marginal benefits of lower emissions. Typically, simulations involving
these models find that the optimal policy is to go slow. Since carbon emissions remain in the
atmosphere for several hundred years, the marginal damages resulting from any new emissions
are modest. Thus, gradually phasing in carbon reduction lowers the opportunity cost of reducing
emissions without having much impact on the global climate. As an example, Nordhaus and
Boyer (2000) calculate an optimal carbon tax in 2005 of $9.13 per ton.

In comparison,

restricting emissions to 1990 levels would require a carbon tax of $52.48.
The first row of table 2 shows the welfare gains for the optimal policy scenario.
Including endogenous technological change increases welfare by 8.3%. An optimal carbon tax
with exogenous technological change improves welfare by $1.74 trillion. This welfare gain
increases to $1.88 trillion when the effects of R&D induced by the policy change are considered.
Although the effect of endogenous technological change on overall welfare is significant,
its effect on key economic and environmental variables is small. Table 3 provides more detail on
the effect of endogenous technological change on key variables. Note that the magnitude of the
optimal policy does not change when technology is endogenous. Both the optimal carbon tax

19

For example, the Kyoto Protocol requires industrialized country emissions to be reduced by 5 to 8 percent below
1990 levels. Since the DICE model is global, capturing regional differences, such as the lack of restrictions on
developing countries, is not possible. Thus, I use a slightly higher global emissions constraint to allow for higher
emissions from developing countries.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

18

and optimal control rate are virtually unchanged. Moreover, although emissions fall somewhat
when technological change is endogenous, the slight decrease in emissions has little effect on
average global temperature. Figure 2 plots the deviation from 1900 temperature levels with no
policy, optimal policy with and without endogenous R&D, and the more restrictive policy
limiting emissions to 1995 levels. Even including induced technological change, an optimal
carbon policy does not come close to reaching the temperature limits imposed by more restrictive
policies. There is almost no variation in global mean temperature between the endogenous and
exogenous R&D case. In fact, after 100 years the temperature is just 0.04% lower when the role
of endogenous technological change is included.
One reason for the small change in atmospheric temperature is that much of the welfare
gains from induced technological change come from cost savings that make meeting
environmental goals cheaper.

To explore this further, I re-ran the model allowing for

endogenous energy R&D and a carbon tax, but fixing emissions in the policy run to equal those
found with exogenous R&D and a carbon tax. In this case, the only benefits coming from
increased energy R&D are potential cost savings, as emissions, and thus climate, do not change
from the exogenous R&D case.20 In this case, considering endogenous energy R&D increases
welfare by 8.1%, rather than the 8.3% increase found when emissions were allowed to change.
In the ENTICE model, the primary gains from energy R&D come not from climate
improvements, but from reducing the opportunity cost of reducing fossil fuel emissions.
To help interpret the magnitude of the energy R&D performed in the simulations, Table 3
includes the level of energy R&D activity with both exogenous and endogenous R&D and the

20

This simulation could also be thought of as the effect of using tradable permits, rather than a carbon tax, to
implement an “optimal” emissions path.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

19

elasticity of energy R&D with respect to carbon price. 21 This figure is calculated for each year
based on the difference in both energy R&D and carbon prices in simulations with and without
policy. Based on the results of Popp (2002), the model is calibrated so that this elasticity equals
0.35 in 2005. Because diminishing returns to energy research reduce the inducement effect over
time, the elasticity of energy R&D falls over time, as shown in Figure 3.22 Thus, diminishing
returns to research have the effect of lowering energy R&D somewhat in the long-run.
These results present a puzzle. The changes in individual variables are small, yet the
welfare gains are more significant. Examining the effect of the carbon tax on energy R&D helps
explain this finding. The additional induced R&D from the optimal carbon tax is small, as the
tax is just a small percentage of the overall price of carbon.23 In addition, energy R&D is just a
small part of the overall economy. Because energy R&D is a small part of the overall economy,
and the elasticity of energy R&D to energy prices is also small, adding induced innovation to the
DICE model has little effect on the optimal policy.

Nonetheless, because knowledge is

cumulative, small changes in R&D in any given year have important long-run effects.
The finding that technological change has just a small effect on these annual measures
emphasizes that it is important to look not at the change in individual variables, but at the overall
welfare change. Although the annual value of these benefits may be small, the accumulated
value over a 300-year time span is important. The creation of new knowledge not only offers
benefits to current generations, but also provides the building blocks for future research. As a
result, long-run welfare gains are larger with endogenous technological change.

21

This is

Recall that the level of energy R&D with exogenous technological change is simply the level of energy R&D
from the base case simulation without policy.
22
To account for the effect of economic growth, all elasticities are calculated using the ratio of energy R&D to
output.
23
For example, the $10.16 in 2005 is just 3.5 percent of the total price of carbon.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

20

illustrated by Figure 4. Figure 4 compares the cumulative welfare gain in the endogenous and
exogenous technology cases.24 In the years immediately after implementation of a carbon tax,
benefits actually accumulate more quickly with exogenous technological change. Early on, the
opportunity cost of additional R&D reduces welfare gains. However, by 2125, the welfare gains
with endogenous technological change begin to outpace those with exogenous technological
change, with the difference between them soon stabilizing.
To further illustrate the effects of additional R&D spending, Figure 5 shows the
accumulation of welfare gains over time resulting from an additional $1 billion energy R&D
spent in the base year of 1995. Note that welfare initially falls after the introduction of $1 billion
of energy R&D, before reaching an eventual increase of $5.12 billion.

This 5:1 ratio is

consistent with the notion that the social returns to R&D should be significant, due to the public
goods nature of research.

B. Restricting Emissions to 1995 Levels
Adding induced innovation to the ENTICE model also increases welfare in the more
restrictive carbon abatement policies, although the effect is smaller. Indeed, the net economic
impact of restricting emissions to 1995 levels is negative even with endogenous technological
change. Section B of Table 2 presents the net economic impact of these restrictions. Induced
innovation improves welfare by 5.6% under the more restrictive policy, compared to 8.3% under
the optimal policy. As shown in Figure 6, with either endogenous or exogenous energy R&D,
the net economic impact is initially positive, but becomes negative beginning in 2035. As the
restriction becomes more binding, requiring more control, the economic costs become too great

24

That is, the figure shows the net economic impact of the optimal policy through the year given on the x-axis.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

21

to justify the policy. For example, in 2025, the restrictive policy calls for a 29.1% reduction in
emissions, compared to 5.4% with the optimal policy.
Innovation has a more limited effect under a restrictive policy because increased energy
R&D crowds out other investment.

To see this, note that net welfare gain from induced

innovation improves from 5.6% to 8.3% if no crowding out is assumed. A similar experiment in
the optimal policy scenario only increases the welfare gain from 8.3% to 9.5%.25 Stronger
emissions restrictions induce more R&D, which amplifies the welfare effects of crowding out.
Table 3 shows how other variables change when energy R&D is endogenized. Including
induced innovation lowers the carbon tax needed to restrict emissions to 1995 levels by about
one percent. Unlike the optimal policy, emissions do not change after induced innovation is
included in the model, since this is a command and control policy. Thus, the changes in the
carbon tax provide a guideline as to how much tax rates could potentially fall in the optimal
scenario if the level of emissions did not change. As before, there is little change in the levels of
consumption and output between the endogenous and exogenous cases.

IV. Sensitivity Analysis

In developing a model such as the ENTICE model, several key assumptions must be
made. To calibrate the model, future projections of energy R&D are based on historical energy
R&D performance. Although these are useful in providing a guide to future energy R&D
performance, there is no guarantee that energy R&D trends will remain the same. Thus, it is
important to consider the potential effects of changes in the behavior of the energy R&D sector.
Furthermore, critical assumptions about the behavior of the R&D sector, such as the potential
role of crowding out, also affect the results.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

22

In this section, I focus on the sensitivity of the model to key assumptions used to calibrate
the model.26 I begin by examining three assumptions about the R&D sector: the opportunity cost
of R&D, deviation between the private and social rates of return to R&D, and the decay rate of
knowledge. I then examine three key choices made in calibrating the model: the percentage of
exogenous R&D remaining, the elasticity of energy R&D, and the energy savings resulting from
such R&D. For each simulation, changes in the parameters were needed. Table 1 shows the
parameter assumptions for each scenario. Table 2 presents the net economic impact of each
scenario.

A. The Opportunity Cost of R&D
The results of section III, along with previous research on induced innovation and climate
policy, suggest that the potential for energy R&D to crowd out other forms of R&D may limit
the gains from induced innovation. Goulder and Schneider (1999) first noted that models
ignoring such costs underestimate the costs of carbon policy.

I examine this claim more

carefully here, and show that assumptions about the opportunity cost of R&D are crucial in
explaining the limiting role of induced technological change found by many recent models.
In the ENTICE model, increases in the opportunity cost of energy R&D come from
potential crowding out of other, more general R&D. The base model assumes 50% of energy
R&D comes at the expense of other research opportunities. To examine the importance of this
25

The sensitivity analysis in section IV provides more detail on the effect of crowding out.
Although it is possible to check the sensitivity of the model to the individual R&D parameters, these results are
less meaningful, as the resulting energy R&D would not be consistent with real-world data. Upon changing one
parameter, it is possible to adjust more than one parameter at a time to get other patterns of energy R&D that closely
match the data. In these cases, the results are similar to those presented above. In general, changing any of the
R&D parameters has little effect. The only variable experiencing significant effects is energy R&D, but since
energy R&D is such a small portion of the total economy, other variables are not affected. The one exception is that
increasing the elasticity of substitution, ρ, increases the elasticity of energy R&D with respect to price, and thus the
level of R&D induced in each simulation. Sensitivity analysis based on this is presented below. Results of
sensitivity analysis for other individual parameters are available from the author by request.
26

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

23

assumption, I consider a low opportunity cost case with no crowding out, and a high opportunity
cost case with complete crowding out. In doing so, it is important to note that changing the
opportunity cost of R&D changes the level of energy R&D. However, the model is designed to
be calibrated to actual values of energy R&D. Thus, I present lower bound and upper bound
values for the sensitivity to potential crowding out effects. The upper bound scenario allows
R&D to adjust as a result of changes in the opportunity cost. This, for example, could be thought
of as the maximum gains possible from government policy that was able to alleviate potential
crowding out effects.27 As a lower bound, I run the model changing the opportunity cost of
R&D, but constrain energy R&D in each case to equal energy R&D in the corresponding base
case scenario. Here, for example, welfare gains in the low opportunity cost case should be
interpreted as the gains from removing the assumption of partial crowding out. They are not the
gains that would result if the government intervened to remedy the problem of partial crowding
out.
Beginning with the optimal policy simulations, the upper bound scenarios suggest
policies that could alleviate potential crowding out effects would have large impacts.
Completely removing crowding out of R&D increases the welfare gain from induced innovation
in the optimal simulation from 8.3 percent to 43.6 percent. Similarly, simulations with complete
crowding out lead to just a 1.8% gain from induced innovation. The more conservative lower
bound simulations, which change the opportunity cost of R&D but constrain energy R&D to
historical levels, also suggest that assumptions about crowding out are important. However, the
magnitude of the effect is smaller. Assuming no crowding out increases the welfare gain from
induced R&D from 8.3% to 9.5% in the optimal simulation, whereas assuming full crowding out
27

In these simulations, energy R&D levels change in both the base case and in the policy scenarios. The effect of
policy that addressed opportunity costs only in conjunction with a climate policy will fall in between the upper and

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming
lowers the gain from 8.3% to 7.6%.

24

In the more restrictive emissions policy case, the

opportunity cost is more harmful, since more R&D is induced by the policy change. Thus, as
discussed before, changes in the opportunity cost have a greater impact on net economic welfare
than with the optimal policy.
These results suggest that assumptions about the opportunity cost of R&D are a key
difference among models. For example, Nordhaus (2002) assumes complete crowding out of
R&D, which limits the potential welfare gains from his model. In comparison, models such as
Buonanno et al. (2003) that do not include crowding out are more optimistic about the possible
effects of induced technological change. More importantly, this suggests that models using
learning-by-doing as the avenue for technological improvement will overstate the potential of
technological change, as such crowding out does not occur in learning by doing models.
Although such models have an opportunity cost to increasing investment in alternative energy
technologies, this cost is simply the loss of one dollar of potential investment elsewhere, as
opposed to the loss of more productive R&D funds from elsewhere in the economy. For
example, both Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2003) and Manne and Richels (2002) use learning by
doing to model technological change, and both find welfare gains from technology to be
significantly higher than in ENTICE.28

B. Deviation Between the Private and Social Rate of Return
The base model constrains the social rate of return on R&D to be four times greater than
that of the return on other investment. This assumption is consistent with the empirical finding
that firms underinvest in research, as they are unable to capture the entire social returns.
lower bounds.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

25

However, the problem of underinvestment could be addressed by subsidies to energy R&D, if
government investments in R&D are set so that all social returns are captured. Models that do
not include market failures, such as Buonanno et al. (2003) implicitly assume that government
R&D subsidies are sufficient to correct all market failures.
Simulations removing the constraint on returns to R&D suggest that the returns on such
subsidies could be quite significant. The gain from ETC for the optimal policy improves to
14.0% when energy subsidies are considered. Only the upper bound of the low opportunity cost
scenario has a higher welfare gain. Similarly, adding R&D subsidies to the endogenous R&D
case increases the net welfare gain to seven percent in the more restrictive policy case.

C. Decay Rate
Many models of R&D assume that the stock of accumulated knowledge decays over
time, due to obsolescence. The base model assumes no such decay, as such an assumption is
necessary for the base (no policy) run to accurately simulate both energy R&D and emissions
levels. Here, I evaluate the effect of knowledge decay by assuming a ten-percent decay of
knowledge. I consider two possible scenarios. In the first scenario, base emissions are calibrated
correctly, but long-run energy R&D levels are higher than justified by historical standards. This
is because some energy R&D now serves the purpose of simply replacing decayed knowledge,
rather than providing new energy savings. I calibrate the second scenario so that energy R&D
levels are consistent with historical levels. Since there is not enough R&D to replace decayed
knowledge in this instance, the resulting long-run emissions are higher than the base model.29
Not surprisingly, adding decay decreases the welfare gains from induced innovation, although
28

Gerlagh and van der Zwaan (2003) report that welfare improves by a factor of three when learning-by-doing is
included. Manne and Richels find that cost fall from 42-72 percent when learning-by-doing is considered.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

26

the effect is not large. In the first scenario, the welfare gain from endogenous energy R&D falls
from 8.3% to 7.1%. The effect of knowledge decay is more noticeable in the second scenario, in
which the welfare gain is only 4.4%.

Similar results are found with the more restrictive

emissions policy.

D. Return to energy R&D
The previous three subsections include sensitivity about assumptions made for modeling
the R&D sector. The remaining three subsections address sensitivity to the values used to
calibrate the model. Although these values are based on historical energy R&D performance,
there is no guarantee that energy R&D trends will remain the same. Understanding the potential
effects of changes in these values is crucial. The simulations suggest that assumptions about the
potential savings from energy R&D are most important.
Following Popp (2001), in the base model I assume each dollar of energy R&D leads to
$4 of energy savings. Here, I re-calibrate the model assuming that each dollar of energy savings
leads to only $2 of energy savings. As would be expected, reducing potential energy savings in
half reduces the potential welfare gains from induced innovation by approximately one-half.
Welfare increases only 4.3% when energy R&D is endogenous, compared to 8.3% in the base
case.

Similarly, the welfare increase falls from 5.6% to 3.7% under the more restrictive

emissions policy. Thus, uncertainty about the potential savings resulting from future energy
R&D is an important consideration. Unfortunately, most simulations to not report the energy
savings that occur per dollar of R&D spending, so evaluation of other models on this important
assumption is not possible.30

29
30

Figures showing the resulting emissions and energy R&D levels are available from the author by request.
The one exception is Nordhaus (2002).

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

27

E. Elasticity of R&D
The base model is calibrated so that this elasticity equals 0.35 in 2005, and declines over
time. This is consistent with the results of Popp (2002). In this section, I re-calibrate the model
to yield elasticities approximately twice as high as those of the base case. Figure 3 shows the
elasticities in the base case and alternative scenario. Interestingly, doubling the response of
R&D does not have a large impact on welfare. Under an optimal carbon policy, the welfare
gains from induced innovation increase by just 6%, from 8.3% to 8.8%. One reason for the
small effect is that some of the gains are canceled by potential crowding out. When the
assumption of partial crowding out is removed, welfare gains rise by 33%, from 9.5% to 12.7%.
Under a more restrictive carbon policy, changes in the elasticity appear more important.
Here, adding induced energy R&D increases welfare by 14.4%, compared to 5.5% in the base
case. Because the costs of a restrictive policy are much greater, a higher elasticity of energy
R&D with respect to energy prices leads to a significant increase in R&D under the restrictive
policy. Unfortunately, most other models do not report the elasticities resulting from parameter
choices, making evaluation of other models on this feature difficult.

F. Exogenous Reduction of Carbon Intensity
One potential concern is that, in order to maintain realistic projections for baseline
emissions, much of the exogenous reduction of carbon intensity described in section II remains
in the model with endogenous R&D. This assumption is necessary for the base (no policy)
model to accurately simulate both the energy R&D sector and projected carbon emissions. It
does not, however, affect the potential welfare gains from induced innovation. As Figure 7
shows, lowering this percentage leads to significantly higher levels of long run emissions.
However, what matters for the welfare gains is not the baseline level of emissions, but rather the

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

28

changes that occur when policy is enacted, both with and without endogenous technological
change.

Since the level of induced R&D does not change much, the welfare gains from

endogenous R&D are similar to the previous results, with a net economic impact of 7.1%.31

V. Discussion

These results suggest that omitting induced innovation from the DICE model overstates
the costs of complying with carbon change policies. Using the base parameters, welfare under
an optimal carbon tax improves by 8.3% when induced innovation is considered. Furthermore,
the model allows for straightforward testing of key assumptions about knowledge markets. Most
important is the finding that removing crowding out may lead to large increases in welfare. This
calls into question the results of models such as Buonanno et al. (2003), that not only do not have
crowding out of R&D, but allow for complementarities between energy R&D and other forms of
R&D. In addition, it suggests that modeling technological change solely by learning by doing
overstates the potential of new technologies to lower cost.32
In addition, assumptions about market failures in knowledge markets are important.
When R&D is left to the private sector, the inability to completely appropriate returns will lead
to underinvestment. Removing the deviation between private and social rates of return in the
model increases the net welfare gain to 14%. Thus, models that neglect to include some notion
of R&D market failure will provide more optimistic results. While such results are attainable, it
is important to note that R&D subsidies from government would typically be needed for that to
occur.
31

Alternatively, one can calibrate the model so that emissions fit the desired pattern by having R&D rise
substantially to adjust for the lack of exogenous technological change. This leads to a more significant increase in
welfare, but also very unrealistic R&D levels. For example, energy R&D is 300% higher in 2005 in this simulation.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

29

The results of this paper suggest several important lessons for policymakers tempted to
rely on technology as a cure-all for climate change. First, and most obvious, is that these
technological gains will not occur without some policy signal to innovators that energy
efficiency research will be profitable. Second, although induced innovation can lower the cost of
any climate change strategy, the effect on the environment was minimal. Most of the welfare
gains from induced innovation in the optimal policy scenario came from cost savings, not
temperature reductions. Achieving significant reductions in future warming will not be possible
without restrictive climate change policies. As the simulations restricting emissions to 1995
levels show, these are likely to come at a cost to society, even when the potential of induced
innovation is realized.
Third, as other researchers have also noted (see, for example, Goulder and Schneider
1999), new energy research comes at a cost, as other investments are reduced. In particular, any
reductions in other R&D will limit the welfare gains from new energy R&D. As shown in the
sensitivity analysis, going from complete crowding out of other R&D to no crowding out of
other R&D increases the potential welfare gains from induced innovation by as much as a factor
of five. More research on both the magnitude of any crowding out that may occur, as well as
policies that could help alleviate crowding out, would both be helpful.
Fourth, the limiting effect of market failures in R&D markets suggest that R&D subsidies
and government financed R&D could improve the potential gains from new technologies. In
deciding on government R&D projects, policymakers can focus on the social, rather than private
rates of return. As shown in the sensitivity analysis, doing so could increase the potential gains
from induced technology by nearly two-thirds.

32

This is not to say that learning-by-doing is not important. Rather, it is that learning-by-doing should not be
modeled as the only way in which technology evolves.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

30

Finally, limitations of the ENTICE model must be discussed. First, by modeling the
world as a single region, the ENTICE model simplifies policy dramatically. Expanding these
results to a regional model, based on Nordhaus’ RICE model, would be beneficial. However, to
do so would require research on how innovative effects vary by region, and how technology
diffuses across regions. In general, new innovations are developed in the industrialized world
and diffuse slowly to developing countries. For example, of the $500 billion spent on R&D in
the 28 OECD countries in 1997, 85% occurred in just 7 countries (National Science Board,
2000).
Second, the ENTICE model only includes innovation designed to improve energy
efficiency. Yet, one of the most important long-term research goals is providing alternative fuels
that provide an emissions-free energy alternative. Policies such as a carbon tax are likely to
induce R&D aimed at substitutes for fossil fuels, such as solar energy. In fact, the energy crisis
of the 1970s led to a dramatic increase in R&D for alternative fuels. By speeding the invention
of a non-carbon based backstop technology, induced innovation may have a more significant
effect than is found in the ENTICE model.33 Adding such backstop technologies to the model is
another important step for future research.
Third, the ENTICE model does not include uncertainty. Not only are the future returns to
R&D uncertain, but the potential impact of climate change itself is also uncertain. Uncertainty
may produce an option value for increased R&D, which could provide a cushion should the
climate problem turn out to be more severe than anticipated. Adding endogenous technological
change to a model allowing for uncertain climate effects, such as Nordhaus and Popp (1997),
would be a useful extension.

33

Gerlagh (2002) presents a theoretical demonstration of the potential of backstop technologies.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

31

References

Ahmad, Syed (1966), “On the Theory of Induced Innovation,” Economic Journal, 76(302), 34457.
Binswanger, Hans P. (1974), “A Microeconomic Approach to Innovation,” Economic Journal,
84(336), 940-58.
Buonanno, Paolo, Carlo Carraro, and Marzio Galeotti (2003), “Endogenous Induced Technical
Change and the Costs of Kyoto,” Resource and Energy Economics, 25(1), 11-34.
Chakravorty, Ujjayant, James Roumasset, and Kinping Tse (1997), “Endogenous Substitution
among Energy Resources and Global Warming, Journal of Political Economy, 105,
1201-1234.
Fisher, Carolyn, Ian W. H. Parry, William A. Pizer (1998), “Instrument Choice for
Environmental Protection When Environmental Protection is Endogenous,” Resources
for the Future Discussion Paper 99-04.
Gerlagh, Reyer (2002), “Induced Technological Change Under Technology Competition,”
Institute for Environmental Studies Working Paper D02-01, Vrije Universiteit,
Amsterdam.
Gerlagh, Reyer and Bob van der Zwaan (2003), “Gross World Product and Consumption in a
Global Warming Model with Endogenous Technological Change,” Resource and Energy
Economics, 25(1), 35-57.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Stephen H. Schneider (1999), “Induced Technological Change and
the Attractivenes of CO2 Emissions Abatement,” Resource and Energy Economics, 21,
211-253.
Goulder, Lawrence H. and Koshy Mathai (2000), “Optimal CO2 Abatement in the Presence of
Induced Technological Change,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
39(1), 1-38.
Griliches, Zvi (1995), “R&D and Productivity: Econometric Results and Measurement Issues,”
in Handbook of the Economics of Innovation and Technological Change, Paul Stoneman,
ed., Blackwell Publishers, Cambridge, MA.
Griliches, Zvi (1989), “Patents: Recent Trends and Puzzles,” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity: Microeconomics, pp. 291-330.
Grübler, Arnulf and Sabine Messner (1998), “Technological Change and the Timing of
Mitigation Measures,” Energy Economics, 20(5-6), 495-512.
Hall, Bronwyn (1995), “The Private and Social Returns to Research and Development,” in
Technology, R&D, and the Economy, Bruce Smith and Claude Barfield, eds., Brookings,
140-183.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

32

Hicks, John R. (1932), The Theory of Wages, London: Macmillan.
Jaffe, Adam B. (1986), “Technological Opportunity and Spillover of R&D: Evidence from
Firms’ Patents, Profits, and Market Value,” American Economic Review, 76, 984-1001.
Jaffe, Adam B., Richard G. Newell, and Robert N. Stavins (2003), “Technological Change and
the Environment,” forthcoming in Handbook of Environmental Economics, K.G. Mäler &
J. Vincent (Eds.), North Holland, Amsterdam.
Jaffe, Adam B. and Karen Palmer (1997), “Environmental Regulation and Innovation: A Panel
Data Study,” Review of Economics and Statistics, 79, 610-619.
Jones, Charles (1995), “R&D Based Models of Economic Growth,” Journal of Political
Economy, 103, 739-784.
Kamien, Morton I. and Schwartz, Nancy L. (1968), “Optimal Induced Technical Change,”
Econometrica, 36(1), 1-17.
Lanjouw, Jean O. and Ashoka Mody (1996), “Innovation and the International Diffusion of
Environmentally Responsive Technology,” Research Policy, 25, 549-571.
Magat, Wesley A. (1978), “Pollution Control and Technological Advance: A Dynamic Model of
the Firm,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 5, 1-25.
Manne, Alan S. and Richard G. Richels (2002), “The Impact of Learning-By-Doing on the
Timing and Costs of CO2 Abatement,” AEI-Brookings Joint Center for Regulatory
Studies Working Paper 02-8.
Mansfield, Edwin (1996), “Microeconomic Policy and Technological Change,” in Technology
and Growth: Conference Proceedings, Jeffrey C. Fuhrer and Jane Sneddon Little, eds.,
Federal Reserve Bank of Boston, 183-200.
Mansfield, Edwin (1977), “Social and Private Rates of Return from Industrial Innovations,”
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 91, 221-240.
Messner, Sabine (1997), “Endogenized Technological Learning in an Energy Systems Model,”
Journal of Evolutionary Economics, 7(3), 291-313.
Milliman, Scott R. and Raymond Prince (1989), “Firm Incentives to Promote Technological
Change in Pollution Control,” Journal of Environmental Economics and Management,
17, 247-165.
National Science Board (2000), Science and Engineering Indicators – 2000, National Science
Foundation, Arlington, VA (NSB-00-1).
Newell, Richard G., Adam B. Jaffe, and Robert N. Stavins (1999), “The Induced Innovation
Hypothesis and Energy-Saving Technological Change,” Quarterly Journal of Economics,
114, 941-975.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

33

Nordhaus, William (1999), “Modeling Induced Innovation in Climate-Change Policy,” mimeo,
Yale University.
Nordhaus, William (1994), Managing the Global Commons: The Economics of the Greenhouse
Effect, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, William and Joseph Boyer (2000), Warming the World: Economic Models of Global
Warming, MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Nordhaus, William and David Popp (1997), “What is the Value of Scientific Knowledge? An
Application to Global Warming Using the PRICE Model”, The Energy Journal, 18(1), 145.
Pakes, Ariel (1985), “On Patents, R&D, and the Stock Market Rate of Return,” Journal of
Political Economy, 93, 390-409.
Parry, Ian W.H. (1995), “Optimal Pollution Taxes and Endogenous Technological Progress,”
Resource and Energy Economics, 17(1), 69-85.
Popp, David (2002) “Induced Innovation and Energy Prices,” American Economic Review, 92,
160-180.
Popp, David (2001) “The Effect of New Technology on Energy Consumption,” Resource and
Energy Economics, 23, 215-239.
Popp, David (1998), “The Productivity of Energy Research,” University of Kansas Working
Paper #1998-4.
Popp, David (1997), Induced Innovation, Energy Prices, and the Environment, Ph.D.
dissertation, Yale University.
Porter, Michael E. and Scott Stern (2000), “Measuring the ‘Ideas’ Production Function:
Evidence From International Patent Output,” NBER Working Paper #7891.
Portney, Paul R. and John P. Weyant eds. (1999), Discounting and Intergenerational Equity,
Resources for the Future, Washington, D.C.
Romer, Paul M. (1990), “Endogenous Technological Change,” Journal of Political Economy, 98,
S71-S102.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

34

Figure 1—Spending on Energy and Non-energy R&D by U.S. Industries
140

120

Index (1982=100)

100

80

60

40

20

0
1972

1974

1976

1978

1980

1982

1984

1986

1988

Year
energy R&D

other R&D

1990

1992

1994

1996

1998

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

35

Figure 2 – Mean Global Temperature
6

Degree Celcius increase from 1900

5

4

3

2

1

0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year

Base

Endogenous

Exogenous

Restrict emissions

The figure shows the departure of mean global temperature from 1990 levels, reported in degrees Celsius. Note that induced energy
R&D has little effect on temperature.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

36

Figure 3 – Elasticity of Energy R&D
0.9
0.8
0.7

Elasticity

0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
2005

2035

2065

2095

2125

2155

2185

Year
Base

High induced

The figure shows the elasticity of energy R&D to energy prices between the base case and optimal policy simulation. The base case
presents the elasticity assumed in the base run presented in section III. A simulation using the elasticity from the high induced case is
presented in section IV

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

37

Figure 4 – Welfare Gains Over Time—Optimal Policy

2
1.8

Trillions 1990 US dollars

1.6
1.4
1.2
1
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
Endogenous R&D

Exogenous R&D

The figure shows the cumulative gains in welfare from an optimal carbon tax. Note that welfare in the induced innovation is initially
lower than exogenous R&D, but that induced innovation leads to larger long run improvements than in a simulation with exogenous
technological change.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

38

Figure 5 – Welfare Effects of Marginal Energy R&D

10

Billions 1990 US dollars

5

0

-5

-10

-15

-20

-25
2005

2055

2105

2155

2205

2255

2305

Year

The figure shows the welfare effects of an additional $1 billion of energy R&D spent in 1995. The initial effects are negative, as the
immediate environmental benefits do not justify the opportunity cost of additional energy R&D. However, by also enhancing the
productivity of future R&D, the cumulative effect of marginal energy R&D is positive.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

39

Figure 6 – Welfare Gains Over Time—Restrict Emissions to 1995 levels

2

Trillions 1990 US dollars

0

-2

-4

-6

-8

-10
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
Endogenous R&D

Exogenous R&D

The figure shows the cumulative gains in welfare from restricting emissions to 1995 levels. Note that the net economic effects are
initially positive, but as greater reductions are required in future years, the long-run net economic impact is negative.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

40

Figure 7 – Emissions Over Time – Sensitivity to Exogenous Reductions in Carbon Intensity
20
18

Emissions -- Billion tons

16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
Base

Low Exogenous Reduction of Carbon Intensity

The figure shows how base case emissions increase when the percentage of exogenous reductions in carbon intensity is reduced.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

41

Table 1 – Summary of Parameter Values

Base parameters
Low opportunity cost
High opportunity cost
Decay: High R&D, base emis.
Decay: Base R&D, high emis.
Low energy savings
High R&D elasticity
Low exog. carbon intens.

scaling
factor
(αH)
0.944
0.944
0.944
1.7
1.8
0.876
0.799
0.93

initial
energy
human
capital
(HE0)
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001
0.0001

IPF: a
0.02202
0.02202
0.02202
0.0315
0.00785
0.016
0.0594
0.0218

IPF: b
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.19
0.3
0.21
0.17
0.18

IPF: φ
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.53
0.4
0.538
0.296
0.53

substitution
parameter
(ρ)
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.41
0.363
0.38
0.7
0.41

percentage
exog.
carbon
intensity
reduction
(αΦ)
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.8
0.5

decay of
knowledge
(δH)
0
0
0
0.1
0.1
0
0
0

crowding
out of
general
R&D
0.5
0
1
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5

The table presents parameter values for both the base ENTICE model presented in section III and for various sensitivity analyses
presented in section IV.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

42

Table 2 – Summary of Net Economic Impacts

A. Optimal Carbon Tax Policy
Base model
Opportunity Cost of R&D
Low opportunity cost: upper bound
Low opportunity cost: lower bound
High opportunity cost: upper bound
High opportunity cost: lower bound
R&D Subsidies
Sensitivity to Decay Rate
High R&D, base emissions
Base R&D, high emissions
Low Energy Savings
Elasticity of R&D
Exogenous Reduction of Carbon Intensity

Endogenous
1.88

Exogenous
1.74

Gain from
ETC
8.3%

1.89
1.91
1.88
1.85
1.98

1.32
1.75
1.84
1.72
1.74

43.6%
9.5%
2.1%
7.6%
14.0%

1.82
1.80
1.87
1.92
2.20

1.70
1.73
1.78
1.76
2.06

7.1%
4.4%
4.8%
8.8%
7.1%

Endogenous
-7.40

Exogenous
-7.84

Gain from
ETC
5.6%

-7.17
-7.19
-7.68
-7.65
-7.29

-8.24
-7.83
-8.00
-7.86
-7.62

13.0%
8.2%
4.0%
2.7%
4.4%

-9.08
-10.70
-8.59
-4.06
-11.16

-9.43
-10.93
-8.92
-4.74
-11.68

3.7%
2.1%
3.7%
14.4%
4.5%

B. Restrict Emissions to 1995 Levels
Base model
Opportunity Cost of R&D
Low opportunity cost: upper bound
Low opportunity cost: lower bound
High opportunity cost: upper bound
High opportunity cost: lower bound
R&D Subsidies
Sensitivity to Decay Rate
High R&D, base emissions
Base R&D, high emissions
Low Energy Savings
Elasticity of R&D
Exogenous Reduction of Carbon Intensity

Note: all figures in trillions of 1990 US dollars.
The table shows the net economic impact, measured by the difference in the present value of
consumption between the policy and a no policy simulation, for various model scenarios. The
table shows the net economic impact with both endogenous and exogenous energy R&D, as well
as the increase in welfare resulting from endogenizing energy R&D. Base case results are
presented in section III, and the remaining trials are presented in the sensitivity analysis of
section IV. The top half of the table shows the net economic impact for an optimal carbon
policy, and the bottom half shows the impact for a policy restricting emissions to 1995 levels.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

43

Table 3 – Key Variables – Optimal Policy

Carbon Tax ($/ton)
Endogenous R&D
Exogenous R&D
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

1995

2005

2015

2025

2055

2105

2205

N/A
N/A

$10.16
$10.17
-0.10%

$14.57
$14.57
0.00%

$19.48
$19.49
-0.05%

$36.81
$36.82
-0.03%

$70.17
$70.16
0.01%

$142.16
$142.04
0.08%

13.34
13.14
0.35

17.16
16.90
0.27

20.21
19.86
0.24

27.66
26.91
0.25

40.41
38.93
0.26

75.44
76.05
0.11

Energy R&D -- billions 1990 US dollars
Endogenous R&D
10.00
Exogenous R&D
10.00
N/A
Elasticity
Emissions -- billion tons
No Policy
Endogenous R&D
Exogenous R&D
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

6.187
6.187
6.187

7.157
6.931
6.932
-0.01%

7.982
7.643
7.646
-0.04%

8.722
8.254
8.259
-0.06%

10.791
9.812
9.823
-0.11%

13.943
11.802
11.819
-0.14%

16.589
13.472
13.488
-0.12%

Control Rate
Endogenous R&D
Exogenous R&D
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

N/A
N/A

3.2%
3.1%
0.44%

4.2%
4.2%
0.89%

5.4%
5.3%
1.08%

9.1%
9.0%
1.14%

15.4%
15.2%
0.80%

18.8%
18.7%
0.52%

0.822
0.818
0.818
0.00%

1.477
1.449
1.449
0.00%

2.595
2.492
2.493
-0.04%

3.946
3.633
3.636
-0.08%

43.73
43.69
43.67
0.05%

63.60
63.47
63.41
0.10%

95.32
95.09
94.94
0.16%

159.06
159.87
159.64
0.15%

32.98
33.00
33.00
-0.02%

48.38
48.38
48.37
0.01%

72.52
72.53
72.50
0.05%

119.56
120.51
120.39
0.10%

Atmospheric Temperature -- degrees change C from 1990
No Policy
0.430
0.491
0.635
Endogenous R&D
0.430
0.491
0.635
Exogenous R&D
0.430
0.491
0.635
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.
0.00%
0.00%
Output -- trillions $1990 US
dollars
No Policy
22.61
30.00
36.95
Endogenous R&D
22.61
30.01
36.93
Exogenous R&D
22.61
30.01
36.92
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.
0.00%
0.02%
Consumption -- trillions $1990 US dollars
No Policy
16.40
Endogenous R&D
16.40
Exogenous R&D
16.40
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

22.25
22.28
22.29
-0.04%

27.68
27.70
27.71
-0.03%

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

44

Table 4 – Key Variables – Emissions Restricted to 1995 Levels

Carbon Tax ($/ton)
Endogenous R&D
Exogenous R&D
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

1995

2005

2015

2025

2055

2105

N/A
N/A

$366.07
$369.34
-0.89%

$755.57
$760.33
-0.63%

$1,135.20
$1,142.59
-0.65%

$2,253.90
$2,272.24
-0.81%

$3,978.32
$4,021.23
-1.07%

14.11
13.14
0.09

18.53
16.90
0.09

22.15
19.86
0.09

31.28
26.91
0.11

46.95
38.93
0.14

Energy R&D -- billions 1990 US dollars
Endogenous R&D
10.00
Exogenous R&D
10.00
N/A
Elasticity
Emissions -- billion tons
No Policy
Endogenous R&D
Exogenous R&D
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

6.187
6.187
6.187

7.157
6.187
6.187
0.00%

7.982
6.187
6.187
0.00%

8.722
6.187
6.187
0.00%

10.791
6.187
6.187
0.00%

13.943
6.187
6.187
0.00%

Control Rate
Endogenous R&D
Exogenous R&D
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

N/A
N/A

13.6%
13.6%
0.00%

22.5%
22.5%
0.00%

29.1%
29.1%
0.00%

42.7%
42.7%
0.00%

55.6%
55.6%
0.00%

0.635
0.635
0.635
0.00%

0.822
0.806
0.806
0.00%

1.477
1.331
1.331
0.00%

2.595
2.095
2.095
0.00%

36.95
36.73
36.71
0.06%

43.73
43.28
43.24
0.10%

63.60
62.35
62.23
0.19%

95.32
92.94
92.66
0.30%

27.68
27.70
27.72
-0.05%

32.98
32.88
32.89
-0.02%

48.38
47.83
47.81
0.04%

72.52
71.36
71.28
0.11%

Atmospheric Temperature -- degrees change C from 1990
No Policy
0.430
0.491
Endogenous R&D
0.430
0.491
Exogenous R&D
0.430
0.491
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.
0.00%
Output -- trillions $1990 US
dollars
No Policy
22.61
30.00
Endogenous R&D
22.61
29.99
Exogenous R&D
22.61
29.99
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.
0.00%
Consumption -- trillions $1990 US dollars
No Policy
16.40
Endogenous R&D
16.40
Exogenous R&D
16.40
% ∆ Endog. vs. Exog.

22.25
22.37
22.39
-0.09%

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

A1

Appendix A – Equations of the ENTICE Model

This appendix presents the complete equations of the ENTICE model.

Exogenous variables and parameters
t = time
Lt = population at time t, also equal to labor inputs
L0 = initial population level
gL,t = growth rate of population
gL,0 = initial value of the growth rate of population
dL = rate of decline of gL,t
Rt = pure time preference discount factor
r0 = initial value of the pure rate of social time preference
gr = growth rate of the social time preference
At = total factor productivity
A0 = initial value of total factor productivity
gL,t = growth rate of total factor productivity
gL,0 = initial value of the growth rate of total factor productivity
dL = rate of decline of gA,t
γ = elasticity of output with respect to capital
β = elasticity of output with respect to energy/carbon inputs
Φt = ratio of carbon emissions per unit of carbon services
gzt = growth rate of Φt per decade
δz = rate of decline of gzt
ζ1, ζ2, ζ3 = parameters of the long-run carbon supply curve
markup= energy services price markup
CumC* = Total carbon resources available
δ = rate of depreciation of the physical capital stock
δH = rate of depreciation of energy knowledge stock
crowdout = percentage of overall R&D crowded out by energy R&D
a, b, φ = parameters of the innovation possibilities curve
αH = scaling factor for the stock of energy knowledge
αΦ = percentage of exogenous carbon intensity reduction
ρ = substitution parameter for energy and knowledge
LUt = Land-use carbon emissions
LU0 = Initial land-use carbon emissions
δLU = Rate of decline of land-use carbon emissions
φ11, φ12, φ21, φ22, φ23, φ32, φ33 = Parameters of the carbon transition matrix
Ot = Increase in radioactive forcing over preindustrial levels due to exogenous anthropogenic
causes
σ1, σ2, σ3 = Temperature dynamics parameters
4.1/λ = Climate sensitivity – equilibrium increase in temperature from a doubling of CO2
concentrations)

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

A2

Endogenous Variables
Ut = utility in period t
ct = per capita consumption
Qt = output (trillions of 1990 US dollars)
µt = emissions control rate in DICE model
Kt = physical capital stock (trillions of 1990 US dollars)
Et = energy inputs
pF = price of fossil fuels
Ft = fossil fuel/carbon inputs, also equal to CO2 emissions
qF = marginal cost of fossil fuel extraction
CumCt = cumulative carbon extractions by year t
It = investment in physical capital
Ct = total consumption
HEt = stock of energy knowledge
REt = energy R&D
EMt = Carbon emissions
MA,t = Atmospheric CO2 concentration
MU,t = Upper oceans/biosphere CO2 concentration
ML,t = Lower oceans CO2 concentration
FORCEt = Radioactive forcing, increase over preindustrial level
Tt = Atmospheric temperature, increase over 1900 level
TLt = Lower ocean temperature, increase over 1900 level
The ENTICE model maximizes per capita utility, defined in equation (A 1) below,
subject to a set of environmental and economic constraints.

Economic constraints are

represented by equations (A 2) – (A 17). Equations (A 18) – (A 26) are the environmental
constraints.
T

(A 1)

max V = ∑ U [c(t ), L(t )]R(t )
t =0

Economic Constraints
t

(A 2)

[

R (t ) = ∏ 1 + r0 e

10

− grt

]

v =0

(A 3)

Qt = At K tγ L1t−γ − β Etβ − p F Ft

(A 4)

Kt = (It – 4*crowdout*RE,t)– δKt-1.

(A 5)

Qt = Ct + It.

(A 6)

Lt = L0exp(gL,t)

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming
(A 7)

gL,t = (gL,0/dL)*(1-exp(-dL*t))

(A 8)

At = A0exp(gA,t)

(A 9)

gA,t = (gA,0/dA)*(1-exp(-dA*t))

(A 10)


 Ft
Et = α H H Eρ,t + 

 αΦΦt

 g z
Φ t = exp  tz
 δ


 1 − exp − δ z t



(

(





ρ

1


 ,

ρ



))


(A 12)

PF = qF + markup
q F = ζ 1 + ζ 2 [CumC t / CumC*]ζ 3

(A 13)

CumCt = CumCt-1 + 10*Ft

(A 14)

Ft < 0.1 * (CarbMax – CumCt)/10

(A 15)

HE,t = h(RE,t) + (1–δH)HE,t-1,

(A 16)

h(RE,t) = aRbE,tHφE,t

(A 17)

Qt = Ct + It + REt

(A 11)

ρ≤1

i = A,E

Environmental Constraints
(A 18)

LUt = LU0(1-δLU)t

(A 19)

EMt = Ft + LUt

(A 20)

MA,t = 10*EMt + φ33ML,t-1 + φ23MU,t-1

(A 21)

ML,t = φ11MA,t-1 + φ21MU,t-1

(A 22)

MU,t = φ12MA,t-1 + φ22MU,t-1 + φ32ML,t-1

(A 23)

FORCEt = 4.1*{log(MA,t/596.4)/log(2)} + Ot

(A 24)

Ot = -0.1965 + 0.13465t,

t < 11

Ot = 1.15,

t ≥ 11

(A 25)

Tt = Tt-1 + σ1{FORCEt - λTt-1 - σ2(Tt-1 – TLt-1)}

(A 26)

TLt = TLt-1 + σ3(Tt-1 – TLt-1)

A3

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B1

Appendix B – Calibration of the ENTICE Model

This appendix describes the steps taken to calibrate the ENTICE model. As a global
macroeconomic model, ENTICE uses Nordhaus’ DICE model (2000) as its basic building block.
Since the current version of Nordhaus’ DICE model does not include carbon emissions as an
input, but rather simply models emissions as a byproduct of output requiring control, the first
step to constructing the model is to add a fossil fuel sector that mimics the behavior of the
original DICE model. I do this using the same modeling structure as Nordhaus’ RICE model,
except that I apply the equations at a global, rather than regional, level. Key equations of the
economic sector of the DICE model, along with the modifications necessary to include carbon
emissions as an input, are included in the modeling appendix. I calibrate this basic model, with
no energy R&D, so that the results are comparable to Nordhaus’ DICE model. To begin, I take
the initial value of F from the latest version of the DICE model. I then solve for initial values of
A and K that reproduce the initial output found in the DICE model. Next, I calculate the
elasticity of output to with respect to energy, β, as the percentage of output spent on fossil fuels
in the initial period, using the 1995 price of carbon based on equations (6) and (7).34 Finally, the
growth rate of Φ, gz (-15.49), and the rate of decline of this growth rate, γz (23.96), are chosen to
produce an emissions path as close as possible to the DICE model. These values represent the
rate of exogenous decline in carbon intensity without any energy R&D in the model. Figures B1
and B2 compares the emissions and output that result from this calibration.
Having added carbon fuels as an input to production in the DICE model, the next step is
to add induced technological change to the ENTICE model. The modeling for this stage is

34

References to equation numbers refer to equations in the text of the main paper.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B2

described the main text of the paper. Calibration requires choosing values for the following
parameters:
• the initial value of energy research, RE0.
• ρ, the substitution parameter in equation (10),
• parameters in the invention possibilities frontier (9): a, b, and φ, and
• the initial level of energy human capital, HE0,35
• αΗ , the scaling factor for the effect of this human capital, and
• αΦ , the percentage of exogenous technological change remaining.
To calibrate the energy R&D sector, three goals must be met. First, R&D levels should
be consistent with historical levels. A starting value of $10 billion is chosen for the base year of
1995. To get this value, I begin with an estimated level of total global spending on R&D of $500
billion. This figure is based largely on data from OECD countries. Energy R&D data is not
available on a global basis. However, it is available for the United States. In the U.S., two
percent of R&D spending in 1995 went to energy-related R&D. The $10 billion figure used in
this paper is simply two percent of the global level of R&D. This figure is also close to the
initial value of R&D used by Nordhaus (2002).
Second, the behavior of energy R&D should be consistent with empirical studies both
across time and across policy dimensions. Based on Popp (2002), I use an elasticity of energy
R&D with respect to energy prices of 0.35 for the base model. As the price of carbon rises over
time, the time path of energy R&D should follow the path predicted by this value as closely as
possible.36 In addition, elasticities of energy R&D calculated on differences in the carbon price
35

Note that, since human capital enters the invention possibilities frontier multiplicatively, the initial value cannot
be zero.
36
Note that, to account for growth in the level of economic activity, all elasticities are calculated based on a ratio of
energy R&D to global output.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B3

with and without a carbon tax in the optimal policy simulation should also equal 0.35. Since the
goal of this paper is to explore the consequences of omitting endogenous technological change
from earlier climate change models, when these two goals are incompatible, the second takes
precedence.

Furthermore, since Popp (2002) also notes that energy R&D experiences

diminishing returns over time, the calibrated elasticity should fall over time. Figure B3 shows
the calibrated levels of energy R&D and what would be predicted by a constant elasticity over
time of 0.35. Figure 3 in the main text shows the elasticity across the policy outcomes.
Finally, Popp (2001) estimates a 4:1 ratio on the returns to energy R&D. Thus, each
dollar of energy R&D should lead to a four dollar reduction in energy savings. The model is
calibrated so that a weighted average of energy savings each period (weighted by the discount
factors used in the model) produce a 4:1 ratio of energy savings to energy R&D.
Using these goals as guidelines for choosing the parameters, I first choose the value of
HE0 to approximate baseline emissions in early years of the simulation. Next, I choose ρ to
approximate the elasticity of energy R&D between the no-policy and optimal policy simulations.
Third, the value of the scaling factor αH is chosen to yield the appropriate rate of return on
energy R&D. To calibrate the inventions possibility frontier, the value a is chosen so that the
change in energy R&D between 1995 and 2005 in the optimal policy simulation is consistent
with the elasticity of 0.35. Values of b and φ are chosen so that future elasticities fit the desired
time path – falling slowly in the near future due to diminishing returns to R&D. Once the
desired time path of R&D is calibrated, the scaling factor αΦ can be adjusted to change the level
of baseline emissions as appropriate. A value of 0.8 is used in the base model, meaning that 80
percent of exogenous technological change remains in the ENTICE model.

As a result,

purposeful R&D efforts to improve energy efficiency are only a small portion of the changes that

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B4

take place over time to reduce energy intensity. Table 1 in the paper presents a complete list of
the parameter values chosen for both the base model and various sensitivity analysis scenarios.

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B5

Figure B1 – Industrial Emissions in the ENTICE & RICE Models
20

Industrial Emissions (billion tons per year)

18
16
14
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
DICE -- no policy
DICE -- opt policy

ENTICE -- no R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- no R&D

ENTICE -- R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- R&D

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B6

Figure B2 – Output in the ENTICE & RICE Models
350

Output (trillions 1990 US dollars)

300

250

200

150

100

50

0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

2295

Year
DICE -- no policy
DICE -- opt policy

ENTICE -- no R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- no R&D

ENTICE -- R&D
ENTICE opt policy -- R&D

ENTICE: Endogenous Technological Change in the DICE Model of Global Warming

B7

Figure B3 – Predicted and Actual Energy R&D
0.14

Energy R&D: Trillions 1990 US $

0.12

0.1

0.08

0.06

0.04

0.02

0
1995

2045

2095

2145

2195

2245

Year
elas = 0.35

Base -- no policy

Base -- opt policy

2295

