                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                         THE QUANTITY AND QUALITY OF LIFE AND
                          THE EVOLUTION OF WORLD INEQUALITY

                                            Gary S. Becker
                                           Tomas J. Philipson
                                           Rodrigo R. Soares

                                          Working Paper 9765
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9765


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




An earlier version of this paper circulated under the title “Growth and Mortality in Less Developed Nations.”
We benefited from comments of seminar participants at the 2002 AEA Meetings (Atlanta) and the World
Bank. Becker and Philipson received support from the George J. Stigler Center for The Study of The
Economy and The State. Becker received support from The John M. Olin Foundation and the NIHCD (Grant
#5401). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2003 by Gary S. Becker, Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including © notice, is given to the source.
The Quantity and Quality of Life and the Evolution of World Inequality
Gary S. Becker, Tomas J. Philipson, and Rodrigo R. Soares
NBER Working Paper No. 9765
June 2003
JEL No. I1, I3, J1, O1

                                           ABSTRACT

Lack of income convergence for the world as a whole has led to concerns about the impact of
globalization of markets on world inequality. GDP per capita is usually used to proxy for the quality
of life of individuals living in different countries. However, well-being is also affected by quantity

of life, as represented by longevity. This paper incorporates longevity into an overall assessment of
the evolution of cross-country inequality. The absence of income convergence noticed in the growth

literature is in stark contrast with the reduction in inequality after incorporating recent gains in
longevity. The paper computes a "full" income measure to value the life expectancy gains
experienced by 49 countries between 1965 and 1995. Countries starting with lower income tended
to grow more in terms of "full" income than countries starting with higher income. The average

growth rate of "full" income is about 140% for developed countries, compared to 192% for
developing countries. Additionally, we decompose changes in life expectancy into changes
attributable to thirteen broad groups of causes of death. Infectious, respiratory and digestive

diseases, congenital and perinatal conditions, and "ill-defined" conditions are responsible for most
of the mortality convergence observed between 1965 and 1995.


Gary S. Becker                                 Tomas J. Philipson
Department of Economics                        The Irving B. Harris Graduate School
University of Chicago                          of Public Policy Studies
1126 E. 59th Street                            University of Chicago
Chicago, IL 60637                              1155 E. 60th Street, Suite 112
                                               Chicago, IL 60637
Rodrigo R. Soares
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
3105 Tydings Hall
College Park, MD 20742
1 Introduction


       Lack of income convergence for the world as a whole has led many people to be
worried about the impact of globalization of markets on world inequality. There is a fear
that although countries are getting richer, many developing countries are falling behind.
Many African countries, for example, have not experienced a significant growth in per
capita income during the last few decades, while OECD countries have grown
substantially. The absence of long run growth for some poor countries raises concerns
about whether development will reach all societies, or whether it will remain restricted to
only some countries.
       Although GDP per capita is usually used as a proxy for the quality of life in
different countries, material gain is obviously only one of many aspects of life that
enhance economic well-being. Overall economic welfare depends on both the quality and
the quantity of life: yearly income and the number of years over which this income is
enjoyed. Recent estimates suggest that longevity has been a quantitatively important
component of the overall gain in welfare in the US during the twentieth century
(Nordhaus, 2003; Garrett, 2001; and Murphy and Topel, 2003). For example, Murphy
and Topel (2003) estimate that the average annual change in life expectancy in the US
between 1970 and 1990 had an aggregate value of approximately $2.8 trillion. These
annual gains corresponded to more than half of real GDP in 1980, and almost the same as
real consumption in that same year.
       Given the quantitative importance of the value of gains in longevity in the US,
one wonders whether longevity gains are also an important part of the overall welfare
gains in the rest of the world. Incorporating longevity into an overall assessment of how
much cross-country inequality has grown may be important, as the absence of income
convergence noticed in the growth literature is in stark contrast with the evidence from
changes in life expectancy. As we show in this paper, there has been considerable
longevity-convergence: in the last 50 years, countries starting with modest longevity
levels experienced life expectancy gains significantly larger than countries starting with
high longevity levels.



                                            1
       This suggests that cross-country comparisons of changes in income per capita
may be misleading as indicators of changes in economic well-being. This paper tries to
account for the impact of longevity on the evolution of welfare across countries during
the last few decades. The use of per capita income to evaluate welfare improvements
assumes that it reflects the level of economic welfare enjoyed by the average person. We
extend the income accounts to incorporate survival rates throughout a person’s life. In
particular, we interpret per capita income as the income that the average individual in a
country would enjoy throughout his life, and interpret the survival rates for different ages
on a given year as determining the survival function of this average individual. This
allows us to analyze the impact of changes in survival probabilities on the welfare of this
hypothetical individual.
       We use our longevity-adjusted income measure to reconsider what happens over
time to cross-country convergence and inequality. Our discussion refers to inequality
across different societies, as measured by differences in welfare of this hypothetical
individual. We do not consider the individual-level evolution of world inequality, as
recently done, for example, by Sala-i-Martin (2002).
       This methodology is an extension of the original work of Usher (1973), which
was developed further by Rosen (1988). The approach allows us to give monetary values
to the longevity gains experienced by different countries between 1965 and 1995. These
estimated values, together with traditional per-capita income data, are then used to assess
the evolution of welfare in different countries, and the evolution of differences in welfare
across countries. Briefly, we compute the income gains that would represent welfare
improvements equivalent to the observed longevity gains. We analyze how the growth in
this “full” income, including both income per year and years enjoyed, changes the
traditional results regarding cross-country convergence. Our results indicate that
countries starting with lower income tended to grow more in terms of the “full” income
measure than countries starting with higher income. Using parameters from the value of
life literature, we estimate the per capita value of the longevity gains in terms of annual
income to be equivalent to 28% of the observed growth in per capita income for the US,
and more than 1.5 times the growth in per capita income for less-developed countries,
such as El Salvador, Chile, and Venezuela. More generally, the growth rate of the “full”


                                             2
income measure in the thirty-year period examined has an average of 140% for
developed countries and 192% for developing countries.
       We also disaggregate mortality data by causes of death to try to understand the
determinants of the cross-country convergence in life expectancy observed in the three
decades between 1965 and 1995. For each group of causes of death, we compute a
counterfactual measure of the mortality rate that would be observed in 1995 had mortality
rates by all causes but the one in question remained at their 1965 values. This approach
allows us to estimate the life expectancy gain attributable to reductions in mortality by
each specific cause of death. We show that changes in mortality due to infectious,
respiratory and digestive diseases, congenital and perinatal conditions, as well as “ill-
defined” conditions are the most important factors determining the convergence in life
expectancy. In other words, mortality of these causes of death fell more rapidly in poor
than in rich countries. At the same time, changes in mortality due to nervous system,
senses organs, heart and circulatory diseases worked against convergence, as mortality
for these causes fell more rapidly in rich rather than in poor countries. The large changes
in mortality observed in the developing world are consistent with the interpretation that
poor countries absorbed technology and knowledge previously available in rich
countries, at relatively low costs, while most of the changes in mortality in developed
countries took advantage of recent developments on the frontier of medical technology.
       The structure of the paper is outlined as follows. Section 2 documents the recent
trends in longevity and per capita income growth, particularly the convergence in
longevity and the lack of convergence in per capita income. Section 3 discusses the
methodology used in the paper, and the parameterization and calibration of the model.
Section 4 uses these estimates to compute the value of welfare gains and the change in
inequality across countries, once life expectancy is accounted for. Of particular
importance here is the fact that poorer countries have gained more in longevity than
richer countries, so that the change in inequality in income per capita underestimates the
convergence in overall economic welfare. Section 5 decomposes the changes in life
expectancy into changes attributable to thirteen broad groups of causes of death. It shows
that recent patterns of mortality change differ greatly between developed and developing
countries. Also, it shows that a particular group of diseases is responsible for most of the


                                             3
mortality convergence observed in the last thirty years. Lastly, section 6 summarizes the
main results and concludes the paper.


2 The Basic Trends: Post-War Convergence in Longevity and
Divergence in Income


        The lack of income convergence across countries has been extensively
documented. This section reviews the evidence, calculates usual indicators of income
convergence for our data set, and analyzes whether there is cross-country convergence in
life expectancy. We concentrate on the changes observed between 1965 and 1995. The
mortality data are from the World Health Organization Mortality Database. Income
figures are from the Penn World Tables, version 6.0. The definition of the variables and
the countries included in the sample are contained in the Appendix.1


2.1 Lack of Income Convergence
        A vast literature has investigated whether poor countries tend to grow faster than
rich ones.2 All these studies give virtually the same results.3 Simple Gini coefficients,
regressions of growth rates on initial or final period incomes, standard deviations,
coefficients of variation, or indices of rank concordance do not show any evidence of
absolute convergence across countries (Park, 2000; Cannon and Duck, 2000; Boyle and
McCarthy, 1999; Quah, 1996; Barro and Sala-i-Martin, 1995; and Parente and Prescott,
1993). If anything, evidence suggests that rich countries tend to grow somewhat faster
than poor ones.



1
  The sample includes 49 countries. These are the countries for which detailed mortality data by causes of
death are available for 1965 and 1995. Since this information is used for the calculations performed later
on in the paper, for consistency, we keep this same sample throughout. None of the results reported in this
section depend in any way on the sample. If anything, results tend to be stronger when a broader group of
countries is used (available from the authors upon request).
2
  See, for example, the original contributions of Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1992) and Mankiw et al (1992).
For a discussion of the main results of this literature, see de la Fuente (1997), Quah (1996), and Barro and
Sala-i-Martin (1995).
3
  There is still controversy in relation to how convergence should be measured: on beta and sigma
convergence see Barro and Sala-i-Martin (1995), on Galton’s fallacy see Cannon and Duck (2000).


                                                     4
         Our data replicates the most commonly cited results of this literature. The income
statistic used is GDP per capita adjusted for terms of trade in international prices (from
now on, GDP). Table 1 presents standard deviations and coefficients of variation for
GDP and ln(GDP), in 1965 and 1995. All measures of dispersion either stay constant or
increase. Overall, the cross-country dispersion of income does not seem to have
decreased in the thirty years between 1965 and 1995.
         But, since Galton, it is well known that a falling variance over time – i.e. reduced
cross-sectional inequality – is not the same thing as regression to the mean – i.e. poor
countries growing faster than rich ones. To explore this point, Figure 1 shows the result
of a regression of the increase in the natural logarithm of GDP between 1965 and 1995
(or growth rate of GDP, ln(GDP95/GDP65)), on the natural logarithm of the initial
income level (ln(GDP65)). The coefficient of ln(GDP65) is negative (-0.13), but not
statistically significant.4 Besides, the correlation between the two variables is very small,
as reflected in the R2 of only 0.04. Poor countries do not seem to grow faster than rich
ones. So evidence from our data set replicates the well-known result that there is no
income convergence across countries, whether interpreted as falling cross-sectional
inequality or growth rates conditional on initial levels.


2.2 Longevity Convergence
         In contrast with the evidence for per capita income, convergence in life
expectancy has been taking place. Countries starting with low longevity tended to gain
more in life expectancy than countries starting with high longevity. We use the same
techniques common to the growth convergence literature to demonstrate this for life
expectancy at birth.
         Table 1 presents standard deviations and coefficients of variation for life
expectancy at birth (from now on, Life), in the years 1965 and 1995. Both measures of
dispersion fall greatly in this thirty-year period. The coefficient of variation falls by 44%,

4
  As discussed by Friedman (1992) in another context, zero-mean measurement error in the initial period
income tends to generate a spurious negative correlation between income per capita in 1965 and growth
rate in the following thirty years. This correlation biases the coefficient of the regression towards negative
values, artificially increasing the measured degree of convergence. Nevertheless, even with the bias




                                                      5
from 0.075 to 0.042. There has been a significant reduction in the cross-country
dispersion of longevity between 1965 and 1995.
         Figure 2 presents the result of a regression of the gains in life expectancy at birth
between 1965 and 1995 (Life95 – Life65) on the initial level of life expectancy (Life65).
The coefficient on Life65 is negative and statistically significant at any conventional
significance level.5 The point estimate implies that, on average, each additional 10 years
of life expectancy in 1965 represented a reduction of more than 6 years in life expectancy
gains in the following 30 years.


2.3 The Changing Relation between Income and Longevity
         The previous evidence shows that, while there is no convergence in per capita
income across countries, there is convergence in longevity. Since at any point in time
there is a positive correlation between longevity and per capita income, this cross-
sectional relation must be shifting over time.
         For given levels of income, longevity has been rising, and this increase has been
greater for poor countries. The shift in this cross-sectional relation was first noticed by
Preston (1975), who analyzed data between 1930 and 1960. He showed that, holding
income constant, the shift in the longevity-income profile represented gains of up to 15
years in life expectancy. Our data shows that this phenomenon is still taking place. Figure
3 plots life expectancy levels for 1965 and 1995 against per capita GDP for the same
years, and fits a logarithm function to each year. For constant levels of income, life
expectancy has been rising. This rise has been more than 5 years for poor countries.6



towards convergence, it is not uncommon for one to obtain a positive and marginally significant coefficient
in this regression when a larger sample of countries is used.
5
  The point raised in footnote 4 does not apply here. It is widely accepted that life expectancy numbers for
developing countries are probably overestimated, since number of deaths in remote areas (where there is
not much presence of the state) are likely to be underreported. In this case, measurement error in the initial
period does not have zero mean. Also, it seems reasonable to assume that record keeping practices have
improved in the last thirty years, and evidence presented in section 5 supports this idea. If that is the case,
developing countries would have a systematically positive measurement error in life expectancy, and this
error would be systematically larger in 1965. Therefore, the regression of changes in life expectancy on
initial levels would bias the convergence coefficient towards positive values. True convergence should be
even higher than the one measured in Figure 2. The measurement error in life expectancy is likely to work
against all the main results discussed in the paper.
6
  Again, these features of the data are intensified when a larger sample of countries is used.


                                                      6
       Measurement error could potentially explain part of this shift. If life expectancy is
determined by permanent income, but we observe permanent income plus a transitory
error, a way to estimate the “permanent” slope would be to compare life expectancy and
income at the means in each year. Assuming a stable ‘permanent income-life expectancy’
profile throughout the period, we can calculate the largest life expectancy gain that could
be potentially explained by changes in income. This strategy attributes the shift to
measurement error, and implicitly assumes that all changes in life expectancy were
determined by changes in permanent income.
       By applying this methodology to our dataset, we find the coefficient of the
relation between life expectancy and the natural logarithm of income per capita to be 9.7,
more than two times larger than the coefficients estimated in the regressions from Figure
3. But additional evidence suggests that measurement error cannot account for the whole
story. First, this estimated coefficient generates systematic differences in prediction
errors between developed and developing countries that are not compatible with the
simplest version of the measurement error hypothesis: life expectancy gains are, on
average, underestimated for developing countries and overestimated for developed
countries. If measurement error in income was behind the observed shift, we should
expect just the opposite. In addition, the cross-sectional relationship between life
expectancy and other demographic variables – such as educational attainment and
fertility – is more stable over time (see, for example, Soares, 2003). To the extent that
these variables are usually thought to be measured less precisely than income, it is
difficult to argue that the entire shift in the income-life expectancy profile should be
attributed to measurement error.
       Together with the evidence presented in Preston (1975), Figure 3 suggests that the
cross-sectional relation between income and longevity has been shifting constantly since
the beginning of the twentieth century. Longevity gains have been taking place in all
income ranges, with particular intensity in medium and lower levels. In fact, this
changing relationship explains the contradicting trends in terms of life expectancy
convergence vis-à-vis income convergence. If we only consider the component of the
change in life expectancy explained by changes in income, there is no convergence.




                                            7
       This point is explored in Figure 4, where we simulate the life expectancy level
that would be observed in 1995, had the 1965 income-life expectancy profile remained
stable throughout the period. In other words, using the regression estimated in Figure 3,
we simulate the 1995 life expectancy level as: L’95 = L65 + 4.05(lny95 – lny65), where L
denotes life expectancy at birth, and y denotes income per capita. This simulates the life
expectancy that would be observed in 1995 if all the changes in this variable between
1965 and 1995 were driven by changes in income, with the 1965 income-life expectancy
profile remaining stable. Figure 4 shows that, once we look only at the component of life
expectancy changes explained by changes in income, there is no convergence. If
anything, the Figure suggests that the dimension of life expectancy correlated with
income tended to increase cross-country dispersion. Convergence in life expectancy
seems to be driven by changes that are actually orthogonal to changes in income.
       Since life expectancy is an important dimension of welfare, the evidence
discussed in this section indicates that it could be misleading to analyze the evolution of a
country’s economic well-being – or the difference in well-being across countries – based
solely on income indicators. In the next section, we develop a methodology to
incorporate longevity into the analysis of the cross-country evolution of welfare and
inequality.


3 Adding the Two Trends: Monetizing the Value of Longevity Gains


       To incorporate life expectancy gains into the analysis, we must be able to express
these gains and income gains into the same units. With this goal, we draw from the
literature on the economic value of risks to life (for an overview of this literature, see
Viscusi, 1993). Estimates for the US suggest that gains in longevity between 1970 and
1990 represented welfare improvements comparable to the material gains observed in the
same period, and that historical reductions in mortality were also major sources of
welfare improvements (see Cutler and Richardson, 1997; Nordhaus, 2003; Murphy and
Topel, 2003; and Garrett, 2001).




                                             8
3.1 Converting Longevity Gains into their Income Value
           Previous work of Usher (1973), Rosen (1988), and Murphy and Topel (2003),
derive the utility parameters of interest that determine the marginal willingness to pay for
longevity gains. Given the infra-marginal changes in longevity and income observed
during the long time period we analyze, we derive the analog infra-marginal expressions
that do not rely on marginal approximations. Consider the indirect utility function V(Y,S)
of an individual with survival function S and lifetime full income Y:7
                              ∞
                               ∫
            V (Y , S ) = max exp(− ρt ) S (t )u (c(t ))dt                                              (1)
                               0
subject to
                 ∞                           ∞
                 ∫                            ∫
            Y = exp(−rt ) S (t ) y (t )dt = exp(− rt ) S (t )c(t )dt ,                                 (2)
                 0                            0
where y(t) is income at age t, c(t) consumption at t, and r is the interest rate; and where
the budget constraint assumes the existence of a complete contingent claims market.
           Now consider a given country at two points in time, τ and τ + ∆τ, with lifetime
income and survival functions denoted Yτ and Sτ, and Yτ+∆τ and Sτ+∆τ. We are interested in
the infra-marginal income that would give a person in this country the same utility level
observed in period τ + ∆τ, but with the mortality rates observed in period τ. This income
equivalent compensation E would satisfy


            V(E + Yτ+∆τ,Sτ) = V(Yτ+∆τ,Sτ+∆τ).                                                          (3)


           Figure 5 illustrates the exercise in terms of indifference curves of the indirect
utility function on the (Y,T) plane, for the case of a deterministic lifetime equal to T. We
slide in the indifference curve of period τ + ∆τ to the longevity observed in period τ; the
income at that point is E + Yτ+∆τ.
           More formally, we abstract from life cycle considerations by assuming that r = ρ,
y(t) is constant (y(t) = y), and the individual has access to a fair insurance (as expressed

7
    When the context is clear, we save on notation by writing the survival function as S, instead of S(t).


                                                        9
in the budget constraint). With these assumptions, it is well known that optimal
consumption c(t) is also constant, so that c(t) = c = y. This implies that the indirect utility
function can be expressed in terms of the yearly income y as
                            ∞
        V ( y , S ) = u ( y ) ∫ exp(−rt ) S (t )dt.                                    (4)
                            0


       Define A(S) as the value of an annuity based on the survival function S, such that
        ∞
A( S ) = ∫ exp(− rt ) S (t )dt . If e is the yearly – as opposed to lifetime – income that
        0


compensates for lower longevity in a manner similar to before, e satisfies


       u(e + yτ+∆τ)A(Sτ) = u(yτ+∆τ)A(Sτ+∆τ).                                           (3’)


       With a first order Taylor expansion of u(.) around yτ+∆τ to approximate
u(e + yτ+∆τ), one obtains u(e + yτ+∆τ) ≈ u(yτ+∆τ) + u' (yτ+∆τ)e. Substituting for u(e + yτ+∆τ)
from expression (3’) above and rearranging terms, yields:


             u ( yτ + ∆τ )  A( Sτ + ∆τ ) − A( Sτ ) 
        e=                                         ,
             u ' ( yτ + ∆τ )       A( Sτ )         
        or                                                                             (5)
          e          1         A( Sτ + ∆τ ) − A( Sτ ) 
               =                                      ;
        yτ + ∆τ ε ( yτ + ∆τ )         A( Sτ )         


where ε(.) is the elasticity of the instantaneous utility function in relation to its argument.
       Though we will not make use of linear approximations in our empirical analysis,
this expression neatly illustrates the main determinants of the value of longevity gains. In
short, the value rises with the degree of inter-temporal substitution and the percentage
(discounted) longevity gain. More specifically, two dimensions summarized in this
expression will be very important in our analysis: the level of income (or consumption)
throughout life (term outside brackets), and the size and moment of the reductions in
mortality (term inside brackets). Whenever income and longevity are positively
correlated across countries, the willingness to pay for an increase in life expectancy will


                                                         10
generally have two offsetting components. Richer countries attach more value to given
longevity gains (higher u(yτ+∆τ)/u'( yτ+∆τ)), and countries with higher longevity attach less
value to given absolute longevity gains (higher A(Sτ); see Dow et al, 1999). The effect of
income comes from the fact that marginal extensions in life expectancy are more valuable
the higher is consumption in this extended lifetime, or, in other words, the higher is the
income level.
          Income can be used to measure material improvements only with a set of
assumptions that justify using a single number to portray changes in a country’s welfare.
Similar simplifying assumptions are needed to measure the material value equivalent to
the life expectancy gains observed in a certain period. More precisely, we interpret per
capita income from national accounts as the income that the average individual would
enjoy throughout his life, and use survival rates for different ages in a given year to
determine the survival function this individual would experience. From now on, when
talking about economic welfare, we refer to this hypothetical individual, who would face
the survival probabilities corresponding to the country’s cross-sectional life expectancy
at birth, and would earn in every period of life an income equal to the country’s per
capita GDP in that year. This allows for the calculation of the value of gains in life
expectancy using only national income and mortality statistics widely available. For this
same reason, the usual critiques of GDP as a measure of full income – due to the fact that
it does not incorporate value of leisure, household production, and non-traded goods –
also apply to our methodology. In fact, what we do is to try to fill in one of these gaps.
          Our argument is similar to the one contained in the usual growth discussions
based on income alone, as they too implicitly assume that GDP per capita reflects in
some way the level of economic welfare enjoyed by the average person. We just extend
this interpretation to take into account survival rates across the average person’s life. This
methodology allows us to discuss the evolution of welfare inequality across countries, by
analyzing the changes in welfare of this representative individual. We do not discuss the
individual-level evolution of world inequality, as done, for example, by Sala-i-Martin
(2002).




                                             11
3.2 The Income Value of Cause Specific Mortality Reductions
           Consider K competing causes of mortality, represented by the survival functions
                             K
in S = S1S2S3…SK = ∏ S k . Following the same steps as in the previous section, define the
                            k =1

value (in annual income) of the longevity gain associated with the kth cause of death as
the ek implicitly determined by the following expression8


           u(ek + yτ+∆τ)A(Sτ) = u(yτ+∆τ)A(S*kτ+∆τ),                                                   (6)


where


            S *τk + ∆τ = Sτk+ ∆τ ∏ Sτi .                                                              (7)
                                   i≠k




           S*kτ+∆τ is a counterfactual survival function, simulating the survival function that
would exist in period τ +∆τ, had the mortality rates for all causes of death but k remained
at their τ period levels. In other words, it simulates what the survival function in τ +∆τ
would be if only the changes observed in the kth cause of death had taken place.
           This strategy allows the decomposition of the gains in life expectancy observed in
any given period into K different causes. But, given that changes in mortality from
different causes interact with each other in generating the final survival function, this
decomposition does not explain exactly 100% of the shift in this function when infra-
marginal changes in mortality are being considered (this is the competing risks nature of
mortality rates, as discussed by Dow et al, 1999). Formally, this strategy is a first order
decomposition of changes in the survival function into changes in its K components. For
marginal changes in S through time, this approach would indeed generate an exact
decomposition, as in



8
    In terms of the first order approximation using the Taylor expansion, the expression for ek would be
                  u ( yτ + ∆τ )  A( S *τk + ∆τ ) − A( Sτ ) 
            ek =                                           .                                        (6’)
                  u ' ( yτ + ∆τ )         A( Sτ )          




                                                       12
         ∂S K             ∂S i 
           = ∑  ∏ S k        .                                                               (8)
         ∂τ i =1  k ≠ i  ∂τ 

        Note that each term in the sum is exactly the change in the survival function due
to each cause of death that would be obtained using our counterfactual measure S*kτ+∆τ:

S *τk + ∆τ − Sτ =  ∏ Sτi ( Sτk+ ∆τ − Sτk ) =  ∏ Sτi ∆S k . So, with marginal changes in mortality
                    i≠k                          i≠k 
            K
rates, e = ∑ e k .
            k =1

        But with infra-marginal changes, higher order terms due to the complementary
nature of mortality rates are also relevant. Nevertheless, we stick to the first order
decomposition of changes in survival functions to simplify the discussion, and because
due to the interaction among these higher order terms, it is impossible to attribute their
effects to any particular cause of death.9
        S*kτ+∆τ allows us to construct a counterfactual life expectancy measure that
simulates the life expectancy that would be observed in τ + ∆τ if only the changes in
mortality due to the kth cause of death had actually taken place. As discussed in the
empirical section, this counterfactual life expectancy measure can be used to decompose
the convergence in life expectancy into K underlying mortality causes, plus a higher
order term (due to interactions between different causes of death).


3.3 Parameterization of the Model
        To calculate the economic value of the longevity gains observed between 1965
and 1995, and decompose it into the value attributable to each different cause of death,
we need data on per capita income (y), survival rates (S), and a specific functional form
for the utility function (u(.)). Two dimensions of the instantaneous utility function u(.) are
relevant. The willingness to pay for extensions in life expectancy is affected both by the
substitutability of consumption in different periods of life, i.e. the inter-temporal
elasticity of substitution, and by the value of being alive relative to being dead.10

9
  As discussed in the empirical section, these first order terms account for more than 80% of the changes in
life expectancy in the dataset.
10
   This is related to the state-dependent nature of this problem, and to the normalization of utility in the
death state to zero (discussed in detail by Rosen, 1988).


                                                    13
        We abstract from leisure throughout the paper, and allow the following functional
form for the instantaneous utility function to capture these two different dimensions:
                    c 1−1 / γ
        u (c ) =              +α ,                                                    (9)
                   1 − 1/ γ
where α is the parameter that arises from the normalization of utility in the death state to
zero, and γ is the inter-temporal elasticity of substitution. The parameter α determines the
level of annual consumption at which the individual would be indifferent between being
alive or dead. If that level were positive, an inter-temporal elasticity γ larger than 1 would
imply that α would be negative.
        The parameter α can be identified from other parameters more commonly
estimated in the value of life literature. More precisely, we have that
           u ' (c ) c     c 1−1 / γ
        ε=            = 1−1 / γ        ,                                              (10)
            u (c )      c
                                    +α
                       1 − 1/ γ

                                         1     1       
and, from this expression, α = c1−1 / γ  −             .
                                          ε 1 − 1/ γ    
        The value of ε can be estimated from compensating differentials for occupational
mortality risks. Murphy and Topel (2003, p.23), using numbers from the literature on
occupational risks, estimate ε to be 0.346.
        A wide range of values is available in the empirical literature on the inter-
temporal elasticity of substitution. Browning, Hansen, and Heckman (1999, p.614), after
exhaustively reviewing the estimates, suggest that the inter-temporal elasticity of
substitution for non-durables is probably slightly above 1.
        We use γ = 1.25, ε = 0.346 and c = $18,000 to calibrate the value of α. The value
of consumption is the value of US per capita income in 1990 in our data set, the year in
which Murphy and Topel (2003) estimate ε using US data. Our calculations give a value
of α equal to -14.97. Together with the value of γ, this means that an individual with




                                                14
annual income equal to 241 would be indifferent between being alive or dead.11
Following Murphy and Topel (2003), we set interest rates to 3% per year.12
        With these values of α and γ, we can use equation (3’) to value the life expectancy
gains experienced by the different countries in the thirty year period between 1965 and
1995. With all assumptions,13
                                                                                 γ
                       1−1 / γ A( Sτ + ∆τ )         1  A( Sτ + ∆τ ) − A( Sτ )  γ −1
          e =  yτ + ∆τ                      + α (1 − )                        − yτ + ∆τ .   (11)
                               A( Sτ )             γ         A( Sτ )          
        Again, e gives the additional flow of annual income that would generate a welfare
gain comparable to the one generated by the increase in survival probabilities observed
during the period. An analogous expression is used to calculate the annual income value
of the reductions in mortality due to each particular cause of death. In this case, we
substitute e by ek, and Sτ+∆τ by S*kτ+∆τ.
        We also use e to calculate what we call the growth rate of the income equivalent
                                      yτ + ∆τ + e
compensation, given by g =                        − 1 . This concept gives the income growth rate that
                                           yτ
would have been observed had all the welfare gain in the period taken the form of income
growth.


4 The Effect on World Inequality


        We use expression (11) to calculate the value of the longevity gains observed in
49 countries between 1965 and 1995, and to evaluate the impact of the changes in
longevity on cross-country inequality. Per capita income figures are taken from the Penn

11
   The lowest value of the GDP per capita variable (adjusted for terms of trade, RGDPTT) in the PWT 6.0
dataset is 275.93, for the Democratic Republic of Congo in 1997. Also, this is the only observation in the
whole PWT 6.0 dataset with value below 300.
12
   When presenting the results, we briefly discuss the effects of assuming a higher interest rate.
13
   The formula used in the calculations is a discrete time version of (11). A cleaner version of this
expression can be obtained if we use the linear approximation from the Taylor expansion. In this case, we
have:
                γ            α           A( Sτ + ∆τ ) − A( Sτ ) 
          e =        −                 
                                 1−1 / γ 
                                                                   .
                                                                                                   (11’)
                γ − 1   yτ + ∆τ                 A( Sτ )         
Since we have a closed form solution for e, there is no reason to use this simpler linear approximation.


                                                        15
World Tables 6.0. Data are ten-year averages centered in the reference years: 1965
corresponds to the average for the period between 1960 and 1969, and 1995 corresponds
to the average between 1990 and 1999 (or years available in these intervals).
         Survival rates are constructed using age specific number of deaths and population
from the World Health Organization Mortality Database. Mortality rates are assumed to
be constant inside the age intervals for which data is tabulated. Figure 6 illustrates the
extent of variation in age specific mortality rates in the dataset, by plotting two extreme
examples: the survival distribution for Egypt in 1965 (lowest life expectancy at birth in
the sample), and the survival distribution for Japan in 1995 (highest life expectancy at
birth in the sample).
         Table 2 presents the results for the value of longevity gains and the growth rate of
the income equivalent compensation, together with other income and life expectancy
statistics, using the value of the parameters derived in the previous section. The value of
longevity gains is presented in two forms: annual income (e), and total discounted
lifetime value (E).14
         Results are presented for individual countries and as un-weighted averages for
groups of developed and developing countries. Developed countries include countries
from North America, Western Europe, and Australia, New Zealand, and Japan, whereas
developing countries include countries from Latin America, Eastern Europe, Southeast
Asia, and Africa.15
         On average, the value of longevity gains in terms of annual income is somewhat
higher for developed countries: $1,747 against $1,265 (in international prices). But the


14
   Remember that E is the present discounted value of the flow of income e, taking into account both the
                                                                                    ∞

                                                                                    ∫
interest rate and the survival probabilities in the initial period (τ = 1965): E = e exp(−rt ) Sτ (t )dt = eA(Sτ).
                                                                                  0
15
  The classification into groups of developed and developing countries inevitably involves some degree of
arbitrariness. We try to do so in a way that does not bias the aggregate results in our favor. If anything, our
grouping will work towards reducing longevity convergence between developing and developed countries.
This is because our developed countries include countries such as Portugal, Spain, Greece, and Ireland, that
were not developed in the 1960’s and that experienced impressive life expectancy gains in the period. At
the same time, our developing countries include Eastern European countries such as Bulgaria,
Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and Romania, that had high life expectancy at 1965 and that experienced
virtually no gain in this variable during the following period, partly as a consequence of the collapse of the
communist block.


                                                       16
highest values of this variable are in the developing world: Chile, Hong Kong, and
Singapore experienced longevity gains with values superior to $3,200 in annual income.
This gain corresponds to 90% of the Chilean GDP per capita in 1965, while the gains for
Hong Kong and Singapore are more than 118% of their GDP’s per capita in 1965.
         Longevity gains are more important for developing countries in terms of average
annual value as a percentage of the GDP. These gains correspond to 55% of the 1965
GDP per capita for the less-developed world, and only 29% for the developed world.
This tendency is reflected in the growth rate of the income equivalent compensation. In
this case, since the initial income level is lower for developing countries, the difference
between developing and developed countries is reversed: the average growth for
developing countries is 192%, against 140% for developed countries.
         This indicates that, unlike income changes, longevity changes since 1965 reduced
the disparity in welfare across countries. Figure 7 explores this point further by plotting
the growth rate of the income equivalent compensation against the natural logarithm of
GDP per capita in 1965. As the Figure shows, the inclusion of life expectancy in the
measure of welfare tends to increase the convergence in the period. The coefficient on
ln(GDP65) is negative and statistically significant. Higher income in 1965 is consistently
associated with lower growth in “full” income in the thirty-year period between 1965 and
1995. 16
         The ideal independent variable in the right-hand side of this regression should be
a measure of “full income in 1965.” Since the approach discussed in section 3 does not
allow us to calculate the value of given levels of life expectancy, but only the value of
changes in life expectancy, we are forced to use the 1965 value of income per capita
rather than “full income.” Using some measure of full income in this regression would
unambiguously increase the degree of convergence since richer countries in 1965 also
had higher life expectancy.


16
  Using a higher interest rate reduces the overall willingness to pay for reductions in mortality because of
the heavier discounting of future gains in longevity. But it does not change the qualitative results regarding
convergence. For example, with r = 0.07 – roughly the rate of return on capital in the US – the average
growth rate of the income equivalent compensation becomes 118% for developed countries, and 145% for
developing countries. In the cross-country convergence regression, the coefficient on income per capita in
1965 increases slightly in absolute value, to –0.21 (with p-value = 0.02).


                                                     17
       These results indicate convergence in welfare, in the sense that countries with
higher initial income tended to have significantly lower subsequent welfare gains (in
terms of “full income”). Incomes 100% higher in 1965 were associated, on average, with
income equivalent growth rates 20% lower in the following 30 years. This result is not
surprising, given the negative correlation between life expectancy gains and income. As
long as the income elasticity of value of life is not much above unity, any value attached
to longevity would work towards increasing convergence. Viscusi and Aldy (2003)
conclude, from various types of evidence, that this elasticity is less than unity, but their
results for countries are greatly affected by a couple of extreme observations for India.
Without these observations, Becker and Elias (2003) get an elasticity of about unity.
       Figure 8 shows, for each country in the sample, the share of the welfare
improvements observed between 1965 and 1995 due to mortality reductions. This share is
calculated as value of longevity gains in annual income/(value of longevity gains in
annual income + increase in annual income between 1965 and 1995). The average value
across countries is 27%, meaning that recent welfare gains due to mortality reductions
average about 1/3 of the material gains observed in the same period. In some cases, like
Chile, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, and Venezuela, longevity gains have been by far the
most important factor in determining the welfare improvements observed after 1965. As
the Figure suggests, this share is systematically related to income: on average, poorer
countries had a higher share of welfare gains due to longevity increases (the coefficient
of a regression of the share of welfare gains due to longevity on lny65 is equal to –0.079
with p-value = 0.03).
       Overall, the evidence shows that longevity changes in the period between 1965
and 1995 worked towards reducing the disparity in welfare across countries. The actual
reduction in disparity depends on the specific values of the parameters α and γ; that is, on
the relative importance of quantity and quality of life. But, nevertheless, the qualitative
role played by mortality reductions in the process should be obvious.
       These results would be even stronger if we accounted for expenditures on health
and R&D, because part of the gains in life expectancy is driven by expenditures on health
and R&D. Since most of these expenditures are undertaken by the developed world, the
share of truly exogenous reductions in mortality is certainly higher for the less-developed


                                            18
countries.17 Therefore, convergence in welfare would be higher if the endogenous part of
longevity gains were netted out.


5 The Causes of Mortality Convergence


        Cross-country life expectancy convergence would follow if the health production
technology were concave, as illustrated by the logarithmic curves in Figure 3. Countries
with higher initial mortality then would have larger mortality reductions because they
have much higher returns on investments in health than do countries with lower
mortality.
        However, some evidence hints that this is not the full story. Figure 3 shows a
possible shift in the relation between income and life expectancy, suggesting that a
considerable part of the changes in longevity is related to technological improvements.
Stable concave returns to investments in health cannot account for this evidence, as
Figure 4 clearly illustrated. Moreover, since investments in health are much larger for
developed than for developing countries – measured either in absolute terms or as shares
of income (see footnote 17) – a stable health production function could not explain the
convergence in life expectancy, unless returns to investments in health were much higher
for the less-developed world.


5.1 Data
        To understand the nature of the changes in mortality in the developing world, we
decompose the gains in life expectancy into different causes of death. The World Health
Organization Mortality Database contains number of deaths by cause of death for the
years under analysis. Causes of death in the different years are classified according to the
current International Classification of Diseases (ICD) code, so data for different periods
has to be made compatible by matching codes of the different versions of the ICD. As we

17
   For example: in 1995, health expenditures per capita in the US and Sweden were around US$4,000; in
the same year, these expenditures were between US$100 and US$200 for Mexico, Poland, and Turkey. In
terms of share of per capita GDP, this corresponded to 14% and 9% for, respectively, US and Sweden, and
below 5% for Mexico, Poland, and Turkey (data from the World Bank Development Indicators). These
numbers are representative of the patterns observed in other developed and developing countries.


                                                  19
will be dealing with rather broad groups of causes of death, this will not be much of a
problem.
         We define the following thirteen groups of causes of death: R01: infectious
diseases; R02: neoplasms; R03: endocrine, metabolic and blood diseases, and nutritional
deficiencies; R04: mental disorders; R05: diseases of the nervous system and senses
organs; R06: heart and circulatory diseases; R07: respiratory and digestive diseases; R08:
urinary and genital diseases; R09: abortion and obstetric causes; R10: skin and
musculoskeletal diseases; R11: congenital anomalies and perinatal period conditions;
R12: ill-defined conditions; and R13: accidents, suicides and homicides. The grouping of
the codes from the ICD-6/7 and ICD-9 into these thirteen categories is described in the
Appendix.


5.2 Convergence Decomposition
         To evaluate the contribution of each cause of death to the observed reductions in
mortality, we use the counterfactual survival function S*kτ+∆τ defined in section 3.2. To
recapitulate, we construct, for each cause of death, the survival function that would have
been observed in 1995 had mortalities of all causes but the one in question remained at
their 1965 levels.18 Or, in other words, we simulate what mortality levels would have
been observed in 1995 if only the changes in one of the causes of death had actually
taken place.
         With the cause specific survival functions S*kτ+∆τ, we can immediately construct
corresponding cause specific counterfactual measures of life expectancy, each one
                         ∞
defined as L *τk + ∆τ = ∫ S *τk + ∆τ (t )dt . L*kτ+∆τ is the exact analog of S*kτ+∆τ in terms of life
                         0


expectancy. For our purposes, it gives the life expectancy that would be observed in 1995
if only mortality rates due to the kth cause of death had actually changed between 1965
and 1995.




18
  Specifically, to compute the survival function S*k95, we use age specific mortality rates for the kth cause
of death calculated using 1995 populations and number of deaths, and age specific mortality rates for all
the other causes of death using 1965 populations and number of deaths.


                                                    20
       This strategy allows the decomposition of the gains in life expectancy observed in
the period into the thirteen different groups of causes of death defined before, plus a
higher order term (see discussion in section 3.2). Let Lτ denote life expectancy at birth in
year τ. Then


       ∆L = ∆L1 + ∆L2 + …+ ∆L13 + ∆LH,                                               (12)


where ∆L is the change in life expectancy observed between 1965 and 1995; ∆Lk, for k =
1,…,13, is the change in life expectancy attributable to the kth cause of death, defined as
∆Lk = L*k95 – L65; and ∆LH is the change in life expectancy due to the interaction
between mortality changes in the thirteen groups (higher order terms).
       Our goal is to decompose the convergence in life expectancy into convergence in
mortality in each one of the thirteen causes of death. By definition, the coefficient
indicating convergence in life expectancy is given by the coefficient of a linear
regression of ∆L on a constant plus L65. Define X65 = [1 L65], a matrix containing a
column of ones, and a column with the life expectancy at birth for the different countries
in the sample in 1965. The convergence coefficient is given by


       β = (X65’X65)-1X65’∆L                                                         (13)


       By substituting ∆L from expression (12), we can write β = (X65’X65)-1X65’(∆L1 +
∆L2 + …+ ∆L13 + ∆LH). This expression gives a natural decomposition for the
convergence coefficient:


                            13
       β = (X65’X65)-1X65’( ∑ ∆Lk + ∆LH) = β1 + β2 + …+ β13 + βH,                    (14)
                            k =1




where β i, for i = 1, …, 13, H, is the coefficient of the OLS regression of ∆Li on X65.
       In words, the coefficient of the regression of changes in life expectancy on initial
life expectancy levels can be decomposed into coefficients of regressions of cause
specific changes in life expectancy on initial life expectancy levels, plus a residual term


                                             21
(βH). That is, convergence in life expectancy is decomposed into convergence attributable
to the thirteen underlying causes of death, plus a residual term. This allows us to evaluate
the role of different causes of death in generating the observed convergence in life
expectancy.
       Table 3 presents the results of regressions of the changes in life expectancy
attributable to a particular cause of death on the initial life expectancy level (the βi
coefficients). The Table also presents the R2 of the regressions and the contribution of the
specific cause of death to the overall life expectancy convergence (βi/β).
       The behavior of the regression coefficient is very different across the different
causes of death. Out of the thirteen coefficients, six are positive, meaning that the
behavior of mortality due to these six causes of death worked against life expectancy
convergence. Most of these six “divergent” causes of death had virtually no impact on
overall convergence, but two played a considerable role in reducing convergence:
mortality by nervous system, senses organs, heart, and circulatory diseases reduced
convergence by more than 20% of its actual value. In the case of nervous system and
senses organs diseases, mortality reductions were experienced by both developed and
developing countries, but the extent of these reductions was considerably larger for
developed countries. In terms of heart and circulatory diseases, mortality reductions were
also considerable for developed countries, but basically nonexistent for most of the
developing world.
       In the case of the causes of death that worked towards increasing convergence,
the action is concentrated in a handful of cases: infectious, respiratory and digestive
diseases, congenital anomalies, perinatal period conditions, and ill-defined conditions
accounted for roughly 110% of the observed convergence. Among these, respiratory and
digestive diseases were by far the most important, accounting for 60% of the
convergence. Note that this group includes infectious diseases related to the respiratory
tract, such as pneumonia and influenza, and digestive tract diseases such as appendicitis
and cirrhosis. The second most important contribution to convergence comes from “ill-




                                            22
defined” causes and conditions. This most likely reflects the relative improvement of
medical practice and record keeping behavior in developing countries.19
         These results support the view that recent reductions in mortality in the
developing world have been due in part to the absorption of previously available
technologies (for arguments in this direction, see Preston, 1980; and Soares, 2003). The
group of infectious, respiratory and digestive diseases, congenital anomalies, and
perinatal period conditions includes the types of diseases for which educational health
programs and simple interventions can have large beneficial effects. On the other side of
the spectrum, developed countries benefited relatively more from reductions in mortality
that required new technological developments, relatively costly change of habits, and
expensive surgical interventions (heart, circulatory, and nervous system diseases). The
concept is of a developed center that generates health and medical knowledge to be
absorbed eventually by the underdeveloped periphery.


5.3 Value of Longevity Gains Decomposition
         Using the methodology described in section 3.2, we decompose the value of life
expectancy gains into gains attributable to the thirteen causes of death. The value of life
expectancy gains attributable to each particular cause of death is calculated using
survival rates which assume that only mortality due to one cause of death changed
between 1965 and 1995.
         Table 4 presents the total value of longevity gains in the period, repeated from
Table 2, and the value attributable to each group of causes of death. Table 5 presents this
same information in relative terms: the first column shows the share of the total value of
life expectancy gains that is explained by the “first order” decomposition, and the other
columns show the share of the explained gain attributable to each disease group (columns




19
   The fact that “ill-defined” conditions were relatively more common in developing countries in 1965
tends to underestimate the actual convergence in the other causes of death. This is so because a larger share
of the reduction in mortality in developing countries is being attributed to “ill-defined” causes and
conditions. Which causes of death suffer the biggest underestimation depends on the correlation between
cause of death and misreporting (“ill-defined”). We do not deal with this problem.


                                                    23
R01 to R13 add up to 100%).20 Results are presented for each individual country and for
the groups of developed and developing countries.
        Table 4 shows that, even though developing countries gained relatively more in
terms of respiratory and digestive diseases, developed countries also gained substantially
in absolute terms from reductions in mortality from these causes. And even though the
gains in life expectancy from improvements in survival for congenital anomalies and
perinatal period conditions were larger for developing countries, the absolute value of
these gains was more than two times higher for developed countries.
        Overall, Table 4 shows that reductions in death by infectious, nervous systems,
senses organs, respiratory and digestive diseases, and congenital anomalies and perinatal
period conditions played some role in enhancing welfare both in developed and
developing countries. Welfare improvements generated by reductions in mortality due to
infectious, respiratory and digestive diseases were higher for developing countries, while
welfare improvements generated by reductions in mortality due to nervous system and
senses organs diseases and congenital anomalies and perinatal conditions were higher for
developed countries. In addition, developed countries experienced some sizeable gains in
areas where developing countries did not: neoplasms, heart, circulatory, and accidents,
suicides and homicides. At the same time, developing countries appear to have
substantially improved their diagnosis and record keeping techniques, which generated a
large increase in welfare attributable to reductions in mortality by “ill-defined” causes.
        Table 5 translates the numbers of Table 4 into relative terms, giving the share of
the gain in welfare attributable to a particular cause. This Table summarizes what types
of mortality reductions were more important for each different country. The value of
mortality reductions due to respiratory and digestive diseases, congenital anomalies and
perinatal period conditions, and ill-defined conditions were the most important ones for
developing countries. Similarly, the value of mortality reductions attributable to nervous
system, senses organs, heart, circulatory, respiratory, and digestive diseases, congenital



20
  Mortality convergence looks at the causes of death for which developing countries (countries with higher
mortality) gained more, when measured by absolute changes in life expectancy. These Tables look at the
value of these changes in life expectancy, which depend, for each particular country, on the importance of
each cause of death in the overall mortality reduction.


                                                   24
anomalies and perinatal period conditions, accidents, suicides, and homicides were the
most important ones for developed countries.


6 Conclusion

       This paper shows that life expectancy gains in the thirty years between 1965 and
1995 have been an important component of improvements in welfare throughout the
world. The total lifetime value (willingness to pay) of these gains for an individual being
born in 1995 corresponds to more than 3 times the value of GDP per capita for the case
of the US, and more than 10 times the GDP per capita for countries like Chile or Egypt.
These values correspond to permanent increases of more than 10% in annual income for
the US, and more than 50% for Chile and Egypt.
       We use the estimated value of the longevity gains to compute “income equivalent
compensation” measures: the 1995 income that would give individuals the same welfare
level observed in 1995, but with mortality levels from 1965. The incorporation of gains
in life expectancy into income measures reverses the absence of income convergence
found in studies using conventional GDP measures. Countries starting with lower income
grew more in terms of this “full” income measure. Growth rates of “full” income for the
period average 140% for developed countries, and 192% for developing countries.
       Finally, mortality data by cause of death are disaggregated to understand the
determinants of the cross-country convergence in life expectancy observed between 1965
and 1995. Changes in mortality due to infectious, respiratory and digestive diseases,
congenital and perinatal conditions, and “ill-defined” conditions are the most important
factors producing the convergence in life expectancy, whereas changes in mortality due
nervous system, senses organs, heart and circulatory diseases worked against
convergence. This evidence suggests that the large changes in mortality observed in the
developing world were due to the absorption of previously available technology and
knowledge, while developed countries took advantage of recent advances on the frontier
of medical technology.
       Assuming that medical advances are available to the whole population of a given
country, the American cohort born in 1995 (approximately 3.8 million people) had an


                                            25
aggregate expected welfare gain equivalent to $261 billions from the mortality reductions
experienced by the US between 1965 and 1995. Mexicans born in 1995 (approximately
2.3 million people) had an aggregate expected welfare gain equivalent to $133 billions
from mortality reductions experienced by Mexico during the same period. These numbers
for the cohort born in 1995 correspond to, respectively, 5% of the total American GDP
for 1995, and 27% of the Mexican GDP for the same year.




                                           26
                                   APPENDIX


A.1 Definition of Variables
• Income Series: RGDPTT from the Penn World Tables 6.0. Real GDP adjusted for
  terms of trade. Information from the PWT 5.6 is used to construct the variable for
  some former Eastern European countries. Values for Northern Ireland and Scotland are
  estimated as fractions of the United Kingdom variable. Value for 1965 is the average
  for all years available between 1960 and 1969. Value for 1995 is the average for all
  years available between 1990 and 1999.

• Life Expectancy Series: Calculated from the World Health Organization Mortality
  Database (number of deaths by cause of death and age group, and population by age
  group). Value for 1965 is the average for all years available between 1960 and 1969.
  Value for 1995 is the average for all years available between 1990 and 1999. The
  dataset is available at http://www.who.int/research/en.

A.2 Countries Included in the Sample
Argentina; Australia; Austria; Barbados; Belgium; Belize; Bulgaria; Canada; Chile;
Colombia; Costa Rica; Cuba; Czechoslovakia, Former; Ecuador; Egypt; El Salvador;
Finland; France; Germany, Former Fed. Rep.; Greece; Hong Kong; Hungary; Iceland;
Ireland; Italy; Japan; Luxembourg; Malta; Mauritius; Mexico; Netherlands; New
Zealand; Norway; Philippines; Poland; Portugal; Puerto Rico; Romania; Singapore;
Spain; Sweden; Trinidad and Tobago; United Kingdom, England & Wales; United
Kingdom, N. Ireland; United Kingdom, Scotland; United States of America; Uruguay;
Venezuela; Yugoslavia, Former.

A.3 Classification of Causes of Death

See Table A.1.




                                         27
References

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1992). Convergence. Journal of Political
  Economy, 100, n2 (April 1992), 223-51.

Barro, Robert J. and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1995). Economic Growth. New York,
  McGraw-Hill, Inc., 1995, 539p.

Becker, Gary S. and Julio J. Elias (2003). “Introducing incentives in the market for live
  and cadaveric organs.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago.

Boyle, G. E. and T. G. McCarthy (1999). Simple measures of convergence in per capita
  GDP: A note on some further international evidence. Applied Economic Letters, 1999,
  6, 343-47.

Browning, Martin, Lars Peter Hansen, and James J. Heckman (1999). Micro data and
  general equilibrium models. In: John B. Taylor and Michael Woodford (editors).
  Handbook of Macroeconomics, V.1A. Elsevier Science B.V., 1999, 543-636.

Cannon, Edmund S. and Nigel W. Duck (2000). Galton’s fallacy and economic
  convergence. Oxford Economic Papers, 52(2000), 415-19.

Cutler, David and Elizabeth Richardson (1997). Measuring the health of the U.S.
  population. Brookings Paper on Economic Activity: Microeconomics, 1997, 217-71.

de la Fuente, Angel (1997). The empirics of growth and convergence: A selective review.
   Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control, 21 (1997), 23-73.

Dow, William H., Tomas Philipson, Tomas, and Xavier Sala-i-Martin (1999). Longevity
  complementarities under competing risks. American Economic Review v89, n5
  (December 1999): 1358-71.

Friedman, Milton (1992). Do Old Fallacies Ever Die? Journal of Economic Literature,
   v30, n4 (December 1992), 2129-32.

Garrett, Allison M. (2001). “Health improvements and the national income and product
  accounts: 1880 to 1940.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Chicago, January
  2001.

Mankiw, Gregory, Paul Romer, and David N. Weil (1992). A contribution to the empirics
  of growth. Quarterly Journal of Economics, v107, 1992, 407-37.

Murphy, Kevin M. and Robert Topel (2003). The economic value of medical research.
  In: Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (eds). Measuring the Gains from Medical
  Research: An Economic Approach. The University of Chicago Press, 2003.

Nordhaus, William D. (1999). The health of nations: The contribution of improved health
  to living standards. In: Kevin M. Murphy and Robert H. Topel (eds). Measuring the


                                           28
  Gains from Medical Research: An Economic Approach. The University of Chicago
  Press, 2003.

Parente, Stephen L. and Edward C. Prescott (1993). Changes in the wealth of nations.
   Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review, Spring 1993, 3-14.

Park, Donghyun (2000). A note on convergence and the inter-country Gini coefficient.
   RISEC, Volume 47 (2000), No.1, 87-94.

Preston, Samuel H. (1975). The changing relation between mortality and level of
   economic development. Population Studies, V.29, Issue 2 (Jul., 1975), 231-48.

Preston, Samuel H. (1980). Causes and consequences of mortality declines in less
   developed countries during the twentieth century. In: Richard S. Easterlin (editor):
   Population and Economic Change in Developing Countries. National Bureau of
   Economic Research, The University of Chicago Press, Chicago, 1980, 289-341.

Quah, Danny T. (1996). Empirics for economic growth and convergence. European
  Economic Review, 40(1996), 1353-75.

Rosen, Sherwin (1988). The value of changes in life expectancy. Journal of Risk and
  Uncertainty, 1: 285-304.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier (2002). “The world distribution of income (estimated from
   individual country distributions).” NBER Working Paper w8933, May 2002.

Soares, Rodrigo R. (2003). “Mortality reductions, educational attainment, and fertility
  choice.” Unpublished Manuscript, University of Maryland.

Usher, Dan (1973). An imputation of the measure of economic growth for changes in life
  expectancy. In: Milton Moss (editor). The Measurement of Economic and Social
  Performance, Studies in Income and Wealth, Volume 38. Conference on Research in
  Income and Wealth. New York, National Bureau of Economic Research and Columbia
  University Press, 1973, 193-225.

Viscusi, W. Kip (1993). The value of risks to life and health. Journal of Economic
   Literature, V31, Issue 4 (Dec., 1993), 1912-46.

Viscusi, W. Kip and Joseph E. Aldy (2003). “The value of a statistical life: A critical
   review of market estimates throughout the world.” NBER Working Paper w9487,
   February 2003.




                                          29
Table 1: Dispersion Measure for Income per capita and Life Expectancy at Birth
                              Std Dev           Std Dev/Mean
                          65          95        65         95
             GDP        2680.8      5410.0    0.5518     0.5403
             ln(GDP)    0.6571      0.6953    0.0791     0.0771
             life       5.0435      3.1181    0.0752     0.0422
                         Table 2: Valuation of Longevity Gains by Countries and Groups of Countries
       Country          GDP per capita     Life Exp at Birth   Growth Rates          Value of     Growth Rate with Total Lifetime
                                                                                 Longevity Gains Income Equivalent   Value of
                        65         95        65        95     GDP       Life    in Annual Income Compensation Longevity Gains

DEVELOPED              6,855     13,853     70      76     111.6%      9.0%         1,747            140.2%           50,280

 AUSTRALIA              9,249    16,046     70       77      73.5%     10.4%         2,040           95.5%            59,219
 AUSTRIA                6,304    13,728     69       76     117.8%     10.4%         2,138           151.7%           61,209
 BELGIUM                6,932    14,285     70       76     106.1%     8.8%          1,736           131.1%           50,084
 CANADA                 8,464    16,779     71       77      98.2%     9.4%          2,228           124.6%           64,546
 FINLAND                6,552    13,898     68       75     112.1%     9.7%          1,650           137.3%           47,603
 FRANCE                 7,563    14,756     71       77      95.1%     9.7%          1,718           117.8%           49,951
 GERMANY, FFR           7,938    15,679     69       75      97.5%     8.5%          2,059           123.5%           59,235
 GREECE                 3,064     7,206     71       77     135.2%     7.7%           901            164.6%           25,968
 ICELAND                5,856    13,525     73       78     131.0%     6.6%          1,208           151.6%           35,575
 IRELAND                4,125    11,531     69       75     179.5%     7.6%          1,327           211.7%           38,269
 ITALY                  6,070    13,286     69       77     118.9%     11.6%         2,466           159.5%           70,204
 JAPAN                  5,012    15,502     69       79     209.3%     14.3%         2,868           266.5%           82,427
 LUXEMBOURG             8,839    20,727     68       76     134.5%     10.4%         3,066           169.2%           88,024
 NETHERLANDS            7,509    14,250     73       76      89.8%     5.1%           985            102.9%           29,064
 NEW ZEALAND            8,883    11,933     70       76      34.3%     8.0%          1,148           47.3%            33,342
 NORWAY                 6,773    15,640     73       76     130.9%     5.0%          1,141           147.8%           33,642
 PORTUGAL               2,567     7,798     64       74     203.8%     15.1%         2,424           298.3%           64,920
 SPAIN                  4,612    10,660     70       77     131.1%     9.9%          1,537           164.5%           44,159
 SWEDEN                 9,582    15,545     73       78      62.2%     6.4%          1,262           75.4%            37,322
 UK, ENGL. & WALES      7,658    13,634     71       76      78.0%     7.9%          1,405           96.4%            40,944
 UK, N. IRELAND         6,126    10,907     69       75      78.0%     8.6%          1,273           98.8%            36,746
 UK, SCOTLAND           6,356    11,316     69       74      78.0%     7.8%          1,256           97.8%            36,130
 USA                   11,635    19,989     69       75      71.8%     8.4%          2,358           92.1%            67,859

DEVELOPING             2,862     6,039      65      72     137.3%     11.5%         1,265            191.9%           33,625
 ARGENTINA             4,927     6,113      67       72     24.1%      6.9%           684            38.0%            19,111
 BARBADOS              3,075     5,881      66       73     91.3%      10.7%         1,080           126.4%           29,721
 BELIZE                          4,127      70       74                6.2%           649                             17,906
 BULGARIA                        4,916      70       70                0.0%           156                             4,476
 CHILE                 3,468     5,793      57       73     67.0%      27.8%         3,207           159.5%           79,302
 COLOMBIA              1,848     3,614      58       72     95.6%      23.4%         1,481           175.8%           36,792
 COSTA RICA            2,482     3,529      65       75     42.2%      14.8%          909            78.8%            24,348
 CUBA                                       69       74                7.3%
 CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FR    2,058      3,921     70       71      90.6%     1.5%           132            97.0%            3,830
 ECUADOR               1,655      2,695     60       71      62.8%     17.8%         1,290           140.8%          30,548
 EGYPT                  958       1,932     48       66     101.6%     38.1%         1,443           252.2%          29,871
 EL SALVADOR           1,749      2,001     59       70      14.4%     18.8%          608            49.2%           15,106
 HONG KONG             3,202     16,839     69       78     425.9%     14.0%         3,808           544.8%          107,974
 HUNGARY               3,487      5,357     68       69      53.6%     0.6%           287            61.9%            8,127
 MALTA                 1,961     16,351     68       75     733.8%     10.4%         2,544           863.5%          72,840
 MAURITIUS             3,022      7,304     59       69     141.7%     16.5%         2,344           219.3%          60,772
 MEXICO                3,320      5,799     59       71      74.7%     20.9%         2,256           142.6%          57,194
 PHILIPPINES           1,281      1,788     65       70      39.6%     8.2%           227            57.4%            6,127
 POLAND                2,946      4,744     68       71      61.0%     3.6%           412            75.0%           11,616
 PUERTO RICO           4,158      7,468     69       73      79.6%     5.7%           918            101.7%          25,761
 ROMANIA                623       1,859     74       69     198.3%     -6.9%          138            220.5%           3,795
 SINGAPORE             2,160     14,823     66       76     586.1%     16.2%         3,342           740.8%          94,023
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO   5,827      8,524     65       70      46.3%     7.5%          1,104           65.2%           30,643
 URUGUAY               3,978      5,761     67       72      44.8%     7.0%           688            62.1%           19,165
 VENEZUELA             5,094      5,251     65       71      3.1%      9.7%           864            20.0%           23,466
 YUGOSLAVIA, FR        2,550      4,593     64       72      80.1%     11.4%         1,050           121.3%          28,116
              Table 3: Decomposition of Life Expectancy Convergence
Cause                                                Coef     R Sq Contribution
                                                             *
Total                                              -0.6201       0.61   100.00%
R01: INFECTIOUS                                              *
                                                   -0.0491       0.22    7.92%
R02: NEOPLASMS                                      0.0097       0.01   -1.56%
R03: ENDOCRINE, METABOLIC AND BLOOD
                                                   -0.0066       0.01   1.06%
DISEASES, NUTRITIONAL DEFFICIENCIES
R04: MENTAL DISORDERS                               0.0001       0.00    -0.01%
R05: NERVOUS SYSTEM AND SENSES ORGANS               0.0733   *
                                                                 0.16   -11.83%
R06: HEART AND CIRCULATORY                          0.0655       0.03   -10.56%
R07: RESPIRATORY AND DIGESTIVE                               *
                                                   -0.3731       0.80    60.16%
R08: URINARY AND GENITAL                                     *
                                                    0.0129       0.11    -2.08%
R09: ABORTION AND OBSTETRIC CAUSES                           *
                                                   -0.0084       0.50     1.36%
R10: SKIN AND MUSCULOSKELETAL                                *
                                                   -0.0036       0.33     0.58%
R11: CONGENITAL ANOMALIES AND PERINATAL                      *
                                                   -0.0561       0.38   9.05%
PERIOD CONDITIONS
R12: ILL-DEFINED                                             *
                                                   -0.2012       0.41   32.44%
R13: ACCIDENTS, SUICIDES AND HOMICIDES              0.0209       0.07   -3.36%

RESIDUAL       (2nd order terms)                   -0.1044              16.84%
Note: * indicates significance at 5%.
                                        Table 4: Decomposition of the Value (in Annual Income) of Life Expectancy Gains by Groups of Causes of Death 1965-95
Country                 Total    R01:           R02:       R03:         R04:        R05:         R06:         R07:          R08:       R09:        R10:              R11:         R12:       R13:
                                 INFECTIOUS    NEOPLASMS   ENDOCRINE, MENTAL        NERVOUS      HEART AND   RESPIRATORY URINARY AND ABORTION      SKIN AND          CONGENITAL   ILL-DEFINED ACCIDENTS,
                                                           METABOLIC, DISORDERS     SYSTEM AND   CIRCULATORY AND DIGESTIVE GENITAL   AND           MUSCULOSKELETAL   ANOMALIES                SUICIDES AND
                                                           BLOOD,                   SENSES                                           OBSTETRIC                       AND                      HOMICIDES
                                                           NUTRITIONAL              ORGANS                                           CAUSES                          PERINATAL
                                                                                                                                                                     PERIOD
                                                                                                                                                                     CONDITIONS



DEVELOPED              1747.49      64.43         65.32       10.67        -2.39      232.99       167.98       284.40        40.47       7.03            6.20         543.79       27.34       119.46

 AUSTRALIA             2040.31      31.04         35.57       15.69        -11.12     262.38        458.96      231.81        54.74       7.36           8.09          517.15       -47.67      238.73
 AUSTRIA               2138.08      72.45         132.99      17.36         -2.55     244.55         64.87      342.17        43.39       8.54           11.67         760.96        -2.49      202.61
 BELGIUM               1735.96      52.56         69.69       19.31        14.13      155.00        257.99      170.42        29.63       4.03           2.99          631.89        84.91      63.04
 CANADA                2227.59      36.86         54.62        -5.75        -0.72     215.71        445.40      276.99        34.89       8.63           9.37          722.31       -69.10      293.81
 FINLAND               1649.54      65.73         132.21      27.04         -3.93     235.98        247.90      136.69        60.14       5.78           3.23          436.88       -12.58      102.70
 FRANCE                1717.85      84.13         46.73       -23.15       20.66      244.64        110.66      214.63        28.42       5.44           4.46          499.88       143.06      113.94
 GERMANY, FFR          2059.01      58.65         91.70       23.14        -16.20     286.25         17.80      254.07        49.55       13.44          7.42          884.02       -48.05      259.01
 GREECE                901.19       84.68         17.03       31.16         6.60      119.78        -65.01      231.38        19.89       3.66           4.23          282.59       111.70       1.82
 ICELAND               1208.15      30.62         101.57       1.51         5.51      194.32         87.99      147.49        55.26       4.40           3.45          339.38         1.25      147.85
 IRELAND               1327.01      60.42         31.20       25.06         0.52      177.03        129.44      238.96        35.01       5.98           6.09          529.41         0.72      -14.90
 ITALY                 2465.99      129.49        47.16        -4.37        -8.24     242.71        175.47      609.35        39.81       12.35          8.18          802.71        24.40      102.15
 JAPAN                 2867.69      186.91        105.77      54.69        14.39      562.29         13.00      463.16        53.96       14.41          14.56         521.31       136.57      289.87
 LUXEMBOURG            3065.75      81.99         190.35      61.10        13.97      274.77        353.75      201.92        84.02       12.43          6.37          1097.79      214.84      134.40
 NETHERLANDS           984.60        8.78         72.13        -6.37        1.53      189.26         67.43       80.13        32.83       4.90           6.89          325.60        -4.95      145.52
 NEW ZEALAND           1147.93      32.90         17.94       15.41         8.50      180.29        217.45      220.23        26.91       5.46           6.36          339.14       -61.62      27.54
 NORWAY                1140.88      21.69         39.96       17.05        -38.10     244.42         55.76      115.62        40.52       3.93           4.05          397.07        66.93      111.46
 PORTUGAL              2424.24      173.17         -5.03       0.94         3.00      210.38         -5.92      1099.26       41.63       8.73           4.81          501.57        73.48      11.10
 SPAIN                 1536.73      140.56        -13.08      -16.64        3.65      259.30         67.76      464.68        32.16       6.76           6.22          298.51       130.67       -3.90
 SWEDEN                1262.24      19.15         89.08       23.57        -19.56     184.75        130.60      118.03        45.99       2.56           3.86          428.92       -32.80      158.70
 UK, ENGL. & WALES     1405.20      20.32         79.80       14.18        -11.11     200.29        162.53      246.80        31.02       4.40           4.07          441.58       -31.02      111.43
 UK, N. IRELAND        1272.60      32.57         30.39       20.78         1.51      183.13        190.45      192.43        24.48       5.21           5.53          481.41        -7.24       -4.14
 UK, SCOTLAND          1255.63      27.83         58.43       12.13        -29.47     204.43        141.50      179.07        27.46       3.97           4.26          456.59       -19.29      86.82
 USA                   2357.99      29.45         76.22       -78.34        -7.88     287.05        537.84      305.89        39.00       9.32           6.38          810.48       -22.81      168.04

DEVELOPING             1264.82     107.29          7.38       10.01        -0.53       94.62        -9.99       397.81        10.26       8.97            3.27         260.84       203.55       9.34

 ARGENTINA             684.49       60.00         31.34        -12.07       2.84      113.00        -41.32      236.99         7.72       5.31            2.53         117.74       104.24       9.41
 BARBADOS              1079.87      74.21          7.34        -33.24       2.80      134.51         28.74      303.13        16.47       18.18           1.12         399.36       42.11       -16.54
 BELIZE                649.41       13.97          5.73        13.12        -1.37     47.52         -43.91      316.40         -1.71      2.38           -1.01         87.55        235.42      -62.82
 BULGARIA              155.65       16.66          -0.52        -1.08       -1.79     90.16        -149.97      149.29         9.10       1.48            1.38         81.31         -1.85       -5.66
 CHILE                 3206.87      254.62        35.94        20.62        8.78      133.77         51.53      1143.64       17.81       26.01           8.22         578.81       142.37      65.66
 COLOMBIA              1481.11      174.15         9.43        67.08        2.43      57.57          -1.96      527.90        13.84       14.49           6.34         185.00       210.52      -53.71
 COSTA RICA            909.07       117.51        25.99        21.77        2.73      36.44           3.73      325.21         8.53       10.49           3.20         101.96       126.19       8.70
 CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FR    132.49       18.28          -7.55        6.91        -0.53     39.26         -45.05       35.15         2.88       0.95            1.74         63.61         -0.47      19.21
 ECUADOR               1289.69      200.12         -6.15       12.17        -2.05     24.32         -22.14      449.69         2.49       10.84           5.09         79.30        256.74       -2.52
 EGYPT                 1443.14      -13.64         1.28        10.01        -0.07      2.00         -43.70      969.52         2.28       2.42            2.37         187.57       70.32       17.48
 EL SALVADOR           607.60       64.99          -4.31       11.90        -9.25     11.88         -25.48      192.64         -3.21      4.23            3.12         84.21        209.18      -12.04
 HONG KONG             3807.78      587.74        49.54        36.22        3.45      320.06        103.20      886.17        39.83       10.97           5.67         750.69       353.25      196.13
 HUNGARY               287.08       35.09         -42.71        3.61        -9.32     91.42         -90.55       49.33         8.86       1.96            4.80         256.77         2.89      -25.22
 MALTA                 2544.21      59.52         -29.69       60.18        4.99      267.59        267.35      338.73        25.42       9.91           14.04         779.65       468.74      20.08
 MAURITIUS             2343.90      95.71          -4.30      188.26       -12.23     131.89        -79.39      873.64        -11.46      18.94           7.19         287.06       553.21       -3.81
 MEXICO                2255.92      203.54         -7.02       -12.35       1.12      51.43          -3.07      971.56         4.33       21.34           2.88         296.40       353.63      31.51
 PHILIPPINES           227.17       43.85          -4.90       23.88        -0.25     11.18         -22.56      110.78         2.30       2.64            1.00         21.29        31.01        -2.95
 POLAND                411.93       62.59         -15.57        9.68        -4.16     51.93         -51.65      177.61         5.78       1.27            5.21         123.52       45.73       -10.70
 PUERTO RICO           918.01       97.70         35.07       -115.27      -11.79     92.96           7.92      278.22         5.88       6.62            0.07         320.43       164.14      -15.08
 ROMANIA               137.89       19.97          0.14         -1.00       -2.03     29.70         -31.21       75.15         2.72       0.78            0.90         40.78          2.83       3.50
 SINGAPORE             3341.93      256.35        89.27        60.72        4.91      234.45         36.11      543.20        47.42       11.86          -1.52         627.22       814.04      133.09
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO   1103.73      51.29          1.85       -115.28       0.58      194.01         20.43      368.92        17.07       21.40           1.33         412.78       72.34       -32.91
 URUGUAY               687.77       46.93         16.23         6.69        7.76      99.09         -17.60      145.11         9.47       5.50            3.56         293.32       49.24       -23.46
 VENEZUELA             863.97       33.98         14.31         -8.14       0.38      47.35         -43.29      211.92        13.53       8.84           -0.18         61.72        494.09      -11.83
 YUGOSLAVIA, FR        1049.71      107.15        -16.18        -4.15       -1.29     52.13         -55.86      265.42         9.14       5.43            2.64         283.00       288.77       8.11
                                                     Table 5: Contribution of Causes of Death to Overall Life Expectancy Welfare Gains 1965-95
Country                 Sum      R01:         R02:       R03:         R04:        R05:         R06:            R07:        R08:         R09:      R10:              R11:         R12:       R13:
                                 INFECTIOUS   NEOPLASMS   ENDOCRINE, MENTAL      NERVOUS      HEART AND      RESPIRATORY URINARY AND ABORTION     SKIN AND          CONGENITAL   ILL-DEFINED ACCIDENTS,
                                                          METABOLIC, DISORDERS   SYSTEM AND   CIRCULATORY    AND DIGESTIVE GENITAL   AND          MUSCULOSKELETAL   ANOMALIES                SUICIDES AND
                                                          BLOOD,                 SENSES                                              OBSTETRIC                      AND                      HOMICIDES
                                                          NUTRITIONAL            ORGANS                                              CAUSES                         PERINATAL
                                                                                                                                                                    PERIOD
                                                                                                                                                                    CONDITIONS



DEVELOPED              90.29%      4.03%        4.25%       0.78%       -0.22%      15.40%       10.49%         17.80%       2.69%        0.44%          0.41%        34.87%       1.63%       7.44%

 AUSTRALIA             88.36%      1.72%         1.97%       0.87%      -0.62%      14.55%        25.46%        12.86%        3.04%       0.41%          0.45%        28.69%       -2.64%      13.24%
 AUSTRIA               88.70%      3.82%         7.01%       0.92%      -0.13%      12.89%         3.42%        18.04%        2.29%       0.45%          0.62%        40.12%       -0.13%      10.68%
 BELGIUM               89.61%      3.38%         4.48%       1.24%       0.91%      9.96%         16.58%        10.96%        1.90%       0.26%          0.19%        40.62%        5.46%       4.05%
 CANADA                90.82%      1.82%         2.70%      -0.28%      -0.04%      10.66%        22.02%        13.69%        1.72%       0.43%          0.46%        35.70%       -3.42%      14.52%
 FINLAND               87.16%      4.57%         9.20%       1.88%      -0.27%      16.41%        17.24%        9.51%         4.18%       0.40%          0.22%        30.39%       -0.87%       7.14%
 FRANCE                86.94%      5.63%         3.13%      -1.55%       1.38%      16.38%         7.41%        14.37%        1.90%       0.36%          0.30%        33.47%        9.58%       7.63%
 GERMANY, FFR          91.35%      3.12%         4.88%       1.23%      -0.86%      15.22%         0.95%        13.51%        2.63%       0.71%          0.39%        47.00%       -2.55%      13.77%
 GREECE                94.27%      9.97%         2.00%       3.67%       0.78%      14.10%        -7.65%        27.24%        2.34%       0.43%          0.50%        33.27%       13.15%       0.21%
 ICELAND               92.75%      2.73%         9.06%       0.13%       0.49%      17.34%         7.85%        13.16%        4.93%       0.39%          0.31%        30.29%        0.11%      13.19%
 IRELAND               92.31%      4.93%         2.55%       2.05%       0.04%      14.45%        10.57%        19.51%        2.86%       0.49%          0.50%        43.22%        0.06%      -1.22%
 ITALY                 88.45%      5.94%         2.16%      -0.20%      -0.38%      11.13%         8.04%        27.94%        1.83%       0.57%          0.37%        36.80%        1.12%       4.68%
 JAPAN                 84.77%      7.69%         4.35%       2.25%       0.59%      23.13%         0.53%        19.05%        2.22%       0.59%          0.60%        21.45%        5.62%      11.92%
 LUXEMBOURG            88.97%      3.01%         6.98%       2.24%       0.51%      10.07%        12.97%        7.40%         3.08%       0.46%          0.23%        40.25%        7.88%       4.93%
 NETHERLANDS           93.81%      0.95%         7.81%      -0.69%       0.17%      20.49%         7.30%        8.67%         3.55%       0.53%          0.75%        35.25%       -0.54%      15.75%
 NEW ZEALAND           90.29%      3.17%         1.73%       1.49%       0.82%      17.39%        20.98%        21.25%        2.60%       0.53%          0.61%        32.72%       -5.94%       2.66%
 NORWAY                94.70%      2.01%         3.70%       1.58%      -3.53%      22.62%         5.16%        10.70%        3.75%       0.36%          0.37%        36.75%        6.20%      10.32%
 PORTUGAL              87.33%      8.18%        -0.24%       0.04%       0.14%      9.94%         -0.28%        51.92%        1.97%       0.41%          0.23%        23.69%        3.47%       0.52%
 SPAIN                 89.58%      10.21%       -0.95%      -1.21%       0.27%      18.84%         4.92%        33.75%        2.34%       0.49%          0.45%        21.68%        9.49%      -0.28%
 SWEDEN                91.33%      1.66%         7.73%       2.04%      -1.70%      16.03%        11.33%        10.24%        3.99%       0.22%          0.33%        37.21%       -2.84%      13.77%
 UK, ENGL. & WALES     90.69%      1.59%         6.26%       1.11%      -0.87%      15.72%        12.75%        19.37%        2.43%       0.35%          0.32%        34.65%       -2.43%       8.74%
 UK, N. IRELAND        90.88%      2.82%         2.63%       1.80%       0.13%      15.83%        16.47%        16.64%        2.12%       0.45%          0.48%        41.63%       -0.63%      -0.36%
 UK, SCOTLAND          91.89%      2.41%         5.06%       1.05%      -2.55%      17.72%        12.26%        15.52%        2.38%       0.34%          0.37%        39.57%       -1.67%       7.53%
 USA                   91.63%      1.36%         3.53%      -3.63%      -0.36%      13.29%        24.89%        14.16%        1.81%       0.43%          0.30%        37.51%       -1.06%       7.78%

DEVELOPING             91.68%      10.31%       -0.26%      0.72%       -0.32%      12.07%        -8.31%        39.25%       1.20%        0.86%          0.45%        27.30%      17.04%       -0.31%

 ARGENTINA             93.17%       9.41%         4.91%      -1.89%      0.45%      17.72%        -6.48%        37.16%        1.21%       0.83%          0.40%        18.46%       16.35%        1.48%
 BARBADOS              90.58%       7.59%         0.75%      -3.40%      0.29%      13.75%         2.94%        30.99%        1.68%       1.86%          0.11%        40.83%        4.31%       -1.69%
 BELIZE                94.13%       2.28%         0.94%       2.15%     -0.22%      7.77%         -7.18%        51.76%       -0.28%       0.39%          -0.17%       14.32%       38.51%      -10.28%
 BULGARIA              121.11%      8.84%        -0.28%      -0.57%     -0.95%      47.83%       -79.56%        79.20%        4.83%       0.79%          0.73%        43.14%       -0.98%       -3.00%
 CHILE                 77.58%      10.23%         1.44%       0.83%      0.35%      5.38%          2.07%        45.97%        0.72%       1.05%          0.33%        23.27%        5.72%        2.64%
 COLOMBIA              81.90%      14.36%         0.78%       5.53%      0.20%      4.75%         -0.16%        43.52%        1.14%       1.19%          0.52%        15.25%       17.35%       -4.43%
 COSTA RICA            87.17%      14.83%         3.28%       2.75%      0.34%      4.60%          0.47%        41.04%        1.08%       1.32%          0.40%        12.87%       15.92%        1.10%
 CZECHOSLOVAKIA, FR    101.46%     13.60%        -5.61%       5.14%     -0.39%      29.21%       -33.51%        26.15%        2.14%       0.71%          1.30%        47.32%       -0.35%       14.29%
 ECUADOR               78.15%      19.85%        -0.61%       1.21%     -0.20%      2.41%         -2.20%        44.62%        0.25%       1.08%          0.50%        7.87%        25.47%       -0.25%
 EGYPT                 83.70%      -1.13%         0.11%       0.83%     -0.01%      0.17%         -3.62%        80.27%        0.19%       0.20%          0.20%        15.53%        5.82%        1.45%
 EL SALVADOR           86.87%      12.31%        -0.82%       2.25%     -1.75%      2.25%         -4.83%        36.50%       -0.61%       0.80%          0.59%        15.95%       39.63%       -2.28%
 HONG KONG             87.79%      17.58%         1.48%       1.08%      0.10%      9.57%          3.09%        26.51%        1.19%       0.33%          0.17%        22.46%       10.57%        5.87%
 HUNGARY               99.96%      12.23%       -14.88%       1.26%     -3.25%      31.86%       -31.56%        17.19%        3.09%       0.68%          1.67%        89.48%        1.01%       -8.79%
 MALTA                 89.87%       2.60%        -1.30%       2.63%      0.22%      11.70%        11.69%        14.81%        1.11%       0.43%          0.61%        34.10%       20.50%        0.88%
 MAURITIUS             87.23%       4.68%        -0.21%       9.21%     -0.60%      6.45%         -3.88%        42.73%       -0.56%       0.93%          0.35%        14.04%       27.06%       -0.19%
 MEXICO                84.90%      10.63%        -0.37%      -0.64%      0.06%      2.69%         -0.16%        50.73%        0.23%       1.11%          0.15%        15.48%       18.46%        1.65%
 PHILIPPINES           95.64%      20.18%        -2.26%      10.99%     -0.12%      5.15%        -10.38%        50.99%        1.06%       1.22%          0.46%        9.80%        14.27%       -1.36%
 POLAND                97.40%      15.60%        -3.88%       2.41%     -1.04%      12.94%       -12.87%        44.27%        1.44%       0.32%          1.30%        30.78%       11.40%       -2.67%
 PUERTO RICO           94.43%      11.27%         4.05%     -13.30%     -1.36%      10.72%         0.91%        32.09%        0.68%       0.76%          0.01%        36.96%       18.93%       -1.74%
 ROMANIA               103.14%     14.04%         0.10%      -0.70%     -1.43%      20.89%       -21.94%        52.84%        1.91%       0.55%          0.63%        28.68%        1.99%        2.46%
 SINGAPORE             85.49%       8.97%         3.12%       2.13%      0.17%      8.21%          1.26%        19.01%        1.66%       0.41%          -0.05%       21.95%       28.49%        4.66%
 TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO   91.85%       5.06%         0.18%     -11.37%      0.06%      19.14%         2.02%        36.39%        1.68%       2.11%          0.13%        40.72%        7.14%       -3.25%
 URUGUAY               93.32%       7.31%         2.53%       1.04%      1.21%      15.44%        -2.74%        22.61%        1.48%       0.86%          0.55%        45.70%        7.67%       -3.66%
 VENEZUELA             95.22%       4.13%         1.74%      -0.99%      0.05%      5.76%         -5.26%        25.76%        1.64%       1.07%          -0.02%       7.50%        60.06%       -1.44%
 YUGOSLAVIA, FR        89.96%      11.35%        -1.71%      -0.44%     -0.14%      5.52%         -5.92%        28.11%        0.97%       0.58%          0.28%        29.97%       30.58%        0.86%
            Table A.1: Classification of ICD Codes into Cause of Death Groups
Disease Group                             ICD-6/7 A             ICD-6/7 B           ICD-9
                              A001, A002, A003, A004, A005,    B001, B002,   B01, B02, B03, B04,
                              A006, A007, A008, A009, A010,    B003, B004,   B05, B06, B07
                              A011, A012, A013, A014, A015,    B005, B006,
                              A016, A017, A018, A019, A020,    B007, B008,
R01: INFECTIOUS DISEASES      A021, A022, A023, A024, A025,    B009, B010,
                              A026, A027, A028, A029, A030,    B011, B012,
                              A031, A032, A033, A034, A035,    B013, B014,
                              A036, A037, A038, A039, A040,    B015, B016,
                              A041, A042, A043                 B017
                              A044, A045, A046, A047, A048,    B018, B019    B08, B09, B10, B11,
                              A049, A050, A051, A052, A053,                  B12, B13, B14, B15,
R02: NEOPLASMS
                              A054, A055, A056, A057, A058,                  B16, B17
                              A059, A060
R03: ENDOCRINE, METABOLIC AND A061, A062, A063, A064, A065,    B020, B021    B18, B19, B20
BLOOD DISEASES, NUTRITIONAL A066
DEFICIENCIES
R04: MENTAL DISORDERS         A067, A068, A069                               B21
R05: DISEASES OF THE NERVOUS A070, A071, A072, A073, A074,     B022, B023    B22, B23, B24
SYSTEM AND SENSES ORGANS      A075, A076, A077, A078
                              A079, A080, A081, A082, A083,    B024, B025,   B25, B26, B27, B28,
R06: HEART AND CIRCULATORY
                              A084, A085, A086                 B026, B027,   B29, B30
DISEASES
                                                               B028, B029
                               A087, A088, A089, A090, A091,   B030, B031,   B31, B32, B33, B34
                               A092, A093, A094, A095, A096,   B032, B033,
R07: RESPIRATORY AND DIGESTIVE
                               A097, A098, A099, A100, A101,   B034, B035,
DISEASES
                               A102, A103, A104, A105, A106,   B036, B037
                               A107
R08: URINARY AND GENITAL       A108, A109, A110, A111, A112,   B038, B039    B35, B36, B37
DISEASES                       A113, A114
R09: ABORTION AND OBSTETRIC    A115, A116, A117, A118, A119,   B040          B38, B39, B40, B41
CAUSES                         A120
R10: SKIN AND                  A121, A122, A123, A124, A125,                 B42, B43
MUSCULOSKELETAL DISEASES       A126
R11: CONGENITAL ANOMALIES      A127, A128, A129, A130, A131,   B041, B042,   B44, B45
AND PERINATAL PERIOD           A132, A133, A134, A135          B043, B044
CONDITIONS
R12: ILL-DEFINED               A136, A137                      B045, B046    B46
                               A138, A139, A140, A141, A142,   B047, B048,   B47, B48, B49, B50,
R13: ACCIDENTS, SUICIDES AND
                               A143, A144, A145, A146, A147,   B049, B050    B51, B52, B53, B54,
HOMICIDES
                               A148, A149, A150                              B55, B56
                                            Figure 1: Regression to the Mean for Income Per Capita

                  2.50

                               y = -0.1265x + 1.7596
                             p-value=0.16, R2 = 0.0429


                  2.00




                  1.50
ln(GDP95/GDP65)




                  1.00




                  0.50




                  0.00
                      6.00       6.50               7.00        7.50               8.00       8.50   9.00   9.50
                                                                       ln(GDP65)
                                              Figure 2: Regression to the Mean for Life Expectancy

                23
                            y = -0.6224x + 48.477
                          p-value=0.00, R2 = 0.6123



                18




                13
Life95-Life65




                8




                3




                     45          50                   55          60             65             70   75   80
                -2




                -7
                                                                        Life65
                                     Figure 3: The Changing Relation Between Life Expectancy and Income per Capita

                           80
                                                                                                                       y = 3.6731Ln(x) + 40.837


                           75


                                                                                                                        y = 4.051Ln(x) + 33.428
                           70
life expectancy at birth




                           65



                           60



                           55



                           50



                           45
                                0   2000     4000      6000      8000       10000        12000      14000      16000      18000        20000
                                                                        GDP per capita

                                                          1965      1995       Log. (1965)       Log. (1995)
                                               Figure 4: Regression to Mean fo the Component of Life Expectancy Changes Explained by
                                                                                  Changes in Income

                                      10


                                       9      y = 0.0519x - 0.5973
                                           p-value = 0.29, R2 = 0.0258
                                       8
Change in Life Expectancy Explained




                                       7
  by Change in Income (1965-95)




                                       6


                                       5


                                       4


                                       3


                                       2


                                       1


                                       0
                                       45.00            50.00            55.00     60.00            65.00      70.00         75.00     80.00
                                                                                           Life65
Figure 5: Income Equivalent Compensation for Life Expectancy Gains



       Y




  E+ Yτ+∆τ

     Yτ+∆τ

                                                              Uτ+∆τ
        Yτ


                                                             Uτ



                     Tτ   Tτ+∆τ
                                                                  T
                                                                                  Figure 6: Survival Rate Distributions - Egypt 1965 and Japan 1995

                                                        1


                                                       0.9


                                                       0.8
S(t,0) - probability of survival from age 0 to age t




                                                       0.7


                                                       0.6


                                                       0.5


                                                       0.4


                                                       0.3


                                                       0.2


                                                       0.1


                                                        0
                                                             0   3   6   9   12 15 18 21 24 27 30 33 36 39 42 45 48 51 54 57 60 63 66 69 72 75 78 81 84 87 90 93 96 99
                                                                                                                     age

                                                                                                              Egypt'65     Japan'95
                                                          Figure 7: Regression to the Mean for Income Equivalent Compensation

                                     2.50


                                                  y = -0.2042x + 2.5687
                                                p-value=0.03, R2 = 0.1031

                                     2.00
ln((GDP95 + Inc Equiv Comp)/GDP65)




                                     1.50




                                     1.00




                                     0.50




                                     0.00
                                         6.00            6.50               7.00     7.50               8.00      8.50          9.00   9.50
                                                                                            ln(GDP65)
                           0%
                                10%
                                      20%
                                            30%
                                                  40%
                                                        50%
                                                              60%
                                                                    70%
                                                                          80%
                                                                                90%
            VENEZUELA
               EL SALV.
                 EGYPT
                  CHILE
              ECUADOR
                MEXICO
            COSTA RICA
              COLOMBIA
             ARGENTINA
             MAURITIUS
            YUGOSLAVIA
             PORTUGAL
            PHILIPPINES
            TRIN. & TOB.
              URUGUAY
             BARBADOS
             NEW ZEAL.
                  ITALY
             AUSTRALIA
               AUSTRIA
                   USA
            HONG KONG
           PUERTO RICO
                 JAPAN
               CANADA




country
             N. IRELAND
              GERMANY
             SINGAPORE
               LUXEMB.
                  SPAIN
             SCOTLAND
                FRANCE
               BELGIUM
          ENGL. & WALES
                POLAND
               FINLAND
               GREECE
                                                                                      Figure 8: Share of Welfare Improvements due to Longevity Gains




               SWEDEN
               IRELAND
                 MALTA
               ICELAND
                 BELIZE
              HUNGARY
              NETHERL.
               NORWAY
               ROMANIA
             CZECHOSL.
              BULGARIA
