                                NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




           INTERNATIONAL MIGRATION, REMITTANCES, AND SCHOOLING:
                       EVIDENCE FROM EL SALVADOR

                                           Alejandra Cox
                                           Manuelita Ureta

                                         Working Paper 9766
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9766


                      NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                               1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                 Cambridge, MA 02138
                                      June 2003




Paper presented at the Inter-American Seminar in Economics organized by the National Bureau of Economic
Research and ITESM, Monterrey Campus – Mexico, November 15-16 2002. The authors benefited from
detailed comments from Bonnie Palifka and from valuable suggestions by Sebastian Edwards, William W.
Gould, Audrey L. Light, Kevin M. Murphy, Wayne Strayer, Finis Welch and workshop participants at Ohio
State University and Texas A&M University. Manuelita Ureta gratefully acknowledges financial support for
this project from The Bush School of Government and Public Service. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Alejandra Cox Edwards and Manuelita Ureta. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.
International Migration, Remittances, and Schooling: Evidence from El Salvador
Alejandra Cox Edwards and Manuelita Ureta
NBER Working Paper No. 9766
June 2003
JEL No. F22, I22, I28, J24, O15

                                            ABSTRACT

We examine the effect of remittances from abroad on households’ schooling decisions using data
for El Salvador. Following the massive war-related emigration of the 1980’s, remittances became
a significant source of household income throughout the 1990’s. We use the Cox proportional
hazard model to examine the determinants of school attendance. Measuring income from a source

that is uncorrelated with parental schooling– remittances– , we find that remittances have a large,

significant effect on school retention. We estimate that while household income net of remittances
has a small, though significant, impact on the hazard of leaving school in rural and urban areas,
remittances have a much larger impact on the hazard of leaving school. In urban areas, the effect
of remittances is, at its smallest, 10 times the size of the effect of other income. In rural areas, the

effect of remittances is about 2.6 times that of other income. Our finding is of interest in that it
suggests that subsidizing school attendance, particularly in poor areas, may have a large impact on
school attendance and retention, even if parents have low levels of schooling.



Alejandra Cox Edwards                           Manuelita Ureta
Department of Economics                         Texas A&M University
California State University
1250 Bellflower Blvd.
Long Beach, CA 90840
Globalization is generally studied from the point of view of international trade, finance or
migration. One aspect of globalization that is less understood is that of remittances. We
examine the effect of remittances on households’ schooling decisions using data for El
Salvador. El Salvador has significantly expanded its educational coverage after the civil
war that ended in 1989. In 1997, 75 percent of rural children and 92 percent of urban
children aged 12 were enrolled in school. The recent higher rates of retention in school
are a remarkable accomplishment for a country that has 30 percent illiteracy rate among
adults aged 40 to 50, and 25 percent illiteracy among adults aged 30 to 40. The record of
expansion of the educational system in El Salvador during the 1960’s and 1970’s was
dismal in comparison with the record of other developing countries. Schultz (1989) notes
that in the period from 1960 to 1981 El Salvador was the only country to report a decline
in expected years of schooling, from 5.63 to 5.06 years, according to the 1984 World
Development Report (table 25).


There are two dimensions of the case of El Salvador that make it unique and interesting.
First, the institutional setting for public policy in the educational sector is such that the
expansion of school facilities is primarily driven by the active participation of parents in
the allocation of public and private funds. Parents have played a leading role financing
the expansion of private schools, which have led the urban expansion. To expand
primary school coverage in rural areas, a priority of the government in the 1990’s, the
Ministry of Education allocates resources to parents’ associations enabling them to hire
teachers and buy materials.


Second, following the massive out migration of the 1980’s, remittances from abroad have
become a significant source of household income throughout the 1990’s. 1 In 1997, 14
percent of rural and 15 percent of urban households received remittances from relatives
or friends living abroad. Income from remittances expands the household budget


1
  The literature has produced a number of studies that look into the flow of remittances, its persistence (see
for example, Funkhouser (1992) and Montes (1990)) and its impact on the economy (see for example
Lopez (1991)).


                                                                                                             1
constraint allowing some families to find it optimal that their children acquire more
schooling than they would acquire otherwise.


Our sample is a cross-section of 14,286 individuals aged 6 to 24, from the 1997 Annual
Household Survey. This is a nationally representative sample collected by the National
Statistics Office (Digestyc). We use the Cox proportional hazard model to estimate the
impact of characteristics of the individual and the family—including remittances and
income separately—on the hazard of dropping out of school. We find that remittances
have a significant impact on school retention.


The use of the Cox proportional hazard model to study school attainment with cross-
sectional data is an innovation.2 The model poses some challenges, which we address,
and at the same time it offers several advantages over its alternatives. First, the Cox
proportional hazard model makes use of all the available information in observations for
children or young adults who are enrolled in school at the time of the survey (9,547 of the
14,286 in our sample) as well as for those who are no longer enrolled. One popular
alternative is to study school completion among older individuals, who are expected to
have finished their formal education. An analysis of school attainment based on the
sample of individuals aged 25 and over would be especially undesirable in El Salvador
where there have been recent efforts to expand school enrollment throughout the country.
Second, the model yields estimates of survival functions, allowing us to establish, for
example, that the 1980-83 urban birth cohort enjoyed the largest improvement in school
attainment relative to the cohort immediately prior, and that the 1984-87 rural cohort
experienced, by far, the largest improvement relative to the cohort that preceded it.
Third, the model allows very flexible specifications, and we find, for example, that the


2
    There are two papers that use proportional hazard models that came to our attention recently.
Inchauste (2000) analyzes Bolivian data and uses a hazard model to estimate the probability that children
quit school in period t+1 given that they attended school in period t. The hazard estimates are weighted by
the probability of being constrained (which is driven by variables such as “no financial resources”, school
being “too far away”, and “having to work.”) Brown and Park (2001) use proportional hazard models to
estimate the impact of several variables (including credit constraints) on the likelihood of dropping out of
school at the primary and secondary level. Neither of these papers discusses the advantages or
shortcomings of using Cox proportional hazard models as we do here.


                                                                                                           2
effect of parental schooling on the hazard of leaving school falls as the level of the
child’s schooling increases.


In what follows we begin with a brief discussion of the literature followed by a
description of the institutional setting of the school system in El Salvador; we then
describe the data and methodology and present our results.


Theoretical Issues


Assuming that parents care about their children’s well being and that they can borrow to
finance productive investments, optimal investment in schooling is a function of net rates
of return. These in turn are a function of benefits and costs. Differences in rates of
return arising from exogenously determined, individual-specific traits, such as innate
ability, likely provide a partial explanation for observed differences in completed
schooling across members of a given family. Differences in rates of return due to
location-specific factors, such as distance to school, likely explain part of the difference
in average completed schooling across residents of different towns. Differences in rates
of returns driven by economy-wide conditions, such as the labor market valuation of
schooling, likely explain some of the difference in school completion levels across
countries.


If parents are unable to borrow to finance investments in education, all of the above
forces still apply, but households’ decisions are going to be constrained by their own
resources. The Becker-Tomes (1976) model suggests that the amount poor parents are
willing to invest in the child’s education will be smaller than the optimum under a non-
binding borrowing constraint, but this amount will be increasing in parental income up to
the point at which the marginal return to investment is equal to the rate of interest. When
there is more than one child at home, parents also decide the allocation of resources
across children (Behrman, Pollack, Taubman, 1991).




                                                                                               3
The literature on the schooling of children in developing countries has emphasized the
role of family income constraints in explaining differences in school attainment. The
empirical work has found that family income, parental schooling, sex, residence, and
family size are important determinants of school attainment. Behrman and Wolfe (1984)
use Nicaraguan data to show that family background (place of birth) and parental
schooling, particularly the mother’s schooling, are important determinants of children’s
school attainment. Parish and Willis (1993) used Taiwanese data and found that the
effects of parental income, and the size and composition of the family were strongest
among older cohorts and poorer households. They interpret this evidence as indicating
that older cohorts and poorer households are more credit constrained than younger
cohorts and richer households. Lillard and Willis (1994) used Malaysian data to study the
effects of parents’ and grandparents’ schooling on children’s progress through the
educational system. Their data allows them to identify separately the effect of parental
schooling from the effect of other time-varying variables on children’s school attainment.
They find that at leas two-thirds of the impact of parental education on children’s
schooling is a direct consequence of parent schooling while the remaining one-third can
be attributed to unmeasured factors that influence educational attainment of parents and
children.


In the absence of longitudinal data, there are two problems when attempting to isolate the
impact of genetic ability and the household budget constraint. First, parental schooling
may capture simultaneously genetic ability, motivation, and the capacity to generate
income. Second, current income is a poor measure of the household budget constraint,
particularly in the context of important variability in current income relative to permanent
income, leading to a downward bias in the estimated effect of household income in
children's schooling (Haveman and Wolfe 1995). This ambiguity is problematic for it
weakens the support for income transfers as a means to improve opportunities for
children whose parents lack schooling. Studies that shed light on the marginal effects of
the parental income versus schooling variables are especially valuable.




                                                                                            4
We examine a cross section of households in 1997, measure the school attainment of
individuals aged 6 to 24, and estimate the impact of household characteristics on the
hazard of dropping out of school. Included in the household characteristics we measure
are local indicators, parental schooling, income and remittances (where the last two are
measured at the time of the survey). The 1980’s out migration wave from El Salvador
was primarily motivated by political factors. The peace accord was signed in 1992, and
migration flows after 1992 are more likely to be explained by economic factors,
including the presence of a migrant population in the United States. Therefore, our
observed sample may include households receiving remittances because they have a one-
time political exile relative or friend living abroad, and households receiving remittances
because they sent a family member to work and remit income from abroad. Remittances
received by the first type of household are arguably equivalent to a randomly assigned
income transfer, while remittances received by the second type are not.


If remittances are randomly assigned across households, our analysis provides an unusual
opportunity to identify separately the effect of income from that of parental schooling. If
migration has been driven primarily by economic reasons and remittances cannot be
viewed as the result of random assignment, our study still makes the important
contribution of focusing attention on the effect of remittances on human capital formation
and quantifies the effect on school retention rates throughout primary and secondary
schooling. To our knowledge, this is the first study to examine the effects of remittances
on an important household decision using micro-level data.


We argue that remittances are closer to a randomly assigned transfer, and that their
measured effect is a cleaner estimate of the impact of relaxing a household’s budget
constraint on school retention rates than is the measured effect of household income—
which is typically correlated with parental schooling. We focus on three characteristics
of households: family income, parental schooling, and the number of school-age
children. We separate rural and urban households because of the significant differences
in income and schooling across the rural-urban divide. Comparing the location of
recipient and non-recipient households along the distribution of these variables, we show


                                                                                           5
that all groups are likely to receive remittances. In addition, we report the median
amount of remittance and show that it is remarkably stable across the various groups.


Household Characteristics and Remittances


Table 1 reports the percentage of households receiving remittances that fall in each decile
of the income distribution of non-recipient households, separately for urban and rural
areas. Non-recipient households represent 85% of urban and 86% of rural households.
Column 2 in each panel of Table 1 reports the percentage of recipient households that fall
in each decile when we measure pre-remittance income only. In both regions, close to
30% of households fall in the first decile of the distribution, and the remaining
households are roughly evenly distributed throughout the other 9 deciles. The over-
representation of households in the lowest decile of the income distribution does not
imply that recipient households are significantly more likely to be poor households.
These households have fewer members employed than non-recipient households so their
income-generating capacity in the local economy must be lower than it is for non-
recipient households.3 Column 3 in each panel shows the median remittance amount
received by households in each decile. Clearly, the remittance amount is independent of
the pre-remittance income of the recipient households: the within-decile median amount
is typically 875 colones (100 U.S. dollars) or half that amount. Of course, the addition of
a remittance to household income changes the location of recipient households along the
income distribution of non recipient households. Column 4 in each panel reports the
percentage of recipient households that fall in each decile of the income distribution of
non-recipient households by post-remittance income. In urban areas, the percentage of
recipient households that fall in each decile is remarkably close to 10 percent, suggesting
that households that have relatives abroad who send remittances come from every
segment of the distribution of income. There is no evidence of a pattern of self-selection
where poor households are predominantly likely to receive funds from relatives living
abroad.

3
   In urban areas, the average recipient household has 1.35 workers against 1.7 in non-recipient household.
In rural areas, the corresponding averages are 1.24 and 1.66.


                                                                                                          6
In rural areas, recipient households are slightly under-represented in the three lowest
deciles of the income distribution. Note that the median remittance amount is the same in
rural and in urban areas because it is largely determined by the expatriates’ earnings in
the United States. But since incomes are considerably lower in rural than in urban areas,
remittances have a more pronounced effect on rural household income that shows up in
an under-representation of recipient households in the three lowest deciles, and a slight
over-representation in the top two deciles. But the important point to note is that we find
no pattern of self-selection where recipient families are predominantly likely to come
from one segment of the distribution of household income.


Table 2 shows that 28% of all households in El Salvador are female-headed. While
recipient households are more likely to be female-headed, 25% of non-recipient
households are also female-headed. An alternative measure of this relationship (not
shown) is that 23% of female-headed households receive remittances against 11% of
male-headed households. Of course, political exiles and those emigrating for economic
reasons are typically male, so the higher incidence of female-headed households among
recipient households is unsurprising and sheds no light on the issue of which type of
migration dominates the data.


Table 3 reports the distribution of urban and rural households by the schooling of the
adult female in the household—head of household or spouse. The choice of the female
adult to represent each household is deliberate, and it allows a cleaner comparison across
households that may or may not have an adult male present. Migration patterns in El
Salvador have resulted in about 30% female-headed households, and female headship is
more common among recipient households. Therefore, a comparison of parental
characteristics between recipient and non-recipient households is better done controlling
for adult female characteristics. The urban and rural distributions of households across
adult female schooling levels are fairly close for non-recipient and recipient households,
though recipient households are somewhat over-represented in the lowest schooling
category, 0 to 3 years of schooling. If political exiles came from all walks of life in El


                                                                                             7
Salvador and the exiles represent the lion’s share of those working abroad, the
educational distribution of the wives left behind would be similar to that of wives in non-
recipient households. The fact that recipient households are somewhat over-represented
in the lowest schooling categories suggests that migrants for economic reasons may have
represented an ever increasing fraction of migration flows in the five years leading up to
the 1997 survey (assuming that they come from the low end of the educational
distribution and that assortative mating dominates).


Table 4 organizes urban and rural households according to the number of school age
children (children aged 6 and older). We find no systematic differences in the
distribution of recipient and non-recipient households by the presence of school-age
children. Finally, note that the median value of the remittance amount is 875 colones
(US$100) in most cells in all three tables.4


Schooling in El Salvador


The educational system in El Salvador is organized along four levels. Children aged 4 to
6 attend pre-school. Children aged 7 to 15 attend primary education which is divided in
three cycles of three years each, from first to ninth grade. Children aged 16 to 18 attend
secondary education which goes from tenth to twelfth grade. Table 5, based on 1997
data, shows the enrollment of children in the school system, by age categories.




4
  The survey collects information on remittances, their amount and their use. Respondents typically quote
the remittances received in dollars, and these amounts are translated into local currency (colones) by the
interviewers, using the official exchange rate. We could have also considered using the information
collected on expenditures and in particular, the amounts of remittances that are said to have been spent on
education. Nevertheless, we decided not to use the latter variable for two reasons. First, there is a
significant discrepancy between the total amount of registered remittances and the total expenditure that
they afford, with total expenditure being about 30 percent higher than the recorded amount received. We
believe that expenditures are more likely to be measured with error, since there are several items involved.
Second, the amount of remittances spent on education says nothing about the fact that remittances spent on
other items will free resources that may be ultimately spent on education. We therefore preferred to stay
within the tradition of economic analysis and keep tabs on what families do about education rather than on
the amounts they say they spend towards education.


                                                                                                           8
There has been a rapid expansion in school enrollment throughout the 1990’s (Table 6).
Note the significant increases in rural pre-school and primary coverage, and urban pre-
school and secondary coverage. The levels of school attainment of recent birth cohorts in
El Salvador are significantly higher than those of older cohorts. This gain is the outcome
of an important national effort, considering current standards of living in El Salvador.
Table 7 reports school attainment levels for older individuals. We see that no more than
40 percent of the parents of current school-aged children completed primary education.


Enrollment levels have yet to reach the equivalent of “universal primary coverage:” of
the young aged 12, only 80 percent of rural residents and 90 percent of urban residents
are enrolled in primary school. As Table 5 suggests, rates of retention in primary
education are relatively high, but there is slow progress through grades. Once children
get to the third cycle of primary schooling, 45 percent are in the grade corresponding to
normal progress, 30.5 percent are behind, and 19 percent have abandoned the system (see
MINED, 1997).


The survey records answers to the question “Why is (a particular person) not attending
school?” Among primary school age children, the most frequent answers are “too
expensive” and “age related reason.” The first one suggests that the family’s budget
constraint has a major impact on the decision to drop out of school. The second answer
hints at the role played by the child’s ability and/or the quality of schools, or may be an
indication that the child never enrolled or started school late.


Demand Driven Expansion
El Salvador’s Community-Managed Schools Program (popularly known by the acronym,
EDUCO, or Educación con Participación de la Comunidad) is an innovative program of
public support for community managed schools. A prototype of today’s EDUCO schools
emerged in the 1980’s when the civil war left a void in public education. Some
communities took the initiative to organize their own schools, administered and
financially supported by a family-based association. While these early attempts were
constrained by the low rural income base, they revealed a strong latent demand for


                                                                                              9
education, as well as a desire to participate in the governance of schools. In 1991, El
Salvador’s Ministry of Education (MINED), with the support of international agencies,
chose the implementation of the same prototype as the main method of expanding
educational coverage in rural areas.


The present EDUCO schools are managed autonomously by an elected Community
Education Association (Asociación Comunal para la Educación or ACE) drawn from the
parents of the students. In EDUCO schools, the ACE performs a central role of
administration and management: ACEs are contracted by MINED to deliver a given
curriculum to an agreed upon number of students. ACEs are charged with the close
monitoring of teachers’ performance, hiring and firing of teachers, and equipping and
maintaining the schools.5


Data and Methodology


The 1997 National Household Survey (Encuesta de Hogares de Propósitos Múltiples
EHPM) has national representation and covers 8,387 families. We focus on the
schooling attendance and family characteristics of individuals aged 6 to 24, about 40
percent of the population. Based on the survey data we can describe a number of
important characteristics of each child’s family. We have information on housing
conditions, the age, schooling, income and labor force status of family members, the
number of household members who are currently living abroad, and the value of
remittances sent by expatriates.


Our hypothesis is that parents make schooling decisions for their children on the basis of
expectations of the returns on these investments. Factors that influence the expected

5
  The EDUCO program has become a very productive model for the modernization for the entire Ministry
of Education (Jacir de Lovo, 1997). Jimenez and Sawada (1998) compared student achievement on
standardized tests and school attendance of rural students in EDUCO schools with the achievement and
attendance of students in traditional schools. Their analysis controls for student characteristics and
selection bias, using an exogenously determined formula for targeting EDUCO schools as an instrumental
variable. They find that the rapid expansion of rural schools through EDUCO has diminished student
absences and has not had an adverse effect on student achievement.



                                                                                                   10
return to schooling are the cost of school attendance—out-of-pocket and opportunity
costs—and the anticipated rewards in the labor market for skills acquired through formal
schooling. Parents will compare the expected returns from investing in the schooling of
their children to the returns from alternative investments that will also increase a child’s
human capital, like nutrition, health care, clothing and shelter. Poor families may find it
optimal to choose quite low levels of completed schooling for their children in order to
enjoy a given level of consumption of food, health services, etc. Low levels of
completed schooling imply relatively low out-of-pocket expenses for schooling and
enable the child to start working at an early age (the legal working age in El Salvador is
10 years of age). That is, in a poor country like El Salvador, the family’s budget
constraint may play an important role in a family’s decision on school attendance of their
children.6


Parents’ expectations of the rewards to skill in the labor market may depend on the
parents’ own schooling levels. More educated parents may be better informed about the
employment opportunities and wages available to those with given schooling levels, or
may themselves enjoy the rewards the labor market offers workers with above average
education. Therefore, parental schooling may play a role in a family’s choice of
completed schooling for their children.


Other factors that affect the perceived costs and benefits of schooling relate to the
availability of schools offering the required grade levels within a reasonable commuting
distance from the household. We do not know the exact location of each household or
the geographical distribution of schools offering given grade levels. We do know,
however, if a household resides in a rural area—where we expect less access to
schools—and if the dwelling has access to neither electricity nor water, suggesting the
household is located in a particularly remote area, or is an extremely poor household.




                                                                                             11
A model of parental schooling decisions for their children would not be complete without
reference to another two factors. First, it is reasonable to expect that parents’ decisions
on the schooling of older children are made sequentially, taking into account the child’s
school experience. When a child is retained in grade, the return to continued investment
in the child’s schooling is instantly reduced. Retention in grade raises the cost of
completing the same grade level with no change in benefits. As we discuss below, we
have access to a single cross-section for El Salvador. The survey has very good
information on school related behavior, but we do not know at what age an individual
started school or if a person—in or out of school—was ever retained in grade. While we
would like to control for the age of children and young adults in a model of the
probability of their continued school attendance, we cannot do it.


The second factor that likely plays a role in parental decisions regarding a child’s
schooling is the composition of the household. The number and ages of siblings bears
heavily on the family’s resources. In order to capture fully the budget constraint of a
family, income is clearly not enough. We know the composition of each household at the
time of the survey, but we do not know it at any other time. In particular, we do not
know it at the various stages in a child’s life when the composition of the household may
have played an important role in determining whether the child would continue on to the
next cycle of education, for example the second cycle (grades 4 through 6).


The Statistical Model
Our sample is a cross-section of 14,286 individuals aged 6 to 24. We know the sex, age
and school attainment of the individual, characteristics of the family, place of residence,
and properties of the dwelling where they live. We assume that children of school age
who are not enrolled in school have dropped out of school, and use the Cox proportional
hazard model to estimate the impact of characteristics of the individual and the family on
the hazard of dropping out of school.


6
  Compulsory free schooling is a way to overrule parental doubts on the potential benefits of education.
Nevertheless, in El Salvador as in most developing countries, compulsory primary education is not
enforced, and schooling is not free or readily available to all children.


                                                                                                           12
The choice of the proportional hazard model is somewhat unusual in the modeling of
school attainment levels, and warrants some discussion. The Cox proportional hazard
model is tailored for the analysis of survival-time data, and, clearly, the number of “years
of completed schooling” does not correspond one-to-one with calendar time because
children can be retained in grade. The question, then, is whether the proportional hazard
framework is acceptable for the analysis of school attainment. We will argue it is.


The hazard framework requires that we choose one of two possible “outcomes” for each
individual in the sample: the individual is enrolled in school (“right-censored”) or is not
enrolled (“failed”). We have a single cross-section and no retrospective information on
enrollment behavior. Thus, we have no choice but to treat every individual who is not
enrolled in school on the day of the survey as if they have “failed.”


The proportional hazard model adapted to the case in question assumes that the observed
fraction of the population that dropped out after grade t, relative to those that completed
grade t, is:


        h(t) = h0(t) * exp{xi'β}


where h0(t) is the baseline hazard of leaving school after grade t, which is left unspecified
and is estimated; xi’ is a vector of covariates, and β is the vector of parameters to be
estimated. The crucial assumption in the Cox proportional hazard model is that the effect
of the covariates is proportional over the entire base line.


The Cox proportional hazard model has several features that make it an attractive
statistical framework for the problem at hand. The most obvious advantage is that it
exploits all the available information in observations that are right-censored, that is,
observations for children or young adults who are enrolled in school at the time of the
survey (9,547 of the 14,286 in our sample). We can avoid the unappealing practice of
limiting the sample to individuals aged 25 and over who are expected to have finished


                                                                                           13
their formal education. In the case of El Salvador, this practice would be especially
undesirable since it is only recently that the government has engaged in a bold effort to
expand grade availability in rural areas and increase school enrollment generally
throughout the country. A focus on older birth cohorts would give us no insight into
recent educational trends in El Salvador.


Another desirable feature of the Cox proportional hazard model is that it readily yields an
estimate of the underlying baseline hazard function, enabling us to identify the grade
levels where dropout rates are concentrated, net of the effect of measured determinants of
school completion. This information may be useful for policy makers seeking to further
expand school enrollment.


In the empirical analysis, we include everyone in the sample aged 6 to 24, who does not
have missing information. Note that the sample includes individuals who have never
attended school. This highlights another convenient feature of the Cox proportional
hazard approach. Since time, in and of itself, is not of the essence for the analysis, we
model the determinants of “never enrolling in school” much like we model the decisions
regarding continuing to attend school. That is, we view “never enrolled” as the first stage
of the schooling process. Everyone in the sample “enters the study” (in the jargon of bio-
statistics) through this stage which has an arbitrarily chosen length of time. Then, there
is a probability that a child will not “fail” and continues on to enroll in the first grade.
Put differently, the hazard of “failing” in the “not enrolled” interval simply refers to the
hazard of never enrolling in school at all. 7


Some of the older individuals in the sample have completed more than 12 years of
schooling. There are few such cases and we are primarily interested in school attainment
in primary and secondary school. So we focus our attention on grades 1 through 12 by

7
  The distinction between failure to enroll and drop-out hazard has generally been overlooked. A notable
exception is Filmer and Pritchet (2000). Interestingly enough, their results show that the enrollment
profiles of the poor differ across countries but fall into distinctive regional patterns: in some regions the
poor reach nearly universal enrollment in first grade, but then drop out in droves leading to low attainment




                                                                                                           14
truncating an individual’s completed schooling at 12 years if he or she has more than 12
years of completed schooling, and treat the observation as right censored.


Note that we are examining a cross section with individuals of different ages, some
currently in school and some who dropped out of school in the past. We have a single
cross section, and find ourselves in the unenviable position of having to limit the vector
of covariates to factors that we can argue convincingly can be treated as time-invariant.
Some determinants of the parents’ schooling choices for their children are clearly grade-
level-invariant, for example the child’s sex and the schooling levels of the parents. Our
empirical specification also includes an indicator variable equal to one if the household
has no access to water or electricity, and a set of variables that measure income and the
presence and amount of remittances received from abroad.


Operational Definitions of the Covariates
Before turning to details of the specification we estimate, we list the set of covariates and
give their operational definitions. The covariates include an indicator variable for sex
(equal to 1 if male). We control for a child’s sex to allow for the possibility that parents
expect different returns to investment in schooling for boys and girls, all else equal.


We include an indicator variable for a household’s lack of access to water and electricity
(equal to 1 if there is no access) to serve as a proxy for local conditions. Presumably,
lack of access to these basic services is correlated with low population density and long
distances to schools, factors that increase the cost of attending school, and lower the
returns. While we realize that access to basic services is not strictly time invariant, we
expect it to be nearly so and include it in our vector of covariates. Even though internal
migration is common, it is far less common for an entire family to change residence,
especially in the rural areas where families typically own the piece of land where they




(typical of South America), while in other regions the poor never enroll in school (typical of South Asia
and Western/Central Africa).


                                                                                                            15
reside. Also, internal migration is more likely among young adults that are starting a
family.8


Parental schooling has been found to be significant in explaining the school attainment of
children. Often times, the effect of father’s schooling is different from that of mother’s
schooling. We chose not to test for differences in the effect of paternal and maternal
schooling levels because in El Salvador close to 30 percent of households have absent
fathers. An attempt to test for the separate effects of paternal and maternal schooling
results in a loss of too many observations, and runs the serious risk of yielding a highly
selected, non-representative sample of households. We created a variable, “Parental
Schooling,” equal to the higher of the two parents’ schooling, if both are present, or the
schooling of the parent who is present when one is absent.


The remaining three covariates pertain to household income and the presence and amount
of remittances. We include the survey variable “household income,” measured in
colones per month, to capture the budget constraint of the child’s household. As other
studies have found, we expect that higher incomes will lower the hazard of leaving
school. Two questions are of interest. First, does household income influence school
attainment? Second, does income from remittances have the same effect as household
income from work in the local economy? To answer the last question we exclude the
remittance amount from the measure of household income and include it as a separate
covariate.9

8
  The 1997 Household Survey we use does not have information on internal migration. Issues related to
migrant families can be examined with the 1998 Household Survey that includes a migration module.
9
  The standard of living in urban areas of El Salvador is significantly higher than in rural areas, so it is
unclear how to measure correctly the impact of an additional colon from remittances on a household’s
budget constraint. We experimented with an alternative metric for household income and remittances. In
the alternative specification, the variable “Location in the income distribution (net of remittance)” is
measured in integers ranging from 1 to 20 that correspond to the location (in intervals of 5 centiles) of a
given income level in the income distribution, excluding remittances. Thus “Location in the income
distribution (net of remittance)” will be equal to 1 if the household income is in the bottom 5 centiles of the
income distribution for the area (urban or rural) where it resides. We then added to each recipient
household’s income, the income from remittances. The location on the income distribution will tend to
worsen for those without remittances, and will improve for those with remittances. The change in location
is measured in units of 5 centile points and ranges from 0 (for no change) to 19 (for a change from the
lowest to the highest 5 centiles in the distribution). “Change in location due to remittance” will be equal to


                                                                                                            16
Income from remittances will also expand the family’s budget constraint, allowing some
families to move closer to the optimum amount of schooling for their children. We note
that the typical amount of remittances is 100 dollars, or 875 colones. As Table 8 shows,
the median remittance represents a more significant fraction of incomes of rural than
urban families: remittances represent 46 percent of household incomes for the median
rural recipient and 27 percent for the median urban recipient household. On average,
remittances make up 49 percent and 37 percent of income for rural and urban recipient
households.


In addition to controlling for household income and income from remittances, we include
an indicator for the presence of income from remittances (equal to 1 if the household
receives remittances from abroad). We believe that the massive out-migration in El
Salvador during the 1980’s was driven primarily by political rather than economic
factors. But we want to allow for the possibility that households that receive remittances
differ systematically, for unobserved reasons, from other households. In fact, even if the
initial stimulus for migrating was political, families receiving remittances have already
experienced direct benefits from migration. One can argue that these families attach a
higher value to the migration option for their own children than do other families. This
effect alone may well cause differences across families in the expected returns from
schooling, and in the hazard of leaving school. More generally, the indicator variable
will capture any additional effect of remittances on children’s schooling that acts through
channels other than the budget constraint, and any systematic differences in attitudes




2 if the family’s income including the remittance falls 2 intervals to the right of its initial location in the
income distribution, that is, when excluding the amount of the remittance.
   The hazard model that uses the metric described above yields a slightly higher value for the log-
likelihood function for the urban sample, and a slightly lower value for the rural sample. Regarding the
remaining coefficient estimates, they are quite invariant to the choice of metric for income and remittances.
We implemented a test proposed by Weesie (1999) that is a generalization of Hausman’s test, of the null
hypothesis that the remaining coefficients are equal in the two specifications. (Note that this is not a nested
hypothesis.) For the urban sample the test-statistic is equal to 12.41 and is distributed chi-squared with 6
degrees of freedom. We fail to reject the null hypothesis; the p-value for the test is 0.0534. For the rural
sample the test-statistic is equal to 13.08 and is distributed chi-squared with 8 degrees of freedom. We fail
to reject the null hypothesis; the p-value for the test is 0.1090.



                                                                                                            17
toward the schooling of children across families that do and those that do not receive
remittances.


It should be noted that the appropriate variable that influences investment on children is
permanent household income. What we use is a crude proxy of the variable, which is
household income in one particular year separated in two components, remittances and
the rest. Arguing that income and the presence of remittances are time-invariant
covariates is perhaps a bit heroic. While it is probably the case that income mobility in
El Salvador is quite low, a question arises with respect to the stability through time of
remittances vs. other income. If remittances are more stable, they are a better measure of
permanent income relative to other observed income. We return to these issues as we
examine the results.


There are two variables we intended to use as covariates, “year of birth” and an indicator
variable for residence in the rural areas. The reason for controlling for year of birth is
simply to pick up any systematic differences between cohorts. The differences could be
due to the implementation of educational reform by the government or any effects that
the civil war of the 1980’s had on the operation of the schools or children’s ability to
attend school. For reasons discussed in detail in the Appendix, our preferred
specification is one where we stratify on year of birth and we estimate separate models
for the urban and rural samples.


We estimate separate models for the urban and rural samples allowing separate effects for
the four segments of the baseline hazard, and we stratify each sample on 5 strata
according to year of birth. The segments are “never enrolled,” 1st through the 6th grade,
7th through the 9th grade, and 10th through the 12th grade.10 The four oldest strata

10
 We divided the baseline hazard into the segments listed in text based on the following considerations.
Primary education is divided into three cycles of three grades each. Therefore, when distance to school
becomes a problem, it is likely it will happen when a child is ready to enroll in the next cycle of primary
education or secondary education. In addition, public education becomes relatively scarce at the third
cycle of primary education, and close to half of secondary education is private. This suggests that out-of-
pocket costs of additional years of schooling beyond the sixth grade rise relative to schooling at younger
ages. In addition, in the early stages of estimation we divided the hazard further, allowing for separate


                                                                                                        18
combine individuals born in four-year intervals: 1972 to 1975, 1976 to 1979, 1980 to
1983, and 1984 to 1987. The youngest stratum is for individuals born between 1988 and
1990.


Estimation Results

To provide a context for the estimation results, we begin by presenting Kaplan-Meier
estimates of the survival functions in Figure 1. It is immediately apparent that children
living in urban areas have a significantly higher probability of attaining any given level
of school completion than rural children do. For example, rural children have a
probability of .60 of completing the 6th grade, compared to over .85 for urban children.
The gap only widens at higher-grade levels. Urban children have a probability of .70 of
completing the 12th grade, compared to only .30 for rural children. The graphed
functions also highlight the more common exit points from schooling for children. The
survival functions show large declines at the 3rd, 6th, and 9th grades, especially in rural
areas.


Of the individuals in our estimation sample (individuals aged 6 to 24 who have no
missing values), 55 percent of those in urban areas live in households that have 2 or more
children in the sample. The corresponding figure is 65 percent in the rural sample. To
allow for correlation in the “residuals” of family members, that is, to allow for a
household effect, we compute robust estimates of variance by clustering observations on
a family identifier.


The estimates of the determinants of the hazard of dropping out of school are
summarized in Tables 9 and 10. The (exponentiated) coefficient for the indicator
variable “Male” is significantly different from one in urban areas, where males are 27
percent more likely to drop out of school (or never enroll in school at all). One possible




effects for the 1st through the 3rd grade, and the 4th through the 6th grade. But we did not reject the null
hypothesis that the segments could be combined into one covering the 1st through the 6th grade.


                                                                                                         19
explanation for this finding is that boys have better labor market opportunities than do
girls, and thus face higher opportunity costs of attending school.


In rural areas, the effect of sex is not proportional over the entire baseline hazard. Boys
have a higher hazard than do girls of never enrolling in school and of leaving school after
the first two cycles of primary education. The estimated hazard ratio is 1.16, or a 16
percent higher hazard. This effect is qualitatively similar to the estimated effect of sex in
urban areas. What is puzzling is that for grades 1 through 6, the hazard of leaving school
is 10 percent lower for boys than girls in rural areas. The coefficients in question are
statistically significantly different from one another, and we do not have an explanation
for this pattern of effects.


Interestingly, the dampening effect of higher parental schooling on the hazard of leaving
school declines monotonically as a child reaches ever higher-grade levels. In urban
areas, each year of additional parental schooling lowers the hazard that a child leaves
school (or never enrolls) by 20 percent, while the child is attending one of the first two
cycles of primary education. Once the child is enrolled in the third cycle, 7th through the
9th grade, an additional year of parental schooling only lowers the hazard by 14 percent.
And the effect on the hazard for secondary education is lower still: 7 percent. The
estimated coefficients are statistically significantly different for the three segments of the
hazard.


In rural areas much the same pattern is observed, though the estimated effects of parental
schooling on the hazard of leaving school are smaller than they are in urban areas. An
additional year of parental schooling has the largest estimated effect on the hazard that a
child will never be enrolled in school: the hazard drops 16 percent with each additional
year of parental schooling.11 For children attending grades 1 through 6, an additional


11
   This may appear to be too large of an effect. But average parental schooling in rural areas is close to
three years of schooling. Thus, the child of a parent with 3 years of schooling has a hazard of never
enrolling in school that is only 59 percent (exp(-.177×3)=.588) as high as the hazard for a child whose
parents have no schooling.


                                                                                                             20
year of parental schooling lowers the hazard of leaving school by 13 percent. For
youngsters attending grades 7 through 12, the effect drops to 8 percent.


Despite the previous discussion, we cannot conclude that parental schooling is a
weightier factor for children’s schooling in urban than in rural areas. As seen in Figure 1,
the survival function is significantly higher in urban than rural areas; correspondingly,
the hazard function is significantly lower in urban than rural areas. The combined effects
of the coefficient estimates for parental schooling and the level of the baseline hazard
functions is illustrated in Figure 2. We graph the estimated survival functions evaluated
at the 10th centile, the 1st quartile, the median, the 3rd quartile and the 90th centile of the
distribution of parental schooling, separately for urban and rural areas. We set income at
the median for each area, and graph the estimated baseline survival functions for boys
belonging to the 1976-1979 birth cohorts (all other covariates are set to zero). The graph
for urban areas appears to have only 4 survival functions. The reason for this is that the
survival functions for the third quartile and the 90th centile overlap completely. Clearly,
the effect of parental schooling on the hazard of leaving school in urban areas is
concentrated in the bottom half of the parental schooling distribution. Children whose
parents have above average schooling levels have survival probabilities close to 1, when
evaluated at the median household income.


The graph for rural areas has 4 survival functions because the 10th decile and the 1st
quartile of the distribution of parental schooling is the same: 0 years of schooling. Recall
that the estimated coefficients of parental schooling are smaller for rural parents, but the
hazard of leaving school is considerably higher in rural areas. As a result, the overall
effect of parental schooling in rural areas is quite important, and operates over the entire
distribution of parental schooling.


The coefficient on lack of access to water or electricity is significant in both regions and
much larger in urban areas. Lacking access to basic services increases the hazard of
leaving school (or never enrolling) by 150 percent in urban areas. In rural areas, lacking
access to basic services increases the hazard of never enrolling in school by 86 percent,


                                                                                                  21
the hazard of leaving school while enrolled in the 1st through the 6th grade by 33 percent,
and there is no effect on the hazard beyond the 6th grade. While 38 percent of rural
households lack water and electricity, only 5 percent of urban families lack water and
electricity. Therefore, this large difference in the estimated coefficients only applies to
the 5 percent of urban families that live in extremely poor conditions.


Household income has a proportional effect over the entire baseline hazard for the urban
areas. This suggests that the household’s budget constraint plays a significant role in the
choice of schooling level for children, and the effect does not diminish as the children
attain ever-higher grade levels. The (exponentiated) estimated coefficient in urban areas
is .996, indicating that an increase in household income of 100 colones lowers the hazard
that a child will never enroll in school or will leave school once enrolled by 0.4 percent.
A movement from the first to the third quartile of the urban income distribution (1,517 to
4,583 colones) lowers the hazard by 12 percent. The estimated effect of income is
weaker in rural areas. Household income has no effect on the hazard of leaving school
beyond the 6th grade. Yet, household income lowers the hazard that a child will never
enroll in school or will leave school before reaching the 6th grade. The point estimate is
.993, indicating that a movement from the first to the third quartile of the rural income
distribution (750 to 2,225 colones) lowers the hazard by 10 percent.


To assess the practical importance, as opposed to the statistical significance, of household
income we graph the baseline survival functions for boys in the 1976-79 birth cohorts.
The functions, presented in Figure 3, are evaluated at the 10th centile, 1st quartile, median,
3rd quartile, and 90th centile of the distribution of household income, separately for urban
and rural areas. Also, the functions correspond to median parental schooling: 6 years in
urban areas, and 2 years in rural areas. Figure 3 makes it abundantly clear that household
income has a very small effect on the survival functions, even though the effect is more
pronounced for rural households. We also examined the survival functions evaluated at
the 1st quartile of the distribution of parental schooling. The survival functions are of
course lower than those graphed in Figure 3, but they convey the same message:




                                                                                              22
household income has a very modest effect on the hazard of leaving school, regardless of
the level of parental schooling.


This result is consistent with previous literature. Haveman and Wolfe (1995) review a
number of studies on the determinants of years of schooling based on U.S. data and
report that income elasticities have been found to be low and estimated in a wide range,
from .02 to .2. They believe this result is likely explained by the measurement error in
the household income variable. At the same time, Hill and Duncan (1987) carefully
measure household income and report that a 10 percent increase in household income,
after controlling for a number of other variables, is associated with an increase in school
attainment of less than 1 percent.


Now we turn our attention to remittances. As we explained earlier, we estimate separate
effects for income from remittances and from other sources to examine the possibility
that the source of the income matters for the choice of schooling levels of children.
Economic theory suggests that the source of income should not matter—a dollar is a
dollar.


We estimate a significant and large effect of income from remittances. In urban areas,
the median remittance (875 colones) lowers the hazard that a child will never enroll in
school, or will leave school while enrolled in the 1st through the 6th grade, by 54 percent
(exp(−.0877×8.75) = .46). The estimated effect for the remaining segments of the
hazard, grades 7th through 12th, is .965, or 27 percent when evaluated at the median
remittance amount. So the effect is half as high for children beyond the 6th grade as for
children below the 7th grade. Note that the estimated coefficients for the two income
effects are statistically significantly different from one another. More importantly, there
is an enormous difference in the magnitude of the effects depending on the income
source: the effect of remittances is, at its smallest, 10 times the size of the effect of other
income.12

12
  We estimated a hazard model where the effect of income was allowed to differ between households that
do and do not receive remittances. For the urban sample, the test statistic for the null hypothesis that the


                                                                                                          23
In rural areas, the median remittance lowers the entire baseline hazard by 14 percent.
That is, the hazard of a child leaving school (or failing to enroll) is 14 percent
(exp(−.0171×8.75) = .86) lower if the child’s family receives the median remittance
amount. The estimated coefficients for the two income effects are statistically
significantly different from one another, and the magnitudes of the effects are not close:
the effect of remittances is 2.6 times higher than the effect of other income.


If income from remittances is more stable than other sources of income, a likely situation
for rural households, income from remittances is a better proxy for permanent income
than is other income and this may explain the difference in estimated effects.13 Another
possible explanation for the difference is that remittances recipients may exhibit a higher
propensity to spend on their children’s schooling out of remitted funds than other funds,
perhaps because the expatriate family member has made it a condition for the financial
support. In any case, whether the source of the income makes a difference is an
empirical issue, regardless of our ability to tell a story that accounts for the observed
behavior.


The presence of remittances in the urban areas has no effect on the hazard of leaving
school, after controlling for the amount of the remittance, so the variable “Receives
remittance” does not appear among the covariates. This means that urban households
that receive remittances from abroad do not differ systematically from other urban
households with regards to the schooling of their children, though the funds from
remittances have a vastly larger effect on the hazard of leaving school than funds from
other sources.



effect of income from other sources is equal for both types of households is equal to 0.11, with one degree
of freedom, and a p-value of 0.742. Consequently, we fail to reject the null hypothesis of same effect. The
same result applies for rural households, in which case the test statistic is equal to 1.58, with a p-value
equal to 0.209.
13
   Edwards (2000) reports that the fraction of households that receive remittances has been remarkably
stable –between 14.4 and 15.6 percent- between 1992 and 1997. This is the short time period for which
remittances income is measured in the national household survey that measures living standards.


                                                                                                        24
The presence of remittances in rural households has a large effect on the hazard of
leaving school. Children in those households have a 24 percent lower hazard. That is, in
rural areas the source of income matters less than in urban areas, but the mere existence
of remittances as an income source tends to reduce the hazard of leaving school. Rural
families receiving remittances appear, then, to differ systematically from other rural
families in that, all else constant, their children show a lower hazard of leaving school, at
all grade levels.


Overall, the effect on the hazard of leaving school of receiving a remittance of 100 U.S.
dollars (the median amount in both areas) is greater for children in urban than in rural
households. In urban areas a remittance of 875 colones (100 dollars) lowers the hazard
by 54 percent for children below the 7th grade, and 27 percent for youngsters beyond the
6th grade. In rural areas, the same remittance amount, combined with the effect of the
presence of the remittance, lowers the hazard by 25 percent at all grade levels. To gauge
whether the effect of remittances is of practical importance, in Figure 4 we graph the
baseline survival functions for boys in the 1976-79 birth cohorts, evaluated at no
remittance and at the median remittance of 875 colones. The functions are evaluated at
the median of parental schooling and household income, separately for urban and rural
areas. Note that in the case of rural children, the survival function showing the effect of
the median remittance includes the effect of the presence of the remittance itself.


In urban areas, a remittance of 875 colones has a small effect on the baseline survival
function. But note that the survival function evaluated at the median parental schooling
and median household income is very high at all grade levels. There isn’t much room for
the remittance to have an effect. And yet, it has the effect of raising the survival function
to near 1. In rural areas, the effect of a remittance in the median amount is substantial
and operates at all grade levels.

Cohort Trends
The estimation of the Cox proportional hazard model stratified by birth cohort yields
estimates of the underlying baseline hazard and survival function for each birth cohort.



                                                                                            25
We report the survival functions corresponding to our preferred specification in Tables
11 and 12, and plot the baseline hazards and the survival functions for the four earliest
birth cohorts in Figures 5 through 8. Following the same procedure used for the previous
figures, we graph baseline functions where parental schooling and household income are
set to their median values for each area. The survival and hazard functions, then, apply
to boys living in dwellings with access to water or electricity and whose household does
not receive a remittance from abroad.


The first row of figures in Tables 11 and 12, labeled Grade Level 0, present the value of
the survival function for the outcome “enrolls in school.” That is, the value .971 (oldest
birth cohort in the urban areas) implies that a child has a .971 probability of enrolling in
the first grade. It also implies that, for that birth cohort, we estimate that .029, or 2.9
percent, of that cohort never enrolled in school.


The survival functions for urban and rural children born in 1988 through 1990 are lower
than the functions for earlier cohorts. This does not mean that grade attainment levels are
declining for recent birth cohorts. Recall that we include everyone between the ages of 6
and 24 in the sample. A high fraction of children aged 6 and 7 are not enrolled in school
in 1997. This is not a surprise. The distribution of ages for children enrolled in the first
grade shows many children aged 7 and 8 and even older children. We observe the
children born in 1990 when they are 7 years old, and a large fraction of this group is not
enrolled in school yet, which explains the estimates of the survival functions for this
cohort.


The survival functions reveal immense progress in school retention rates for recent birth
cohorts in El Salvador. Traditional “exit” points have been the highest grade in each
three-year cycle of primary education: the 3rd, 6th, and 9th grades. The estimate of the
survival function for the 4th grade increases from .902 for those born in the years 1972-75
to .941 for those born in 1984-87, in urban areas. The improvement is even more
pronounced in rural areas. The estimate increases from .445 to .797, implying a near




                                                                                              26
doubling of the probability that rural children will enroll in the 4th grade or beyond,
bringing the survival probabilities much closer to those observed in urban areas.


Retention rates beyond the 6th grade show even more improvement. In urban areas, the
estimate of the survival function for the 7th grade increases from .808 for the 1972-75
cohorts to .929 for the 1984-87 cohorts. The improvement is even more pronounced in
rural areas. For grade level 7, the estimate of the survival function increases from .192
for the earliest cohort to .773 for children born in 1984-87, a four-fold increase, and one
that makes the probability of enrolling in the 7th grade in rural areas considerably closer
to those observed in urban areas.


The probability that children will enroll in secondary education has increased almost 20
percentage points in urban areas, and increased three-fold in rural areas, between the
cohorts born in 1972-75 and those born in 1980-83. For the 1980-83 cohorts, the
probability is .884 in urban and .333 in rural areas.


Figures 5 and 6 make evident the timing of the improvements highlighted above.
Focusing on the survival function at the 6th grade, in urban areas we see a steady, gradual
rising of the survival probability as we move from the earliest to the most recent cohorts.
In contrast, in rural areas we see little improvement for the 1976-79 cohorts compared to
the 1972-75 cohorts. But then we see a big upward shift of the survival function for
those born in 1980-83, and an even bigger shift for the 1984-87 cohort. More generally,
the survival functions for the urban areas suggest that the 1980-83 cohorts enjoyed the
largest improvement relative to the cohort immediately prior. In rural areas, the 1984-87
cohorts experienced, by far, the largest improvement relative to the cohort that preceded
it. Clearly, improvements in retention rates were delayed in rural compared with urban
areas.


There is another interesting aspect to the timing of the improvement in school retention
rates. Note that the children born in the years 1980 to 1983—the cohorts enjoying the
largest relative improvement in urban areas—were aged 6 to 9 in 1989, the year that the


                                                                                              27
civil war ended. Those children were at the beginning of their school careers, and it
appears that they benefited greatly from the ending of the civil war. Put differently, the
civil war probably disrupted significantly the functioning of schools and impoverished a
large number of families with the unfortunate consequence that many children of
schooling age in the decade of the 1980’s received very little schooling. The delayed
improvement in school retention rates in rural areas perhaps can be explained by the
severity of the effects of the civil war and the fact that it took longer for things to go back
to normal in the rural areas. Another contributing factor may be the higher rate of
retention in grade in rural than urban areas.


Finally, Figures 7 and 8 present the estimated baseline hazards. The hazards for the
urban area show that improvement in retention rates has been concentrated in the
traditional “exit” points. There has been scant progress up through the 5th grade, but the
hazard has decreased significantly at the 6th and 9th grades, as we move from the earliest
to the more recent cohorts. In sharp contrast, in rural areas the improvement has
occurred at all grade levels.


Concluding Remarks


We study school attainment with cross-sectional data using the Cox proportional hazard
model. This technique is particularly attractive to examine data for El Salvador because
there has been a significant expansion in school attainment in the recent years. The
estimates reveal immense progress in school retention rates for recent birth cohorts in El
Salvador.


The estimated survival functions for the urban areas suggest that the 1980-83 birth
cohorts enjoyed the largest improvement relative to the cohort immediately prior. In
rural areas, the 1984-87 cohorts experienced, by far, the largest improvement relative to
the cohort that preceded it. Clearly, improvements in retention rates were delayed in
rural compared with urban areas. The cohorts enjoying the largest relative improvement
in urban areas were aged 6 to 9 in 1989, the year the civil war ended. These children


                                                                                             28
were luckier than their older siblings were; they benefited from government efforts to
increase enrollment in primary schooling, especially in rural areas. These efforts were a
central component of the peace process.


The key determinant of school retention is parental schooling. The evidence of strong
correlation between parental schooling and school survival both in urban and rural areas
is especially interesting in El Salvador, because of the significant differences in school
availability between urban and rural areas. It suggests that the task of increasing school
retention would generally take several generations, and would continue in spite of the
expansion of school facilities.


Among the factors that affect the costs and benefits of schooling we are particularly
interested in the effect of income and the possible impact of remittances. The evidence
from El Salvador sends a powerful message regarding the impact of the budget constraint
on school retention rates. We find that budgets have a small, though significant, impact
on the hazard of leaving school in rural and urban areas. But we find that remittances
have a much larger impact on the hazard of leaving school. In urban areas, the effect of
remittances is, at its smallest, 10 times the size of the effect of other income. In rural
areas, the effect of remittances is about 2.6 times that of other income. In addition, the
presence of remittances—irrespective of amounts—lowers the hazard of leaving school
in rural areas but has no effect in urban areas.


Our finding that parental schooling has a significant effect on the hazard of leaving
school is consistent with previous literature. As others have argued, parental schooling
may simultaneously capture genetic ability, motivation, and the capacity to generate
income. This ambiguity is problematic for it weakens the policy implications for
improving opportunities for children who lack schooling. We measure income from a
source that is not directly correlated with parental schooling—remittances, and find that
remittances have a larger effect than other types of income on school retention. This
suggests that relaxing the budget constraint of poor households does have an effect on
children’s school attainment, even if parents have low levels of schooling.


                                                                                             29
References

Al-Sanarrai Samer; and Tessa Peasgood (1998): “Educational Attainments and
Household Characteristics in Tanzania,” Economics of Education Review Vol. 17, No. 4,
pp. 395-417.

Becker, Gary (1991): A Treatise on the Family Enlarged Edition Cambridge: Harvard
University Press

Becker, Gary and Nigel Tomes (1976): “Child Endowments and the Quality and Quantity
of Children,” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 87, No. 4, pt.2: S143-S162.

Behrman, Jere R. and Barbara L. Wolfe (1984), “The Socioeconomic Impact of
Schooling in a Developing Country,” The Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 66,
pp. 296-303.

Blake, Judith (1989): Family Size and Achievement. Berkeley: University of California
Press.

Brown, Phillip and Albert Park (2001): “Education and Poverty in Rural China,”
Economics of Education Review (forthcoming)

Cameron, Stephen V. and James J. Heckman (1998): “Life Cycle Schooling and
Dynamic Selection Bias: Models and Evidence for Five Cohorts of American Males,”
Journal of Political Economy Vol. 106, No. 2, pp. 262-333.

Chuang, Hwei-Lin (1997): “High School Youth’s Dropout and Re-Enrollment Behavior,”
Economics of Education Review Vol. 16, No. 2, pp.171-86.

Cochrane, Susan H. and Dean T. Jameson (1982): “Educational Attainment and
Achievement in Rural Thailand,” in New Directions for Testing and Measurement:
Productivity Assessment in Education #15 edited by Anita A. Summers. San Francisco:
Jossey-Bass.

Edwards, Alejandra Cox (2000): “Alternativas de Politica Económica para agilizar la
creación de empleo,” Chapter 3 in Crecimiento con Participación: Una estrategia de
desarrollo para el siglo XXI. Vol. II Fusades. San Salvador.

Filmer, Deon and Lant Pritchett (2000): The Effect of Household Wealth on Educational
Attainment around the World: Demographic and Health Survey Evidence. The World
Bank.

Funkhouser, Edward ( 1992): “Migration, remittances and economic adjustment,” in G.
Borjas and R. Freedman eds. Immigration and the work force (University of Chicago
Press).



                                                                                        31
Grambsch, P. M. and T. M. Therneau (1994): “Proportional hazards tests and diagnostics
based on weighted residuals,” Biometrika Vol. 81, pp. 515-26.

Haveman, Robert and Wolfe, Barbara (1995): “The Determinants of Children’s
Attainments: A Review of Methods and Findings,” Journal of Economic Literature, 33:
1829-78.

Hill, Martha, and Duncan, Greg J. (1987): “Parental Family Income and the
Socioeconomic Attainment of Children,” Social Science Research, 16 (1): pp 39-73.

Inchauste, Graciela (2000): “Educational Choices and Educational Constraints: Evidence
from Bolivia,” IMF Working Paper WP/00/42 March.

Jacir de Lovo, Ana Evelyn (1997) Reforma Educativa y Decentralización: Aspectos
Institucionales (Documento Fusades).

Jimenez, Emmanuel and Yasuyuki Sawada (1998): “Do Community-Managed Schools
Work? An Evaluation of El Salvador’s EDUCO Program” The World Bank Research
Department, February.

King, Elizabeth M. and M. Anne Hill (1993): Women’s Education in Developing
Countries: Barriers, Benefits and Policies Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press
for The World Bank.

Knight, John B. and Richard H. Sabot (1990): Education, Productivity, and Inequality:
The East African Natural Experiment. Baltimore: The John Hopkins University Press for
the World Bank.

Lillard, Lee A. and Robert J. Willis (1994), “Intergenerational Educational Mobility:
Effects of Family and State in Malaysia,” The Journal of Human Resources Vol. 29, No.
4, pp. 1126-66.

Lopez, Jose Roberto, et al. (1991): “Small Business Development in El Salvador: The
Impact of Remittances,” Migration, remittances, and small business development:
Mexico and Caribbean Basin countries Series on Development and International
Migration in Mexico, Central America and the Caribbean Basin, vol 4, Boulder and
Oxford: Westview Press.

MINED (Ministry of Education) (1997). Dinámica de la Matrícula Estudiantil de
Educación Parvularia, Básica y Media correspondiente al período 1986-1996. San
Salvador (May).
Montes, Segundo (1990): “Las remesas que envían los Salvadoreños de Estados Unidos.
Consecuencias Sociales y Económicas. Instituto de Investigaciones, Universiodad
Centroamericana Jose Simeon Canas, San Salvador.



                                                                                      32
Parish, William L. and Robert J. Willis (1993): “Daughters, Education, and Family
Budgets: Taiwan Experiences,” The Journal of Human Resources Vol. 28, No. 4, pp.863-
98.

Parson, Donald O. (1975): ”Intergenerational Wealth Transfers and the Educational
Decisions of Male Youth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp 605-17.

Schultz, T. Paul (1989): “Education Investments and Returns,” in Handbook of
Development Economics, vol. 1, edited by Hollis Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan.
Amsterdam: North-Holland.

STATA (1999). Stata Statistical Software: Release 6.0. College Station, TX: Stata
Corporation.

Weesie, Jeroen (1999): “Seemingly Unrelated Estimation and the Cluster-Adjusted
Sandwich Estimator,” STATA Technical Bulletin Reprints, Vol. 9, pp. 231-48.

Wolfe, Barbara and Jere Behrman (1984): “Who is schooled in Developing Countries?
The Roles of Income, Parental Schooling, Sex, Residence and Family Size” Economics of
Education Review Vol. 3, No. 2, pp. 231-45.




                                                                                    33
   Table 1.      Location of Households Receiving Remittances in the Income
                 Distribution of Households that Do Not Receive Remittances

             Urban Households                              Rural Households
             Households receiving remittances              Households receiving remittances
                % of                  % of                    % of                  % of
  Income households                households   Income households                households
distribution in given               in given  distribution in given               in given
      of       decile    Median      decile         of       decile    Median      decile
    non       (income   remittanc   (income       non       (income   remittanc   (income
 recipient     before       e         plus     recipient     before       e         plus
households remittances amount remittances households remittances amount remittances
  Decile          )     (colones)       )        Decile         )     (colones)       )
    1          27.4       875         6.3         1          36.5        875        3.1
    2           9.9       875         9.2         2           8.4        525        5.1
    3           9.6       586        10.5         3           9.9        438        6.0
    4          10.8       875         9.2         4           6.2        875       12.1
    5           5.6       438        11.6         5           5.0        438       10.2
    6           7.9       586        10.3         6           7.4        875        9.6
    7           5.7       875         9.6         7           4.3        438       11.3
    8           8.1       875        10.4         8           4.1        875       10.4
    9           9.8       875        14.1         9           8.3        438       14.4
    10          5.2       875         8.8         10         10.1        875       17.8




                                                                                    34
Table 2:      Fraction of Female Headed Households among Non-Recipient,
Recipient, and All Households, in Rural and Urban Areas

                    Urban Households
   % of Female       Non-recipient  Recipient       All
     Headed           households   households    households
   Households             %            %             %
                          27.4          45.9         30.2

                    Rural Households
   % of Female       Non-recipient   Recipient      All
     Headed           households   households    households
   Households             %             %            %
                          22.5          41.7         25.2



Table 3.        Distribution of Non-Recipient and Recipient Households,
                By Schooling of the Adult Female

                    Urban Households
Years of schooling Non-recipient    Recipient      Median
of the adult female   households   households    Remittance
                          %            %          (colones)
      0–3                 35.3          48.7         875
      4–6                 20.2          20.5         875
      7–9                 16.1           9.7         875
      9 – 12              17.4          14.9         875
      13 +                11.1           6.2         875

                   Rural Households
Years of schooling Non-recipient    Recipient       Median
of the adult female households    households      remittance
                         %             %           (colones)
       0-3                75.3          80.3         875
       4-6                17.5          14.5         656
       7-9                 5.2          3.8          875
    9 or more              2.0          1.5          438




                                                                          35
Table 4.     Distribution of Non Recipient and Recipient Households,
             by the Number of School-Age Children

                           Urban Households
Number of school-age     Non-recipient     Recipient          Median
     children             households      households        remittance
                              %               %              (colones)

       none                     32.2             36.4            875
         1                      23.3             26.4            875
         2                      23.3             18.1            438
     3 or more                  21.1             19.1            875

                           Rural Households
Number of school-age     Non-recipient     Recipient          Median
     children             households      households        remittance
                              %               %              (colones)

       none                     28.0             31.0            875
         1                      19.4             26.6            875
         2                      18.8             15.8            875
     3 or more                  33.8             26.7            875




Table 5.     Placement of Children in the School System,
             Percentages by Age Group, 1997

  Age            Target grade          No school In grade Behind Dropout Total

 4–6            Pre-school               64.2     35.8                    100
 7–9     I cycle of primary (1-3)        13.1     83.9     1.8      1.2   100
10 – 12 II cycle of primary (4-5)         6.5     60.2    28.6      4.7   100
13 – 15 II cycle of primary (6-9)         5.5     45.2    30.5     18.9   100
16 – 18     Secondary (10-12)             7.5     30.0    22.4     40.1   100




                                                                                 36
 Table 6.         Annual Growth in School Registration, by Grade Level
                  (Average for 1990-96)

Level      Target            Total               Urban               Rural
            age       Total Public Privat Total Public Privat Total Public Privat
                                        e                   e                   e
 Pre-K    4–6         20.7    24.0   12.6 10.1        8.6      12.6 53.1   57.5   11.9
 1–9     7 – 15        4.2     3.9    5.9 1.5         0.2       6.7 7.5     7.7   -0.6
10 – 11 15 – 18       11.7     8.0   16.4 11.7        8.0      16.4



 Table 7.         Distribution of School Attainment in 1997, by Age

 Age        No school Primary I Primary II Primary III Secondary Post-Sec Total

 24 – 25       12.9          15.2    22.6           23.8            19.7    5.7   100
 26 – 30       14.3          15.9    22.1           18.5            20.3    9.0   100
 31 – 35       17.8          17.7    19.9           16.9            16.6   11.1   100
 36 – 40       22.2          18.7    21.3           13.9            14.2    9.7   100
 41 – 45       24.2          21.3    23.2           12.0            13.0    6.3   100
 46 – 50       31.4          25.2    21.9            7.2             9.4    4.9   100
 51 – 55       34.1          25.2    20.5            7.8             7.1    5.3   100
 56 – 60       41.6          24.8    16.9            5.2             5.3    6.2   100
 61 – 65       46.2          25.9    16.1            4.3             3.7    3.8   100
 66 – 70       53.1          24.8    12.3            2.7             4.1    3.1   100
 71 +          58.0          20.8    14.0            3.0             2.3    2.0   100
 Total         32.5          19.1    19.8           12.4            11.2    5.1   100



 Table 8.         Household Income and Remittances in 1997,
                  By Region (full sample, in Colones)

                                            Urban           Rural

 Average household income                   4,105           1,768
 Per capita average household income        1,081            419
 Recipient households (% of all)             15%             14%
 Median remittance (among recipients)         875            875
 Average remittance (among recipients)      1,183            909




                                                                                         37
Table 9.      Estimates of the Determinants of the Hazard of Leaving School,
              Urban Areas
              (Cox Proportional Hazard Stratified by Birth Cohort)

                                                           Specification that uses
                                                          income (in hundreds of
                                                                  Colones)
Covariate; segment of the hazard over which the effect   Hazard Robust z-stat.
applies, if it does not apply to the entire hazard        Ratio      st.
                                                                    error
Male                                                     1.274     .058      5.32
Parental schooling; never enrolled, 1st-6th grade         .801     .011    −15.98
Parental schooling; 7th-9th grade                         .860     .012    −10.69
Parental schooling; 10th-12th grade                       .927     .009     −8.10
No access to water or electricity                        2.553     .272      8.81
Income (net of remittance)                                .996     .001     −3.47
Remittance amount; never enrolled, 1st-6th grade          .916     .016     −5.08
Remittance amount; 7th-12th grade                         .965     .008     −4.48
(Born in 1988-1990)×( Parental schooling; never          1.111     .021      5.59
enrolled, 1st-6th grade)
(Born in 1988-1990)×( Remittance amount; never           1.084     .024      3.58
enrolled, 1st-6th grade)
Log-likelihood                                                 −11,843.387
Number of observations                                            7,382




                                                                                     38
Table 10.      Estimates of the Determinants of the Hazard of Leaving School,
               Rural Areas
               (Cox Proportional Hazard Stratified by Birth Cohort)

Covariate; segment of the hazard over which the effect      Hazard Robust z-stat.
applies, if it does not apply to the entire hazard           Ratio   st.
                                                                    error
Male; never enrolled, 7th-12th grade                        1.156    .054     3.07
Male; 1st-6th grade                                          .902    .046    −2.02
Parental schooling; never enrolled                           .839    .015 −10.06
Parental schooling; 1st-6th grade                            .874    .013    −9.41
Parental schooling; 7th-12th grade                           .923    .015    −4.83
No access to water or electricity; never enrolled           1.856    .138     8.29
No access to water or electricity; 1st-6th grade            1.334    .088     4.36
Income (net of remittance); never enrolled, 1st-6th grade    .993    .002    −3.44
Income (net of remittance); 7th-12th grade                  1.000    .002     0.05
Remittance amount                                            .983    .011    −1.57
Receives remittance                                          .764    .088    −2.35
Log-likelihood                                                   −19,443.516
Number of observations                                              6,904




                                                                                     39
Table 11.     Estimated Survival Functions, by Birth Cohort
              Urban Areas

                             Birth Cohort
Grade
Level   1972-75    1976-79    1980-83       1984-87   1988-90

  0         .971      .976      .982          .965      .919
  1         .962      .970      .976          .960      .915
  2         .946      .959      .964          .951      .912
  3         .926      .942      .948          .946      .912
  4         .902      .918      .932          .941      .912
  5         .879      .898      .916          .936
  6         .829      .861      .901          .929
  7         .808      .838      .892          .929
  8         .792      .819      .884          .929
  9         .699      .761      .884
 10         .684      .752      .862
 11         .672      .743      .856
 12         .491      .635      .856


Table 12.     Estimated Survival Functions, by Birth Cohort
              Rural Areas

                             Birth Cohort
Grade
Level   1972-75    1976-79    1980-83       1984-87   1988-90

  0         .832      .854      .896          .891      .645
  1         .787      .814      .856          .863      .634
  2         .679      .714      .781          .837      .630
  3         .552      .601      .701          .816      .613
  4         .445      .493      .617          .797      .613
  5         .353      .393      .539          .793
  6         .217      .276      .441          .773
  7         .192      .246      .420          .773
  8         .174      .229      .408          .773
  9         .110      .150      .333
 10         .101      .143      .333
 11         .095      .140      .333
 12         .035      .071      .333




                                                                40
  1

  .9                                  Urban


  .8

  .7

  .6

  .5

  .4

  .3
                                      Rural
  .2

  .1

  0
       0         3          6                 9      12
                        Grade level
Figure 1. Kaplan-Meier survival estimates, by area




                                                          41
             0 years (10th centile)             3 years (1st quartile)
             6 years (median)                   11 years (3rd quartile)

     1



    .8



    .6



    .4



    .2



     0
         0                   3               6                   9         12
                                 Grade level---Urban areas



         0 years (10th & 25th centiles)        2 years (median)
         4 years (3rd quartile)                6 years (90th centile)

     1



    .8



    .6



    .4



    .2



     0
         0                  3                6               9            12
                                 Grade level---Rural areas


     Figure 2. Estimated survival functions, by level of parental
schooling, for urban and rural areas. (Household income is set at the
median for each area. The functions correspond to the 1976-79 birth
cohorts)




                                                                                42
              826 colones (10th centile)           1,517 colones (1st quartile)
              2,742 colones (median)               4,583 colones (3rd quartile)

          1



         .8



         .6



         .4



         .2



          0
              0                  3               6                9                12
                                     Grade level---Urban areas


                  430 colones (10th centile)        750 colones (1st quartile)
                  1,290 colones (median)            2,225 colones (3rd quartile)

          1



         .8



         .6



         .4



         .2



          0
              0                  3                6                   9             12
                                      Grade level---Rural areas




Figure 3. Estimated survival functions, by level of household income,
for urban and rural areas. (Parental schooling is set at the median for
each area. The functions correspond to the 1976-79 birth cohorts)




                                                                                         43
              no remittance                           875 colones (median)

      1



     .8



     .6



     .4



     .2



      0
          0                       3                6                   9          12
                                       Grade level---Urban areas


          no remittance                             875 colones (median)

     1



     .8



     .6



     .4



     .2



     0
          0                   3                   6                9         12
                                      Grade level---Rural areas


Figure 4. Estimated survival functions, with and without remittances
in urban and rural areas. (Household income and parental schooling
are set at the median for each area. The functions correspond to the
1976-79 birth cohorts)




                                                                                       44
       1972-75                      1976-79
       1980-83                      1984-87

  1

  .9

  .8

  .7

  .6

  .5

  .4

  .3

  .2

  .1

  0
       0          3               6               9   12
                      Grade level---Urban areas
Figure 5. Estimated survivor functions, by birth cohort


       1972-75                      1976-79
       1980-83                      1984-87

  1

  .9

  .8

  .7

  .6

  .5

  .4

  .3

  .2

  .1

  0
       0          3               6               9   12
                      Grade level---Rural areas
Figure 6. Estimated survivor functions, by birth cohort




                                                           45
       1972-75                     1976-79
       1980-83                     1984-87

  .7

  .6


  .5


  .4

  .3


  .2


  .1


  0
       0         3               6               9   12
                     Grade level---Urban areas
Figure 7. Estimated baseline hazards, by birth cohort


       1972-75                     1976-79
       1980-83                     1984-87

  .7

  .6


  .5


  .4

  .3


  .2


  .1


  0
       0         3               6               9   12
                     Grade level---Rural areas
Figure 8. Estimated baseline hazards, by birth cohort




                                                          46
                                             APPENDIX

Specification of the Statistical Model

We analyze separately the behavior of rural and urban households. The key reason being
the presence of factors we cannot control for that affect the demand for schooling in rural
areas. Schools are more readily available in urban areas; the living conditions in urban
areas are much better than in rural areas, and the organization of the economy,
particularly in the way it affects the costs of attending school is less favorable to
schooling in rural than urban areas. The separate analyses are not driven by the
assumption that perceived benefits from schooling differ between rural and urban areas.
El Salvador is a relatively small and densely populated country; the fact that internal
migration is significant does not justify that assumption. Nevertheless, we tested the null
hypothesis that the urban and rural samples can be combined and the estimated
coefficients are equal for the two samples. We reject the null hypothesis, with a p-value
for the test statistic equal to 0.00. As a second check, we tested the null hypothesis that,
while the underlying baseline hazards differ for the urban and rural samples, the effect of
the covariates on the hazards are the equal for the two samples. Once again, we reject the
null hypothesis, with a p-value for the test statistic equal to 0.00.


The crucial assumption in the Cox proportional hazard model is that the hazard ratio is
proportional over the entire base line. For example, if the hazard of leaving school is 30
percent higher for boys than for girls, the proportional hazard assumption implies that
this ratio is the same in the first grade, the fifth grade, or at any grade level. In our search
for a parsimonious specification, we paid special attention to the validity of the
proportionality assumption. We tested the assumption for each individual covariate and
conducted a global test.14




14
   Grambsch and Therneau (1994) proposed a scaled adjustment of the Schoenfeld residuals and a global
test of the proportionality assumption based on the adjusted residuals. The global test and a chi-squared
test for individual covariates are implemented in STATA 6.0 (1999).


                                                                                                      47
The testing revealed that the proportionality assumption was invalid for at least one
covariate in the urban and the rural samples. We relaxed the assumption of
proportionality by allowing the covariates to have different effects over four segments of
the baseline hazard. The segments are “never enrolled,” 1st through the 6th grade, 7th
through the 9th grade, and 10th through the 12th grade.15 When we repeated the tests we
found that the variable “year of birth” continued to fail the proportionality test.
Consequently, we estimated separate models for the urban and rural samples allowing
separate effects for the four segments of the baseline hazard, and we stratified each
sample on individual year of birth. Inspection of the estimated baseline hazard and
survival function for each stratum revealed that it is reasonable to combine the
observations into 5 strata according to year of birth. The four oldest strata combine
individuals born in four-year intervals: 1972 to 1975, 1976 to 1979, 1980 to 1983, and
1984 to 1987. The youngest stratum is for individuals born between 1988 and 1990.


The next step in the specification search involved testing the null hypothesis that the
effect of the covariates is the same for all the strata. We estimated a fully interacted
model, where the effect of each covariate was allowed to differ between strata and
segments of the baseline hazard, separately for the urban and rural samples. Then, we
estimated the model that imposes the constraints contained in the null hypothesis. For
the urban sample, the likelihood ratio test results in rejection of the null hypothesis. The
test statistic is equal to 97.69 with 69 degrees of freedom, and a p-value equal to 0.013.
When we allow the effects to differ for the youngest stratum, those born between 1988
and 1990, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the effects of the covariates are equal




15
  We divided the baseline hazard into the segments listed in text based on the following considerations.
Primary education is divided into three cycles of three grades each. Therefore, when distance to school
becomes a problem, it is likely it will happen when a child is ready to enroll in the next cycle of primary
education or secondary education. In addition, public education becomes relatively scarce at the third
cycle of primary education, and close to half of secondary education is private. This suggests that out-of-
pocket costs of additional years of schooling beyond the sixth grade rise relative to schooling at younger
ages. In addition, in the early stages of estimation we divided the hazard further, allowing for separate
effects for the 1st through the 3rd grade, and the 4th through the 6th grade. But we did not reject the null
hypothesis that the segments could be combined into one covering the 1st through the 6th grade.


                                                                                                         48
for the remaining 4 strata. The test statistic is equal to 55.79 with 58 degrees of freedom,
and a p-value equal to 0.558.16


We continued testing nested hypotheses aimed at simplifying the specification as much
as possible. Finally, we reduced the original specification that had 93 separate effects to
one with 10 effects. The covariates in our preferred specification for the urban sample
are:
1. an indicator for sex
2. parental schooling—first two segments of the hazard
3. parental schooling—third segment of the hazard
4. parental schooling—fourth segment of the hazard
5. an indicator for lack of access to basic services
6. household income
7. remittance amount—first two segments of the hazard
8. remittance amount—last two segments of the hazard
9. an indicator variable for the youngest stratum interacted with parental schooling for
     the first two segments of the hazard
10. an indicator variable for the youngest stratum interacted with the remittance amount
     for the first two segments of the hazard.


Note that we failed to reject the null hypothesis that the presence of remittances (after
controlling for the remittance amount) has no effect on the hazard of leaving school, and
therefore, we drop it from the specification for the urban sample.




16
   We use six covariates: indicators for sex, lack of access to basic services, and presence of remittances,
parental schooling, location on the income distribution, and change in the location due to the remittance.
We allow the effects to differ for four segments of the hazard. Therefore, in principle, the set of estimated
coefficients for each stratum has 24 (6 × 4) coefficients. Note that that two tests described in text only
differ by 11 degrees of freedom. The reason is that there are no observations in the later segments of the
baseline hazard for the younger birth cohorts—no one born in 1988 is in the 7th grade or beyond by 1996,
the survey year. Also, there are no observations with “no access to basic services” falling in the second
segment of the hazard. Consequently, we can only estimate 11 separate parameters for the youngest
stratum, which explains the difference of 11 degrees of freedom between the tests.


                                                                                                           49
The individual tests of the null hypothesis of proportionality for each of the ten variables
listed fail to reject the null hypothesis. The largest test statistic is for household income.
It is equal to 2.68, and is asymptotically distributed chi-squared with 1 degree of
freedom, so the p-value for the test is equal to 0.102. When we perform the global test of
the null hypothesis of proportionality of effects over all segments of the baseline hazard,
the test statistic is equal to 4.38, with 10 degrees of freedom, and a p-value equal to
0.929, and we fail to reject the null hypothesis.


For the rural sample, we fail to reject the null hypothesis that the effects of the covariates
are equal for all strata. The statistic for the likelihood ratio test is equal to 82.08,
distributed with 66 degrees of freedom, and the p-value is equal to 0.088. But we reject
the null hypothesis that the covariates have the same effect on all four segments of the
baseline hazard. Through sequential testing we arrived at the simplest specification of
the model that does not violate the proportionality assumption of the Cox proportional
hazard model. There are eleven covariates in the specification:
1. an indicator for sex—first, third and fourth segments of the hazard
2. an indicator for sex—second segment of the hazard
3. parental schooling—first segment of the hazard
4. parental schooling—second segment of the hazard
5. parental schooling—third and fourth segments of the hazard
6. an indicator for lack of access to basic services—first segment of the hazard
7. an indicator for lack of access to basic services—second segment of the hazard
8. household income—first and second segments of the hazard
9. household income—third and fourth segments of the hazard
10. remittance amount
11. an indicator for the presence of remittances


We failed to reject the null hypothesis that lack of access to basic services, for the third
and fourth segments of the hazard (that is, the 7th through the 12th grade), has no effect on
the hazard of leaving school.




                                                                                               50
The individual tests of the null hypothesis of proportionality for each of the ten variables
listed fail to reject the null hypothesis. The largest test statistic is for parental schooling
for the second segment of the hazard.          It is equal to 3.10, and is asymptotically
distributed chi-squared with 1 degree of freedom, so the p-value for the test is equal to
0.078. When we perform the global test of the null hypothesis of proportionality of
effects over all segments of the baseline hazard, the test statistic is equal to 12.14, with
11 degrees of freedom, and a p-value equal to 0.353, and we fail to reject the null
hypothesis.


We conclude the discussion of our specification search noting that “Parental schooling”
is the only covariate with a different effect on the hazard of leaving school at different
grade levels, both in the urban and the rural samples.


The pattern of effects of parental schooling estimated for the urban and rural samples has
intuitive appeal. As a child progresses through the school system, the child’s own school
experience will weigh more heavily, and the parents’ schooling will weigh less heavily,
in the evaluation of the returns to additional schooling for the child. In the sociology of
education literature, the declining effect of “family background” variables (typically
parental schooling and family income) on ever-higher school grade transitions has been
interpreted as “dynamic selection bias.” In other words, family background correlates
with unobserved factors like ability, and as the group of students who attain ever-higher
grade levels becomes smaller and smaller it also becomes increasingly less representative
of the population of individuals of that age because they are of above-average ability.
The effect of family background variables declines because the correlation of these
variables with unobserved ability fades away as the sample of “survivors” gets smaller
and average ability in the sample increases.


Cameron and Heckman (1998) argue that the standard model used in the sociology of
education literature, a logit specification, together with the data typically used to estimate
it require ad hoc distributional assumptions before inferences regarding dynamic
selectivity bias can be made. They estimate a logit model and an ordered discrete-choice


                                                                                              51
model with corrections for unobserved heterogeneity. The logit results are of interest
because they allow a comparison of parameter estimates with and without corrections for
unobserved heterogeneity.


Comparing the estimates for variables capturing parental schooling and family income
reported in Cameron and Heckman’s Tables 1 and 4, it is clear that the selectivity
correction makes scant difference for primary and secondary schooling. The effect of
correcting for selectivity is concentrated in graduating from high school and higher
schooling levels. Moreover, in their preferred specification, the ordered discrete-choice
model, the estimates of the density of “ability” at various schooling levels suggest that
the density for high school graduates is only slightly to the right of the baseline density.
We interpret Cameron and Heckman’s results as suggesting that dynamic selectivity bias
is unimportant in primary and secondary schooling. Indeed, in most countries the
curriculum is set at a level of difficulty that allows near universal graduation from
primary school and very high graduation rates from secondary school.


For several reasons, we have elected not to implement a correction for selectivity. First,
the evidence discussed in the paragraph above suggests that dynamic selectivity bias is a
minor problem for the analysis of grades 1 through 12, the grades we examine. Second,
our results do not conform to the typical pattern found in logit models: our estimate of the
effect of family income declines for higher grade levels in rural but not in urban areas.
Third, assume we found a lowering of the hazard of leaving school in grades 1 through 6
and an increase in the hazard of leaving school after the 6th grade over time. It is possible
that the increase in the hazard beyond the 6th grade would be due to a “worsening” of the
pool of students because of higher retention rates in grades 1 through 6. We could
conclude erroneously that matters have gotten worse in grades 7 through 12. But we
have found no such pattern. We estimate improvements in retention rates at all grade
levels as we move from the oldest to the most recent birth cohorts.




                                                                                               52
