NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

COORDINATION AND POLICY TRAPS
George-Marios Angeletos
Christian Hellwig
Alessandro Pavan
Working Paper 9767
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9767
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003

For encouragement and helpful comments, we are thankful to Daron Acemoglu, Andy Atkeson, Gadi Barlevy,
Marco Bassetto, Olivier Blanchard, Ricardo Caballero, V.V. Chari, Eddie Dekel, Glenn Ellison, Paul
Heidhues, Patrick Kehoe, Robert Lucas Jr., Narayana Kocherlakota, Kiminori Matsuyama, Stephen Morris,
Nancy Stokey, Jean Tirole, Jaume Ventura, Ivan Werning, and seminar participants at AUEB, CarnegieMellon, Harvard, Iowa, Lausanne, LSE, Mannheim, MIT, Northwestern, Stanford, Stony Brook, Toulouse,
UCLA, the Minneapolis Fed, the 2002 SED annual meeting, and the 2002 UPF workshop on coordination
games. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.
©2003 by George-Marios Angeletos, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Coordination and Policy Traps
George-Marios Angeletos, Christian Hellwig, and Alessandro Pavan
NBER Working Paper No. 9767
June 2003
JEL No. C72, D82, D84, E5, E6, F31
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the ability of a policy maker to control equilibrium outcomes in an environment
where market participants play a coordination game with information heterogeneity. We consider
defense policies against speculative currency attacks in a model where speculators observe the
fundamentals with idiosyncratic noise. The policy maker is willing to take a costly policy action
only for moderate fundamentals. Market participants can use this information to coordinate on
di.erent responses to the same policy action, thus resulting in policy traps, where the devaluation
outcome and the shape of the optimal policy are dictated by self-fulfilling market expectations.
Despite equilibrium multiplicity, robust policy predictions can be made. The probability of
devaluation is monotonic in the fundamentals, the policy maker adopts a costly defense measure
only for a small region of moderate fundamentals, and this region shrinks as the information in the
market becomes precise.

George-Marios Angeletos
Department of Economics
MIT
50 Memorial Drive, E52-353
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
angelet@mit.edu

Christian Hellwig
UCLA
chris@econ.ucla.edu

Alessandro Pavan
Northwestern University
alepavan@northwestern.edu

2

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan
As Mr. Greenspan prepares to give a critical new assessment of the monetary policy
outlook in testimony to Congress on Wednesday, the central bank faces a diﬃcult choice
in grappling with the economic slowdown. If it heeds the clamour from much of Wall
Street and cuts rates now ... it risks being seen as panicky, jeopardizing its reputation for
policy-making competence. But if it waits until March 20, it risks allowing the economy
to develop even more powerful downward momentum in what could prove a crucial three
weeks. (Financial Times, February 27, 2001)

1

Introduction

Economic news anxiously concentrate on the information that diﬀerent policy choices convey about
the intentions of the policy maker and the underlying economic fundamentals, how markets may
interpret and react to diﬀerent policy measures, and whether government intervention can calm
down animal spirits and ease markets to coordinate on desirable courses of actions. This paper
investigates the ability of a policy maker to influence market expectations and control equilibrium
outcomes in environments where market participants play a coordination game with information
heterogeneity.
A large number of economic interactions are characterized by strategic complementarities, can
be modeled as coordination games, and often exhibit multiple equilibria sustained by self-fulfilling
expectations. Prominent examples include self-fulfilling bank runs (Diamond and Dybvig, 1983),
debt crises (Calvo, 1988; Cole and Kehoe, 1996), financial crashes (Freixas and Rochet, 1997;
Chari and Kehoe, 2003a,b), and currency crises (Flood and Garber, 1984; Obstfeld, 1986, 1996).1
Building on the global-games work of Carlsson and Van Damme (1993), Morris and Shin (1998,
2000) have recently argued that equilibrium multiplicity in such coordination environments is merely
“the unintended consequence” of assuming common knowledge of the fundamentals of the game,
which implies that agents can perfectly forecast each others’ beliefs and actions in equilibrium.
When instead diﬀerent agents have diﬀerent private information about the fundamentals, players
1

Strategic complementarities arise also in economies with restricted market participation (Azariadis, 1981), pro-

duction externalities (Benhabib and Farmer, 1994; Bryant, 1983), demand spillovers (Murphy, Shleifer and Vishny,
1989), thick-market externalities (Diamond, 1982), credit constraints (Bernanke and Gertler, 1989; Kiyotaki and
Moore, 1997), incomplete risk sharing (Angeletos and Calvet, 2003) and imperfect product market competition (Milgrom and Roberts, 1990; Vives 1999). The reader can refer to Cooper (1999) for an overview of coordination games
in macroeconomics.

Coordination and Policy Traps

3

are uncertain about others’ beliefs and actions, and thus perfect coordination is no longer possible.
Iterated deletion of strictly dominated strategies then eliminates all but one equilibrium outcome
and one system of beliefs.2
This argument has been elegantly illustrated by Morris and Shin (1998) in the context of currency crises. When it is common knowledge that a currency is sound but vulnerable to a large
speculative attack, two equilibria coexist: One in which all speculators anticipate a crisis, attack
the currency and cause a devaluation, which in turn confirms their expectations; another in which
speculators refrain from attacking, hence vindicating their beliefs that the currency is not in danger. On the contrary, a unique equilibrium survives when speculators receive noisy idiosyncratic
signals about the willingness and ability of the monetary authority to defend the currency against a
speculative attack (the fundamentals). Devaluation then occurs if and only if the fundamentals fall
below a critical state. This unique threshold in turn depends on all financial and policy variables
aﬀecting the payoﬀs of the speculators. Morris and Shin hence argue that, “in contrast to multiple
equilibrium models, [their] model allows analysis of policy proposals directed at curtailing currency
attacks.” For example, raising domestic interest rates, imposing capital controls, or otherwise increasing the opportunity cost of attacking the currency, reduces the set of fundamentals for which
devaluation occurs.
However, when the fundamentals are so weak that the collapse of the currency is inevitable,
there is no point in raising domestic interest rates or adopting other costly defense measures.
Similarly, when the fundamentals are so strong that the size of the attack is minuscule and the
currency faces no threat, there is no need to intervene. Therefore, whenever the bank raises the
interest rate, the market can infer that the fundamentals are neither too weak nor too strong. This
information in turn may permit coordination in the market on multiple courses of action, thus
interfering with the ability of the policy maker to fashion equilibrium outcomes.
In this paper, we analyze endogenous policy in a global coordination game. To settle in a
particular environment, we add a first stage to the speculative currency attacks model of Morris
and Shin (1998). The central bank moves first, setting the domestic interest rate. Speculators
move second, taking a position in the exchange rate market on the basis of their idiosyncratic noisy
signals about the fundamentals, as well as their observation of the interest rate set by the central
bank. Finally, the bank observes the fraction of speculators attacking the currency and decides
whether to defend the currency or devalue.
2

See Morris and Shin (2001) for an extensive overview of this literature. Earlier uniqueness results are in Postle-

waite and Vives (1987) and Chamley (1999).

4

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

The main result of the paper (Theorem 1) establishes that the endogeneity of the policy leads
to multiple equilibrium policies and multiple devaluation outcomes, even when the fundamentals
are observed with idiosyncratic noise. Diﬀerent equilibria are sustained by diﬀerent modes of
coordination in the reaction of the market to the same policy choice. Let θ denote the fundamentals
and r the interest rate. As long as the value of defending the peg is increasing with θ and the size
(or the cost) of an attack is decreasing with θ, the central bank is willing to incur the cost of a high
interest rate in order to defend the currency only for intermediate values of θ. The observation of an
increase in the interest rate thus signals that the fundamentals are neither too low nor too high, in
which case multiple courses of action may be sustained in the market, creating diﬀerent incentives for
the policy maker. If speculators coordinate on the same response to any level of the policy, the bank
never finds it optimal to raise the interest rate. Hence, there exists an inactive policy equilibrium,
in which the bank sets the same low interest rate r for all θ and speculators play the Morris-Shin
continuation equilibrium in the foreign exchange market. If instead speculators coordinate on a
lenient continuation equilibrium (not attacking the currency) when the bank raises the interest
rate suﬃciently high, and otherwise play an aggressive continuation equilibrium (attacking the
currency for suﬃciently low private signals), the bank finds it optimal to raise the interest rate
for an intermediate range of fundamentals. Hence, there also exists a continuum of active-policy
equilibria, in which the bank sets a high interest rate r∗ > r for θ ∈ [θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ], and devaluation occurs

if and only if θ < θ∗ . Which equilibrium is played, how high is the rate r∗ the bank needs to set in
order to be spared from an attack, and what is the threshold θ∗ below which devaluation occurs,
are all determined by self-fulfilling market expectations. This result thus manifests a kind of policy
traps: In her attempt to fashion the equilibrium outcome, the policy maker reveals information that
market participants can use to coordinate on multiple courses of action, and finds herself trapped in
a position where both the eﬀectiveness of any particular policy choice and the shape of the optimal
policy are dictated by arbitrary market sentiments.
The second result of the paper (Theorem 2) establishes that information heterogeneity significantly reduces the equilibrium set as compared to common knowledge and enables meaningful
policy predictions despite the existence of multiple equilibria. In all robust equilibria, the probability of devaluation is monotonic in the fundamentals, the policy maker is “anxious to prove herself”
by raising the interest rate only for a small region of moderate fundamentals, and the “anxiety
region” vanishes as the information in the market becomes precise. None of these predictions could
be made if the fundamentals were common knowledge.
In the benchmark model, the policy maker faces no uncertainty about the aggressiveness of

Coordination and Policy Traps

5

market expectations and the eﬀectiveness of any particular policy choice. We relax this assumption
in Section 5 by introducing sunspots on which speculators may condition their response to the policy.
The same equilibrium interest rate may now lead to diﬀerent devaluation outcomes. These results
thus reconcile the fact documented by Kraay (2003) and others that raising interest rates does
not systematically aﬀect the outcome of a speculative attack — a fact that prima facie contradicts
the policy prediction of Morris and Shin (1998). Moreover, these results help make sense of the
Financial Times quote: The market may be equally likely to “interpret” a costly policy intervention
either as a signal of strength, in which case the most desirable outcome may be attained, or as a
signal of panic, in which case the policy maker’s attempt to coordinate the market on the preferable
course of action proves to be in vain.
On a more theoretical ground, this paper represents a first attempt to introduce signaling in
global coordination games. The receivers (speculators) use the signal (policy) as a coordination
device to switch between lenient and aggressive continuation equilibria in the global coordination
game, thus creating diﬀerent incentives for the sender (policy maker) and resulting in diﬀerent
equilibria in the policy game (policy traps). Our multiplicity result is thus diﬀerent from the
multiplicity result in standard signaling games. It is sustained by diﬀerent modes of coordination,
not by diﬀerent systems of out-of-equilibrium beliefs, and it survives standard forward induction
refinements, such as the intuitive criterion test of Cho and Kreps (1987). The multiplicity result in
this paper is also diﬀerent from the multiplicity that arises in standard global coordination games
with exogenous public signals (e.g., Morris and Shin, 2001; Hellwig, 2002). In our environment,
the informational content of the public signal (the policy) is endogenous and it is itself the result
of the self-fulfilling expectations of the market. Most importantly, our policy-traps result is not
merely about the possibility of multiple continuation equilibria in the coordination game given any
realization of the policy; it is rather about how endogenous coordination in the market makes the
eﬀectiveness of the policy depend on arbitrary market sentiments and leads to multiple equilibria
in the policy game.
Finally, our policy traps are diﬀerent from the expectation traps that arise in Kydland-PrescottBarro-Gordon environments (e.g., Obstfeld, 1986, 1996; Chari, Christiano and Eichenbaum, 1998;
Albanesi, Chari and Christiano, 2002). In these works, multiple equilibria originate in the government’s lack of commitment and would disappear if the policy maker could commit to a fixed policy
rule. In our work, instead, equilibrium multiplicity originates in endogenous coordination and is
orthogonal to the commitment problem; what is more, despite the risk of falling into a policy trap,
the government need not have any incentive ex ante to commit to a particular interest rate.

6

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 introduces the model and the equilibrium
concept. Section 3 analyzes equilibria in the absence of uncertainty over the aggressiveness of
market expectations. Section 4 examines to what extent meaningful and robust policy predictions
can be made despite the presence of multiple equilibria. Section 5 introduces sunspots to examine
equilibria in which the policy maker faces uncertainty over market reactions. Section 6 concludes.

2

The Model

2.1

Model Description

The economy is populated by a continuum of speculators (market participants) of measure one,
indexed by i and uniformly distributed over the [0, 1] interval. Each speculator is endowed with
one unit of wealth denominated in domestic currency, which he may either invest in a domestic
asset or convert to foreign currency and invest it in a foreign asset. In addition, there is a central
banker (the policy maker), who controls the domestic interest rate and seeks to maintain a fixed
peg, or some kind of managed exchange-rate system.3 We let θ ∈ Θ parametrize the cost and
benefits the bank associates with maintaining the peg, or equivalently her willingness and ability
to defend the currency against a potential speculative attack. θ is private information to the bank
and corresponds to what Morris and Shin (1998) refer to as “the fundamentals.” For simplicity, we
let Θ = R and the common prior shared by the speculators be a degenerate uniform.4
The game has three stages. In stage 1, the central banker learns the value of maintaining the
peg θ and fixes the domestic interest rate r ∈ R = [r, r]. In stage 2, speculators choose their

portfolios after observing the interest rate r set by the central bank and after receiving private
signals xi = θ + εξ i about θ. The scalar ε ∈ (0, ∞) parametrizes the precision of the speculators’

private information about θ and ξ i is noise, i.i.d. across speculators and independent of θ, with
absolutely continuous c.d.f. Ψ and density ψ strictly positive and continuously diﬀerentiable over
the entire real line (unbounded full support) or a closed interval [−1, +1] (bounded support).
3

We adopt the convention of using female pronouns for the central banker and masculine pronouns for the specu-

lators.
4
That the fundamentals of the economy coincide here with the type of the central bank is clearly just a simplification. Our results remain true if one reinterprets θ as the policy maker’s perception of the fundamentals of the
economy, and xi as the signal speculator i receives about the information of the policy maker. Also, our results hold
for any interval Θ ⊆ R and any strictly positive and continuous density over Θ, provided that the game remains

“global.” We refer to Morris and Shin (2001) for a discussion of the role of degenerate uniform and general common
priors in global coordination games.

Coordination and Policy Traps

7

Finally, in stage 3, the central bank observes the aggregate demand for the foreign currency and
decides whether to maintain the peg. Note that stages 2 and 3 of our model correspond to the
global speculative game of Morris and Shin (1998); our model reduces to theirs if r is exogenously
fixed. On the other hand, if the fundamentals were common knowledge (ε = 0), stages 2 and 3
would correspond to the speculative game examined by Obstfeld (1986, 1996).
We normalize the foreign interest rate to zero and let the pay-oﬀ for a speculator be
u(r, ai , D) = (1 − ai )r + ai Dπ,
where ai ∈ [0, 1] is the fraction of his wealth converted to foreign currency (equivalently, the

probability that he attacks the peg), π > 0 is the devaluation premium, and D is the probability

the peg is abandoned. That is, a speculator who does not to attack (ai = 0) enjoys r with
certainty, whereas a speculator who attacks the peg (ai = 1) earns π if the peg is abandoned and
zero otherwise.
We denote with α the aggregate demand for the foreign currency (equivalently, the measure of
speculators who attack the peg) and let the payoﬀ for the central bank be
U (r, α, D, θ) = (1 − D)V (θ, α) − C(r).
V (θ, α) is the net value of defending the currency against an attack of size α and C(r) the cost of
raising the domestic interest rate at level r. V is increasing in θ and decreasing in α, C is increasing
in r, and both V and C are continuous.5
Let θ and θ be defined by V (θ, 0) = V (θ, 1) = 0. For θ < θ it is dominant for the bank to
devalue, whereas for θ > θ it is dominant to maintain the peg. The interval [θ, θ] thus represents the
“critical range” of θ for which the peg is sound but vulnerable to a suﬃciently large attack. Also,
©
ª
let x ≡ inf {x : Pr(θ < θ|x) < 1} and x ≡ sup x : Pr(θ < θ|x) > 0 ; if the noise ξ has bounded

support [−1, +1], x = θ − ε and x = θ + ε, whereas x = −∞ and x = +∞ if the noise has

unbounded full support. Next, note that r > 0 represents the eﬃcient, or cost-minimizing, interest
rate. We normalize C(r) = 0 and, without any loss of generality, let the domain of the interest rate
be R = [r, r], where r solves C(r) = maxθ {V (θ, 0) − V (θ, 1)}; r represents the maximal interest

rate the bank is ever willing to set in order to deter an attack. To make things interesting, we
assume r < π, which ensures that it is too costly for the bank to raise the interest rate to totally

oﬀset the devaluation premium. Finally, to simplify the exposition, we let V (θ, α) = θ − α. It
follows that θ = 0 = C(r) and θ = 1 = C(r).
5

That the bank has no private information about the cost of raising the interest rate is not essential.

8

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

2.2

Equilibrium Definition

In the analysis that follows, we restrict attention to perfect Bayesian equilibria that are not sensitive to whether the idiosyncratic noise in the observation of the fundamentals has bounded or
unbounded (full) support. We refer to equilibria that can be sustained under both specifications of
the information structure as robust equilibria. We will also verify that all robust equilibria satisfy
the intuitive criterion refinement, first introduced in Cho and Kreps (1987). As the global coordination game described in Section 2.1 is very diﬀerent from the class of signaling games examined
in the literature, it is useful to formalize the equilibrium concept and the intuitive criterion test for
the strategic context of this paper.
Definition 1 A perfect Bayesian equilibrium is a set of functions r : Θ → R, D : Θ × [0, 1] ×
R → [0, 1], a : R × R → [0, 1], α : Θ × R → [0, 1] , and µ : Θ × R × R → [0, 1] , such that:
r(θ) ∈ arg max U (r, α(θ, r), D(θ, α(θ, r), r), θ) ;

(1)

r∈R

a(x, r) ∈ arg max

R

a∈[0,1] Θ

u(r, a, D (θ, α(θ, r), r))dµ (θ|x, r) and α(θ, r) =

+∞
R

a(x, r)ψ

−∞

D(θ, α, r) ∈ arg max U (r, α, D, θ);

¡ x−θ ¢
ε

D∈[0,1]

µ (θ|x, r) = 0 for all θ ∈
/ Θ(x) and µ (θ|x, r) satisfies Bayes’ rule for any r ∈ r(Θ(x)),

dx;

(2)
(3)
(4)

©
¡
¢
ª
where Θ(x) ≡ θ : ψ x−θ
> 0 is the set of fundamentals θ consistent with signal x.
ε
r(θ) is the policy of the bank and D(θ, α, r) is the probability of devaluation. µ (θ|x, r) is
a speculator’s posterior belief about θ conditional on private signal x and interest rate r, a(x, r)
is the speculator’s position in the foreign-exchange market, and α(θ, r) the associated aggregate
demand for foreign currency.6 Conditions (1) and (3) mean that the interest rate set in stage 1
and the devaluation decision in stage 3 are sequentially optimal for the bank, whereas condition
(2) means that the portfolio choice in stage 2 is sequentially optimal for the speculators, given
beliefs µ (θ|x, r) about θ. Finally, condition (4) requires that beliefs do not assign positive measure
to fundamentals θ that are not compatible with the private signals x, and are pinned down by
Bayes’ rule on the equilibrium path. To simplify notation, in what follows we will also refer to
D(θ) = D(θ, r(θ), α(θ, r(θ)) as the equilibrium devaluation probability for type θ.
6

That α(θ, r) =

R +∞
−∞

a(x, r)ψ

¡ x−θ ¢
ε

dx represents the fraction of speculators attacking the currency follows directly

from the Law of Large Numbers when there are countable infinitely many agents; with a continuum, see Judd (1985).

Coordination and Policy Traps

9

Definition 2 A perfect Bayesian equilibrium is robust if and only if the same policy r(θ) and
devaluation outcome D(θ) can be sustained with both bounded and unbounded idiosyncratic noise
in the speculators’ observation of θ.
As it will become clear in Section 4, this refinement simply eliminates strategic eﬀects that
depend critically on whether the speculators’ private information has bounded or unbounded full
support over the fundamentals. Note that robustness imposes no restriction on the precision of the
signals.
Definition 3 Let U (θ) denote the equilibrium payoﬀ of the central bank when the fundamentals are
θ, and define Θ(r) as the set of θ for whom the choice r is dominated in equilibrium by r(θ) and M(r)
as the set of posterior beliefs that assign zero measure to any θ ∈ Θ(r) whenever Θ(r) ⊂ Θ(x).7 A

perfect Bayesian equilibrium survives the intuitive criterion test if and only if, for any θ ∈ Θ

and any r ∈ R, U (θ) ≥ U (r, α(θ, r), D(θ, α(θ, r), r), θ) , for α(θ, r) satisfying (2) with µ ∈ M(r).

In words, a perfect Bayesian equilibrium fails the intuitive criterion test when there is a type
θ that would be better oﬀ by choosing an interest rate r 6= r(θ) should speculators’ reaction not
be sustained by out-of-equilibrium beliefs that assign positive measure to types for whom r is

dominated in equilibrium by r(θ). Such beliefs are often highly implausible, although consistent
with the definition of perfect Bayesian equilibria. In our game, all robust equilibria pass the intuitive
criterion test.

2.3

Model Discussion

The particular pay-oﬀ structure and many of the institutional details of the specific coordination
environment we consider in this paper are not essential for our results. For example, the cost of
the interest rate can be read as the cost of implementing a particular policy; this may depend also
on the fundamentals of the economy, as well as the aggregate response of the market. Similarly,
the value of maintaining the peg represents the value of coordinating the market on a particular
action; this may depend, not only on the underlying fundamentals and the reaction of the market,
but also on the policy itself.
That stage 3 is strategic is also not essential. Given the payoﬀ function of the central bank, the
devaluation policy is sequentially optimal if and only if D(θ, r, α) = 1 whenever V (θ, α) < 0 and
7

Formally, Θ(r) ≡ {θ such that U (θ) > U (r, α(θ, r), D(θ, α(θ, r), r), θ) for any α(θ, r) satisfying (2) and (4) with

µ ∈ M(r)}, whereM(r) ≡ {µ satisfying (4) and such that µ (θ|x, r) = 0 for any θ ∈ Θ(r) if Θ(r) ⊂ Θ(x)}.

10

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

D(θ, r, α) = 0 whenever V (θ, α) > 0, for any r. All our results would hold true if the currency were
exogenously devalued for any θ and α such that V (θ, α) ≤ 0, as in the case the bank has no choice but
to abandon the peg whenever the aggregate demand of foreign currency (α) exceeds the amount

of foreign reserves (θ). Indeed, although described as a three-stage game, the model essentially
reduces to a two-stage game, where in the first stage the policy maker signals information about θ
to the market and in the second stage speculators play a global coordination game in response to
the action of the policy maker. Stage 3 serves only to introduce strategic complementarities in the
actions of market participants.8
In short, we suggest that our model may well fit a broader class of environments in which a
stage of endogenous information transmission (signaling) is followed by a global coordination game,
such as, for example, in the case of a government oﬀering an investment subsidy in an attempt
to stimulate the adoption of a new technology, or a telecommunications company undertaking an
aggressive advertising campaign in attempt to persuade consumers to adopt her service.

3

Policy Traps

3.1

Exogenous versus Endogenous Policy

Suppose for a moment that the interest rate r is exogenously fixed, say r = r. Our model then
reduces to the model of Morris and Shin (1998). The lack of common knowledge over the fundamentals eliminates any possibility of coordination and iterated deletion of strongly dominated
strategies selects a unique equilibrium profile and a unique system of equilibrium beliefs.
Proposition 1 (Morris-Shin) In the speculative game with exogenous interest rate policy, there
exists a unique perfect Bayesian equilibrium, in which a speculator attacks if and only if x < xM S
and the bank devalues if and only if θ < θ MS . The thresholds xM S and θM S are defined by
µ
¶
xMS − θ MS
π−r
θM S =
=Ψ
π
ε

(5)

and are decreasing in r.
8

Note that, if the bank could commit never to devalue in stage 3, there would be no speculation in stage 2, and

the market would not play a coordination game. Such lack of commitment is essential for the literature on policy
discretion and expectation traps, but not for our results. What is essential for the kind of policy traps we identify in
this paper is that the game the market plays in response to the action of the policy maker is a global coordination
game; the origin of strategic complementarities is irrelevant.

Coordination and Policy Traps

11

Proof. Uniqueness is established in Morris and Shin (1998). Here, we only characterize
xM S and θM S in our setting. Given that D(θ) = 1 if θ < θM S and D(θ) = 0 otherwise, a
speculator with signal x finds it optimal not to attack if and only if πµ(θ < θ MS |x) ≤ r, where
´
³
R
µ(θ < θM S |x) = θ<θM S dµ(θ|x). By Bayes rule, µ(θ < θ MS |x) = 1 − Ψ x−θεM S . Thus, xM S
´i
h
³
MS
= r. The fraction of speculators attacking
solves the indiﬀerence condition π 1 − Ψ xM S −θ
ε
´
³
is then α(θ, r) = Pr(x < xM S |θ) = Ψ xM εS −θ . It follows that V (θ, α(θ, r)) < 0, and hence
the bank devalues, if and only if θ < θM S , where θM S solves V (θM S , α(θ MS , r)) = 0, that is,
´
³
MS
θM S = Ψ xM S −θ
. Combining the indiﬀerence condition for the speculators with that for the
ε
central bank gives (5). It is then immediate that xM S and θM S are both decreasing in r.

The larger the return on the domestic asset, or the higher the cost of short-selling the domestic
currency, the less attractive it is for a speculator to take the risk of attacking the currency. It follows
that xM S and θM S are decreasing functions of r, which suggests that the monetary authority should
be able to reduce the likelihood and severity of a currency crisis by simply raising the domestic
interest rate, or more generally reducing the speculators’ ability and incentives to attack.
Indeed, that would be the end of the story if the policy did not convey any information to
the market. However, since raising the interest rate is costly, a high interest rate signals that the
bank is willing to defend the currency and hence that the fundamentals are not too weak. On the
other hand, as long as speculators do not attack when their private signal is suﬃciently high, the
bank faces only a small attack when the fundamentals are suﬃciently strong, in which case there
is no need to raise the interest rate. Therefore, any attempt to defend the peg by increasing the
interest rate is interpreted by the market as a signal of intermediate fundamentals,9 in which case
speculators may coordinate on either an aggressive or a lenient course of action. Diﬀerent modes of
coordination then create diﬀerent incentives for the policy maker and result in diﬀerent equilibria.
At the end, which equilibrium is played, how high is the level of the policy the bank needs to set
in order to be spared from a crisis, and what is the critical value of the fundamentals below which
a devaluation occurs, are all determined by self-fulfilling market expectations.
Theorem 1 (Policy Traps) In the speculative game with endogenous policy, there exist multiple
perfect Bayesian equilibria for any ε > 0.
9

This interpretation of the information conveyed by a high interest rate follows from Bayes’ rule if the observed

level of the interest rate is on the equilibrium path, and from forward induction (the intuitive criterion) otherwise.

12

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

(a) There is an inactive-policy equilibrium: The bank sets the cost-minimizing interest rate
r for all θ and devaluation occurs if and only if θ < θM S .
(b) There is a continuum of active-policy equilibria: Let re solve C(e
r) =

π−r
π ;

For any

r∗ ∈ (r, re], there is an equilibrium in which the bank sets either r or r∗ , raises the interest rate at
r∗ only for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], and devalues if and only if θ < θ∗ , where
θ∗ = C(r∗ )

and

³
h
θ∗∗ = θ∗ + ε Ψ−1 1 −

r
∗
π−r θ

´

i
− Ψ−1 (θ∗ ) .

(6)

The threshold θ∗ is independent of ε and can take any value in (θ, θM S ], whereas the threshold θ∗∗
is increasing in ε and converges to θ ∗ as ε → 0.
All the above equilibria are robust, satisfy the intuitive criterion, and can be supported by
strategies for the speculators that are monotonic in x.
The proof of Theorem 1 follows from Propositions 2 and 3, which we present in the next two
sections. Theorem 1 states that there is a continuum of equilibria, which contrasts with the uniqueness result and the policy conjecture of Morris and Shin. The policy maker is subject to policy traps:
In her attempt to use the interest rate so as to fashion the size of a currency attack, the monetary
authority reveals information that the fundamentals are neither too weak nor too strong. This information facilitates coordination in the market, sustains multiple self-fulfilling market responses to
the same policy choice, and leads to a situation where the eﬀectiveness of any particular policy (the
eventual devaluation outcome) and the shape of the optimal policy are dictated by the arbitrary
aggressiveness of market expectations. In the inactive-policy equilibrium, speculators expect the
bank never to raise the interest rate and play the same continuation equilibrium (attacking if and
only if x < xM S ) for any r. Anticipating this, the bank finds it pointless to raise the interest rate,
which in turn vindicates market expectations. In an active-policy equilibrium instead, speculators
expect the bank to raise the interest rate at r∗ only for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], coordinate on an aggressive

response for any r < r∗ and on a lenient one for any r ≥ r∗ . Again, the bank can do no better than

simply conforming to the arbitrary self-fulfilling expectations of the market.

All equilibria in Theorem 1 can be supported by simple threshold strategies for the speculators
that are monotonic in x. That is, given any policy choice r, a speculator attacks the currency if
and only his private signal about the fundamentals falls below a threshold which depends on the
particular equilibrium played by the market.
Finally, note that all active-policy equilibria in Theorem 1 share the following properties. First,
the devaluation outcome is monotonic in the fundamentals. Second, the devaluation threshold

Coordination and Policy Traps

13

is determined by self-fulfilling market expectations, but never exceeds the devaluation threshold
that would prevail under policy inaction. Third, when the fundamentals are either very weak, or
suﬃciently strong, the market can easily recognize this, in which case there is no value for the
policy maker to raise the interest rate; it is then only for a small range of moderate fundamentals
that the market is likely to be “uncertain” or “confused” about eventual devaluation outcomes,
and it is thus only for moderate fundamentals that the policy maker is “anxious to prove herself”
by taking a costly policy action. Fourth, the “anxiety region” shrinks as the precision of market
information increases. In Section 4, we further discuss the robustness of these policy predictions.

3.2

Inactive Policy Equilibrium

When the interest rate is endogenous, the Morris-Shin outcome survives as an inactive policy
equilibrium, in which the interest rate remains uninformative about the probability the currency
will be devalued.
Proposition 2 (Perfect Pooling) There is a robust inactive policy equilibrium, in which the
central bank sets r for all θ, speculators attack if and only if x < xMS , independently of the interest
rate chosen by the central bank, and devaluation occurs if and only if θ < θ MS . The thresholds xM S
and θM S are defined as in (5).
Proof. Since in equilibrium all θ set r = r, the observation of r conveys no information about
the fundamentals θ and hence the continuation game starting after the bank sets r = r is isomorphic
to the Morris-Shin game: There is a unique continuation equilibrium, in which a speculator attacks
if and only if x < xM S and the central bank devalues if and only if θ < θM S . Equilibrium beliefs
are then pinned down by Bayes’ rule.
Next, consider out-of-equilibrium interest rates. Note that re solves C(e
r) = V (θ MS , 0). Any

r > re is dominated in equilibrium by r for all types: For θ < θ MS , V (θ, 0) − C(r) < 0; for

θ ≥ θM S , C(r) > θM S > α(θ, r) and thus V (θ, 0) − C(r) < V (θ, α(θ, r)). On the other hand, any

r ∈ (r, re) is dominated in equilibrium by r(θ) for any θ such that θ < C(r) or α(θ, r) < C(r),
where C(r) ≤ C(e
r) = θM S . Therefore, for any out-of-equilibrium r 6= re, one can construct out-

of-equilibrium beliefs µ that satisfy (4) and the intuitive criterion, i.e. µ ∈ M(r), and such that

µ(θ < θM S |x, r) is non-increasing in x and satisfies πµ(θ < θM S |x, r) = r at x = xM S . For such

beliefs, a speculator finds it optimal to attack if and only if x < xMS , forcing devaluation to occur

if and only if θ < θM S . Finally, for r = re,10 let µ(θM S |x, re) = 1 for all x such that θM S ∈ Θ(x), and
10

Note that re is dominated in equilibrium by r for all θ 6= θM S .

14

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

µ(θ|x, re) = µ(θ|x) otherwise, so that again (4) and the intuitive criterion are satisfied. Then, there
is a mixed-strategy equilibrium for the continuation game following r = re, in which a speculator
attacks if and only if x < xM S and type θM S devalues with probability re/π.

Given that speculators attack if and only if x < xM S for any r, it is optimal for the central

bank to set r(θ) = r for all θ. Finally, consider robustness in the sense of Definition 2. Given
θM S =

π−r
r

∈ (0, 1), (5) is satisfied for any ε > 0 and any c.d.f. Ψ, with either bounded or

unbounded support, by simply letting xM S = θM S +εΨ−1 (θM S ). It follows that the policy r(θ) = r

for all θ, and the devaluation outcome D(θ) = 1 for θ < θ MS and D(θ) = 0 otherwise, can be
sustained as a robust equilibrium.

The inactive policy equilibrium is illustrated in Figure 1. θ is on the horizontal axis, α and C
on the vertical one. The devaluation threshold θM S is the point of intersection between the value of
defending the peg θ and the size of the attack α(θ, r). Figure 1 also illustrates the intuitive criterion.
Note that the equilibrium payoﬀ is U (θ) = 0 for all θ ≤ θM S and U (θ) = θ − α(θ, r) > 0 for all

θ > θM S . Consider a deviation to some r0 ∈ (r, re) and let θ0 and θ00 solve θ 0 = C(r0 ) = α(θ00 , r).

Note that C(r0 ) > θ if and only θ < θ0 and C(r0 ) > α(θ, r) if and only if θ > θ00 , which implies that

/ [θ0 , θ00 ]. Hence, if θ ∈ [θ0 , θ00 ] and the bank
r0 is dominated in equilibrium by r if and only if θ ∈

deviates to r0 , the market “learns” that θ ∈ [θ0 , θ00 ].11 Furthermore, since θM S ∈ [θ0 , θ00 ], one can
construct beliefs that are compatible with the intuitive criterion for which speculators continue to
attack whenever x < xM S , in which case it is pointless for the bank to raise the interest rate at r0 .
Insert Figure 1 here
Clearly, any system of beliefs and strategies such that α(θ, r) ≥ α(θ, r) for all r > r sustains

policy inaction as an equilibrium; the bank has then no choice but to set r(θ) = r for all θ, confirming the expectations of the market. Note that a higher interest rate increases the opportunity cost
of attacking the currency and, other things equal, reduces the speculators’ incentives to attack. In
an inactive-policy equilibrium, however, this portfolio eﬀect is oﬀset by the higher probability speculators attach to a final devaluation. The particular beliefs we consider in the proof of Proposition
2 have the property that these two eﬀects just oﬀset each other, in which case speculators use the
11

Throughout the paper, the expression “the market learns X by observing Y ” means that the event X becomes

common p = 1 belief among the speculators given that Y is common knowledge; see Monderer and Samet (1989)
and Kajii and Morris (1995).

Coordination and Policy Traps

15

same strategy on and oﬀ the equilibrium path and condition their behavior only on their private
information. It is then as if speculators do not pay attention to the policy of the bank.12

3.3

Active Policy Equilibria

We now prove the existence of robust active-policy equilibria in which the bank raises the interest
rate at r∗ for every θ ∈ [θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ].
Proposition 3 (Two-Threshold Equilibria) For any r∗ ∈ (r, re], there is a two-threshold equi-

librium in which the central bank sets r∗ for all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] and r otherwise; speculators attack if

and only if either r < r∗ and x < x∗ , or r ≥ r∗ and x < x; finally, devaluation occurs if and only if
θ < θ ∗ . x∗ solves πµ(θ < θ∗ |x∗ , r) = r, whereas θ∗ and θ∗∗ are given by (6). A two-threshold equilib-

rium exists if and only if r∗ ∈ (r, re] or, equivalently, if and only if θ∗ ∈ (θ, θM S ]. All two-threshold

equilibria are robust.

θ, α(b
θ, r)) = 0, where α(b
θ, r) = Ψ
Proof. Let b
θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] solve V (b
∗
b
any r < r , speculators trigger devaluation if and only if θ < θ.

³

x∗ −b
θ
ε

´

, and note that, for

Consider first the behavior of the speculators. When r = r, beliefs are pinned down by Bayes’

rule for all x, since (6) ensures Θ(x) * [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] for all x.13 Therefore,

´
³
∗
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
´
³
´,
³
θ|x, r) = µ(θ < θ∗ |x, r) =
µ(D(θ) = 1|x, r) = µ(θ < b
∗
x−θ∗∗
+
Ψ
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
ε

which is decreasing in x. We let x∗ be the unique solution to µ(θ < θ∗ |x∗ , r) = r/π. For any
θ|x, r) is non-increasing in
r ∈ (r, r∗ ), we consider out-of-equilibrium beliefs µ such that µ(θ < b
x and πµ(θ < b
θ|x, r) = r at x = x∗ . Furthermore, if for some θ ∈ Θ(x), r is not dominated in

equilibrium by r(θ), i.e., if C(r) ≤ min {α(θ, r), θ} , then we further restrict µ to satisfy µ(θ|x, r) =

0 for all θ ∈ Θ(x) such that θ < C(r) or α(θ, r) < C(r). When r = r∗ , Bayes’ rule implies

µ(θ ∈ [θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ]|x, r∗ ) = 1 for all x such that Θ(x) ∩ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] 6= ∅. Finally, for any (x, r) such that

either r = r∗ and Θ(x) ∩ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] = ∅, or r > r∗ , we let µ(θ ≥ θ|x, r) = 1 for all x ≥ x and

µ(θ ≥ θ|x, r) = 0 otherwise. Given these beliefs, (4) is satisfied, µ ∈ M(r) for any r, and the
strategy of the speculators is sequentially optimal.
12

Moreover, speculators do not need to “learn” how to behave oﬀ the equilibrium path; they simply continue to

play the same strategy they “learned” to play in equilibrium.
13
When the noise is unbounded, this is immediate; when it is bounded, it follows from the fact that |θ ∗∗ − θ∗ | < 2ε

and Θ(x) = [x − ε, x + ε], for any x.

16

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

Consider next the central bank. Given the strategy of the speculators, the bank clearly prefers
r to any r ∈ (r, r∗ ) and r∗ to any r > r∗ . θ∗ is indiﬀerent between setting r∗ (and not being

attacked) and setting r (and being forced to devalue) if and only if V (θ∗ , 0) − C(r∗ ) = 0, i.e.

θ∗ = C (r∗ ) . Similarly, θ ∗∗ is indiﬀerent between setting r∗ (and not being attacked) and setting

r (and being attacked without devaluing) if and only if V (θ∗∗ , 0) − C(r∗ ) = V (θ∗∗ , α(θ∗∗ , r)),
³ ∗ ∗∗ ´
. For any θ < θ∗ , r is optimal; for any
i.e. C (r∗ ) = α (θ∗∗ , r) , where α (θ∗∗ , r) = Ψ x −θ
ε

θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ), α (θ, r) > α (θ∗∗ , r) = C (r∗ ) and thus r∗ is preferred to r, whereas the reverse is true

for any θ > θ∗∗ . From the indiﬀerence conditions for θ∗ , θ∗∗ , and x∗ , we obtain x∗ = θ ∗∗ + εΨ−1 (θ∗ )
and

³
h
θ∗∗ = θ∗ + ε Ψ−1 1 −

r
∗
π−r θ

´

i
− Ψ−1 (θ∗ ) .

(7)

It follows that θ ∗ ≤ θ∗∗ if and only if θ∗ ≤ (π − r)/π = θM S . Using θ∗ = C(r∗ ) and θ MS = C(e
r), we
infer that a two threshold equilibrium exists if and only if θ∗ ∈ (θ, θ MS ], or equivalently r∗ ∈ (r, re].

Finally, consider robustness in the sense of Definition 2. For any r∗ ∈ (r, re), let θ∗ = C(r∗ ) and take

any arbitrary θ∗∗ > θ∗ . For any c.d.f. Ψ with either bounded support [−1, +1] or unbounded full
³
´
i
h
r
r
θ∗ − Ψ−1 (θ∗ ) ∈ (0, ∞) since (1 − π−r
θ ∗ ) ∈ (θ∗ , 1).
support R, we have that κ ≡ Ψ−1 1 − π−r
Hence, for any θ∗∗ > θ∗ and for any κ, condition (7) can always be satisfied by letting ε =

θ∗∗ −θ∗
κ

∈

(0, ∞). For r∗ = re, θ ∗ = θ∗∗ = θM S and (7) holds for every ε and every Ψ. The indiﬀerence
condition for the speculators is then clearly satisfied at x∗ = θ∗∗ + εΨ−1 (θ∗ ). It follows that the

policy r(θ) = r∗ if θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] and r(θ) = r otherwise, and the devaluation outcome D(θ) = 1 if

θ < θ ∗ and D(θ) = 0 otherwise, can be sustained as a robust equilibrium.

A two-threshold equilibrium is illustrated in Figure 2. Like in the inactive policy equilibrium,
the observation of any interest rate r > r is interpreted by market participants as a signal of
intermediate fundamentals. However, contrary to the inactive policy equilibrium, speculators switch
from playing aggressively (attacking if and only if x < x∗ ) to playing leniently (attacking if and
only if x < x) whenever the policy meets market expectations (r ≥ r∗ ). Anticipating this reaction
by market participants, the bank finds it optimal to raise the interest rate to defend the currency

whenever the fundamentals are strong enough that the net value of defending the currency oﬀsets
the cost of raising the interest rate (θ ≥ θ∗ ), but not so strong that the cost of facing a small and

unsuccessful attack is lower than the cost of raising the interest rate (θ ≤ θ∗∗ ). The thresholds θ ∗ and

θ∗∗ are determined by the indiﬀerence conditions θ∗ = C(r∗ ) and α(θ∗∗ , r) = C(r∗ ), as illustrated
in Figure 2. Finally, note that, in any two-threshold equilibrium, the exact fundamentals θ never
become common knowledge among speculators. What the market “learns” from equilibrium policy

Coordination and Policy Traps

17

/ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], but this is enough to facilitate coordination.
observations is only whether θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] or θ ∈
Insert Figure 2 here
There are other out-of-equilibrium beliefs and strategies for the speculators that also sustain
the same two-threshold equilibria. For example, we could have assumed speculators coordinate on
the most aggressive continuation equilibrium (attack if and only if x < x) whenever the policy falls
short of market expectations (r < r < r∗ ). Nonetheless, the beliefs and strategies we consider in
the proof of Proposition 3 have the appealing property that the speculators’ strategy is the same
for all r < r∗ . It is then as if speculators simply “ignore” any attempt of the policy maker that falls
short of market expectations and continue to play exactly as if there had been no intervention.
For any r∗ , the devaluation threshold θ∗ is independent of ε, whereas θ ∗∗ is increasing in ε and
θ∗∗ → θ ∗ as ε → 0. As private information becomes more precise, the bank needs to raise the interest
rate only for a smaller measure of fundamentals. At the limit, the interest rate policy has a spike

at an arbitrary devaluation threshold θ∗ ∈ (θ, θM S ] dictated by market expectations. Note also

that a two-threshold equilibrium exists if and only if θ∗ ≤ θM S . The intuition behind this result is
as follows. From the bank’s indiﬀerence conditions, θ ∗ = C (r∗ ) = α (θ∗∗ , r) , we infer that a higher

r∗ raises both the devaluation threshold θ∗ and the size of the attack at θ∗∗ . The latter is given
by Pr(x ≤ x∗ |θ∗∗ ), which is also equal to Pr(θ ≥ θ∗∗ |x∗ ). Therefore, Pr(θ ≥ θ∗∗ |x∗ ) increases with
r∗ . For a marginal speculator to be indiﬀerent between attacking and non attacking conditional
on r = r, it must be that Pr(θ ≤ θ ∗ |x∗ ) also increases with r∗ . It follows that ∆θ(r∗ ) ≡ θ ∗∗ − θ ∗

is decreasing in r∗ . Obviously, ∆θ(r∗ ) is also continuous in r∗ . A two-threshold equilibrium exists
if and only if ∆θ(r∗ ) ≥ 0. By the monotonicity of ∆θ(r∗ ), there exists at most one re such that

∆θ(e
r) = 0, and ∆θ(r∗ ) > 0 if and only if r∗ < re. But ∆θ(e
r) = 0 if and only if θ∗ = θ∗∗ , in

which case the continuation game following r is (essentially) the Morris-Shin game and therefore
θ∗ = θ∗∗ = θM S . It follows that re solves C(e
r) = V (θM S , 0) =

π−r
π
∗

and a two-threshold equilibrium

exists if and only if r∗ ∈ (r, re], or equivalently, if and only if θ ∈ (θ, θ MS ]. In Section 4, we will

establish that these properties extends to all robust equilibria of the game.

3.4

Discussion

We conclude this section with a few remarks about the role of coordination, signaling, and commitment in our environment.
First, consider environments where the market does not play a coordination game in response

18

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

to the policy maker, such as when the bank (sender) interacts with a single speculator (receiver).14
In such environments, the policy can be non-monotonic if the receivers have access to exogenous
information that allows to separate very high from very low types of the sender (Feltovich, Harbaugh
and To, 2002). Moreover, multiple equilibria could possibly be supported by diﬀerent out-ofequilibrium beliefs. However, a unique equilibrium would typically survive the intuitive criterion
or other proper refinements. To the contrary, the multiplicity we have identified in this paper
does not depend in any critical way on the specification of out-of-equilibrium beliefs, originates
merely in endogenous coordination, and would not arise in environments with a single receiver.
The comparison is sharp if we consider ε → 0. The limit of all equilibria of the game with a single

speculator would have the latter attacking the currency if and only if x < θ, and the bank devaluing

if and only if θ < θ. Contrast this with our findings in Theorem 1, where the devaluation threshold
θ∗ can take any value in (θ, θM S ].
Second, consider environments where there is no signaling, such as standard global coordination
games. As shown in Morris and Shin (2001) and Hellwig (2002), these games may exhibit multiple
equilibria if market participants observe suﬃciently informative public signals about the underlying
fundamentals. The multiplicity of equilibria documented in Theorem 1, however, is substantially
diﬀerent from the kind of multiplicity in that literature. The policy in our model does generate a
public signal about the fundamentals. Yet, the informational content of this signal is endogenous,
as it depends on the particular equilibrium played in the market. Moreover, Theorem 1 is not
about the possibility of multiple continuation equilibria in the coordination game that follows a
given realization of the public signal; it is rather about how endogenous coordination in the market
makes the eﬀectiveness of the policy depend on arbitrary market sentiments and leads to multiple
equilibria in the signaling game.
Third, note that policy introduces a very specific kind of signal. The observation of active policy
reveals that the fundamentals are neither too weak nor too strong, and it is this particular kind
of information that restores the ability of the market to coordinate on diﬀerent courses of action.
In this respect, an interesting extension is to consider the possibility the policy itself is observed
with noise. It can be shown that all equilibria of Theorem 1 are robust to the introduction of
small bounded noise in the speculators’ observation of the policy, whether the noise is aggregate or
idiosyncratic.15
Lastly, consider the role of commitment. Note that policy traps arise in our environment because
14
15

See, for example, Drazen (2001).
The proof of this claim is available upon request.

Coordination and Policy Traps

19

the policy maker moves first, thus revealing valuable information about the fundamentals, which
market participants use to coordinate their response to the policy choice. This raises the question
of whether the policy maker would be better oﬀ committing to a certain level of the policy before
observing θ, thus inducing a unique continuation equilibrium in the coordination game. To see that
commitment is not necessarily optimal, suppose the noise ξ has full support and consider ε → 0.

If the policy maker commits ex ante to some interest rate r, she incurs a cost C(r) and ensures
θ(r), α(θ, r) → 0 as
that devaluation will occur if and only if θ < b
θ(r) ≡ π−r ; moreover, for all θ > b
π

Hence, the ex ante payoﬀ from committing to r is U (r) = Pr(θ ≥ b
θ(r))E[θ|θ ≥ b
θ(r)]−C(r).
θ(rc )|rc ∈ arg maxr U (r)}. If instead the policy maker retains the
Let Uc = maxr U (r) and θc = min{b

ε→

0.16

option to fashion the policy contingent on θ, the ex ante payoﬀ depends on the particular equilibrium

(r∗ , θ∗ , θ∗∗ ) the policy maker expects to be played.17 As ε → 0, θ∗∗ → θ ∗ and α(θ, r) → 0 for all

θ ≥ θ∗∗ , meaning the bank pays C(r∗ ) only for a negligible measure of θ. It follows that the ex

ante value of discretion is Ud = Pr(θ ≥ θ ∗ )E [θ|θ ≥ θ ∗ ] . But note that θc > θ, and therefore any

θ∗ ∈ (θ, θc ) necessarily leads to Ud > Uc . A similar argument holds for arbitrary ε. We conclude
that, even when perfect commitment is possible, the government will prefer discretion ex ante as
long as she is not too pessimistic about future market sentiments.

4

Robust Policy Predictions

Propositions 2 and 3 left open the possibility that there also exist other equilibria outside the two
classes of Theorem 1, which would only strengthen our argument that policy endogeneity facilitates
coordination and leads to policy traps. Nonetheless, we are also interested in identifying equilibria
that are not sensitive to the particular assumptions about the underlying information structure of
the game, in which case “robust” policy predictions can be made.
We first note that, when the noise has unbounded full support, for any r∗ ∈ (r, r] one can con-

struct a one-threshold equilibrium, in which speculators threaten to attack the currency whenever

they observe any r < r∗ , no matter how high their private signal x, thus forcing the bank to raise
the interest rate at r∗ for all θ above the devaluation threshold θ∗ , where θ∗ solves V (θ∗ , 0) = C(r∗ ).
This threat is sustained by beliefs such that speculators interpret any failure of the bank to raise
the interest rate as a signal of devaluation independently of their private information about the
16
17

These results follow from Proposition 1, replacing r with an arbitrary r.
Note that the payoﬀ for the policy maker associated with the pooling equilibrium of Proposition 2 equals the

payoﬀ associated with the two-threshold equilibrium in which θ∗ = θM S .

20

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

fundamentals. It seems more plausible, however, that speculators remain confident that the peg
will be maintained when they observe suﬃciently high x even if the bank fails to raise the interest
rate, in which case all one-threshold equilibria disappear. This is necessarily true when the noise is
bounded: For x > x ≡ θ + ε speculators find it dominant not to attack, which implies that for all

θ > x + ε the bank faces no attack and hence sets r.

On the other hand, when the noise has a bounded support, it is possible for the market to
separate types that set the same interest rate. For example, suppose that for some θ1 , θ2 , θ 3 , θ 4
with θ1 < θ2 < θ2 + 2ε < θ3 < θ4 , the bank sets r(θ) = r0 for any θ ∈ [θ1 , θ2 ] ∪ [θ3 , θ4 ] and r(θ) 6= r0

otherwise. Since [θ1 , θ2 ] and [θ3 , θ4 ] are suﬃciently apart and the noise is bounded, whenever r0 is
observed in equilibrium, it is common p = 1 belief among the speculators whether θ ∈ [θ1 , θ2 ] or

θ ∈ [θ3 , θ 4 ]. In principle, the possibility for the market to separate diﬀerent subsets of types who
set the same interest rate may lead to equilibria diﬀerent from the ones in Theorem 1. However,

this possibility critically depends on small bounded noise and disappears with large bounded or
unbounded supports, whatever the precision of the noise.
We conclude that unbounded noise introduces strategic eﬀects that are not robust to bounded
noise, and vice versa. It is these considerations that motivated the refinement in Definition 2.
We seek to identify equilibrium predictions that are robust to whether the noise is bounded or
unbounded. The following then provides the converse to Theorem 1.
Theorem 2 (Robust Equilibria) Every robust perfect Bayesian equilibrium belongs to one of
the two classes of Theorem 1. If the distribution of the noise satisfies the monotone likelihood ratio
property, any robust active-policy equilibrium is a two-threshold equilibrium as in Proposition 3.
We sketch the intuition for Theorem 2 here and present the formal proof in the Appendix.
Consider any perfect Bayesian equilibrium of the game. If all θ set r, we have perfect pooling.
Otherwise, let
θ0 = inf{θ : r(θ) > r} and θ 00 = sup{θ : r(θ) > r}
be, respectively, the lowest and highest type who raise the interest rate. Since there is no aggregate
uncertainty, the central bank can perfectly anticipate whether she will devalue and hence is willing
to pay the cost of an interest rate r > r only if this leads to no devaluation. It follows that
any equilibrium observation of r > r necessarily signals that there will be no devaluation and
induces any speculator not to attack. If there were more than one interest rates above r played
in equilibrium, and the noise were unbounded, the bank could always ensure no devaluation by

Coordination and Policy Traps

21

setting the lowest equilibrium interest rate above r. Since C(r) is strictly increasing, it follows
that at most one interest rate above r is played in any robust equilibrium. Let r∗ denote this
interest rate and define θ∗ and θ ∗∗ as in Theorem 1. Obviously, it never pays to raise the interest
rate for any θ < θ∗ . Hence, in any robust equilibrium, θ0 ≥ θ ∗ . If the noise were bounded, all

θ > x + ε = θ + 2ε would necessarily set r. Hence, in any robust equilibrium, θ00 < ∞. Compare

now the strategy of the speculators in any such equilibrium with the strategy in the corresponding

two-threshold equilibrium. Any θ > θ∗ necessarily does not devalue as it can guarantee herself a
positive payoﬀ by setting r = r∗ . If there also exist types θ < θ∗ who do not devalue, then the
incentives to attack when observing r are lower than when all θ < θ∗ devalue. Similarly, if there
exist types θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ00 ] who do not raise the interest rate at r∗ , then the observation of r = r is

less informative of devaluation than in the case where all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ00 ] set r∗ . Hence, speculators

are most aggressive at r when D(θ) = 1 for all θ < θ∗ and r(θ) = r∗ for all [θ∗ , θ00 ], which, by
definition of θ∗∗ , is possible if and only if θ 00 = θ∗∗ . Equivalently, the size of the attack in the
two-threshold equilibrium corresponding to r∗ represents an upper bound on the size of the attack
in any active-policy equilibrium in which r∗ is played. It follows that, in any robust equilibrium,
θ00 ≤ θ∗∗ . Since θ∗∗ < θ∗ whenever r∗ > re, this immediately rules out the possibility of equilibria in
which r∗ > re. On the other hand, for any r∗ ≤ re, we have

θ∗ ≤ θ0 ≤ θ00 ≤ θ∗∗ .

It follows that the anxiety region of any robust equilibrium is bounded by the anxiety region of the
corresponding two-threshold equilibrium. By iterated deletion of strictly dominated strategies, one
can also show that all θ < θ ∗ necessarily devalue and that θ0 = θ∗ , which proves the first part of
Theorem 2.
Observe next that the monotonicity of the devaluation policy implies monotonicity of the speculators’ strategy as long as the posterior probability of devaluation is monotonic in the speculators’
private signals. The latter is necessarily true when the noise distribution satisfies the monotone
likelihood ratio property (MLRP), that is, when ψ0 (z)/ψ(z) is decreasing in z. In this case, the
size of the attack α(θ, r) is decreasing in θ, and therefore all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ00 ] raise the interest rate

at r∗ . But then θ00 = θ∗∗ and r(θ) = r∗ if and only if θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ ∗∗ ], which completes the second

part of the theorem. When instead the speculators’ posteriors fail to be monotonic in x, we can
not exclude the possibility there also exist active-policy equilibria diﬀerent from the two-threshold
equilibria, namely equilibria in which the policy maker raises the interest rate at r∗ only for a

subset of [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]. Nevertheless, in any such equilibrium, it remains true that devaluation occurs if

22

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

and only if θ < θ∗ and the policy is active only for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]. Finally, we earlier noted that the

perfect-pooling and two-threshold equilibria can be supported by strategies for the speculators that

are monotonic in the private information x. If one restricts attention to such simple x−monotonic
strategies, the MLRP condition in the second part of Theorem 2 can be dispensed.
Recall that in an inactive-policy equilibrium r is dominated by r for every θ if and only if r > re.

In other words, re represents the maximal interest rate that the bank would ever be tempted to

deviate to in the inactive-policy equilibrium. Following Theorems 1 and 2, the policy in any robust
equilibrium is bounded above by re. Equivalently, the devaluation threshold with active policy is
always lower than the one with inactive policy.

An immediate corollary of Theorem 2 is that as private information becomes more precise, the

anxiety region in any robust active-policy equilibrium shrinks. In the limit, the policy converges to
a spike around the devaluation threshold dictated by market sentiments.
Corollary 1 (Limit) The limit of any robust equilibrium as ε → 0 is such that the policy is
r(θ) = r for all θ 6= θ∗ , for any arbitrary θ∗ ∈ (θ, θM S ], and devaluation occurs if and only if
θ < θ∗.

At this point, it is interesting to compare the above results with the set of equilibrium policies
that would arise if fundamentals were common knowledge.
Proposition 4 (Common Knowledge) Suppose ε = 0. An interest rate policy r : Θ → R can
be part of a subgame perfect equilibrium if and only if C (r(θ)) ≤ V (θ, 0) for θ ∈ [θ, θ] and r(θ) = r

for θ ∈
/ [θ, θ]. Similarly, a devaluation outcome D : Θ → [0, 1] can be part of a subgame perfect
equilibrium if and only if D(θ) ∈ [0, 1] for θ ∈ [θ, θ], D(θ) = 1 for θ < θ, and D(θ) = 0 for θ > θ.

Proof. The second part is obvious, so consider the interest rate policy. For θ < θ, it is dominant
for the bank to set r and devalue and for speculators to attack. Similarly, for θ > θ, the bank never
devalues, speculators do not attack, and there is no need to raise the interest rate. Finally, take
any θ ∈ [θ, θ]. The continuation game following any interest rate r is a coordination game with two
(extreme) continuation equilibria, no attack and full attack. Let r(θ) be the minimal r for which
speculators coordinate on the no-attack continuation equilibrium, i.e. they attack if and only if
r < r(θ). Clearly, it is optimal for the bank to set r(θ) > r if and only if V (θ, 0) − C(r(θ)) ≥ 0, or
equivalently C (r(θ)) ≤ θ.

Coordination and Policy Traps

23

That is, if the fundamentals were common knowledge, the equilibrium policy r(θ) could take
essentially any shape in the critical range [θ, θ]. For example, it could have multiple discontinuities
and multiple non-monotonicities. Similarly, the devaluation outcome D(θ) could also take any
shape in [θ, θ] and need not be monotonic. These results contrast sharply with our results in
Theorem 2 and Corollary 1. When the information about fundamentals is very precise (i.e. ε
is small but positive), the policy is active only for a small range of intermediate fundamentals
[θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], this range vanishes as ε → 0, and the devaluation outcome is necessarily monotonic in
θ. We conclude that introducing small idiosyncratic noise in the observation of the fundamentals

does reduce significantly the equilibrium set, as compared to the common knowledge case. The
global-game methodology thus maintains a strong selection power even in our multiple-equilibria
environment.
Another interesting implication of Corollary 1 is that, in the limit, all active-policy equilibria
are observationally equivalent to the inactive-policy equilibrium in terms of the interest rate policy,
although they are very diﬀerent in terms of the devaluation outcome. An econometrician may
then fail to predict the probability of devaluation on the basis of information on the fundamentals
and the policy of the monetary authority. An even sharper dependence of observable outcomes on
unobservable market sentiments arises if one introduces sunspots, as we discuss next.

5

Uncertainty over the Aggressiveness of Market Expectations

The analysis so far assumed the policy maker was able to anticipate perfectly the aggressiveness
of market expectations, which we identify with the threshold r∗ at which speculators switch from
an aggressive to a lenient response to the policy. In reality, however, market expectations are hard
to predict, even when the underlying economic fundamentals are perfectly known to the policy
maker. To capture this possibility, we introduce payoﬀ-irrelevant sunspots, on which speculators
may condition their responses to the actions of the policy maker. Instead of modelling explicitly
the sunspots, we assume directly that r∗ is a random variable with c.d.f. Φ over a compact support
R∗ ⊆ R. The realization of the random variable r∗ is common knowledge among the speculators,

but is unknown to the bank when it sets the policy. Uncertainty over the aggressiveness of market
expectations then generates random variation in the eﬀectiveness of any given policy choice and

leads to random variation in the devaluation outcome. Diﬀerent sunspot equilibria are associated
with diﬀerent distributions (Φ, R∗ ) and result in diﬀerent equilibrium policies r(θ).

24

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

Proposition 5 Take any random variable r∗ with compact support R∗ ⊆ (r, re) and distribution

Φ. For ε > 0 suﬃciently small,18 there exist thresholds θ∗ ∈ (θ, θM S ) and θ ∗∗ ∈ (θ∗ , θ) and a

robust equilibrium such that: The central bank follows a non-monotonic policy with r(θ) = r for

θ∈
/ [θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ], and r(θ) ∈ R∗ with r(θ) non-decreasing in θ for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]; devaluation occurs with

certainty for θ < θ ∗ , with probability less than one and non-increasing in θ for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], and
never occurs for θ > θ∗∗ . Finally, θ∗ is independent of ε, whereas θ∗∗ → θ∗ as ε → 0.

The sunspot equilibria of Proposition 5 are qualitatively similar to the two-threshold equilibria
of Proposition 3. The policy maker is anxious to prove herself only for a small range of moderate
fundamentals, and this range vanishes as ε → 0. The interval R∗ represents the set of random

thresholds r∗ such that speculators coordinate on an aggressive response whenever r < r∗ and on
a lenient one whenever r ≥ r∗ . When θ < θ∗ , raising the policy to any level in R∗ is too costly

compared to the expected value of defending the peg, in which case the bank finds it optimal to set
r and devalue with certainty. When instead θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], it pays to raise the interest rate at some

level in R∗ so as to lower the probability of a speculative attack. Since the value from defending

the currency is increasing in θ, so is the optimal policy in the range [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]. Finally, for θ ≥ θ∗∗ ,

the size of the attack at r is so small that the bank prefers the cost of such an attack to the cost of a
high interest rate. The thresholds θ∗ and θ ∗∗ are again given by the relevant indiﬀerence conditions
for the bank, but diﬀer from the ones we derived in the absence of sunspots. The definition of the
thresholds and the complete proof of the above proposition are provided in the Appendix.19
With random variation in the aggressiveness of market expectations, policy traps take an even
stronger form. Not only the policy maker has to adopt a policy that simply confirms market expectations, but also the equilibrium outcome of any given policy action is determined by animal
spirits and market sentiments. Empirical evidence suggests that raising interest rates does not
systematically prevent an exchange-rate collapse. Kraay (1993), for example, studies the behavior
of interest rates and other measures of monetary policy during 192 episodes of successful and unsuccessful speculative attacks and finds a “striking lack of any systematic association whatsoever
between interest rates and the outcome of speculative attacks,” even after controlling for various
observable fundamentals. This evidence is hard to reconcile with Morris and Shin’s (1998) predic18

The assumption that ε is suﬃciently small is not essential; it ensures θ∗∗ < θ, which we use only to simplify the

construction of these equilibria (see the Appendix).
19
If one takes a sequence of sunspot equilibria such that R∗ converges to a single point r ∗ , the thresholds θ∗ and

θ∗∗ in Proposition 5 converge to the ones given in (6). That is, the two-threshold equilibria of Proposition 3 can be
read as the limit of sunspot equilibria.

Coordination and Policy Traps

25

tion that defense policies decrease the probability of devaluation, but is consistent with the sunspot
equilibria of Proposition 5, where the same combination of interest rates and fundamentals may
lead in equilibrium to either no devaluation or a collapse of the currency.
Finally, the results of this section help understand and formalize the kind of arguments that
commonly appear in the popular press, like the one we quoted from Financial Times in the beginning
of the paper. Once the policy maker has taken a costly policy action in an attempt to achieve a
favorable outcome, the market may be equally likely to “interpret” this action either as a signal of
strength, in which case market participants coordinate on the desirable course of action, or as a
signal of panic, in which case the policy maker’s attempt proves in vain.

6

Concluding Remarks

In this paper we investigated the ability of a policy maker to influence market expectations and
control equilibrium outcomes in economies where agents play a global coordination game. We found
that policy endogeneity leads to multiple self-fulfilling equilibria, even when the fundamentals are
observed with idiosyncratic noise. The multiple equilibria take the form of policy traps, where
the policy maker is forced to conform to the arbitrary expectations of the market instead of being
able to fashion the equilibrium outcome. There is an inactive-policy equilibrium in which market
participants coordinate on “ignoring” any attempt of the policy maker to aﬀect market behavior, as
well as a continuum of active-policy equilibria in which market participants coordinate on the level
of the policy beyond which they “reward” the policy maker by playing a favorable continuation
equilibrium. Despite equilibrium multiplicity, information heterogeneity significantly reduces the
equilibrium set as compared to the case of common knowledge and enables robust policy predictions.
Although this paper focused on the particular example of self-fulfilling currency attacks, our
approach may extend to other environments where policy can serve as a coordination device among
market participants. Monetary policy in economies with staggered pricing, fiscal and growth policies
in economies with investment complementarities, and stabilization policies or regulatory intervention during financial or debt crises, are only a few examples where our results might be relevant.

26

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

Appendix
Proof of Theorem 2.

When no interest rate other than r is played in equilibrium, we have the

pooling equilibrium in (a) of Theorem 1. Hence, in what follows, we consider equilibria in which
r(θ) > r for some θ and we let
θ0 = inf{θ : r(θ) > r} and θ00 = sup{θ : r(θ) > r}.
We prove the result in a sequence of five lemmas.
Lemma 1.

In any robust equilibrium, there is at most one interest rate r∗ > r played in

equilibrium and θ00 < ∞.
Proof.

Any interest rate r > r is played in equilibrium only if it leads to no devaluation, i.e.

only if D(θ) = 0; all types who devalue set r = r. Speculators attack if and only if the expected
R
devaluation premium is higher than the interest rate diﬀerential, i.e. π Θ D (θ) dµ (θ|x, r) ≥ r. If
the noise is unbounded, any equilibrium interest rate r > r results in a posterior µ(Θ0 |x, r) = 1 for

all x, where Θ0 ≡ {θ : D (θ) = 0} is the set of fundamentals for which devaluation does not occur.
Hence, no speculator ever attacks when he observes an equilibrium r > r, and thus α(θ, r) = 0 for

any equilibrium r > r. Since C(r) is strictly increasing in r, this also implies that, in any robust
equilibrium, at most one interest rate r∗ 6= r will be chosen by the central bank, which proves the

first part of the lemma. Next, if the noise were bounded, it would be dominant for a speculator

not to attack whenever x > x ≡ θ + ε, in which α(θ, r) = 0 for all r whenever θ > x + ε and thus

r(θ) = r for all θ > x + ε. Therefore, an equilibrium with θ00 = ∞ could never be sustained with

bounded noise, which proves the second part of the lemma. ¤
Given any r∗ ∈ (r, r], define the thresholds
θ∗ = C (r∗ )

and

³
h
θ∗∗ = θ∗ + ε Ψ−1 1 −

r
∗
π−r θ

´

i
− Ψ−1 (θ∗ ) ,

and note that θ∗∗ > θ∗ when r∗ < re, θ ∗∗ = θ∗ when r∗ = re, and θ ∗∗ < θ ∗ when r∗ > re. For the rest
of the proof, it suﬃces to consider unbounded noise.

Lemma 2. For any r∗ ∈ (r, r], θ∗ ≤ θ0 and θ00 ≤ θ ∗∗ .
Proof. Since for any θ < θ ∗ , r∗ is strictly dominated by r, it immediately follows that θ0 ≥ θ ∗ . On
the other hand, any θ > θ∗ can always set r∗ , face no attack, and ensure a payoﬀ V (θ, 0)−C(r∗ ) > 0.

Therefore, necessarily D(θ) = 0 for all θ > θ∗ . However, there may exist types θ < θ∗ that also

Coordination and Policy Traps

27

do not devalue in equilibrium. Define δ(x) as the probability, conditional on x, that θ < θ∗ and
D = 0. Further, define p (x) as the probability, conditional on x, that θ ∈ [θ ∗ , θ 00 ] and r (θ) = r.
Then, the probability of devaluation conditional on x and r is given by
´
³
∗
− δ(x)
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
´
³
´.
³
µ (D = 1|x, r) =
∗
x−θ00
+
p
(x)
+
Ψ
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
ε

Clearly, a speculator never attacks at r whenever µ (D = 1|x, r) < r/π. Define
´
´ −1
³
³

∗
x−θ00
Ψ
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
ε
´
³
´ = 1 +
´ .
³
³
F (x; θ∗ , θ00 ) ≡
∗
00
x−θ
x−θ
x−θ∗
+Ψ
1−Ψ
1−Ψ
ε
ε
ε

¢
¡
Note that F (x; θ ∗ , θ 00 ) is strictly decreasing in x, and let x
b θ∗ , θ00 solve
¡ ∗ 00 ¢
F x
b; θ , θ = r/π.

(8)

Since δ (x) ≥ 0 and p (x) ≥ 0, we have µ (D = 1|x, r) ≤ F (x; θ∗ , θ00 ) for all x. It follows that,
¢
¢
¡ ∗ 00 ¢
¡
¡
b; θ , θ = r/π, and therefore any
whenever x > x
b θ∗ , θ00 , µ (D = 1|x, r) ≤ F x; θ∗ , θ00 < F x
¡ ∗ 00 ¢
speculator with x > x
b θ , θ does not attack in equilibrium. That is, in any equilibrium in

which r∗ is played, speculators are necessarily at most as aggressive as they would be if it were

the case that D(θ) = 1 for all θ < θ ∗ and r(θ) = r∗ for all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ00 ]. This is intuitive for (i)

a positive probability that D(θ) = 0 for some θ < θ∗ reduces the incentives to attack for every x,

and (ii) a positive probability that r(θ) = r for some θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ00 ] reduces the probability that the

observation of r signals devaluation and thereforeÃalso
! incentives to attack conditional
¡ reduces
¢ the
x
b θ∗ , θ00 − θ
on r and x. It follows that for any θ, α (θ, r) ≤ Ψ
. From the indiﬀerence condition
ε
³ ∗ 00 00 ´
¡
¢
for θ00 , we have that α θ00 , r = C (r∗ ) . Since C (r∗ ) = θ∗ , it follows that θ∗ ≤ Ψ xb(θ ,θε )−θ .

From the indiﬀerence conditions of Proposition (3), and using x
b (θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ) = x∗ , we also have that
³ ∗ ∗∗ ∗∗ ´
. Hence, in any equilibrium in which r∗ is played, θ00 must satisfy
θ∗ = Ψ xb(θ ,θ ε )−θ
¢
¡
b θ∗ , θ00 − θ00 .
x
b (θ ∗ , θ ∗∗ ) − θ∗∗ ≤ x

¢
¡
From (8), x
b θ∗ , θ 00 − θ00 is decreasing in θ00 , and hence we conclude that θ00 ≤ θ∗∗ . ¤

Recall that θ∗ ≤ θ∗∗ if and only if r∗ ≤ re ≡ C −1 (θM S ) . For any r∗ > re, Lemma 2 implies

θ00 ≤ θ∗∗ < θ ∗ ≤ θ0 , which is a contradiction, since by definition θ0 ≤ θ00 . Therefore, there exists no

r, r]. On the other hand, in any robust equilibrium where r∗ ∈ (r, re]
robust equilibrium with r∗ ∈ (e
is played, necessarily θ∗ ≤ θ0 ≤ θ00 ≤ θ ∗∗ .

28

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

Next, we show, by iterated deletion of strictly dominated strategies, that in any robust equilibrium in which r∗ is played, devaluation occurs if and only if θ < θ ∗ , which in turn implies that
θ0 = θ∗ .
Lemma 3. D(θ) = 1 for all θ < θ∗ , D(θ) = 0 for all θ > θ∗ , and θ0 = θ ∗ .
Proof. Given an arbitrary equilibrium policy r(θ), we consider the continuation game that follows
£
¤
£
¤
r = r and construct the iterated deletion mapping T : θ, θ 0 → θ, θ0 as follows. Take any
¤
£
e
θ ∈ θ, θ0 and let
³
´
e
θ
1 − Ψ x−
ε
´
³
´.
³
G(x; e
θ) ≡
∗
x−θ00
+
p
(x)
+
Ψ
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
ε

G(x; e
θ) thus represents the probability of θ < e
θ, conditional on x and r. Note that limx→−∞ p(x) =
limx→+∞ p(x) = 0 and therefore limx→−∞ G(x; e
θ) = 1 and limx→+∞ G(x; e
θ) = 0. It follows that,

e=x
e(e
θ) be the
for every e
θ, there is at least one solution to the equation G(x; e
θ) = r/π. Then let x
e
e
e
e
e
e
lowest solution to this equation,
e(θ) ≡ min{x | G(x; θ) = r/π}, and define θ = θ(e
θ) as the
¶ i.e. x
µ
´
³
e
e
e
θ
> θ for
e and Ψ xe−θ
. Note that G(x; e
θ) > r/π for every x < x
unique solution to e
θ = Ψ xe−
ε
ε

e
every θ < e
θ. That is, if all θ < e
θ are expected to devalue, all x < x
e necessarily find it optimal to
e
attack, which in turn implies that any θ < e
θ necessarily devalues, unless θ is playing r∗ rather than
r, which happens in equilibrium only if θ ≥ θ 0 . The iterated deletion operator T is thus defined by
¾
½
³ ´
0 e
e
e
T θ ≡ min θ , θ .

e
Observe that G is strictly increasing in e
θ, implying that x
e and therefore e
θ are also strictly increasing
£
¤
θ ∈ θ, θ0 . Obviously, T is
in e
θ.20 We conclude that the mapping T is weakly increasing for all e

also bounded above by θ0 . Finally, note that θ∗ ≤ θ 0 ≤ θ∗∗ < ∞ and θ∗ ≤ θ MS , but so far we have

ruled out neither θ 0 ≤ θM S , nor θ0 > θM S .

Next, we compare T with the iterated deletion operator of the Morris-Shin game without

signaling (or, equivalently, of the continuation game at r when the pooling equilibrium is played).
£ ¤
£ ¤
b
b
bb
This operator, F : θ, θ → θ, θ , is defined by F(b
θ) =µ b
θ, where
x
b = x
b(b
θ) and b
θ = b
θ(θ) are
¶
´
³
b
b
b
b
θ
θ
= r/π and b
. F has a unique fixed point at
θ = Ψ xb−
the unique solutions to 1 − Ψ xb−
ε
ε

e
In general, x
e and therefore e
θ need not be continuous in e
θ. Continuity is ensured when Ψ satisfies the MLRP,
in which case G is strictly decreasing in x, implying that G(x, e
θ) = r/π has a unique solution and this solution is
e
continuously increasing in θ. All we need, however, is monotonicity of the lowest solution, which is true for any Ψ.
20

Coordination and Policy Traps

29

b
b
θ < F(b
θ) < θ MS whenever b
θ ∈ [θ, θ M S ) and b
θ > F(b
θ) > θM S
θ = b
θ = θM S , and satisfies b
¡ x−θ ¢
b
e(θ) > x
b(θ)
whenever θ ∈ (θM S , θ]. Moreover, since G(x; θ) > 1 − Ψ ε for all x and θ, we have x
e
b
e
and therefore e
θ(θ) > b
θ(θ). We conclude that, for any θ ∈ [θ, θ0 ], either e
θ(θ) ≥ θ0 , in which case
e
T (θ) = θ0 , or e
θ(θ) < θ 0 , in which case T (θ) > F(θ).
© ª∞
Finally, we consider the sequence θk k=1 , where θ1 = θ and θk+1 = T (θ k ) for all k ≥ 1. This

sequence represents iterated deletion of dominated strategies starting from θ. Since this sequence

is monotone and bounded above by θ0 , it necessarily converges to some limit θ∞ ≤ θ 0 . This limit

must be a fixed point of T , that is, θ∞ = T (θ∞ ). We first prove that either θ∞ = θ0 , or θ∞ > θM S .
e ∞
θ(θ ) < θ0 . If it were the case that θ∞ ≤ θM S , we
Suppose θ∞ < θ 0 . This can be true only if e

would then have T (θ∞ ) > F(θ∞ ) ≥ θ∞ , which contradicts the assumption that θ ∞ is a fixed point

for T (·). Therefore, θ∞ = θ0 whenever θ0 ≤ θM S , whereas θ∞ > θ MS whenever θ0 > θ MS . We
next prove that θ∞ = θ 0 = θ∗ . Suppose that θ0 > θ∗ . If θ0 ≤ θM S , then θ ∞ = θ0 > θ∗ and all

θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ0 ) would devalue in equilibrium. If instead θ0 > θM S , then θ ∞ > θM S ≥ θ∗ and again all

θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∞ ) would devalue in equilibrium. But either case is impossible as any θ > θ∗ can ensure

no devaluation and a positive payoﬀ by setting r∗ . Therefore, it is necessarily the case that θ 0 = θ∗ .
This also implies that θ0 ≤ θM S and therefore θ∞ = θ0 = θ∗ , which completes the proof of this
lemma. ¤

We next show that, if the posterior beliefs given r are monotonic in x, then speculators follow
a threshold strategy and therefore the size of an attack is decreasing in the fundamentals θ. This
in turns implies that the bank sets r∗ for all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ].
Lemma 4.

If in equilibrium µ(θ ≤ θ∗ |x, r) is monotonic in x, then necessarily α(θ, r) is strictly

decreasing in θ, in which case θ00 = θ∗∗ , and r(θ) = r∗ for all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ].

Proof. Following Lemma 3, the probability of devaluation conditional on x and r is given by
´
³
∗
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
´
³
´,
³
µ (D = 1|x, r) = µ(θ ≤ θ∗ |x, r) = G(x; θ∗ ) ≡
x−θ∗
x−θ00
+
p
(x)
+
Ψ
1−Ψ
ε
ε

with limx→−∞ G(x; θ ∗ ) = 1 and limx→+∞ G(x; θ∗ ) = 0. When G(x, θ∗ ) is monotonic in x, there
is a unique x0 such that G(x0 ; θ∗ ) = r/π and thus speculators follow a threshold strategy with
a(x, r) = 1 if x < x0 and a(x, r) = 0 if x > x0 . It follows that α(θ, r) is strictly decreasing in θ and,
since θ00 solves α(θ00 , r) = C(r∗ ), all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ00 ] necessarily set r∗ . But then, p (x) = 0 for any x, and
³ ∗ 00 ´
³ ∗ 00 00 ´
¢
¡
= C(r∗ ),
b θ∗ , θ00 , implying that α(θ, r) = Ψ xb(θ ,θε )−θ . Thus, θ00 solves Ψ xb(θ ,θε )−θ
x0 = x

30

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

¢
¡
b θ∗ , θ00 − θ00 . From the monotonicity of x
b (θ∗ , θ) − θ
and from Proposition (3), x
b (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ) − θ ∗∗ = x

established in Lemma 2, it follows that θ00 = θ∗∗ . ¤

The above result presumed monotonicity of the posterior µ(θ ≤ θ ∗ |x, r) in x. Since all θ ≤ θ ∗

set r, this is likely to be the case for a wide range of noise structures. In the next lemma, we prove
this is necessarily the case at least when the noise ξ follows a distribution which satisfies the MLRP.
Lemma 5. If Ψ satisfies the MLRP, then µ(θ ≤ θ ∗ |x, r) is monotonic in x.
´ R
³
00
∞ 1 ¡ x−θ ¢
I (θ) dθ,
=
Proof. Let I(θ) be the probability that θ sets r. Using p (x) + Ψ x−θ
ε
ε
θ∗ ε ψ

we have that

´
³
x−θ∗
1
−
Ψ
ε
G(x; θ )
,
= R ∞ 1 ¡ x−θ ¢
1 − G(x; θ∗ )
I
(θ)
dθ
∗ εψ
ε
θ
∗

and therefore
³
´
G(x;θ∗ )
d 1−G(x;θ
∗
)
dx

= R∞
θ∗

h
³
³
´
´i ¡R
¢
∗
∞ 1 ¡ x−θ ¢
x−θ∗
d
1
−
Ψ
− 1ε ψ x−θ
I (θ) dθ
ε
ε
dx
ε
θ∗ ε ψ
¡ x−θ ¢
−
.
£R ∞ 1 ¡ x−θ ¢
¤2
1
I (θ) dθ
ψ
I (θ) dθ
∗
εψ
ε
θ

It follows that dG(x; θ ∗ )/dx ≤ 0 if and only if
R θ∗

¡

¢

1 0 x−θ
dθ
−∞ ε2 ψ
ε
R θ∗ 1 ¡ x−θ ¢
dθ
−∞ ε ψ
ε

−

R∞

¡

¢

ε

ε

1 0 x−θ
I (θ) dθ
∗
2ψ
ε
Rθ ∞ε1 ¡ x−θ
¢
I (θ) dθ
θ∗ ε ψ
ε

≤ 0.

Using the fact that I (θ) = 1 for all θ ≤ θ∗ , the above is equivalent to
"
#
"
#
¡
¢¯
¡
¢¯
1 0 x−θ ¯
1 0 x−θ ¯
¯
¯
∗
∗
εψ
ε
εψ
ε
¡
¡ x−θ ¢ ¯ θ > θ , x, r ≤ 0,
¢ ¯ θ ≤ θ , x, r − Eθ
Eθ
¯
¯
ψ x−θ
ψ
ε
ε

which holds true if ψ 0 /ψ is monotone decreasing. ¤

Combining Lemmas 1, 2, and 3, we conclude that any robust equilibrium belongs necessarily
to either (a) or (b) in Theorem 1. If, in addition, Ψ satisfies the MLRP, Lemmas 4 and 5 imply that
any equilibrium in (b) is a two-threshold equilibrium, which completes the proof of the theorem. ¥

Proof of Proposition 5.

Take any random variable r∗ with compact support R∗ ⊆ (r, re) and

distribution Φ. We want to show that for ε suﬃciently small, there exist thresholds x∗ , θ∗ ∈ (θ, θM S ),
and θ∗∗ ∈ (θ∗ , θ), a system of beliefs µ, and a robust equilibrium such that: (i) The bank follows

/ [θ∗ , θ ∗∗ ], and r(θ) ∈ R∗ with r(θ) non-decreasing
a non-monotonic policy with r(θ) = r for θ ∈

in θ for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ]. (ii) Whenever r < r∗ , speculators attack if and only if x < x∗ ; whenever

Coordination and Policy Traps

31

r ∈ [r∗ , r∗ ), they attack if and only if x < x; and whenever r ≥ r∗ , they attack if and only if

x < x. (iii) Devaluation occurs with probability D(θ) = 1 for θ < θ∗ , with probability D(θ) < 1
and non-increasing in θ for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], and with probability D(θ) = 0 for θ > θ∗∗ .

The proof is in five steps: Steps 1 and 2 characterize the thresholds θ∗ , θ∗∗ , and x∗ ; Step 3

examines the behavior of the bank; Step 4 examines the beliefs and the strategy of the speculators;
Step 5 establishes robustness in the sense of Definition 2.
Step 1. Let r∗ ≡ min R∗ > r and r∗ ≡ max R∗ < re. Define



if θ < θ,
max {−C(r)}


r∈[r∗ ,r∗ ]


b (θ) ≡
max {θΦ(r) − C(r)}
if θ ∈ [θ, θ],
U
r∈[r∗ ,r∗ ]


©
¡ x−θ ¢
ª



θ
−
(1
−
Φ(r))Ψ
−
C(r)
if θ > θ,
 max
ε
∗ ∗
r∈[r ,r ]

and rb(θ) as the corresponding arg max . Note that maximizing over [r∗ , r∗ ] is equivalent to maximizb
ing over R∗ as necessarily rb(θ) ∈ R∗ . Note also that U(θ)
is non-decreasing for all θ, and strictly
b (θ) = −C(r∗ ) < 0 and U
b (θM S ) ≥ θ MS − C(r∗ ) >
b (θ) > −C(r∗ ). Moreover, U
increasing whenever U
b (θ ∗ ) = 0, U
b (θ) < 0 for
r) = 0. Therefore, there exists a unique θ∗ ∈ (θ, θ MS ) such that U
θM S − C(e
b (θ) > 0 for all θ > θ∗ .
all θ < θ∗ , and U

Step 2.

b (θ; θ∗ ) and v(θ; θ∗ ) as follows
For any θ ≥ θ∗ , define the functions x
³
´
∗
¶
µ
1 − Ψ xb−θ
ε
r
x
b (θ; θ∗ ) − θ
∗
´
³
´=
³
and v(θ; θ ) = θ − Ψ
.
∗
x
b−θ
π
ε
+
Ψ
1 − Ψ xb−θ
ε
ε

Note that db
x (θ; θ∗ ) /dθ ∈ (0, 1) and therefore dv(θ; θ ∗ )/dθ > 1. Note also that for any θ > θ∗ ,
³
´
´
³
∗
∗
Ψ xb(θ;θε )−θ → 0 as ε → 0. To see this, suppose instead that limε→0 Ψ xb(θ;θε )−θ = ω for some
ω > 0. This can be true only if limε→0 x
b (θ; θ∗ ) ≥ θ, in which case θ > θ∗ implies limε→0 x
b (θ; θ∗ ) > θ ∗
´
³
∗
∗
and therefore limε→0 Ψ xb(θ;θε )−θ = 1. But then
lim




ε→0 

1−Ψ

³

1−Ψ

³

x
b(θ;θ∗ )−θ∗
ε

x
b(θ;θ∗ )−θ∗
ε

´

+Ψ

³

´

x
b(θ;θ∗ )−θ
ε

´





=

0
r
=0< ,
0+ω
π

b (θ). From the envelope
which is a contradiction. Consider now the function g(θ) = v(θ; θ∗ ) − U
b (θ)/∂θ is bounded above by 1 for any θ ≤ θ and hence g(θ) is strictly increasing in θ
theorem, ∂ U
³ ∗ ∗ ∗´
over this range. Moreover, by definition of x
b (θ; θ∗ ) , we have that Ψ xb(θ ;θε )−θ = π−r
π = θM S and
∗ ∗
∗
∗
∗
b (θ ) = 0, we conclude that g(θ∗ ) < 0. Next,
therefore v(θ ; θ ) = θ − θM S . Since θ < θM S and U

32

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

note that for any θ ≤ θ, θ∗ and rb(·) are independent of ε, whereas Ψ

³

x
b(θ;θ∗ )−θ
ε

´

→ 0 as ε → 0 for

∗
every θ > θ∗ . (See µ
the argument
r(θ)) > 0, it follows that there exists
¶ above). Since θ > θ and C(b
∗
x
b(θ;θ )−θ
b (θ)
< C(b
r(θ)) whenever ε < ε. But then v(θ; θ∗ ) > θ − C(b
ε > 0 such that Ψ
r(θ)) ≥ U
ε

and therefore g(θ) > 0. We conclude that, for ε < ε, there exists a unique θ∗∗ ∈ (θ ∗ , θ) such that

g(θ∗∗ ) = 0, g(θ) < 0 for θ < θ∗∗ , and g(θ) > 0 for θ > θ∗∗ . Moreover, note that, as ε → 0,
b (θ) for every θ > θ∗ ; it follows that θ ∗∗ → θ∗ as ε → 0. Next, let
v(θ; θ∗ ) → θ > U
¶
µ ∗
x −θ
∗
∗∗ ∗
∗
e
x ≡x
.
b (θ ; θ ) and U (θ; θ ) ≡ θ − Ψ
ε

e (θ; θ ∗ ) with v(θ; θ∗ ). That x
e (θ ∗∗ ; θ∗ ) = v(θ∗∗ ; θ∗ ), while the
Compare now U
b (θ∗∗ ; θ∗ ) = x∗ implies U
e (θ; θ∗ ) < v(θ; θ∗ ) for all θ < θ∗∗ and U
e (θ; θ∗ ) > v(θ; θ∗ )
fact that x
b (θ; θ∗ ) is increasing in θ implies U
for all θ > θ∗∗ . Combining this result with the properties of the function g(θ), we conclude that
b (θ) for all θ < θ∗∗ , U
e (θ; θ∗ ) = v(θ; θ∗ ) = U
b (θ) at θ = θ∗∗ , and U
e (θ; θ∗ ) >
e (θ; θ∗ ) < v(θ; θ∗ ) < U
U
b
e (b
for all θ > θ∗∗ . Finally, let b
θ be the unique solution to U
θ; θ∗ ) = 0 and note that
v(θ; θ∗ ) > U(θ)

b
e (θ∗∗ ; θ∗ ) > 0 > U
e (θ∗ ; θ∗ ).
θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ∗∗ ), since U
Step 3.

Consider now the behavior of the bank. Given the strategy of the speculators, the bank

prefers r to any r < r∗ , and r∗ to any r > r∗ . Furthermore, by definition, rb(θ) dominates any

r ∈ [r∗ , r∗ ]. We thus need to compare only the payoﬀ from playing rb(θ) with that from playing
b (θ), while playing r yields U (θ) = max{0, U
e (θ; θ∗ )}. Note that U (θ) = 0
r. Playing rb(θ) yields U
e (θ) > 0 if θ > b
b (θ) < 0 = U (θ) for all
if θ ≤ b
θ and U (θ) = U
θ ∈ (θ∗ , θ ∗∗ ). It follows that U

b (θ) > 0 = U (θ) for all θ ∈ (θ∗ , b
b (θ) > U
e (θ) = U (θ) > 0 for all θ ∈ (b
θ], U
θ, θ∗∗ ), and
θ < θ∗, U
e (θ) > U
b (θ) for all θ > θ ∗∗ . Therefore, it is indeed optimal for the bank to play rb(θ)
U (θ) = U
whenever θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] and r otherwise. The resulting probability of devaluation is D(θ) = 1 for

r(θ)) ∈ [0, 1) for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], and D(θ) = 0 for θ > θ∗∗ . Since rb is non-decreasing,
θ < θ ∗ , D(θ) = Φ (b

D is non-increasing in the range [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ].

Consider next the behavior of the speculators. For any r < r∗ , devaluation occurs if and
only if θ < b
θ. In equilibrium, at r = r, the probability of devaluation is given by
´
³
∗
1 − Ψ x−θ
ε
´
³
´.
³
µ(θ < b
θ|x, r) = µ (θ < θ∗ |x, r) =
x−θ∗
x−θ∗∗
+
Ψ
1−Ψ
ε
ε
Step 4.

By construction, x∗ solves πµ(θ < b
θ|x∗ , r) = r, and since µ(θ < b
θ|x, r) is decreasing in x, attacking

the currency if and only if x < x∗ is indeed optimal. For any out-of-equilibrium r < r∗ , we consider

Coordination and Policy Traps

33

beliefs µ such that µ(θ < b
θ|x, r) is non-increasing in x and πµ(θ < b
θ|x, r) = r at x = x∗ . For

any r ≥ r∗ , we let µ(θ ∈ (θ, θ)|x, r) = 1 for all x ∈ [x, x], µ(θ < θ|x, r) = 1 for x < x, and

µ(θ > θ|x, r) = 1 for x > x. In particular, for any r ∈ r(Θ) with r ≥ r∗ , µ(θ ∈ θ−1 (r)|x, r) = 1
for all x such that Θ(x) ∩ θ−1 (r) 6= ∅, where θ−1 (r) = {θ : r(θ) = r} . In addition, for any outof-equilibrium r, if r is not dominated in equilibrium by r(θ) for some θ ∈ Θ(x), then we further

restrict µ to satisfy µ(θ|x, r) = 0 for all θ ∈ Θ(x) such that θ − C(r) < U (θ). These beliefs satisfy
(4), as well as µ ∈ M(r); and given these beliefs, the strategy of the speculators is sequentially
optimal for any r and x.

Finally, consider robustness. Assume Ψ has bounded support, let ε be suﬃciently small,
³ ∗ ∗´
and construct the corresponding sunspot equilibrium as above. Let α∗ ≡ α(θ∗ , r) = Ψ x −θ
ε
³ ∗ ∗∗ ´
∗∗
∗
x −θ
∗∗
∗∗
∗
−1
and α ≡ α(θ , r) = Ψ
and note that 0 < α < α < 1. Similarly, let ξ ≡ Ψ (α∗ )
ε
Step 5.

and ξ ∗∗ ≡ Ψ−1 (α∗∗ ) and note that ξ ∗∗ < ξ ∗ . Hence, one can always find a k > 0 such that

0 < Ψ(ξ ∗∗ − k) < Ψ(ξ ∗ + k) < 1, and a c.d.f. F with unbounded support such that F (ξ) = Ψ(ξ)
for all ξ ∈ [ξ ∗∗ − k, ξ ∗ + k], F (ξ) > Ψ(ξ) for all ξ < ξ ∗∗ − k, and F (ξ) < Ψ(ξ) for all ξ > ξ ∗ + k.

We argue that the same r(θ) and D(θ) that is sustained when the noise distribution is Ψ, can
b , rb, x
e , and U
also be sustained when the distribution is F. Indeed, consider the functions U
b, v, g, U
b (θ) and rb(θ) are independent of the noise
defined above, where Ψ is replaced with F. Note that U
b (θ∗ ) = 0. By construction
distribution for all θ ≤ θ. It follows that the same θ∗ continues to solve U

of F , the functions x
b (θ; θ∗ ) , v(θ; θ ∗ ), and g(θ) remain the same in a neighborhood of θ∗∗ . It follows
e (θ; θ ∗ ) and
b (θ ∗∗ ; θ∗ ) . But then U
that the same θ∗∗ and x∗ continue to solve g(θ∗∗ ) = 0 and x∗ = x

b (θ) is also the same for all θ < θ, and
U (θ) also remain the same in a neighborhood of θ ∗∗ . Since U
e (θ∗∗ ; θ∗ ) = U
b (θ∗∗ ). Like in Step 3 above, the latter ensures that the
θ∗∗ < θ, we infer U (θ∗∗ ) = U
optimal policy is r(θ) = rb(θ) for all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] and r(θ) = r otherwise. Since rb(θ) is also the
same for all θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ], this proves that the same policy r(θ) can be sustained with either Ψ or F.

Similarly, all θ < θ∗ continue to devalue with certainty and all θ > θ∗∗ continue to maintain the peg

with certainty, while for θ ∈ [θ∗ , θ∗∗ ] the probability of devaluation is D(θ) = Φ(b
r(θ)). Therefore,

the same devaluation probability D(θ) can also be sustained with either Ψ or F . A symmetric
argument applies if Ψ is unbounded. With ξ ∗ and ξ ∗∗ defined as above, take an arbitrary k > 0

and construct F so that F has bounded support [ξ ∗∗ − 2k, ξ ∗ + 2k] and satisfies F (ξ) = Ψ(ξ) for

all ξ ∈ [ξ ∗∗ − k, ξ ∗ + k], F (ξ) < Ψ(ξ) for all ξ < ξ ∗∗ − k, and F (ξ) > Ψ(ξ) for all ξ > ξ ∗∗ − k. It

follows that F sustains the same r(θ) and D(θ) as Ψ. We conclude that the sunspot equilibria of
Proposition 5 are robust. ¥

34

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

References
[1] Albanesi, Stefania, V.V. Chari, and Lawrence Christiano, (2002), “Expectation Traps and
Monetary Policy,” NBER working paper 8912.
[2] Angeletos, George-Marios, and Laurent Calvet (2003), “Idiosyncratic Production Risk,
Growth, and the Business Cycle,” NBER working paper.
[3] Azariadis, Costas (1981), “Self-fulfilling Prophecies,” Journal of Economic Theory 25, 380-96.
[4] Benhabib, Jess, and Roger Farmer (1994), “Indeterminacy and Increasing Returns,” Journal
of Economic Theory 63, 19-41.
[5] Bernanke, Ben, and Mark Gertler (1989), “Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations,” American Economic Review 79, 14-31.
[6] Bryant, John (1983), “A Simple Rational Expectations Keynes-Type Model,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 98, 3, 525-28.
[7] Calvo, G. (1988), “Servicing the Public Debt: the Role of Expectations.” American Economic
Review, 78(4), 647-661.
[8] Carlsson, Hans, and Eric van Damme (1993), “Global Games and Equilibrium Selection,”
Econometrica 61, 5, 989-1018.
[9] Chamley, Christophe (1999), “Coordinating Regime Switches,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 114, 3, 869-905.
[10] Chari, V.V., Lawrence Christiano, and Martin Eichenbaum (1998), “Expectation Traps and
Discretion,” Journal of Economic Theory 81, 2, 462-92.
[11] Chari, V.V., and Patrick Kehoe (2003a), “Hot Money,” Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
staﬀ report 228.
[12] Chari, V.V., and Patrick Kehoe (2003b), “Financial Crises as Herds,” Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis working paper 600.
[13] Cho, In-Koo, and David Kreps (1987), “Signaling Games and Stable Equilibria,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics 102, 2, 179-221.

Coordination and Policy Traps

35

[14] Cole, Harold, and Timothy Kehoe (1996), “Self-fulfilling Debt Crises,” Federal Reserve Bank
of Minneapolis staﬀ report 211.
[15] Cooper, Russell (1998), Coordination Games, Complementarities and Macroeconomics, Cambridge University Press.
[16] Diamond, Douglas, and Philip Dybvig (1983), “Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity,”
Journal of Political Economy 91, 401-19.
[17] Diamond, Peter (1982), “Aggregate Demand Management in Search Equilibrium,” Journal of
Political Economy 90, 5, 881-94.
[18] Drazen, Alan (2001), “Interest Rate Defense Against Speculative Attack as a Signal: A
Primer,” University of Maryland mimeo.
[19] Feltovich, Nick, Rick Harbaugh, and Ted To (2002), “Too Cool for School? Signaling and
Countersignaling,” Rand Journal of Economics 33, 630-649.
[20] Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984), “Gold Monetization and Gold Discipline,” Journal of
Political Economy 92, 1, 90-107.
[21] Freixas, Xavier, and Jean-Charles Rochet (1997), Microeconomics of Banking, Cambridge and
London: MIT Press.
[22] Hellwig, Christian (2002), “Public Information, Private Information and the Multiplicity of
Equilibria in Coordination Games,” Journal of Economic Theory, 107, 191-222.
[23] Judd, Kenneth, (1985) “The Law of Large Numbers with a Continuum of IID Random Variables,” Journal of Economic Theory 35, 19-25.
[24] Kajii A. and S. Morris (1997), “Common p-beliefs: The General Case,” Games and Economic
Behavior, 18, 73-82.
[25] Kiyotaki, Nobuhiro, and John Moore (1997), “Credit Cycles,” Journal of Political Economy
105, 211-248.
[26] Kraay, Aart (2003), “Do High Interest Rates Defend Currencies During Speculative Attack?”,
Journal of International Economics 29, 297-321.

36

G.M. Angeletos, C. Hellwig and A. Pavan

[27] Milgrom, Paul, and John Roberts (1990), “Rationalizability, Learning and Equilibrium in
Games with Strategic Complementarities,” Econometrica, 58, 1255-1277.
[28] Monderer, D. and D. Samet (1989), “Approximating Common Knowledge with Common Beliefs,” Games and Economic Behavior, 1, 170-190.
[29] Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (1998), “Unique Equilibrium in a Model of Self-Fulfilling
Currency Attacks”, American Economic Review, 88, 3, 587-597.
[30] Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2000), “Rethinking Multiple Equilibria in Macroeconomics,” NBER Macro Annual.
[31] Morris, Stephen and Hyun Song Shin (2001), “Global Games - Theory and Applications,”
in Advances in Economics and Econometrics, 8th World Congress of the Econometric Society
(M. Dewatripont, L. Hansen, and S. Turnovsky, eds.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge,
UK.
[32] Murphy, Kevin M., Andrei Shleifer, and Robert Vishny (1989), “Industrialization and the Big
Push,” Journal of Political Economy 97, 5, 1003-26.
[33] Obstfeld, Maurice (1986), “Rational and Self-Fulfilling Balance-of-Payments Crises”, American
Economic Review 76, 1, 72-81.
[34] Obstfeld, Maurice (1996), “Models of Currency Crises with Self-Fulfilling Features,” European
Economic Review 40, 3-5, 1037-47.
[35] Postlewaite, Andrew, and Xavier Vives (1987), “Bank Runs as an Equilibrium Phenomenon,”
Journal of Political Economy 95, 3, 485-91.
[36] Vives, Xavier (1999), Oligopoly Pricing: Old Ideas and New Tools, MIT Press.

θ

α(θ,r)

C( r )
C(r')

θ

θ'

θMS

θ''

θ

θ

Figure 1
There exists an inactive policy equilibrium in which the central bank sets r for all θ, the size of the
attack is α(θ,r), and devaluation occurs if and only if θ < θMS. Any r'∈(r, r ] is dominated in
equilibrium by r if and only if C(r') > θ or C(r') > α(θ,r), that is, if and only if θ ∉ [θ',θ'']. It follows
that, for any θ∈[θ',θ''], if the central bank deviates from r to r', the market “learns” that θ∈[θ',θ''].
Speculators then coordinate on the same behavior as when r = r, thus eliminating any incentive for
the bank to raise the interest rate.

r*

r(θ)
r
θ∗

θ

θ∗∗

θ

θ

θ

α(θ,r)

C(r*)

θ

θ∗

θ̂

θ∗∗

θ

θ

Figure 2
For each r*∈ (r, r ], there is a two-threshold equilibrium in which the interest rate is r(θ) = r* if
θ ∈ [θ*, θ**] and r(θ) = r otherwise, and in which devaluation occurs if and only if θ < θ*. When the
central bank raises the interest rate at r*, the market “learns” that θ ∈ [θ*, θ**] and coordinates on no
attack. When instead the bank sets r, speculators attack if and only if their signal is sufficiently low, in
which case the size of the attack is decreasing in θ. Ιt follows that it is optimal for the central bank to
raise the interest rate at r* if and only if C(r*) ≤ θ and C(r*) ≤ α(θ,r), that is, if and only if θ ∈ [θ*, θ**].

