                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                  HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVES ON RACIAL DIFFERENCES
                        IN SCHOOLING IN THE UNITED STATES

                                           William J. Collins
                                           Robert A. Margo

                                         Working Paper 9770
                                 http://www.nber.org/papers/w9770


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




This paper is a revision of one prepared for presentation at the Bush School, Texas A&M University, March
2003. Comments from participants at the Bush School are gratefully acknowledged. A future version of this
paper will appear as a chapter in the E. Hanushek and F. Welch, eds. Handbook of the Economics of
Education. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by William J. Collins and Robert A. Margo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.
Historical Perspectives on Racial Differences in Schooling in the United States
William J. Collins and Robert A. Margo
NBER Working Paper No. 9770
June 2003
JEL No. I2, J7, N31, N32

                                            ABSTRACT

African-Americans entered the post-Civil War era with extremely low levels of exposure to
schooling. Relying primarily on micro-level census data, we describe racial differences in literacy
rates, school attendance, years of educational attainment, age-in-grade distributions, spending per

pupil, and returns to literacy since emancipation, with emphasis on the pre-1960 period. The
overwhelming theme is one of educational convergence, despite overt discrimination for much of

the period studied, and subject to several qualifications. We interpret this theme in light of a simple
model of educational attainment.


William J. Collins                                     Robert A. Margo
Department of Economics                                Department of Economics
Box 1819-B                                             412 Calhoun
Vanderbilt University                                  Vanderbilt University
Nashville, TN 37235                                    Nasville, TN 37235
and NBER                                               and NBER
william.collins@vanderbilt.edu                         robert.a.margo@vanderbilt.edu
1. Introduction


       In the United States, gaps in average economic outcomes between African Americans
and white Americans have always been quantitatively significant, and racial disparities in
educational opportunities and attainment have always been correlated with the gaps in economic
outcomes. Consider the standard semi-log model of earnings


{eq. 1}: Ln Y = a + bS + e


where Y = earnings, S = years of schooling, a and b are coefficients, and e is a random error term
with a zero mean. Let W stand for whites and AA for African Americans. It is well known (see
Oaxaca 1973) that at the sample means,


{eq. 2}: Ln YW – Ln YAA = bW(SW – SAA) + SAA(bW – bAA).


The first term on the right hand side of equation (2), bW(SW – SAA), is the portion of the racial
difference in log earnings that is accounted for by racial differences in schooling. The second
term, SAA(bW – bAA), is the portion of racial difference in log earnings that is accounted for by
racial differences in the b’s, the schooling coefficients. Differences in the schooling coefficients
may exist because of racial differences in the quality of schooling, among many other factors,
including racial discrimination in the labor market. This “decomposition” of the mean racial
difference in log earnings is not unique, and the phrase “accounted for” in the previous sentences
cannot be interpreted in strictly causal (or “counterfactual”) terms without additional
assumptions. However, equation (2) helps motivate economists’ study of racial differences in
schooling because such differences, quantitatively speaking, do account for significant portions
of mean racial differences in earnings and other economic outcomes.
       Children do not choose their own parents and typically have little or no say over where
they are raised. However, where and by whom they are raised matters a great deal in
determining the quantity and quality of schooling that they receive. Each generation’s schooling
is shaped by the constraints and incentives faced by previous generations. History matters, and
in the case of African Americans, it matters very much, indeed.



                                                 1
        In this chapter we present an overview of the history of racial differences in schooling in
the United States. We present basic data on literacy, school attendance, educational attainment,
various measures of school quality, and the returns to schooling. Then, in the context of a simple
model of schooling attainment, we interpret the fundamental trends in an “analytic narrative” that
illuminates change over time. Although some the data presented in the tables carry the story to
the present day, the bulk of the evidence and the narrative focuses on the period before 1954, the
year of the U.S. Supreme Court’s decision in Brown v. Board of Education.
        Central to the narrative is a theme of convergence. Conditions inherited from slavery
were such that black children in the immediate aftermath of the Civil War faced many obstacles
in acquiring education. Society and its educational institutions were overtly racist, and the
negative implications for black children’s schooling were significant. Yet, despite the
impediments placed in their way, successive generations of black children managed to narrow
racial gaps in schooling. The pace of change was not constant, however, and on occasion, there
were periods of short-run divergence. The long-term process of convergence, moreover, has yet
to fully run its course, and the remaining racial gaps in schooling has proven quite stubborn to
eliminate (see Neal 2004 in this volume).
        Although our focus is on the United States, many of the same issues arise in other “New
World” economies in which the “Peculiar Institution” of African slavery was established and
subsequently dismantled. More generally, economic differences between ethnic or racial groups
may be partly inherited from the distant past, in the sense that past institutions shaped initial
conditions adversely (from the perspective of one group versus another) and, for a variety of
reasons, convergence may be protracted. In all such cases, it is the task of the economist to
delineate the relevant institutions; measure, if possible, the “treatment effects”; and develop
models to explain the pace (or lack) of convergence.


2. Basic Statistics


        The decennial censuses are a basic source of information on the schooling of Americans.
Since 1850, every census has included at least one question pertaining to school attendance, and
at least one question pertaining to educational attainment. Before the Civil War, these questions
were asked only of the free population.



                                                  2
       Until 1940, the sole question on educational attainment pertained to self-reported literacy
(see below). Beginning in the 1940 census and continuing to the present, educational attainment
has been measured by “highest grade completed”. It is commonplace to equate highest grade
completed with “years of schooling”, although the two concepts are distinct. “Highest grade
completed” refers to the completion of a given body of work – a grade – whereas a “year of
schooling” means a period of time spent in school – a school year. Today, elementary and
secondary school is structured such that a student making acceptable progress can complete a
grade in a single school year, and a single school year is (generally) 180 days in length. Thus, in
particular, if a student completes one grade for each year of age, she will complete elementary
school eight years (eight grades) after entering the first grade. Four years later, she will have
graduated from high school (the twelfth grade).
       Historically, there was a much looser association between age and grade, particularly in
the South. Indeed, prior to World War One, many Southern schools, particularly schools
attended by blacks, were not “graded” per se (Margo 1986b). Later in the chapter we discuss the
implications of this phenomenon for interpreting historical trends in years of schooling.


2.1. Literacy


       From 1850 to 1930 the census inquired about “literacy” – specifically, whether an
individual could read and write. These questions could be answered in the affirmative if they
were true in any language, not just English. In view of the high rates of immigration, however,
several of the pre-1940 censuses also asked about English language skills if the person was
foreign born. It is important to note that the literacy questions were never asked of everyone, but
only of individuals who had reached a certain minimum age: 20 years of age before the Civil
War, and 10 years of age afterwards.
       Census data on literacy are inherently difficult to interpret for several reasons. The data
were self-reported: no objective test was given routinely by the census enumerator to determine
if the individual was telling the truth, or to determine precisely the level of reading and writing
skills. Thus, it is entirely possible that a census respondent in one household might consider a
particular individual to be literate whereas an individual with exactly the same level of literacy in
a second household might be deemed illiterate by that household’s respondent. Even if literacy
were defined in the same way by every respondent, a “0-1” indicator, by its very nature, cannot

                                                  3
capture the inherent complexity of reading and writing skills. One person could be deemed
literate by the census and yet able to write her name and little else, whereas another might be
capable of writing full sentences or paragraphs or more.
         Two data sources are available that shed some light on the relationship between literacy
and time spent in school. The first is contained in a survey of white women and children
working in North Carolina manufacturing in the early twentieth century.1 Individuals in the
survey were asked about the total number of months spent in school and whether they could read
or write. A cross-tab of literacy by months attended suggests a structural break around eighteen
months of schooling. Given the average length of the school year over the period of time that
persons in the survey would have attended school (roughly, six months), this suggests that three
“years of schooling” were sufficient to achieve basic literacy skills.
         A second survey of adults, conducted by the census just after World War Two, asked
about highest grade completed and literacy status (U.S. Bureau of the Census 1948). According
to this survey, illiteracy was close to universal (88 percent) among persons with no schooling
whatsoever. Among persons who had completed only the first grade, 82 percent were deemed
illiterate. Illiteracy fell sharply, however, with completion of the second and third grades.
         Judging from this evidence, an “illiterate” person was someone who had attended school
for a very short time, or more likely, had never attended school.2 Consequently, while illiteracy
is a (fairly) accurate indicator of the absence of formal schooling, literacy per se provides no
information other than that years of schooling exceeded the minimal level of exposure necessary
to be deemed “literate”. Many white sub-populations in the United States achieved this minimal
level of exposure to formal schooling by the middle of the nineteenth century and, for these sub-
populations, levels and trends in census literacy yield minimal insights about trends in
educational attainment. However, for African-Americans, changes over time in illiteracy
provide very useful evidence because, as will be shown, their illiteracy rates were very high in
the immediate aftermath of the Civil War, but began to fall rapidly thereafter.
         Table 1 shows cohort-specific illiteracy rates for African-Americans for various census
years over the interval 1870 to 1930. For most census years the rates are based on samples

1
  See Goldin (1990). The discussion in the text derives from Goldin’s unpublished work with the North Carolina
survey (personal communication).
2
   A child might become literate without having gone to school if there were literate individuals (for example, the
parents) in the household willing and capable to teach the child to read and write. Further, some children become
literate prior to attending school on a formal basis. In such cases, an association between literacy and school


                                                          4
drawn from the Integrated Public Use Microdata Series (IPUMS, Ruggles and Sobek 1997), but
IPUMS samples do not exist for 1890 or 1930. For the entire United States, reported in panel A,
we have added figures from the 1890 and 1930 published census volumes. Birth cohorts are
grouped into ten-year intervals (for example, 1840-49). Reading down a column gives the
illiteracy rates by cohort in the given census year. Reading across a row shows how the rate in a
particular cohort evolved over time. The figures in panel B pertain to southern-born blacks while
those in panel C pertain to non-southern born blacks. Table 2 repeats the computations for
whites, and table 3 shows racial differences (black – white).
        The pre-Civil War censuses only ascertained the literacy of free blacks. Thus, the 1870
census is the first to provide nationally representative evidence on the literacy status of African-
Americans. According to this 1870 census, fully 81 percent of African-Americans ages 10 and
older in the nation as a whole were illiterate. Illiteracy rates were far higher among those born in
the South than those born elsewhere. The national rate, therefore, was so high in 1870 for two
proximate reasons: most southern-born blacks were illiterate, and most blacks in 1870 were
southern born.
        The illiteracy rate of white Americans in 1870 was 8.5 percent. As for blacks, illiteracy
among whites was higher in the South, but the regional gap was far smaller, and in addition, the
geographic distribution of the white population across regions was far more uniform than that of
the black population.
        There are three reasons why illiteracy rates might decline as a cohort ages. To the extent
that acquisition of literacy occurs primarily because of school attendance, illiteracy rates will
decline as the cohort moves from the first age group (10-19) to the second age group (20-29).
Some adults may became literate beyond this age, possibly by attending school at night (or
Sunday school) or perhaps from literate children or other relatives. However, the more likely
reasons why illiteracy would continue to decline beyond age 30 are “educational creep” and
mortality bias. Educational creep occurs if illiterate adults claim to be literate. Mortality bias
occurs if literacy and longevity are positively correlated.
        Inspection of tables 1 and 2 reveals evidence of the first process just noted. For both
races, illiteracy rates consistently declined within cohorts between the first and second age
groups. However, in most cases, illiteracy rates did not decline much after age 30 as cohorts


attendance would not be causal. However, for the post-bellum period and, for much of this century, we believe that
the association is causal for African-Americans.
                                                        5
aged, suggesting that the second and third factors (creep and mortality bias) were of relatively
minor importance.
          Table 1 reveals that African-American illiteracy rates declined sharply after 1870, and
that this decline was driven primarily by the replacement of high-illiteracy older cohorts by low-
illiteracy young cohorts. It is clear, moreover, that this replacement effect was not in progress
prior to 1870. In that year, there was only a nine percentage point spread between the illiteracy
rates of the oldest (85 percent) and the youngest cohorts (76 percent). By 1900, the spread
between the two had increased to more than 40 percentage points (85 – 43 percent), and the flow
of better-educated African-Americans into the adult population was having a large impact on the
overall illiteracy rate.
          Decreases in illiteracy after 1870 were achieved by both southern and non-southern born
blacks. In absolute terms, the reductions in illiteracy were larger in magnitude for southern-born
blacks than non-southern born blacks, and thus the gap in illiteracy between the two groups
declined over time. But the process of decline seems to have been similar for both groups: high
illiteracy, older cohorts were replaced by low illiteracy, younger cohorts.
          The conventional interpretation of the downward trend in black illiteracy after 1870 is
that it represented a structural break from the past. Prior to the Civil War, the vast majority of
blacks were southern born and, as just noted, the vast majority of southern-born blacks were
slaves.
          Historians have used a variety of evidence to gauge the extent of slave literacy – for
example, the so-called “ex-slave narratives” conducted by the Works Progress Administration in
the middle of the 1930s, slave autobiographies from the era, and advertisements for runaway
slaves. The best current estimate is that, for the late antebellum period, perhaps 10 percent of
slaves were literate (Cornelius 1991 p. 9). This figure is not out of line with the cohort evidence
from the post-bellum censuses and our own discussion of the treatment effect of emancipation
(see below).
          Wage data by occupation suggest that literate free workers earned a premium before the
Civil War (Margo 2000). If this were the case, why did so few slaves become literate,
particularly if their owners could extract all or part of the return? Although some owners were
clearly aware of the economic incentives, most slave owners were extremely wary of literate




                                                   6
slaves.3 Literate slaves could forge passes, and passes were used by free blacks to travel
throughout the South. Slave owners believed that literate slaves were more likely to be
dissatisfied with their lot, and more likely to foment rebellion (Genovese 1976). Laws making it
a crime to teach a slave to read and write date from the seventeenth century and, according to
Genovese (1976), became more restrictive over time.
         Nevertheless, as suggested by the estimate mentioned above, some slaves did manage to
become literate. Some were taught by their masters, particularly children of house servants;
others learned (as children) from their white playmates on the plantation. Literate slaves taught
others, sometimes with the approval of their masters, but often surreptitiously. The motivation
was sometimes economic, particularly among urban slaves whose services were rented out. But
for many slaves, the economic returns were evidently secondary to the religious returns – the
ability to read the Bible. Although the fraction of slaves who did attain literacy remained very
small, sufficient numbers existed to aid in the post-war educational effort (Cornelius 1991, p.10).
         Unfortunately, none of the post-bellum censuses ascertained the ex-slave status of
African-Americans. However, pre-war southern birth is likely to be a very good indicator of ex-
slave status simply because the vast majority of blacks in the South before 1860 were slaves (see
Fogel and Engerman 1974).4
         Illiteracy rates of southern-born blacks among older age cohorts were very high in 1870.
For example, 88 percent among those born between 1810 and 1819. For those born a generation
later, in the 1840s, the rate was 84 percent, a difference of only four percentage points.
However, for persons born a generation later still, in the 1870s, the illiteracy rate in 1900 (the
first date shown for this cohort in the table) was 37 percent. Treating the difference between
cohorts born in the 1810s and the 1840s as a measure of the ante-bellum inter-generational trend,
had the trend simply continued after the War, the predicted illiteracy rate for the 1870s cohorts
would have been 76 percent, far higher than the actual illiteracy rate.


3
  While denial of literacy to slaves has not always been the case in slave societies, it does seem to have been the
norm in “New World” slave economies; see Engerman, Haber, and Sokoloff (2000).
4
  Sacerdote (2003) provides an extended analysis of the post-bellum convergence in literacy rates between southern
and non-southern born blacks. Although southern and non-southern born are not synonymous with “slave” and
“free”, the difference in practice is likely to be slight (see the text and Sacerdote 2003). In particular, Sacerdote
shows that there was initially (in 1880) a gap in literacy and school attendance between the children of southern and
non-southern born blacks, but that this gap declined sufficiently over time that substantial convergence was achieved
in essentially two generations. Differencing between southern and non-southern born blacks in this manner is
tantamount to factoring out the effects of race, thereby identifying the effects of slavery per se; see Sacerdote
(2003).

                                                         7
       This simple calculation reinforces the point made above: the post-bellum decline in black
illiteracy occurred because low illiteracy younger cohorts replaced high illiteracy older cohorts,
and that this process was not in place before the Civil War. We can refine the estimate of the
“treatment effect” of the war and emancipation on black illiteracy in a two-step procedure. First,
we estimate aggregate black illiteracy rates in 1850 and 1860. Because we know (from the
census) the illiteracy rates of free blacks in 1850 and 1860, as well as the proportion of the
overall black population that was enslaved, we can use the aggregate rate to back out estimates
of slave illiteracy rates in both years. All estimates are made for the age group 20-29 although,
in principle, they could be made for any age group.
       Our initial estimate of aggregate black illiteracy in 1850 (1860) assumes that the rate for
20-29 year olds in 1850 is that given by the rate for 40-49 year olds (30-39 year olds) in 1870.
These estimates, however, are likely to be biased downwards if, as suggested above, there are
reasons (such as mortality bias) for illiteracy to decline within a cohort as the cohort ages.
Therefore, we adjust for “cohort drift” in illiteracy; that is, we presume that illiteracy in 1850
among 20-29 year olds, say, was somewhat higher than it was among 40-49 year olds in 1870.
As implied by our earlier discussion, these adjustments are quantitatively slight and do not, in
any case, affect our substantive conclusions.
       Next, we estimate counterfactual black illiteracy rates for 1870, 1880, and 1900. These
counterfactual rates assume the Civil War was delayed; that is, that emancipation had not yet
occurred. We also assume that the counterfactual share of blacks who were slaves in each of
these years (again, ages 20-29) was the average observed in 1850 and 1860, and that the
counterfactual illiteracy rate of “free” blacks in each of these years is the rate predicted by the
linear trend occurring before the Civil War (that is, between 1850 and 1860). This trend, as it
happens, was distinctly downward. In 1850, 36.2 percent of free blacks aged 20-29 were
illiterate; the corresponding rate in 1860 was 29.1 percent (computed from the IPUMS samples,
see table 4). Our estimate of slave illiteracy rates in 1850 and 1860 does suggest a pre-war
downward trend, albeit very slight (see table 4). We incorporate this downward trend in
computing the counterfactual level of slave illiteracy in 1870 and subsequent years although, as
it happens, this trend has virtually no effect on our substantive conclusions.
       Our estimate of the structural break is the difference between the counterfactual illiteracy
rate and the actual illiteracy rate. As is clear from table 4, had the Civil War, emancipation, and
the subsequent expansion of educational opportunity been delayed, black illiteracy in 1870,

                                                  8
1880, and 1900 would have been much higher than it actually was. That is, even though the
trend in illiteracy among free blacks before the War was downward, a continuation of this
downward trend after the War, by itself, cannot account for the observed time series pattern of
aggregate black illiteracy rates. There must have been a structural break in black illiteracy
associated with the War, and this break must have been due to a significant, indeed enormous,
decline in illiteracy among former slaves and their offspring (see Sacerdote 2003).5
         Illiteracy rates among African-Americans continued to decline in the late nineteenth and
early twentieth centuries, absolutely and relative to whites. In terms of percentage points, these
decreases were steeper among southern-born blacks than non-southern born blacks.
Unfortunately, there is yet no IPUMS sample for 1930, and the published volumes for that year
do not distinguish southern-born from non-southern born blacks. However, given that the
aggregate illiteracy fell between 1920 and 1930 by more percentage points (10.9 points) than
between 1910 and 1920 (9.3 points), that southern-born blacks constituted the overwhelming
share of all blacks in 1920, and that illiteracy among non-southern born blacks ages 10-19 was
already very low in 1920, there is no question that illiteracy among southern-born blacks must
have continued to decline in the 1920s. Furthermore, it is clear from the age pattern of
educational attainment of southern-born blacks in 1940 that further declines would have occurred
in the 1930s. Even so, it is likely that, in the sense measured by the census, illiteracy rates of
southern-born blacks in 1940 exceeded those of non-southern born blacks, as well as rates for
whites. Remaining gaps aside, it is clear that enormous progress had been made by the eve of
World War Two in eliminating what was surely one of the worst “legacies of slavery” – the
extremely high rates of illiteracy that existed under the slave regime. Reductions in illiteracy
appear to have had tangible benefits for the freedmen, in particular, higher rates of occupational
status and, almost surely, higher rates of wealth accumulation (see below and Smith 1984;
Collins and Margo 2001). Children of former slaves, along with subsequent generations,
benefited directly from the economic gains that flowed from literacy, because higher living
standards encouraged black parents to send their children to school (Margo 1990).




5
 As is apparent from table 4, the adjustment for cohort drift raises the counterfactual black illiteracy rate after the
War, and thus increases the size of the estimated treatment effect.
                                                            9
2.2 School Attendance


        The federal census has included a question on school attendance since 1850. In general,
these questions have pertained to persons of “school age,” a phrase that was never rigorously
defined but generally meant ages 5 to 24 inclusive; the practical age range, however, was shorter
– ages 5 to 19.6 Prior to 1940, the question on school attendance could be answered in the
affirmative if the person had attended at least one day of school during the previous (census)
year, obviously a minimal level of compliance. In 1900, additional information was collected on
the number of months attended. In 1940, the question was modified to refer to attendance during
the month prior to the census week (the last week of March).
        Panel A of table 5 shows school attendance rates by race and region of residence (South
vs. Non-South) for ages 5 to 19 from 1870 to 1940. In 1870, approximately half of white
children in this age group had attended school during the census year but only 9.1 percent of
black children had attended school. Regional breakdowns reveal that black and white attendance
rates were considerably lower in the South (7.4 percent for blacks, 31.0 percent for whites) than
outside the South (34.4 percent for blacks, 60.1 percent for whites). In both regions, however,
the black rate was considerably lower than the white rate.
        The history of black school attendance from the end of the Civil War to World War Two
is a history of convergence between blacks and whites, and between the South and the rest of the
country. The aggregate rate (ages 5 to 19) for blacks more than doubled between 1870 and 1880,
and it doubled again between 1880 and 1910. The rate for whites was also increasing but not
nearly as much as the black rate. Consequently, the racial gap in school attendance that had
existed just after the Civil War (41 percentage points in 1870) had been reduced to 18 percentage
points by 1910, or by more than half (57 percent). Convergence continued for the next thirty
years. By the eve of World War Two, the black attendance rate was a scant seven percentage
points behind that of whites.
         Panel B provides more detail by age on attendance rates. In any given year, attendance
rates followed an inverted-U, peaking between the ages of 10 and 14. Proportionately the largest
increases in black school attendance prior to World War Two occurred in the 5 to 9 age group,


6
 In computing rates of attendance from the census data, the usual practice is to convert non-responses to zeroes
(non-attendance), and this is the practice that we follow in Table 5. Margo (1990, ch. 2) shows that the common
practice produces a downward bias in school attendance rates in the case of the 1900 census, although the bias
appears to be small.
                                                        10
with the rate increasing nearly by a factor of ten over the seventy-year period. For the age
groups 10 to 14 and 15 to 19 the proportional increase was smaller but still very impressive (a
factor of 6). It is also noteworthy that the racial gaps, conditional on age, were decreasing
between successive census dates in all cases except one – ages 15-19, between 1920 and 1940
(see below).
         By 1940, the racial gap in attendance for 10-14 years olds, the age range at which
attendance peaked, had declined to 5 percentage points, compared with a 56-point gap in 1870.
At younger and older ages, however, there still was considerable scope for further reductions in
racial gaps on the eve of World War Two. Further, while rates of college attendance were still
relatively low in 1940, they had begun a secular increase, one that would accelerate in pace after
World War Two.
         Table 6 shows racial differences in school attendance for ages 5-9, 10-14, 15-19, and 20-
24, for the census years 1950 to 1980, based on the IPUMS sample. Detailed analysis of the
1940 data (not shown) reveals that the racial gap in the 5 - 9 age group was especially
pronounced at age 5 and, to a lesser extent, at age 6, especially in the South. Black children, in
other words, appear to have begun school at a later age than most whites, with obvious
consequences for “age-in-grade” distributions (see below). The attendance gaps at age 5 and 6
began to close after World War Two, but substantial progress was not made until the late 1960s
and early 1970s with the widespread expansion of kindergarten programs in the South (Cascio
2003).
         The widening of the racial gap in attendance among 15-19 year olds between 1920 and
1940 primarily reflects increased high school attendance among whites, a trend that had begun
earlier in the century (Goldin 1998). However, the racial gap at ages 15-19 began to close soon
after 1940, and by 1970, this gap was very small. Reflecting growth in college attendance, the
gap at ages 20-24 widened between 1950 and 1970, but this gap, like the others, eventually
narrowed (after 1970). Racial gaps in school attendance continue to exist today, but they are
vastly smaller at all ages than was true a century ago, or even a half-century ago.




                                                 11
2.3 Years of Schooling


        Data on years of schooling were first collected at a national level in 1940. These data are
reasonably comparable between 1940 and 1980. The 1990 data, however, are fundamentally
different and are not directly comparable to earlier years.
        To use the census data to construct a time series, it is necessary to fix an age by which
schooling (generally) completed. Customarily, this age is set at 24, though one could argue that
30 is a reasonable upper bound. Then, using each decade’s census data, we can construct short
“contemporaneous” time series for those within a fixed ten-year age window. For example, we
can use the 1950 census to describe educational attainment for those age 30 to 39, and we can
use the 1960 census to describe the same age category, but of course, for a later set of birth
cohorts.
        Except for two states (North Dakota and Iowa), no data on years of schooling are
available prior to 1940. However, the 1940 census can be used to “back-cast” educational
attainment by race. The idea is to assume that older persons in 1940 are representative of their
respective birth cohorts. This “retrospective” series can then be combined with the
contemporaneous series just described.
        Table 7 shows race-specific estimates for males following this procedure, arranged by
five-year birth cohorts, and distinguishing between southern and non-southern born individuals.7
We begin with cohorts born between 1880 and 1884 and end with the 1950-54 cohort as this is
the youngest relevant cohort (that is, ages 25-29) in 1980. As in the previous tables, the basic
long-run pattern in table 7 is one of convergence between blacks and whites, and between
southern and non-southern born blacks. However, unlike the previous tables, convergence was
not continuous. Indeed, there is evidence of racial divergence at the national level for cohorts
born between 1880 and 1910.
        The apparent widening in the racial gap in years of schooling for cohorts born between
1880 and 1910 would be even more glaring if we presented estimates for the pre-1880 birth
cohorts. It is certainly possible to use the 1940 census to back-cast even further than this (see
Smith 1984) but, on a priori grounds, it seems less likely that persons older than age 60 in 1940
were representative of their respective birth cohorts than were younger persons because of

7
 Smith (1984) reports similar estimates based on the same procedure using data from the published census volumes.
Unlike our estimates, Smith does not break his down between southern and non-southern birth (this is not possible
with the published volumes) but he does provide estimates by sex.
                                                       12
mortality (or creep) bias. Nonetheless, it is almost certainly true that the trend in racial
differences in years of schooling for the pre-1880 cohorts was one of convergence. Pre-1880
cohorts include African-Americans who were born under slavery, and, as we saw in preceding
tables, for such cohorts illiteracy rates were extremely high. Illiteracy rates began to decline
precisely when post-bellum cohorts of African-Americans began to attend school in increasing
numbers. As they did, mean years of schooling for blacks must have increased relative to mean
years of schooling for whites for the pre-1880 cohorts.
        Arranging the data by region of birth (panels B and C) does not alter the substantive
conclusion of racial divergence for the 1880 to 1910 birth cohorts. The magnitude of divergence
is smaller within regions than at the national level, as the gap in attainment between southern and
non-southern born blacks also appears to have widened for the 1880-1910 cohorts.
        These patterns are puzzling because counterpart trends are not obviously present in the
data on illiteracy or school attendance (see our previous discussion). According to Margo
(1986a, 1986b), the back-casting procedure used in table 7 is problematic. Two potential biases,
those due mortality and educational creep, have already been mentioned, but in view of our
limiting the back-casting to persons under age 60 in 1940, are not likely to be major concerns. A
more pressing issue is the meaning of the concept of a “year of schooling”. The literal
interpretation is one of time spent in school, but conventionally, the phrase is used as shorthand
for the completion of a “grade”, which is what the census data purport to measure (educational
attainment).
        During the post-bellum period and, indeed, continuing into the early twentieth century
many schools in the South were “ungraded”. That is, there was no sorting of students into
grades. Grading was primarily a consequence of high population density and low transport costs
(that is, costs of physically getting to and from school). Not surprisingly, ungraded schools were
more likely to be small, rural, or otherwise isolated. Ungraded schools had been common in the
North and Midwest in the nineteenth century, as well, but had all but been replaced by graded
schools by the end of the century (indeed, much earlier in the Northeast; see Perlmann and
Margo 2001). Ungraded schools persisted for far longer in the South, especially among schools
attended by black children.8




8
 For example, data collected by the Texas Department of Education show that majority of black schools in the state
were ungraded in 1900 (Margo 1986b).
                                                       13
       Students in an ungraded school were taught at different levels; the absence of grades did
not mean that students were studying the same material. However, the absence of grades makes
it difficult to determine exactly what these levels were. Census officials in 1940 were aware of
this problem, and they instructed enumerators to make their best guess as to the appropriate
grade completed, if an individual had attended an ungraded school.
       Under various assumptions, it is possible to use contemporary data on school attendance
rates to simulate the time path of a series that measures “years of schooling” in a literal sense.
When this series is compared with the back-casted series on educational attainment, it suggests
that, when faced with an individual in 1940 that had attended an ungraded school, enumerators
simply assumed that educational attainment in terms of grades equaled the number of years
attended (Margo 1986b). The effect is to overstate the educational attainment of southern born
blacks, but in a way that was non-neutral with respect to year of birth. Specifically, for blacks
born in the South after 1880, the likelihood of attending a graded school was increasing over
time, and for such persons the reported census data are more accurate. This non-neutrality
makes years of schooling appear to diverge between the races when, as Margo shows, it is
possible that no such divergence actually occurred.
       In evaluating Margo’s argument two points should be kept in mind. First, any bias due to
ungraded schools only applies to the South. But, as panel C of table 7 makes clear, a divergence
in educational attainment for the 1880-1910 birth cohorts also occurred for non-southern born
blacks. Second, some portion of the measured divergence at the national level for the 1880-1910
cohorts is likely to have been a real phenomenon that can be explained by increasing rates of
high school attendance among whites (Smith 1986; Goldin and Katz 1998). For these reasons it
seems likely that a “true” series on educational attainment would, at a minimum, show some
slowdown in racial convergence for cohorts born in the late nineteenth and early twentieth
centuries, compared with cohorts born earlier in the nineteenth century or later in the twentieth
century.
       In any case, the data in table 7, as previously noted, reveal a substantial degree of racial
convergence in years of schooling for cohorts born after 1910. For cohorts born before World
War Two, racial convergence was confined to southern-born individuals. Not only did blacks
born in the South between 1910 and 1940 manage to close the gap in years of schooling between
themselves and southern-born whites, they also closed the gap between themselves and non-
southern born blacks. Because the majority of blacks at the time were still southern born, and

                                                 14
because the convergence trend in the South was so pronounced, racial convergence occurred at
the national level, despite the fact that divergence was occurring for non-southern born persons
over the same period. For cohorts born after 1940, mean racial differences in years of schooling
declined among both the southern and non-southern born. By 1980, the mean difference was
less than a year of schooling for persons aged 25-34.
        Table 8 reports the 10th, 50th, and 90th percentiles of educational attainment by race and
birth cohort. Table 7’s story of convergence at the means is complemented by the median
figures in table 8. For the earlier cohorts (1880-84 to 1910-14), the median black male attained
three or four fewer years of education than the median white male, but by the 1940-44 birth
cohort, median education levels were essentially equal (at 12 years). As suggested above, the
racial gap at the upper end of the educational distribution proved more stubborn: the gap was
four years among the earlier cohorts, and narrowed to about two years for cohorts born in 1940
or later.
        It was not until the twentieth-century birth cohorts that southern-born black men at the
10th percentile of the distribution had even a single year of education; and it was not until the
1920-24 birth cohort that southern-born black men at the 10th percentile attained the level of
education that southern-born white men at the 10th percentile had attained for the 1880-84 cohort
(three years of schooling). In other words, among the southern-born, there was a forty-year
racial lag in educational attainment at the bottom end of the educational distribution. Subsequent
convergence at the 10th percentile was remarkably fast, and by the 1950-54 birth cohort, black
and white southern-born men had the same level of educational attainment. The racial gap in the
educational distributions was smaller in the non-South than in the South among the early birth
cohorts, but there is some evidence of widening at each percentile between, say, the 1885-69 and
1910-14 cohorts.


2.3.1 Age-in-Grade Distributions


        An “age-in-grade” distribution shows the distribution of ages of persons enrolled in
school conditional on having completed no more than a specified grade, usually at an elementary
level. Today, children enrolled in elementary school generally take a single school “year” to
complete a grade. If all children enrolled in the first grade at, say, exactly age 6, and advanced
accordingly, the age-in-grade distribution those who had completed first grade would be a spike

                                                 15
at age 7. However, some children may first enter school at a younger age, others at an older age.
Some children may skip a grade, others might be held back. In the presence of such deviations,
the age-in-grade distribution will not be a spike. Even so, if the probability of a deviation from
the norm is low, the variance of age, conditional on grade, should be low as well, and relatively
few students should be “over age” for their grade level.
       Tables 9 to 11 show age-in-grade distributions for students who have finished (only)
grades one, four, and eight in 1940, 1960, and 1980. If children enroll in the first grade by age
six or seven, an “over-age” child, conditional on having completed just the first grade, will be
age 9 or older. At the national level, approximately 70 percent of black children in 1940 who (a)
were enrolled in school (b) had completed the first grade were age 8 or younger. This percentage
was considerably below the corresponding figure for whites (93 percent), indicating that a higher
proportion of black children (30 percent) who had completed the first grade were “over-age” for
their grade level compared with white children (7 percent). Not surprisingly, the racial gap was
considerably larger in the South where fully one third of black students who had completed just
the first grade were older than age 8, and about 10 percent were more than age 10.
       These racial gaps in the age-in-grade distributions can be traced to two proximate causes:
starting school at a later age, and slower progress through the grades than whites. Data on school
attendance rates already reviewed in this chapter suggests that the first proximate cause was
important: black children at age 5 or 6 were less likely to be enrolled in school than white
children. The second factor cannot be documented directly in the census data. However, if
black children simply delayed entry into the first grade until no later than age 8 or 9, but
otherwise completed the first grade in a single school year, all would have completed the first
grade by age 10, but this clearly was not the case in 1940.
       Delay in entering in the first grade coupled with slow progress through subsequent grades
compounded the extent to which southern black children were “over age” for their grade at
higher levels of educational attainment. Consider the fourth grade, as shown in table 9. A child
entering the first grade by age seven and progressing normally through the fourth grade would be
age 11. Yet, in 1940, approximately 62 percent of southern black students who had completed at
most the fourth grade were age 12 or older. Fully 29 percent were age 14 or older, compared
with about 9 percent of southern white children.
       Because the 1940 census was the first to collect educational attainment, national level
evidence cannot be provided prior to 1940. However, data on school enrollments by grade

                                                 16
collected by Welch (1973) suggests that the same phenomenon (a relatively high proportion of
“over age” southern black students) existed prior to 1940.9
         By 1960 (table 10), this phenomenon had been significantly mitigated at every grade
level, though not completely eroded. Only about 18 percent of southern black children who had
only finished the first grade were above age 8 (compared with 33 percent in 1940), and just 29
percent of those who had only finished fourth grade were above age 11 (compared with 62
percent in 1940).
         Between 1960 and 1980 (table 11) racial differences in grade completion continued to
narrow, although the gaps were still quantitatively non-trivial and tended to widen with age.
Nationally, about 8.5 percent of black students who had completed only the first grade were
older than eight, compared with 6.7 percent of whites; 10.2 percent of blacks who had completed
only fourth grade were older than 11, compared with 6.6 percent of whites. The age
distribution’s right tail was noticeably fatter among black eighth grade finishers than among
whites in both the South and the non-South. Nationally, 18.8 percent of black students who had
finished only the eighth grade were 16 or older compared with only 9.7 percent of whites. It
seems highly likely that the relatively wide racial difference in “over age” eighth grade
completers, as compared with first or fourth grade finishers, was driven by racial differences in
grade repetition.


2.4 The Quality of Schooling


         By “quality of schooling” we refer to conventionally measured educational inputs like the
expenditures per pupil, the teacher-pupil ratio, the length of the school year, and similar
indicators. We recognize that contemporary research lacks consensus on whether such measures
constitute true indicators of school quality and that studies of “educational production functions”
are fraught with methodological problems. As severe as these problems are with contemporary
data, they are worse with historical data. Nevertheless, we believe that examining data on school
inputs is useful because the racial gaps are strikingly large – so large that, on a priori grounds, it
seems they must have mattered, whether in terms of school performance or labor market
outcomes.

9
  Welch (1973) points out that, assuming a constant rate of entry in the first grade and all students complete at least
the second grade, the ratio of first to second grade enrollment should be one. However, in the South, this ratio
typically was well in excess of unity for black children.
                                                          17
       Modern studies of racial differences in school characteristics are based on samples that
identify the race of the student and characteristics at the school level. Although archival
evidence of this type exists, it has yet to be systematically examined by economic historians.
Most studies have been based on the published reports of state superintendents of education,
which pertain to public schools. Such reports provide no direct evidence on racial differences
unless the data in them are so reported. Typically, the only states that did so were states that
operated legally segregated schools; that is, states in the South.
       Table 12, taken from Margo (1990), provides a representative sample of this evidence
(for additional data see Welch 1973; Card and Krueger 1992; and Donohue, Heckman, and Todd
2002). In 1890, the first year shown, black children in some southern states, such as Alabama,
were receiving school resources on a per pupil basis that were in rough equivalence to those
received by whites. In other states, such as Florida or Maryland, spending per black pupil was
considerably lower than spending per white pupil. Most whites, however, did not live in the
South, unlike most blacks, and the South was an educational laggard. A proper national average
for 1890 would unquestionably show that, relative to schools attended by the typical white
children, the school attended by the typical black child was woefully under-financed.
       In an absolute sense, per pupil spending in the black schools was low ca. 1890 in part
because teacher salaries, black or white, were low in the South. Low teacher salaries in the
South partly reflected the poor educational qualifications of Southern teachers (Margo 1984).
Southern teacher salaries were also low because southern wages, in general, were low in most
occupations (Margo 2002). Teacher’s pay was not the only problem, however. Class sizes were
generally larger in the black schools and the length of the school year was shorter.
       Between 1890 and 1910, real per pupil spending in southern black schools appears to
have been flat on average, with some states declining and others, such as Alabama, rising
slightly. On average, over this period, the length of the school year was rising in the black
schools. The increase in the length of the school year would have, by itself, increased real per
pupil spending, but class sizes were also rising while the black-to-white ratio of teacher salaries
was declining, offsetting the increase in term lengths in determining the trend of expenditures.
Relative to the white schools, however, the trend was unmistakably downward. That is, the
black-to-white ratio of per pupil spending declined between 1890 and 1910.
       From 1910 to 1935, black children in most southern states experienced increases in real
spending per pupil, reflecting rising school terms and teacher salaries, and falling class sizes. In

                                                 18
some states these increases were sufficient to raise the black-to-white spending ratio within the
South, but in other states, such as Tennessee and Texas, the ratio declined. However, substantial
increases in the black-to-white ratio within the South occurred from 1935 to 1950. While much
of the increase in the ratio after 1935 reflects improvements in the relative salaries of black
teachers, relative improvements in class sizes and school term lengths also occurred (Margo
1990). Moreover, southern schools were improving in general relative to non-southern schools
over the same period, resulting in a decline in regional disparities in school spending (Goldin and
Margo 1992). In absolute terms, there was more racial equality in the distribution of school
resources within the South, and between the South and the rest of the nation, on the eve of the
Supreme Court’s historic decision in Brown vs. Board of Education, than in the previous half-
century.


3. Race and the Returns to Schooling: Historical Evidence


       Our model of schooling (presented in section 4) presumes that the returns to schooling
were an important determinant of schooling decisions, and therefore racial differences in the
returns would influence racial differences in educational attainment. Our focus here is primarily
on the period before World War Two. Racial differences in the returns to schooling have been
the subject of intensive study by labor economists (see, for example, Smith and Welch 1989,
Donohue and Heckman 1991, and Card and Krueger 1992). These studies, which are based
primarily on earnings data from the census and Current Population Survey, generally find that
the returns to schooling were initially lower for blacks than for whites, but that racial differences
in the returns converged over time. Some of the timing in the convergence in returns suggests
that improvements in the relative quality of schools attended by blacks may have been an
important causal factor, but other factors, notably increases in the demand for educated black
labor resulting from anti-discrimination legislation, were also important (Card and Krueger 1992;
Donohue and Heckman 1991).
       Documenting racial differences in the returns to schooling prior to 1940 is difficult
because no large samples containing information on race, earnings, and schooling exist prior to
the 1940 census. The pre-1940 censuses however, contain race-specific information on
occupations. “Occupational status”, a continuous variable, can be created from these data by



                                                 19
assigning a numerical score to each occupation. Typically these numerical scores are based on
mean or median income in the occupation in a particular year.
        Smith (1984) is the first paper to examine long-term racial trends in occupational status.
Smith’s numerical scores were based on race-specific and occupation-specific average income in
the 1970 census. Using these scores and the occupational tables in the published census
volumes, he produced estimates of the black-white ratio of occupational status by birth cohort for
the census years 1890 to 1980.
        Smith’s work produced two basic findings. First, in the aggregate, the black-white status
ratio increased only slightly from 1890 to 1940 but then rose sharply from 1940 to 1980.
Second, these ratios were generally constant within cohorts as cohorts aged. It follows that the
replacement of low black-white status older cohorts by high black-white status younger cohorts
was an important mechanism behind the long term rises in the aggregate status ratio. Since the
same process was at work at narrowing the racial gap in schooling, it is natural to hypothesize
that the two convergence trends – schooling and status – are related. Moreover, the slow pace of
convergence in occupational status prior to World War Two, according to this conjecture, may
be related to the slow pace of convergence in years of schooling for cohorts born in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth century, and to the apparent decline in the relative quality of black
schools in the South at roughly the same time.
        Smith also used a back-casting procedure to produce cohort-estimates of the racial gap in
years of schooling. A regression of Smith’s status ratios on his racial gap (white-black) in years
of schooling produces a negative and statistically significant coefficient, indicating that
convergence in years of schooling and in occupational status were positively correlated.
However, the regression is not very robust to minor modifications in the specification, which
suggests that an aggregate time-series approach may not be the best way to investigate these
issues (Margo 1990)
        Another approach is to use the IPUMS samples to estimate regressions of occupational
status. For the pre-1940 censuses these regressions cannot reveal the returns to an additional
year of schooling, because data on years of schooling were not reported. But the regressions can
reveal the returns to literacy.
        The IPUMS samples come with a ready-made measure of occupational status based on
occupation-specific median income in the 1950 census. The IPUMS measure has been used by
other scholars (for example, Sacerdote 2003), but for our purposes it suffers from several

                                                 20
deficiencies. In particular, it does not use race-specific or sex-specific weights, nor does it
reflect regional differences in income. In its place, we constructed our own measure of
occupational status based on median total income for males reported in the 1960 IPUMS sample,
partitioned by occupation, region, and race.10
        We estimate regressions in which the dependent variable is the log of occupational status,
and the independent variables are a fourth-order polynomial in age, and dummies for literacy,
inter-regional migrants, foreign birth, metropolitan residence (central city and suburb dummies),
and region of residence (Midwest, South, and West dummies). We used the 1870, 1880, 1900,
1910, and 1920 IPUMS to estimate separate regressions for blacks and whites, first with national
samples, and then separately for the South and non-South.
        Table 13 reports the coefficients on the literacy variable. Several features of the results
are noteworthy. First, the returns to literacy were positive in the South for both whites and
blacks, but the black coefficients are roughly half the size of the white coefficients. The lower
returns to literacy among blacks may be explained by discrimination in the labor market,
although many other explanations are possible. Second, among whites, the returns to literacy
were considerably higher in the South than outside the region. The regional difference in the
returns to literacy is consistent with other evidence showing that skill premia were higher in the
South than in the non-South. Among blacks the returns to literacy outside the South appear to be
relatively small.
          Third, the mean values (in square brackets) indicate that there was a very large gap in
occupational status between the South and non-South, in all years, for both races. This gap
reflects differences in the occupational structure, to be sure, but it also reflects the fact that, in the
immediate aftermath of the Civil War, wages in the South declined sharply relative to the non-
South. The southern wage disadvantage moderated to some extent up to 1890, but in the 1890s
worsened again, and a substantial wage gap remained in place well into the 20th century.
        The existence of a regional wage gap suggests there were substantial economic gains to
migrating from the South in the early twentieth century. Margo (1990; see also Vigdor 2002)
show that better educated southern blacks (and whites) were more likely to leave the South.
Margo also (1990) specifies and estimates a migration model using 1940 data that allows for
unobservable factors to influence both the migration decision and the returns to migration from


10
  We assign scores based on median total incomes for men in three-digit occupational codes, in four regions
(Northeast, Midwest, South, and West), and by two race categories (white and nonwhite).
                                                       21
the South. The results of the estimation suggest that the lower returns to schooling for blacks
outside the South is partly due to the fact that migrants from the South predominated among the
lesser educated. That is, less educated blacks who left the South appear to have either been
highly motivated, worked harder, or possessed more ability than more highly educated migrants,
and their earnings outside the South were higher than otherwise would be predicted given their
education level.


4. Analytic Framework


4.1. A Model of Educational Attainment


         In this section we sketch a simple model of schooling choice that we use to interpret the
historical facts presented in the preceding tables. A household in our model consists of a parent
and a child. Parental utility is defined over the household’s current consumption and the child’s
future consumption, which depends on the child’s earnings E and any transfers from the parent to
child, X11


                                               U = V(C) + δ(E + X)


The budget constraint is


                                             C + γX = Y + w(T – S)


Here, Y = income of the adult, w = marginal product of the child, and γ = 1/1+r. The parent
decides how much of the child’s time endowment T is to be allocated towards production of the
consumption good versus schooling.
         We assume that E = E(S, q, Y), where q = “quality” of schooling. The first derivatives of
the earnings function are positive, second derivatives are negative, and the cross-partials are
positive. This specification of the earnings function can be rationalized as follows. Let H =
child’s “human capital”, and let E = E(H). Also let H=H(s,q,Y): H, in other words, is an


11
  These transfers can be thought of as “savings” in the current period, which are transferred to the child in the future
and which the child can then use towards consumption.
                                                          22
educational production function. The parameter δ is the marginal utility (to the parent) of the
child’s future consumption. The presumption is that δ<1; that is, the parent subjectively
discounts these earnings relative to current consumption.
       The parent maximizes the utility function with respect to S and X. The first order
conditions are


                                             wV’ = δEs


                                                V’ = δ/γ


These two conditions can be combined


                                                w = γEs


According to this condition the parent allocates the child’s time to equate the marginal cost of
schooling (w) to the marginal benefits (γEs).
       Several features of this first order condition are important to our narrative. First, there
will be an interior solution if γEs(0)>w. We think of Es(0) as the marginal returns to going to
school for a minimal amount of time, which is the amount of schooling necessary to just become
literate. The idea is that Es(0) in the past, and today, is very high. Unless γ =0 or was very
small, a parent would generally desire that the child go to school long enough to become literate.
The data at hand do not really us to estimate the marginal returns, but we can estimate the
average returns (see below).
       Second, the likelihood of an interior solution, and the value of s if s is positive, are both
decreasing in w, holding other exogenous variables in the model constant. In particular, changes
over time that reduced the value of child labor relative to the value of adult labor lead to
increases in schooling.
       Third, increases in factors complementary to s in the production of E – that is, Y and q in
the model – will also increase s under the assumptions of the model. Although Y is defined to
be the parent’s income in the model, in general Y can be thought of as any “family background”
variable that is complementary to s in the production of E. Increases (decreases) in school
quality are also associated with increases (decreases) in S. Further, it is intuitively clear that we

                                                  23
could introduce another argument Z in the E function such that, as long as Esz>0, then ds/dZ>0.
Positive shifts in Z can be thought of as factors that increase the relative demand for educated
labor in general, or educated black labor in particular.
        The model treats q as exogenous. We could, however, specify a political process in
which black (and other) parents participate and through which q is determined. Changes in the
price of q would influence the optimal level of school quality, as would changes in the political
process that make it easier or more difficult for a particular population group to influence the
outcome (see our discussion of disenfranchisement in the next section).12


4.2. Applying the Model: An Analytic Narrative


        Since emancipation, African-Americans have increased their schooling levels relative to
whites. That is, there is a long-term pattern of convergence. The pace of convergence, however,
was not constant, and for some aspects of schooling, there were shorter periods of divergence. In
this section, we sketch an “analytical narrative” that uses the model in the previous section to
make sense of the historical patterns documented in the tables.
        The data from the 1870 census indicate that school attendance rates of black children
were very low and rates of adult illiteracy were very high in the immediate aftermath of the Civil
War. However, over the next two decades, black school attendance rates increased substantially,
as did literacy, and the process of convergence was underway.
        We believe that the post-bellum convergence can be explained by two factors. First,
initial conditions mattered. Black children emerged from slavery with essentially no exposure to
formal schooling. According to our model, as long as the marginal returns to schooling at the
initial level (zero) exceeded the marginal cost, the parents of these children would have desired
to send them to school. If the adjustment from the initial dis-equilibrium could have happened
instantaneously there would have been, by definition, some amount of racial convergence.
        Several pieces of evidence lead us to contend that the marginal returns to schooling were
positive for black children during the early post-bellum period. Wage data indicate a substantial

        12
            The model can also accommodate government intervention that specifies a minimum level of S. At the
minimum level of S, the demand for S (the Es) function becomes horizontal. If this occurs above w, there is no
effect on S. If this occurs below the current value of w, parents will increase the level of S. Relevant historical
examples of such interventions are child labor and compulsory schooling laws. Margo (1990, ch.2) presents some
evidence that the passage of compulsory laws raised black attendance rates in the South, but the magnitude of the
effect was small.
                                                        24
premium for educated, white-collar labor ca. 1860 (Margo 2000). More on point, the previous
section documented that, in 1870 and 1880, literate adult blacks held jobs that, on average, had
higher earnings than jobs held by illiterate adult blacks, and that these returns were higher in the
South than elsewhere in the country. Further, for blacks born in the South, an important
component to the returns to literacy was it facilitated migration to the North, where wages were
much higher than in the South (Margo 1990, 2002; Vigdor 2002).
       The adjustment to the initial disequilibrium could not have taken place immediately.
Adult blacks emerged from slavery with little in the way of physical wealth and few marketable
skills, and they worked in a regional economy where wages were low. Factors complementary
to the production of human capital – Y and q – were low, if not non-existent, for most black
children in the immediate aftermath of the War, and this is reflected in the low rates of black
school attendance in 1870.
       In fact, the initial adjustment would have never taken place – or rather, only taken place
with substantial out-migration – had educational expansion not occurred in the South in the
1870s. Some schools for black children were established, often by ex-slaves themselves, in
occupied areas of the Confederacy during the War. The effort expanded after the Emancipation
Proclamation and the establishment of the Freedmen’s Bureau in 1865 (Butchart 1980; Morris
1981). White female teachers from the North were involved in the initial effort but to an extent
that surprised contemporaries so were former slaves, many whom were barely literate themselves
(Anderson 1988). Black teachers from the North also went South to assist – according to one
recent estimate, slightly more than 10 percent of the Freedmen’s Bureau teachers were black
(Butchart 1988). However, Reconstruction (1866-1877) truly was the catalyst for the initial
establishment of black schools by state governments in the South. During the Reconstruction
period, blacks enjoyed some measure of political clout, and this clout was reflected in
fundamental civil rights legislation at the time and in provisions in state constitutions that
guaranteed black access to public schools (see, in particular, Anderson 1998, ch. 1). As we
described earlier, rates of black school attendance jumped markedly between 1870 and 1880, and
this simply could not have happened without the institutional changes just mentioned.
       Despite the provision of public schools in the South beginning in the 1870s, the
constraints on black educational advance were severe. Although black wealth and incomes had
begun to converge on white wealth and incomes (Higgs 1982; Margo 1984; Smith 1984), black



                                                 25
parents were still poor and poorly educated, and their children’s schooling suffered for it. The
South’s emphasis on cotton agriculture was another important factor. The productivity of child
labor was relatively high in cotton. As a result, schools in cotton counties, black and white, were
open fewer days per year, to accommodate seasonal demands for child labor.
       Reconstruction ended in 1877. Although blacks continued to vote in some states after
Reconstruction ended, their political clout was on the wane. Beginning in the 1880s, the states
of the ex-Confederacy passed legislation and amended state constitutions for the purpose of
disenfranchising black voters (Kousser 1974). These “legal” measures were supplemented by
extra-legal ones, including violence, intimidation, and outright electoral fraud. The
disenfranchisement movement was highly effective. In Louisiana, for example, slightly more
than fifty percent of the electorate was black in 1890, but by 1910, less than 0.1 percent was
black (Margo 1982).
       Disenfranchisement was accompanied by changes in school finance. In the late
nineteenth century, prior to disenfranchisement, public schools in the South were often financed
solely at the state level, deriving from state levied property, poll, and other taxes. State school
funds were typically allocated to counties on the basis of the school age population. Whites in
so-called “black belt counties” resisted efforts to levy local school property taxes, fearing that the
bulk of these taxes would go to the black schools. After disenfranchisement, white-dominated
school boards began using state school funds that had been allocated on the basis of the black
school population for use in the white schools. As one school superintendent remarked at the
time “we use their money … colored people are mighty profitable to us.” Opposition to local
taxes abated, and whites in predominantly white counties began levying local property taxes to
improve their own schools. The upshot of all these changes was deterioration in the relative
(black/white) quality – as measured, for example, by per pupil expenditures -- of schools
attended by black children in the period between 1890 and 1910 (Bond, 1934, 1939; Harlan
1958; Smith 1973; Kousser 1980a; Margo 1982; Pritchett 1985, 1989; Walters, James, and
McCammon 1997).
       At the federal level, de jure segregation received constitutional protection with the
Supreme Court’s decision in Plessy v. Ferguson (Lofgren 1987). Plessy, however, required that
schools be “equal” if they were legally “separate”. Another decision, Cummins v. Georgia in
1898, demonstrated just how limited in law this protection really was (Kousser 1980b). In
Cummins, the Supreme Court ruled that, in effect, a Georgia school board was not required under

                                                 26
the separate-but-equal doctrine to open up a public high school for black children who wished to
attend. If a black child wishing to go to high school grew up in a county without one, attendance
required that either the child or his family must migrate, a costly activity.
       Economic historians have attempted to investigate whether the violations of the equal
part of the separate-but-equal doctrine hampered the educational progress of southern black
children. Using individual level data on black and white children from the 1900 public use
sample, Margo regresses months of school attendance on parental and family attributes and
county-level data on school and labor market characteristics. According to his regressions,
equalizing black and white school characteristics at the sample means would have reduced the
racial gap in months of school attendance by nearly half. This effect, as large as it is, was
dwarfed by the impact of racial differences in family background factors, as measured by
occupational status and adult literacy. Using IPUMS data for 1900 and 1910, Moehling (2002)
reports similar findings with regard to school characteristics (see also Walters, James and
McCammon 1990; Walters and James 1993; and Walters and Briggs 1993, for additional studies
of racial differences in school enrollment in the early twentieth century South). Moehling also
shows that the schooling of southern black children in the early twentieth century was hampered
by a family background factor not considered by Margo – a higher rate of single parenthood.
       Other studies have examined the effects of separate-but-equal on racial differences in
literacy rates and test scores. Margo (1986) is a study of race-specific literacy rates in Alabama
over the period 1920 to 1940, based on county level panel data. Alabama regularly took a school
census in which the literacy of children ages 7-20 was measured. Margo regresses the literacy
rate on the average daily attendance rate in grades one through six, the length of the school year
in days, expenditure per pupil per day, the value of school capital per pupil, and the percentage
of one-teacher schools. He also includes two family background variables: per capita income
and the percentage of families owning their homes; and he controls for county-level
unobservables using random effects and fixed effects. The random effects estimates suggest that
expenditures per pupil per day were significant determinants of literacy rates for both races, but
the fixed effects coefficients are small and statistically insignificant. However, both the random
and fixed effects estimates agree that the length of the school year mattered, both economically
and statistically, and it mattered somewhat more at the margin for blacks than for whites.
       Performing a decomposition, Margo finds that equalizing school-term lengths explains
some of the racial gap in literacy (20 percentage points in 1920 is the mean racial difference); for

                                                 27
example, equalizing school terms cuts this by around 4 percentage points, using the black fixed
effects coefficient. In terms of percent explained, the effects of equalizing school terms are
similar in 1920 and 1930, but quite a bit smaller in 1940. This is perhaps because by 1940, the
average length of the black school year was similar to that of the white school year, and county-
level variation had narrowed considerably. Margo finds that equalizing expenditures per day
along with school term increases the explanatory power of separate-but-equal up to around 50
percent of the literacy gap using the coefficients from the random effects regression, but
considerably less using the coefficients from the fixed effects regression.
          Fishback and Baskin (1991) examine child literacy in Georgia in 1910. The age range in
their study is 7 to 12, and the sample is restricted to children attending school, on the grounds
that school inputs would have had little or no influence on the literacy status of children not
attending school.13 In a footnote, Fishback and Baskin allude to the possibility that selecting the
sample in such a manner might bias their results. To examine this possibility, they estimate a
selection equation, which is identified by assuming that family size affected school attendance
but not literacy. Their results on child literacy are unaffected by a correction for selectivity
bias.14
          Fishback and Baskin model child literacy as a function of current school inputs in the
county of residence, which are measured by the value of school capital per child, expenditures on
teacher salaries per pupil per day, and the length of term. Per pupil here refers to children ages
6-14, so this is really per “elementary school age child”. Literacy here means the ability to write.
Also included in the model are the child’s age, gender, race, and labor force status; and the
household head’s literacy, age, and occupational status. If the head’s spouse is present, spouse’s
age and literacy are included. Also included are homeownership and family size.
          The basic results are similar to Margo (1987). School inputs have positive coefficients,
but only length of term is statistically significant. Older children were more likely to be literate,
males had lower literacy, and no relationship was found between literacy and whether the child
works. The head’s occupational status has a positive effect, as do head’s and spouse’s literacy, if
latter is present.

13
   This is debatable, because children in school can teach younger or older children not in school but still at home, or
their parents.
14
   For this estimation, they exclude the child’s labor force status and family size from the literacy equation, later
adding these back in. Perhaps a better identification strategy would be to assume that the relative value of the
child’s time outside school varied with geographic characteristics – for example, the extent of urbanization, or the
crop mix.
                                                          28
       Like Margo, Fishback and Baskin include with a decomposition analysis of literacy rates.
Equalizing all school inputs closes the gap in literacy by about 40 percent, about half of which
can be attributed to the impact of the length of the school year. Variations in the value of the
school capital stock per pupil were unimportant, perhaps because they really were (the
interpretation favored by Fishback and Baskin), or perhaps because of measurement error.
       Also as in Margo (1987), Fishback and Baskin find that family background variables,
particularly adult literacy, were critical determinants of children’s educational outcomes.
Equalizing adult literacy rates of both head and spouse would have cut the literacy gap among
children nearly in half, if nothing else had changed. Like Moehling (2002), Fishback and Baskin
also find that an absent spouse was associated with lower child literacy.
       Orazem (1987) is a unique study of racial differences in test scores in Maryland in the
1920s and 1930s. The dependent variable is the “proportion of students taking a nationally
standardized test of reading skills who meet or exceed the national norm for the test”. The test
was evidently first administered in 1924. The state department of education published the results
of the test, by race, at the county level for selected years between 1924 and 1938. Blacks clearly
performed much worse on the test than whites. The black average over the entire period of study
is 0.224, implying that 22.4 percent of blacks exceeded the national norm, compared with 54
percent of white children.
       Orazem first regresses the average daily attendance rate on six school characteristics (the
proportion of teachers with at least one year of school, length of the school year, value of school
capital per enrolled student, proportion of teachers with at least a “normal” degree, enrollment
per teacher, the proportion of schools with at most one or two teachers). He also controls for the
average salary in manufacturing, the value of crop production per acre (he claims this is a proxy
for child opportunity costs), the average value of farm land and buildings (an asset variable).
Also included are county fixed effects, plus a dummy variable indicating that the year is before
1931, when the school truancy laws were changed. It is not clear from the article if year effects
were included. The sample for attendance equation consists of all years 1924-1938.15
       For blacks, school attendance rates were negatively influenced by class size and the
proportion of one-teacher schools, and positively associated with the proportion of state certified
teachers. For whites the results are less clear-cut: having certified teachers encouraged


       15
            Data for Baltimore were unavailable.

                                                   29
attendance while one-teachers schools discouraged attendance, but otherwise, school
characteristics did not matter. For both races there is evidence that family and local labor market
characteristics mattered: in general, a higher opportunity cost of child time reduced attendance,
while better economic circumstances at home (as measured by the proxies for assets and adult
income) promoted attendance.
       Using the test score data, Orazem estimates two models, one pooled with a race dummy,
and separately by race. County-level fixed effects are included but not year fixed effects. The
test score is modeled as a linear function of school characteristics. These characteristics are
multiplied by the predicted value of average daily attendance, the idea being that, unless a child
was attending school, she could not benefit from the characteristics.
       In the regressions estimated separately by race, the length of the school year emerges as a
significant factor affecting black test scores. Orazem computes a decomposition of the mean
racial difference in test scores, finding that equalizing school characteristics accounts for about
38 percent of the racial gap.
       These various studies by economic historians should be viewed cautiously as they are
based on relatively crude cross-section data, certainly by comparison with modern studies of
education production. It is easy to imagine, for example, that unobservable factors, rather than a
genuine causal link between school characteristics and school outcomes, are driving the results.
Nonetheless, the findings are broadly consistent across the studies, and do suggest that, had the
equal part of separate but equal been enforced, schooling outcomes for southern black children
would have been better than they actually were. Earlier we noted that racial convergence in
years of schooling appears to have slowed considerably for cohorts born around the turn of the
century. The results of the various studies just reviewed suggest that some portion of the
slowdown in convergence may be attributable to the violations of Plessy.
       While southern school boards appear to have violated the equal part of Plessy, for the
most part they did not do so with impunity. That is, separate-but-equal did not mean separate-
and-non-existent. To be sure, at higher levels of education, especially those supplied by state
governments, the sheer absence of any facilities for blacks was more of a problem. But at the
elementary level, most southern black children, it seems, had access to a public school.
       The fact that blacks continued to receive local public goods after they were
disenfranchised has been called “Myrdal’s paradox”, after Gunnar Myrdal (1944). Myrdal
answered his own question by asserting that southern whites, despite their racism, believed it

                                                 30
would be a violation of the “American Creed” if blacks were denied basic access to schooling.
The fact that any such violations at the elementary level would have been so obviously
unconstitutional surely played some role as well.
       Another resolution to Myrdal’s paradox emphasizes economic motives. Freeman (1973;
see also Harris 1985) suggested that whites were willing to allocate school funds to blacks if
schooling made blacks more productive in the labor market in specific ways – better field hands,
better cooks, better seamstresses and servants. So-called “industrial education” was a hallmark
of the program for black economic advance advocated by Booker T. Washington. However, at
the elementary level, the curriculum in the black schools seems to have emphasized more basic
skills – literacy, mathematics, and so on – than purely “industrial” skills.
       Margo (1991) presents a game-theoretic model of a local government in which the
dominant group (whites) supplies a local public good to a minority group (blacks). The local
public good is funded by the imposition of a lump sum tax on the minority group. The majority
group derives income from capital that it combines with the labor of the minority group. The
minority group, however, is partially mobile across jurisdictions; if no members of the minority
group choose to live in a particular jurisdiction, the income of the majority group falls to zero. In
equilibrium, the local government may have some monopoly power and therefore will tax the
minority in excess of the value of any local public service provided to the minority. However,
unless the minority group is completely immobile, some amount of the public good will be
provided to the minority group. Margo (1991) provides some qualitative and econometric
evidence that whites were, indeed, aware of the constraints that black geographic mobility placed
on their ability to discrimination in the supply of local public goods, such as schools.
       An important corollary of Margo’s argument is that factors that increased black demand
for better schools – suppose, for example, that better educated black parents desired better
schools for their children – could not be totally ignored by local school boards, even if blacks
were unable to vote at the ballot box, because they could, and did, vote with their feet. However,
it seems doubtful that the Tiebout-like incentives emphasized by Margo were the sole factor
explaining increases over time in black school quality that took place not only prior to Brown,
but also prior to fundamental voting rights legislation in the 1960s.
       Private philanthropy played an important role in improving the quality of black schools in
the South. Numerous private organizations were involved in providing philanthropic monies;
examples include the Peabody Fund, the Jeanes Fund, and, especially, the Rosenwald

                                                 31
Foundation. Philanthropic dollars were especially important in the initial establishment of
institutions of higher learning for blacks; see Martin (1981) and Peeps (1981). One might
hypothesize that funds provided by philanthropists might have simply substituted, in part, for
money that might have been spent anyway, and therefore, some benefits might have flowed
indirectly to whites. In an important paper, Heckman, et. al. (2002) demonstrate that
philanthropic dollars do not appear to have been very fungible in this sense, and thus black
children benefited substantially from the efforts of the philanthropists (see also Strong, Walters,
Driscoll, and Rosenberg 2000). In terms of our model, improvements in black school quality
financed by philanthropic efforts increased the economic benefits of black school attendance.
       In sum, a variety of factors help to explain the long-term convergence of black and white
schooling levels. In the initial aftermath of the Civil War, the returns to attending school for
even a very short time appear to have been substantial, and school attendance was facilitated by
political changes that forced southern state governments to provide education to black children
for the very first time. These incentives were sufficient to result in an initial period of
convergence in black and white schooling levels. However, eventually, by the late nineteenth
century, convergence slowed as political factors again intervened in the form of
disenfranchisement.
       However, disenfranchisement never led to a complete abrogation of black access to
schools in the South. Each successive generation of black parents was becoming progressively
better educated. As more blacks left the South, the costs of migrating from the region declined,
and the economic returns to migration, which was facilitated by schooling, loomed even larger.
Ultimately, an education was a ticket out of the rural South, a ticket that black children and their
parents sought eagerly.


5. Conclusions and Suggestions for Further Research


       In the contemporary United States racial differences in schooling receive a great deal of
public and scholarly attention. Without wishing to minimize the importance of these differences,
our goal has been to place them in historical perspective. From an historical perspective the
important “stylized fact” is racial convergence: over the period since Emancipation, black
schooling levels have converged on white schooling levels.



                                                  32
        Our approach in this chapter has been deliberately “broad-brushed” and we have relied
very heavily on one source of data, namely the IPUMS. Many features of our “analytical
narrative” could be fleshed out with additional effort. For example, archival evidence from
school records could shed additional light on the impact of the violations of the equal part of the
“separate but equal” doctrine on black school outcomes. Our analysis has concentrated heavily
on the South because this was where most black children historically were educated, but it also
because this is where records were generally kept separately by race. The scope for improving
our understanding of black education outside the South is vast.
        We have relied on the IPUMS samples to provide evidence on the economic returns to
schooling, but by their very nature, these data provide only crude evidence prior to 1940.
Although we are very doubtful of finding large bodies of relevant data, it is possible that firm-
level records may provide some additional evidence.
        Perhaps the most important extension of our work, however, is to other times and places.
Slavery was not unique to the United States, and many other countries have equally horrendous
histories of racial, ethnic, or religious persecution of minorities. Sometimes these histories are
abruptly interrupted through revolution, invasion, or spontaneous political change, but
invariably, the different groups start the new era with very different initial levels of human
capital and wealth. How quickly do the groups converge, if at all? Does convergence take place
for every one or does it take place only through a succession of cohorts? What role does the
“market” play? Is government policy a force for convergence or a force for maintaining or
exacerbating differences? These are the questions that have motivated the study of the historical
evolution of racial differences in the United States, and they are the same questions, we believe,
that should motivate similar studies of other histories.16




16
  The limited evidence currently available suggests that convergence may have been more rapid in the US than in
other New World slave societies. For example, the literacy rate in Brazil in 1920 (ages 10 and over), some three
decades, after slavery was abolished was only 30 percent (this figure pertains to the entire population); see
Engerman, Haber, and Sokoloff (2000, p. 126) for these and other literacy figures pertaining to New World slave
societies.
                                                       33
                                         References

Anderson, James D. 1988. The Education of Blacks in the South, 1860-1935. Chapel Hill, NC:
       University of North Carolina Press.
Bond, Horace Mann. 1934. The Education of the Negro in the American Social Order. New
       York: Prentice-Hall.
Bond, Horace Mann. 1939. Negro Education in Alabama: A Study in Cotton and Steel. New
       York: Associate Publishers.
Butchart, Ronald E. 1980. Northern Schools, Southern Blacks, and Reconstruction: Freedmen’s
       Education, 1862-1975. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press.
Butchart, Ronald E. 1988. “’We Can Best Instruct our Own People’: New York African-
       Americans in the Freedmen’s Schools, 1861-1875,” Afro-Americans in New
       York Life and History 12: 27-49.
Card, David and Alan Krueger. 1992. “School Quality and Black/White Relative Earnings: A
       Direct Assessment,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 151-200.
Cascio, Elizabeth U. 2003. “Schooling Attainment and the Introduction of Kindergartens in the
       South.” Working paper, University of California at Berkeley.
Collins, William J. and Robert A. Margo. 2001.”Race and Homeownership: A Century Long
       View,” Explorations in Economic History 38: 68-92.
Cornelius, Janet Duitsman. 1991. ‘When I can Read My Title Clear’ Literacy, Slavery, and
       Religion in the Ante-bellum South. Columbia: University of South Carolina Press.
Donohue, John J. and James J. Heckman. 1991. “Continuous Versus Episodic Change: The
       Impact of Affirmative Action and Civil Rights Policy on the Economic Status of Blacks,”
       Journal of Economic Literature 29: 1603-44.
Donohue, John J., James J. Heckman, and Petra Todd. 2002. “The Schooling of Southern
       Blacks: The Roles of Legal Activism and Private Philanthropy, 1910-1960.” Quarterly
       Journal of Economics 117: 225-268.
Engerman, Stanley L., Stephen H. Haber, and Kenneth L. Sokoloff. 2000. “Inequality,
       Institutions, and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies.” In C.
       Menard, ed. Institutions, Contracts, and Organizations: Perspectives from New
       Institutional Economics. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.
Fishback, Price V. and John H. Baskin. (1991). “Narrowing the Black-White Gap in Child
       Literacy in 1910: The Roles of School Inputs and Family Inputs,” Review of Economics
       and Statistics 73: 725-728.
Fogel, Robert W. 1989. Without Consent or Contract: The Rise and Fall of American Slavery.
       New York: W.W. Norton.
Fogel, Robert and Stanley Engerman. 1974. Time on the Cross: The Economics of American
       Negro Slavery. Boston: Little and Brown.
Genovese, Eugene. 1976. Roll, Jordan, Roll: The World the Slaves Made. New York: Random
       House.
Goldin, Claudia. 1990. Understanding the Gender Gap: An Economic History of American
       Women. New York: Oxford University Press.
Goldin, Claudia. 1998. “America’s Graduation from High School: The Evolution and Spread
       of Secondary Schooling in the Twentieth Century,” Journal of Economic History 58:
       345-374.
Goldin, Claudia and Robert A. Margo. 1992. “The Great Compression: The US Wage Structure
       at Mid-Century,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 107: 1-34.
Harlan, Louis. 1958. Separate and Unequal: School Campaigns and Racism in the Southern
                                                34
        Seaboard States, 1901-1915. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Harris, Carl V. 1985. “Stability and Change in Discrimination Against Black Public Schools:
        Birmingham, Alabama, 1871-1931,” Journal of Southern History 51: 375-416.
Higgs, Robert. 1982. “Accumulation of Property by Southern Blacks Before World War One,”
        American Economic Review 72: 725-737.
Jones, Jacqueline. 1980. Soldiers of Light and Love: Northern Teachers and Georgia Blacks,
        1865-1973. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press.
Kousser, J. Morgan. 1974. The Shaping of Southern Politics: Suffrage Restriction and the
        Establishment of the One Party South, 1880-1910. New Haven: Yale University Press.
Kousser, J. Morgan. 1980a. “Progressivism—For Middle Class Whites Only,” Journal of
        Southern History 46: 169-94.
Kousser, J. Morgan. 1980b. “’Separate but Not Equal: The Supreme Court’s First Decision on
        Racial Discrimination,” Journal of Southern History 46: 17-44.
Margo, Robert A. 1982. “Race Differences in Public School Expenditures: Disfranchisement and
        School Finance in Louisiana, 1890-1910,” Social Science History 6: 9-33.
Margo, Robert A. 1984a. “Accumulation of Property By Southern Blacks Before World War
        One: Comment and Further Evidence,” American Economic Review 74: 768-76.
Margo, Robert A. 1984b. “’Teacher Salaries in Black and White’: The South in 1910,”
        Explorations in Economic History 21: 306-326.
Margo, Robert A. 1986a. “Educational Achievement in Segregated School Systems: The Effects
        of ‘Separate-But-Equal’,” American Economic Review 76: 794-801.
Margo, Robert A. 1986b. “Race and Human Capital: Comment,” American Economic Review
        76: 1221-24.
Margo, Robert A. 1987. “Accounting for Racial Differences in School Attendance in the
        American South, 1900: The Role of Separate-But-Equal,” Review of Economics and
        Statistics 6: 661-666.
Margo, Robert A. 1990. Race and Schooling in the South, 1880-1950: An Economic History.
        Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Margo, Robert A. 1991 “Segregated Schools and the Mobility Hypothesis: A Model of
        Local Government Discrimination,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 106: 301-310.
Margo, Robert A. 2000. Wages and Labor Markets in the United States, 1820-1860. Chicago:
        University of Chicago Press.
Margo, Robert A. 2002.”The North-South Wage Gap, Before and After the Civil War,” National
        Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 8778, Cambridge, MA.
Martin, Sandy Dwayne. 1981. “The American Baptist Home Mission Society and Black Higher
        Education in the South, 1865-1920,” Foundations 24: 310-27.
Moehling, Carolyn. 2002. “Family Structure, School Attendance, and Child Labor in the
        American South in 1910.” Working Paper, Department of Economics, Yale University.
Morris, Robert C. 1981. Reading, ‘Riting, and Reconstruction: The Education of Freedmen in
        the South, 1861-1870. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Myrdal, Gunnar. 1944. An American Dilemma: The Negro Problem and Modern Democracy.
        New York: Harper & Brothers.
Orazem, Peter. 1987. “Black-White Differences in School Investment and Human Capital
        Production in Segregated School Systems,” American Economic Review 77: 714-723.
Peeps, J.M. Stephen. 1981. “Northern Philanthropy and the Emergence of Black Higher
        Education -- Do-Gooders, Compromisers, or Co-Conspirators?” Journal of Negro
        Education 50: 251-269.
Perlmann, Joel and Robert A. Margo. 2001. Women’s Work? American Schoolteachers,
                                            35
        1670-1920. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Pritchett, Jonathan B. 1985. “North Carolina’s Public Schools: Growth and Local Taxation,”
        Social Science History 9: 277-291.
Pritchett, Jonathan B. 1989. “The Burden of Negro Schooling: Tax Incidence and Racial
        Redistribution in Post-Bellum North Carolina,” Journal of Economic History 49:
        966-973.
Ruggles, Steven, Matthew Sobek, et al. 1997. Integrated Public Use Microdata Series.
        Minneapolis: Historical Census Projects, University of Minnesota.
Sacerdote, Bruce. 2003. “Slavery and the Intergeneration Transmission of Human Capital,”
        National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 9227, Cambridge, MA.
Smith, James. 1984. “Race and Human Capital,” American Economic Review 74: 685-98.
Smith, James. 1986. “Race and Human Capital: Reply,” American Economic Review 76: 1225-
        29.
Smith, James and Finis Welch. 1989. “Black Economic Progress After Myrdal,” Journal of
        Economic Literature 27: 519-64.
Smith, Richard. 1973. The Economics of Educational Discrimination in the United States
        South, 1870-1910. Ph.D. dissertation, Department of Economics, University of
        Wisconsin.
Strong, David, Pamela B. Walters, Brian Driscoll, and Scott Rosenberg. 2000. “Leveraging the
        State: Private Money and the Development of Public Education for Blacks,” American
        Sociological Review 65: 658-681.
United States Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census. Historical Statistics of the
        United States, Colonial Times to 1970. GPO: Washington, DC, 1975.
Vigdor, Jacob L. 2002. “The Pursuit of Opportunity: Explaining Selective Black Migration.”
        Journal of Urban Economics 51: 391-417.
Walters, Pamela B. and Carl M. Briggs. 1993. “The Family Economy, Child Labor, and
        Schooling: Evidence for the Early Twentieth Century South.” American Sociological
        Review 58: 163-181.
Walters, Pamela B. and David R. James. 1992. “Schooling for Some: Child Labor and School
        Enrollment of Blacks and White Children in the Early Twentieth Century South.”
        American Sociological Review 57: 625-650.
Walters, Pamela B., David R. James, and Holly J. McCammon. 1990. “Schooling or Working?
        Public Education, Racial Politics, and the Organization of Production in 1910,”
        Sociology of Education 63: 1-26.
Walters, Pamela B., David R. James, and Holly J. McCammon. 1997. “Citizenship and Public
        Schools: Accounting for Racial Inequality in Education in the Pre- and Post-
        Disfranchisement South.” American Sociological Review 62: 34-52.
Welch, Finis. 1973. “Education and Racial Discrimination,” in O. Ashenfelter and A. Rees, eds.
        Discrimination in Labor Markets, pp. 43-81. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press.




                                              36
                     Table 1: Illiteracy Among African-Americans, by Birth Cohort, 1870-1930

                1870             1880          1890           1900          1910           1920           1930
Panel A: Everyone, Age 10-69
1800-09         0.850
1810-19         0.864            0.794
1820-29         0.845            0.806         --
1830-39         0.833            0.781         --             0.847
1840-49         0.812            0.729         --             0.747         0.754
1850-59         0.764            0.656         --             0.617         0.590          0.613
1860-69                          0.627         --             0.454         0.417          0.422          --
1870-79                                        --             0.373         0.291          0.294          --
1880-89                                                       0.434         0.247          0.212          --
1890-99                                                                     0.289          0.186          --
1900-09                                                                                    0.182          --
1910-19                                                                                                   --
All Cohorts     0.808            0.689         0.557          0.482         0.336          0.242          0.146
Observations    66,240           43,711        full count     30,978        28,337         77,770         full count

Panel B: Southern Born
1800-09          0.873
1810-19          0.884           0.812
1820-29          0.868           0.827         ---
1830-39          0.864           0.806         ---            0.866
1840-49          0.842           0.758         ---            0.776         0.773
1850-59          0.795           0.684         ---            0.640         0.609          0.638
1860-69                          0.658         ---            0.480         0.442          0.447          --
1870-79                                        ---            0.393         0.307          0.315          --
1880-89                                                       0.460         0.264          0.229          --
1890-99                                                                     0.308          0.199          --
1900-09                                                                                    0.194          --
1910-19                                                                                                   --
All Cohorts      0.837           0.717         ---            0.507         0.355          0.258          --
Observations     61,769          40,620        ---            28,782        26,117         71,121         --

Panel C: Non-Southern Born
1800-09            0.408
1810-19            0.409            0.458
1820-29            0.479            0.440        ---
1830-39            0.420            0.409        ---          0.521
1840-49            0.416            0.367        ---          0.316          0.481
1850-59            0.374            0.319        ---          0.316          0.360         0.292
1860-69                             0.234        ---          0.160          0.130         0.135            --
1870-79                                          ---          0.100          0.104         0.082            --
1880-89                                                       0.078          0.057         0.051            --
1890-99                                                                      0.035         0.050            --
1900-09                                                                                    0.026            --
1910-19                                                                                                     --
All Cohorts        0.408            0.317        ---          0.157          0.109         0.064            --
Observations       4,452            3,085        ---          2,178          2,137         6,344            --
Notes: Samples include black and white persons, age 10 to age 69. Those who cannot write are counted as illiterate,
regardless of ability to read (following census convention according to U.S. Dept. of Commerce, 1975, p. 365).
Those with birthplace code “U.S., not specified” are not included in the “Southern Born” versus “Non-Southern
Born” tabulations. The census inquires about age, but generally not about year of birth; therefore, the birth cohorts
listed above are not precise. For example, those aged 60 to 69 at the time of the 1870 census are assigned to the
1800-1809 birth cohort, but some 60 year-olds would have been born in 1810. Given the age categories available in
the published census volumes, the 1890 and 1930 figures are calculated for persons from age 10 to 64 (rather than
age 10 to 69).
                                                         37
Sources: 1870, 1880, 1900, 1910, and 1920 figures are calculated using the IPUMS census data (Ruggles and Sobek
1997). The figures for 1890 and 1930 are calculated using the published census volumes.




                                                      38
                           Table 2: Illiteracy Among Whites, by Birth Cohort, 1870-1930

                      1870            1880          1890         1900          1910          1920          1930
Panel A: Everyone, Age 10-69
1800-09               0.148
1810-19               0.144           0.136
1820-29               0.130           0.124         --
1830-39               0.114           0.107         --           0.114
1840-49               0.100           0.092         --           0.090         0.087
1850-59               0.141           0.083         --           0.077         0.072         0.070         --
1860-69                               0.104         --           0.058         0.061         0.059         --
1870-79                                             --           0.047         0.057         0.054         --
1880-89                                                          0.052         0.052         0.051         --
1890-99                                                                        0.033         0.033         --
1900-09                                                                                      0.017         --
1910-19
All Cohorts           0.125           0.100         0.076        0.063         0.053         0.041         0.024
Observations          248,734         312,690       full count   245,281       245,330       710,213       full count

Panel B: Southern Born
1800-09                0.250
1810-19                0.253          0.226
1820-29                0.227          0.204         --
1830-39                0.203          0.188         --           0.183
1840-49                0.204          0.177         --           0.158         0.144
1850-59                0.325          0.177         --           0.148         0.124         0.121
1860-69                               0.267         --           0.107         0.095         0.095         --
1870-79                                             --           0.088         0.073         0.063         --
1880-89                                                          0.140         0.065         0.050         --
1890-99                                                                        0.076         0.038         --
1900-09                                                                                      0.041         --
1910-19                                                                                                    --
All Cohorts            0.255          0.211         --           0.126         0.083         0.054         --
Observations           64,598         73,993        --           54,973        55,076        161,753       --

Panel C: Non-Southern Born
1800-09                 0.113
1810-19                 0.109         0.109
1820-29                 0.102         0.101         --
1830-39                 0.089         0.085         --            0.098
1840-49                 0.067         0.068         --            0.073         0.071
1850-59                 0.073         0.051         --            0.058         0.058          0.057
1860-69                               0.049         --            0.047         0.053          0.051          --
1870-79                                             --            0.034         0.052          0.052          --
1880-89                                                           0.020         0.048          0.051          --
1890-99                                                                         0.017          0.032          --
1900-09                                                                                        0.008          --
1910-19                                                                                                       --
All Cohorts             0.083         0.066         --            0.044         0.044          0.037          --
Observations            184,071       238,614       --            190,170       189,828        546,536        --
Notes: The census inquires about age, but generally not about year of birth; therefore, the birth cohorts listed above
are not precise. For example, those aged 60 to 69 at the time of the 1870 census are assigned to the 1800-1809 birth
cohort, but some 60 year-olds would have been born in 1810. Given the age categories available in the published
census volumes, the 1890 and 1930 figures are calculated for persons from age 10 to 64 (rather than age 10 to 69).
Sources: 1870, 1880, 1900, 1910, and 1920 figures are calculated using the IPUMS census data (Ruggles and Sobek
1997). The figures for 1890 and 1930 are calculated using the published census volumes.


                                                         39
                   Table 3: Racial Gap in Illiteracy (Black –White), by Birth Cohort, 1870-1930

                       1870           1880          1890        1900         1910         1920    1930
Panel A: Everyone, Age 10-69
1800-09                0.702
1810-19                0.720          0.658
1820-29                0.715          0.682         --
1830-39                0.719          0.674         --          0.733
1840-49                0.712          0.637         --          0.657        0.667
1850-59                0.623          0.573         --          0.540        0.518        0.543
1860-69                               0.523         --          0.396        0.356        0.363   --
1870-79                                             --          0.326        0.234        0.240   --
1880-89                                                         0.382        0.195        0.161   --
1890-99                                                                      0.256        0.153   --
1900-09                                                                                   0.165   --
1910-19                                                                                           --
All Cohorts            0.683          0.589         0.481       0.419        0.283        0.201   0.122

Panel B: Southern Born
1800-09                  0.623
1810-19                  0.631        0.586
1820-29                  0.641        0.623         --
1830-39                  0.661        0.618         --          0.683
1840-49                  0.638        0.581         --          0.618        0.629
1850-59                  0.470        0.507         --          0.492        0.485        0.517
1860-69                               0.391         --          0.373        0.347        0.352   --
1870-79                                             --          0.305        0.234        0.252   --
1880-89                                                         0.320        0.199        0.179   --
1890-99                                                                      0.232        0.161   --
1900-09                                                                                   0.153   --
1910-19                                                                                           --
All Cohorts              0.582        0.506         --          0.381        0.272        0.204   --

Panel C: Non-Southern Born
1800-09                 0.295
1810-19                 0.300        0.349
1820-29                 0.377        0.339          --
1830-39                 0.331        0.324          --          0.423
1840-49                 0.349        0.299          --          0.243        0.410
1850-59                 0.301        0.268          --          0.258        0.302        0.235
1860-69                              0.185          --          0.113        0.077        0.084   --
1870-79                                             --          0.066        0.052        0.030   --
1880-89                                                         0.058        0.009        0.000   --
1890-99                                                                      0.018        0.018   --
1900-09                                                                                   0.018   --
1910-19                                                                                           --
All Cohorts             0.325        0.251          --          0.113        0.065        0.027   --
Notes and Sources: See notes and sources for table 1 or 2.




                                                         40
                    Table 4: Emancipation and the Trend in Black Illiteracy in 20-29 Age Cohort

                 Free Black        Estimated Slave          Counterfactual        Actual Black         Col. 4 – Col. 3
                 Illiteracy        Illiteracy               Black Illiteracy      Illiteracy
Panel A: No Adjustment for Cohort Drift
1850             0.362             0.910                                          0.845
1860             0.291             0.899                                          0.833
1870                                                        0.842                 0.812                -0.030
                                                                                                       [0.025]
1880                                                        0.794                 0.656                -0.138
                                                                                                       [-0.121]
1900                                                        0.758                 0.373                -0.385
                                                                                                       [0.384]

Panel B: Adjustment for Cohort Drift
1850                                                                              0.924
1860                                                                              0.916
1870                                                        0.897                 0.812                 -0.085
                                                                                                        [-0.059]
1880                                                        0.889                   0.656               -0.233
                                                                                                        [-0.209]
1900                                                        0.865                   0.373               -0.492
                                                                                                        [-0.478]
Notes and Sources: Because the 1850 and 1860 census only reported literacy for free blacks, we must estimate the
“actual black illiteracy” rates in those years. In panel A, the 1850 and 1860 “actual black illiteracy” rates equal the
rates of those aged 40-49 and 30-39 in 1870. “Free black illiteracy” for 1850 and 1860 is calculated using the
IPUMS for those years. Slave illiteracy in 1850 and 1860 is estimated using the slave share of the black population
(from Historical Statistics of the United States), the “actual black illiteracy” rate, and the free black illiteracy rate.
For 1870, 1880, and 1900, the actual black illiteracy rate is calculated using the IPUMS. Bracketed terms are
calculated assuming that the counterfactual free black illiteracy rate in those years would have been zero. In panel
B, we make an upward adjustment to the estimated black illiteracy rates in 1850 and 1860. The adjustment in 1850
equals the decline in illiteracy experienced by the 1870-79




                                                           41
                           Table 5: School Attendance Rates, by Age Cohort, 1870-1940

                  1870        1880           1890         1900         1910         1920         1930         1940
Panel A: By Region, Ages 5-19
Black            0.097        0.222          0.329        0.355        0.461        0.567        0.636        0.671
 South           0.074        0.205           ---         0.344        0.450        0.559         ---         0.646
 Non-South       0.344        0.416           ---         0.490        0.607        0.645         ---         0.780

White              0.527        0.556        0.578        0.570        0.655        0.696        0.749        0.750
 South             0.310        0.414         ---         0.520        0.618        0.661         ---         0.684
 Non-South         0.601        0.606         ---         0.589        0.671        0.711         ---         0.779

Panel B: By Age Cohort
Black
 5-9             0.065          0.157        0.242        0.263        0.404        0.542         ---         0.669
 10-14           0.153          0.362        0.517        0.567        0.685        0.791         ---         0.890
 15-19           0.070          0.144        0.215        0.234        0.292        0.343         ---         0.443

White
  5-9               0.498      0.540        0.534        0.517       0.653        0.712          ---          0.744
  10-14             0.713      0.779        0.846        0.845       0.916        0.940          ---          0.941
  15-19             0.339      0.323        0.346        0.341       0.401        0.401          ---          0.573
Notes and Sources: 1870, 1880, 1900, 1910, 1920, and 1940 figures are calculated using the IPUMS census data
(Ruggles and Sobek 1997). Figures for 1890 are calculated using Tables 11 (white) and 17 (black) from Volume 1
of the published Census of Population, in combination with the age categories reported in Historical Statistics of the
United States (series A 119-134). 1930 figures are calculated using Table 8, Chapter 12, Volume II of the Census of
Population.




                                                         42
                                Table 6: School Enrollment Rates by Race, 1950-1990

                        1950                 1960               1970                  1980      1990
Panel A: By Region, Ages 5-24
Black                   58.9                  69.1              72.5                  72.3       73.7
 South                  58.7                  68.4              71.5                  71.1       74.1
 Non-South              59.4                  70.3              73.8                  73.5       73.3

White                    62.4                 72.0              74.1            70.6 [70.7]   74.1 [74.7]
 South                   58.7                 67.6              69.9            69.1 [69.1]   72.9 [73.1]
 Non-South               64.0                 73.8              75.8            71.2 [71.4]   74.7 [75.5]

Panel B: By Age Cohort
Black
 5-9                     71.9                 80.3              84.7                  93.9       89.3
 10-14                   93.2                 95.0              95.6                  97.8       95.6
 15-19                   52.9                 63.7              73.5                  75.6       78.6
 20-24                   10.0                 10.2              13.4                  21.2       27.8

White
 5-9                      76.3               83.8               87.8            94.2 [94.4]   89.1 [89.1]
 10-14                    95.7               97.4               97.4            99.0 [99.1]   96.4 [96.5]
 15-19                    61.8               70.0               78.7            75.2 [75.9]   80.6 [81.7]
 20-24                    14.5               15.1               22.2            23.3 [23.8]   33.5 [34.7]
Notes: The figures in brackets exclude Hispanic whites.
Sources: IPUMS (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).




                                                          43
                  Table 7: Mean Years of Education, by Race, Birth Cohort, and Region of Birth

                                          White                        Black                     Difference
Panel A: All States
       1880-84 [1940]                      7.79                        4.66                          3.13
       1885-89 [1940]                      7.99                        4.95                          3.04
       1890-94 [1940]                      8.35                        5.37                          2.98
       1895-99 [1940]                      8.83                        5.58                          3.25
       1900-04 [1940]                      9.27                        5.92                          3.35
       1905-09 [1940]                      9.81                        6.36                          3.45
       1910-14 [1950]                     10.23                        7.23                          3.00
       1915-19 [1950]                     10.62                        7.83                          2.79
       1920-24 [1960]                 11.09 (11.12)                 8.73 (8.74)                      2.36
       1925-29 [1960]                 11.25 (11.27)                 9.22 (9.23)                      2.03
       1930-34 [1970]                 11.70 (11.74)                10.15 (10.17)                     1.55
       1935-39 [1970]                 11.93 (11.97)                10.54 (10.54)                     1.39
       1940-44 [1980]                 12.67 (12.82)                11.67 (11.74)                     1.00
       1945-49 [1980]                 13.04 (13.19)                12.11 (12.17)                     0.93
       1950-54 [1980]                 12.99 (13.08)                12.21 (12.25)                     0.78

Panel B: Southern Born
          1880-84                         7.48                         4.41                          3.07
          1885-89                         7.73                         4.68                          3.05
          1890-94                         8.04                         5.10                          2.94
          1895-99                         8.29                         5.32                          2.97
          1900-04                         8.59                         5.65                          2.94
          1905-09                         9.03                         6.07                          2.96
          1910-14                         9.30                         6.90                          2.40
          1915-19                         9.66                         7.52                          2.14
          1920-24                     10.17 (10.19)                 8.32 (8.33)                      1.85
          1925-29                     10.43 (10.44)                 8.79 (8.80)                      1.64
          1930-34                     10.99 (11.02)                 9.89 (9.91)                      1.10
          1935-39                     11.34 (11.36)                10.37 (10.37)                     0.97
          1940-44                     12.19 (12.30)                11.49 (11.55)                     0.70
          1945-49                     12.62 (12.73)                11.95 (12.00)                     0.67
          1950-54                     12.68 (12.75)                12.02 (12.04)                     0.66

Panel C: Non-Southern Born
           1880-84                          7.87                         6.58                          1.29
           1885-89                          8.06                         7.21                          0.85
           1890-94                          8.44                         7.48                          0.96
           1895-99                          8.99                         7.68                          1.31
           1900-04                          9.49                         8.19                          1.30
           1905-09                         10.08                         8.79                          1.29
           1910-14                         10.57                         9.59                          0.98
           1915-19                         10.96                         9.75                          1.21
           1920-24                     11.41 (11.44)                10.16 (10.18)                      1.25
           1925-29                     11.55 (11.58)                10.50 (10.51)                      1.05
           1930-34                     11.96 (12.00)                10.69 (10.70)                      1.27
           1935-39                     12.15 (12.19)                10.87 (10.88)                      1.28
           1940-44                     12.85 (13.01)                12.12 (12.21)                      0.73
           1945-49                     13.19 (13.35)                12.43 (12.51)                      0.76
           1950-54                     13.10 (13.20)                12.53 (12.58)                      0.57
Notes: The topcoded level of educational attainment changed over time. In 1940 and 1950, the topcode was for five
(or more) years of college; in 1960 and 1970, the topcode was for six (or more) years of college; for 1980, the
topcode was for eight (or more) years of college. The figures in parentheses do not make any adjustments for the
change in topcode. The figures that are not in parentheses apply a topcode of five years of college for all samples.

                                                        44
Sources: The census years in square brackets (panel A, column 1) denote the IPUMS sample from which the data
are drawn for that cohort. Figures for the 1880-84 to 1905-09 cohorts are calculated using the 1940 IPUMS; figures
for 1910-14 to 1915-19 are calculated using the 1950 IPUMS; figures for 1920-24 to 1925-29 are calculated using
the 1960 IPUMS; 1930-34 to 1935-39 are calculated using the 1970 IPUMS; 1940-44 to 1950-54 are calculated
using the 1980 IPUMS.




                                                       45
                      Table 8: Distribution of Years of Education, by Race and Birth Cohort (men)

                                            White                                           Black
                         10 percentile   50 percentile   90 percentile   10 percentile   50 percentile   90 percentile
Panel A: All States
  1880-84 [1940]              3               8                12             0               4               8
  1885-89 [1940]              3               8                12             0               4               8
  1890-94 [1940]              4               8                13             0               5               9
  1895-99 [1940]              5               8                13             1               5               9
  1900-04 [1940]              5                8               14             1                5              10
  1905-09 [1940]              6                9               14             2                6              11
  1910-14 [1950]              6               10               15             2                7              12
  1915-19 [1950]              7               11               15             3                8              12
  1920-24 [1960]              7               12               16             3                8              12
  1925-29 [1960]              7               12               16             4                9              13
  1930-34 [1970]              8               12               17             5               10              14
  1935-39 [1970]              8               12               16             6               11              14
  1940-44 [1980]              9               12               18             8               12              16
  1945-49 [1980]              10              13               18             9               12              16
  1950-54 [1980]              10              12               17             9               12              16

Panel B: Southern Born
      1880-84                  3               7               12             0                4               8
      1885-89                  3               7               12             0                4               8
      1890-94                  3               8               12             0                4               8
      1895-99                  4               8               12             0                5               9
      1900-04                  4               8               13             1                5               9
      1905-09                  4               8               13             2               5               10
      1910-14                  4               9               14             2               6               12
      1915-19                  5               9               14             2               7               12
      1920-24                  5              11               16             3                8              12
      1925-29                  6              11               16             3                8              12
      1930-34                  6              12               16             5               10              14
      1935-39                  7              12               16             6               11              13
      1940-44                  8              12               17             8               12              15
      1945-49                  9              12               17             8               12              16
      1950-54                  9              12               16             9               12              15

Panel C: Non-Southern Born
      1880-84               3            8                     12              2               7              12
      1885-89               3            8                     12              3               7              12
      1890-94               4            8                     13              3               8              12
      1895-99               5            8                     14              4               8              12
      1900-04               6            8                     14              4               8              12
      1905-09               7           10                     15              4               8              13
      1910-14               7           11                     16              5               9              13
      1915-19               8           12                     16              5              10              14
      1920-24               8           12                     16              6              10              14
      1925-29               8           12                     16              7              11              14
      1930-34               8           12                     17              6              11              14
      1935-39               9           12                     17              8              12              14
      1940-44              10           12                     18              9              12              16
      1945-49              11           13                     18             10              12              16
      1950-54              11           13                     17             10              12              16
Source: IPUMS samples (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).

                                                          46
           Table 9: Age Distributions for Children Attending School, by Highest Grade Completed, 1940

Age            Completed         Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed
               1st Grade         1st Grade        4th Grade        4th Grade        8th Grade        8th Grade
               White             Black            White            Black            White            Black
Panel A: 1940 All States
Under 6        3.9               2.1
6              23.9              18.1
7              42.7              28.0
8              20.6              21.9             1.7              2.0
9              5.1               12.2             16.1             8.2
10             1.8               7.8              38.8             17.1
11                               3.8              23.5             17.4                              1.2
12                               2.4              10.4             17.3             3.1              3.3
13                               1.3              4.6              12.7             16.5             10.3
14                               1.1              2.2              10.8             36.6             24.2
15                                                                 5.6              24.2             20.3
16                                                                 4.0              10.1             19.6
Over 16                                                            4.5              8.7              19.9

Panel B: 1940 Southern States
Under 6        1.3               1.6
6              19.7              16.5
7              38.8              26.1
8              24.9              22.7             1.5              1.7
9              8.1               13.1             12.4             5.9
10             3.8               8.8              30.7             14.1
11             1.5               4.3              23.8             16.0
12             1.0               2.8              14.6             18.4             2.4              3.0
13                               1.4              7.9              14.5             14.9             9.1
14                               1.3              4.7              12.6             31.5             20.8
15                                                2.0              6.5              25.9             18.7
16                                                1.0              4.7              13.5             21.7
Over 16                                           1.1              5.2              10.9             24.7

Panel C: 1940 Non-Southern States
Under 6         5.1              5.4
6               25.8             27.5
7               44.5             39.4
8               18.6             17.2              1.8                3.7
9               3.7              6.7               17.8               18.6
10                               1.7               42.5               30.6
11                                                 23.4               24.1                           1.8
12                                                 8.5                12.1            3.2            3.8
13                                                 3.1                4.5             16.9           12.1
14                                                 1.1                2.6             37.9           29.4
15                                                                    1.4             23.8           22.7
16                                                                                    9.3            16.6
Over 16                                                                               8.2            12.7
Notes: Figures represent the age distribution of students (that is, those who have attended school during the census
year) who have completed (only) a particular grade level. Figures under one percent are not shown.
Sources: IPUMS (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).




                                                         47
          Table 10: Age Distributions for Children Attending School, by Highest Grade Completed, 1960

Age            Completed         Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed
               1st Grade         1st Grade        4th Grade        4th Grade        8th Grade        8th Grade
               White             Black            White            Black            White            Black
Panel A: 1960 All States
Under 6                          1.2
6              4.7               9.3
7              55.6              45.0
8              32.5              29.8
9              4.3               9.5              3.0              5.8
10                               2.6              53.0             39.2
11                                                33.7             30.7
12                                                6.7              12.5                              1.7
13                                                1.9              5.7              4.9              8.1
14                                                                 1.9              50.6             32.3
15                                                                 1.1              31.2             30.6
16                                                                                  7.6              14.5
Over 16                                                                             4.9              12.4

Panel B: 1960 Southern States
Under 6                          1.1
6              4.1               7.9
7              48.6              40.1
8              36.3              32.9
9              6.7               11.2             2.3              4.5
10             1.9               3.5              44.9             35.3
11                               1.2              36.8             30.6
12                                                9.5              14.5                              1.3
13                                                3.6              7.1              4.2              7.2
14                                                1.1              2.7              42.5             29.6
15                                                                 1.6              34.7             31.2
16                                                                                  10.6             16.0
Over 16                                                                             7.3              14.4

Panel C: 1960 Non-Southern States
Under 6                          1.3
6             5.0                11.8
7             58.4               53.9
8             31.1               24.2                                 1.0
9             3.4                6.3               3.3                7.9
10                               1.0               56.2               45.9
11                                                 32.5               30.8
12                                                 5.5                9.1                            2.4
13                                                 1.1                3.2             5.2            9.8
14                                                                                    53.6           37.2
15                                                                                    29.8           29.5
16                                                                                    6.5            11.6
Over 16                                                                               4.0            9.0
Notes: Figures represent the age distribution of students (that is, those who have attended school during the census
year) who have completed (only) a particular grade level. Figures under one percent are not shown.
Sources: IPUMS (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).




                                                         48
          Table 11: Age Distributions for Children Attending School, by Highest Grade Completed, 1980

Age            Completed         Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed        Completed
               1st Grade         1st Grade        4th Grade        4th Grade        8th Grade        8th Grade
               White             Black            White            Black            White            Black
Panel A: 1980 All States
Under 6
6              1.9               5.4
7              47.7              47.6
8              43.5              38.0
9              5.7               7.2              1.7              4.7
10                                                49.5             47.7
11                                                42.1             36.7
12                                                5.6              8.2
13                                                                 1.4              1.6              2.9
14                                                                                  46.6             39.5
15                                                                                  41.9             38.4
16                                                                                  6.8              11.8
Over 16                                                                             2.9              7.0

Panel B: 1980 Southern States
Under 6
6             1.9                4.0
7             46.5               44.9
8             43.4               40.3
9             6.9                9.1              1.7              3.9
10                                                48.2             45.0
11                                                41.9             38.4
12                                                6.6              9.7
13                                                1.0              1.8              1.4              2.5
14                                                                                  44.2             36.8
15                                                                                  41.5             39.2
16                                                                                  8.9              12.9
Over 16                                                                             3.8              8.3

Panel C: 1980 Non-Southern States
Under 6
6               1.9              6.9
7               48.3             50.6
8               43.6             35.4
9               5.2              5.0               1.6                5.5
10                                                 50.0               50.6
11                                                 42.3               35.0
12                                                 5.2                6.5
13                                                                    1.1             1.7            3.3
14                                                                                    47.6           42.4
15                                                                                    42.1           37.6
16                                                                                    5.9            10.7
Over 16                                                                               2.5            5.6
Notes: Figures represent the age distribution of students (that is, those who have attended school during the census
year) who have completed (only) a particular grade level. Figures under one percent are not shown.
Sources: IPUMS (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).




                                                         49
                         Table 12: Racial Differences in School Quality in the South 1890-1950:
                                       Black-White Ratio of Per Pupil Spending

                      Ca. 1890               Ca. 1910               Ca. 1935               Ca. 1950
Alabama               0.99                   0.31                   0.33                   0.76
Arkansas              na                     0.42                   0.45                   0.62
Delaware              na                     0.75                   1.00                   0.87
Florida               0.49                   0.28                   0.41                   0.8
Georgia               na                     0.29                   0.27                   0.68
Louisiana             0.5                    0.17                   0.27                   0.62
Maryland              0.65                   0.59                   0.78                   0.95
Mississippi           0.5                    0.28                   0.23                   0.31
North Carolina        1.01                   0.54                   0.64                   0.93
South Carolina        na                     0.19                   0.28                   0.64
Tennessee             na                     0.67                   0.57                   0.69
Texas                 na                     0.63                   0.50                   0.83
Virginia              0.69                   0.42                   0.52                   0.88
Source: Margo (1990, pp. 21-22).




                                                        50
                        Table 13: The Returns to Literacy, by Race and Region, 1870-1920

                   1870                1880               1900                1910               1920
National
 White             0.160               0.133              0.169               0.171              0.188
                   (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.005)             (0.005)            (0.004)
                   [8.074]             [8.086]            [8.176]             [8.212]            [8.313]
 Black             0.109               0.067              0.119               0.138              0.118
                   (0.008)             (0.009)            (0.010)             (0.010)            (0.008)
                   [7.007]             [7.089]            [7.135]             [7.138]            [7.318]

South
 White             0.175               0.150              0.202               0.243              0.286
                   (0.008)             (0.007)            (0.010)             (0.011)            (0.008)
                   [7.655]             [7.656]            [7.736]             [7.789]            [7.972]
 Black             0.117               0.066              0.120               0.133              0.113
                   (0.008)             (0.009)            (0.011)             (0.011)            (0.008)
                   [6.915]             [6.997]            [7.019]             [7.008]            [7.111]

Non-South
 White              0.112                 0.085              0.119               0.111                0.118
                    (0.005)               (0.005)            (0.006)             (0.006)              (0.004)
                    [8.196]               [8.218]            [8.309]             [8.345]              [8.413]
  Black             0.057                 0.031              0.024               0.039                0.004
                    (0.020)               (0.024)            (0.027)             (0.032)              (0.014)
                    [7.840]               [7.875]            [8.055]             [8.020]              [8.165]
Notes: Each coefficient in the table is from a separate regression of log occupational status on a fourth-order
polynomial in age, region dummies (when multiple regions are included), central city and suburban residence
dummies, and dummies for inter-regional and international migrants. Unpaid family farm workers are excluded.
The occupational status index is based on the median total income in 1960 for men by race, region (Northeast,
Midwest, South, West), and three-digit occupation cells. Standard errors are in parentheses.
Source: Computed from IPUMS samples (Ruggles and Sobek 1997).




                                                       51
