                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                                   THE MARRIED WIDOW:
                                MARRIAGE PENALTIES MATTER!

                                             Michael Baker
                                              Emily Hanna
                                           Jasmin Kantarevic

                                          Working Paper 9782
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9782


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




We thank Stacy Dickert-Conlin for very helpful discussions and Dwayne Benjamin, Kevin Milligan,
Marianne Page, Aloysius Siow, Frances Woolley and numerous seminar participants for comments. Much
of this paper was completed while Baker held a F.H Gruen Distinguished Fellowship at the Australian
National University. He thanks the Economics Program, Research School of Social Sciences at ANU for their
hospitality and research support. He also gratefully acknowledges the funding of SSHRC (Grant #410-99-
0112). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research.

©2003 by Michael Baker, Emily Hanna, and Jasmin Kantarevic. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
© notice, is given to the source.
The Married Widow: Marriage Penalties Matter!
Michael Baker, Emily Hanna, and Jasmin Kantarevic
NBER Working Paper No. 9782
June 2003
JEL No. H2, H3, J1

                                           ABSTRACT

Marriage penalties are a controversial feature of many government policies. Empirical evidence of
their behavioral effects is quite mixed. This is surprising because economic theory predicts that they
should have an impact on the headship decision. We investigate the removal of marriage penalties

from the surviving spouse pensions of the Canadian public pension system in the 1980s. These
reforms provide a simple and transparent source of identification. Our results indicate that marriage

penalties can have large and persistent effects on marriage decisions. We also present evidence
suggesting that it is individuals with characteristics correlated with greater wealth who respond to
the penalties.

Michael Baker                  Emily Hanna                   Jasmin Kantarevic
Department of Economics        Department of Economics       Department of Economics
University of Toronto                  University of Toronto         University of Toronto
150 St. George St.             150 St. George St.            150 St. George St.
Toronto, ON M5S 3G7            Toronto, ON M5S 3G7           Toronto, ON M5S 3G7
and NBER                       ehanna@chass.utoronto.ca jkantare@chass.utoronto.ca
baker@chass.utoronto.ca
Introduction

       Subsidies or penalties for certain family structures are a feature of many government

policies. These provisions attract spirited debate in both media and policy circles. Alm et al.

(1999) argue that marriage penalties are viewed as not only violating principals of equity and

efficiency, but also undermining the rule of law and family values. Few features of legislation

enjoy such widespread notoriety.

       Economists’ primary interest is in the behavioural effects of these penalties. The reasons

are standard efficiency concerns, as well as the ideal opportunity the penalties provide to test the

widely accepted economic model of marriage (Becker 1973, 1974). This model predicts that

relative economic opportunities, inside and outside marriage, are an input to the decision to wed.

Marriage penalties/subsidies generate direct variation in income by an individual’s marital state.

An additional policy interest is the possible collateral effects of the penalties on health and

longevity, as well as children’s outcomes. For example, if marriage penalties promote out of

wedlock births, or prevent widowed or divorced individuals from re-marrying, children will miss

any developmental benefits that result from growing up with two, married adults instead of

growing up with two, cohabiting adults or with a single adult.

       Empirical evidence of the impact of marriage penalties challenges both our theoretical

intuition and policy interest. Most studies indicate that the penalties have very modest effects. A

number of explanations are offered for this anomaly. The structure of the penalties in, for

example, the US welfare system makes identification problematic (e.g., Moffitt 1998).

Alternatively, the variation in the penalties of the US federal tax code across individuals or

regions or time is not very large (see, for example, Alm et al 1999). One might speculate that

these problems mask substantial impacts of marriage penalties but there is little direct evidence




                                                                                                    3
that this is true. In another vein, new theoretical work explains how a strong link between

marriage penalties and marriage and/or illegitimate births can be consistent with the small

empirical estimates (e.g., Nechyba 2001).

       In this paper we present direct evidence that marriage penalties can have large and

persistent effects on marriage decisions. Our analysis exploits reforms that removed marriage

penalties from the surviving spouse pensions of the Canadian public pension system in the

1980s. Prior to the reforms surviving spouses lost their pensions upon remarriage. A unique

feature of the Canadian system is that there are two separate, but mostly identical, pension plans

that cover individuals in different parts of the country. The Quebec Pension Plan (QPP) serves

individuals working in Quebec, while the Canada Pension Plan (CPP) serves workers in other

parts of the country. The marriage penalties were removed from the QPP in 1984 and from the

CPP in 1987. The structure of the reforms allows us to avoid many of the perceived deficiencies

of previous studies. More specifically, it offers: 1) simple identification—the temporal structure

implies that as widows/widowers in one part of the country are affected by a reform, those in

another part are not, 2) size—the marriage penalty is relatively large so that widows/widowers in

most age groups experience an unambiguous reduction in financial welfare through remarriage

before the reforms take place, 3) high treatment—the majority of prime age widows were in

receipt of a survivor pension before the reforms took place, and 4) breadth—the group of

individuals affected by the reforms spans a fairly large range of the age distribution, and a

greater range of the income distribution than samples used in many past studies.

       Trends in marriage rates by previous marital status, presented in figure 1, suggest these

penalties had some effect. There is a significant negative trend in the marriage rate of each

group throughout the period. There are distinct spikes in the remarriage rates of widows,




                                                                                                     4
however, in 1984 and 1987 when the marriage penalties were removed from the QPP and CPP,

respectively.1 Furthermore, post 1987 there appears to be a trend break in the remarriage rates of

widows relative to the rates of the other groups.

         Using data from vital statistics, we confirm this inference documenting large and

significant jumps in the remarriage rates of widows aged 15-59 and prime age widowers as the

reforms take place. The identification of this result is transparent in graphs of the remarriage

rates of widows and widowers by jurisdiction over the period, and the estimates are robust to a

variety of checks for spurious inference. The impact of the penalties varies across age groups and

jurisdictions in expected ways. Finally, we control for “stock” or “timing” effects that appear as

spikes in remarriage rates in the years that the reforms took effect. Controlling for these spikes, a

persistent, substantive effect of the penalties on marriage decisions remains.

         Our estimates contrast with many in the literature. One explanation is the identification

strategy we exploit coupled with the large values of the penalty and high levels of treatment.

Another possibility is that many previous studies focus on the low-income population. We argue

that many of the benefits of marriage over alternatives such as cohabitation have value to higher

income individuals. This is because the benefits are typically legal rights to assets and income

when the relationship ends, or to employment benefits associated with high paying jobs. Using

data from the 1990 and 1995 General Social Surveys we investigate the characteristics of

widows/widowers who remarried as the penalties were removed. We present evidence that

suggests that individuals responding to the reforms possess characteristics associated with higher

economic status relative to the mean in the pre-reform equilibrium.




1
  There is also a spike in the marriage rate of divorcees in 1987. This is due to the 1986 reforms of Canada’s divorce
law. The effect of these reforms is discussed below.


                                                                                                                    5
        While our primary contribution is new evidence that marriage penalties matter, the

application to survivor pensions commands policy interest in its own right. Many survivor

pensions incorporate marriage penalties either explicitly through a prohibition of remarriage, or

implicitly through an income test applied at the household level. For example, the survivor

benefits of the public pension plans of almost all countries of the European Union incorporate a

full or partial penalty2, as do the benefits of the US Social Security system3. Our results provide

direct evidence on the potential impact of these penalties on the remarriage decisions of

beneficiaries.

Previous Evidence

        The vast majority of previous evidence is studies of the marriage penalties in US federal

laws, many of which are surveyed in Alm et al. (1999). One source is the penalties in the US

federal tax code. The results indicate fairly small effects.4 For example, Alm and Whittingham

(1999) estimate the elasticity of the probability of marriage with respect to the marriage penalty

to be –0.23 for females and can’t reject the hypothesis of no effect for males. One potential

problem here is that the tax code is federal which makes identification difficult. Time series

variation in the penalty due to changes in the tax law may be correlated with secular trends in

family structure. There is also cross-section variation in the penalty—the penalty generally

larger the greater the similarity of spouses’ incomes—but this may be correlated with

heterogeneity in couples’ decision-making processes, bargaining positions or preferences for

marriage. In addition, as documented by Alm and Whittington (1996a), there are multiple,

legitimate ways to calculate the penalty and the estimated penalties at the mean are not that large.

2
  See http://europa.eu.int/comm/employment_social/missoc2001/missoc_153_en.htm. The exception appears to be
Denmark in cases in which the death occurred after June 30, 1992.
3
  See Brien et al (2000) for example.




                                                                                                              6
         The other main source of evidence is the literature on welfare and marriage. There are

numerous papers that explore the relationship between the incidence of marriage or single

parenthood and the various income maintenance programs in the United States (i.e., AFDC).5 As

noted by Moffitt (1998) in his survey of this literature, these studies provide conflicting signals,

and “better” identification has not necessarily led to more confidence a relationship exists.

Moffitt (1994) and Hoynes (1997) report that the penalties have little effect in studies that exploit

time-series cross-section variation in welfare benefits and make proper allowance for state

specific and individual specific fixed effects. Dooley et al (2001) make a very similar point

using Canadian data. That said, Yelowitz (1998) reports some effect of headship incentives in

the Medicaid program on marriage exploiting the expansions of the program in the 1980s and

early 1990s for identification, and Grogger and Bronars (2001) document a relationship between

welfare and marriage using a twins experiment.

         In addition to concerns about identification, other factors hindering progress in this

literature include low levels of treatment and a focus on the stocks of individuals in various

marital states. For example, the proportion of individuals potentially affected by AFDC rules in

analysis samples can be fairly low.6 Also, significant effects on flows out of single parenthood

may build slowly over time in the stock, and therefore be lost in contemporaneous comparisons

of changes in the stock to changes in marriage penalties.7




4
  Similar conclusions are offered in studies of marriage penalties and the decision to divorce (Whittington and Alm
1997 and Dickert-Conlin 1999).
5
  Recent research has investigated the marriage incentives of the TANF programs relative to this period (e.g., Bitler
et al 2002).
6
  Moffitt (1992) reports AFDC participation rates of female heads with children of under 50 percent in the 1980s.
7
  Hoynes (1997) and Bitler et al. (2002) discuss the stock/flow issue in the context of the marriage penalties in the
welfare system.


                                                                                                                    7
         There is evidence of more substantial impacts of tax provisions on the timing of

marriage, divorce and births.8 Alm and Whittington (1996b) find that the size of the potential

marriage penalty a couple faces has an effect on the decision to postpone marriage to the

following tax year. Gelardi (1996) identifies a link between the timing of marriages within the

year and tax provisions using time-series variation in the laws of Canada and the United

Kingdom. Finally, Dickert-Conlin and Chandra (1999) provide evidence that the probability of a

birth in the last week of the year (versus the first week of the following year) is related to child

provisions in the US federal tax code.

         One other paper, of interest here, is Brien et al’s (2000) study of the marriage penalties in

the US Social Security (SS) system. The authors exploit a change in the law in 1979, which

removed a partial penalty for remarriage after age 60. They document a dip in the marriage rate

of widows at age 59, and spike at age 60, which becomes more pronounced in the post-1979

period. This strongly suggests that the SS marriage penalty affects the timing of marriage.

Survivor’s Benefits in the Canada and Quebec Pension Plans

         The CPP and QPP provide survivor benefits to widows and widowers (henceforth

“widows”). To qualify, an individual must be the legal or common law spouse of the deceased.

Separated legal spouses can also qualify for this benefit.9 The benefit is payable, regardless of

the age of the deceased, as long as s/he made contributions to the Plans in one third of the

calendar years in the contributory period (three year minimum) or 10 calendar years, whichever

is less. The contributory period begins at age 18 (or January 1, 1966, whichever is later) and in

the 1980s ends at age 65 (or death whichever is earlier). Prior to the reforms outlined below,

8
  There is a parallel here to the empirical tax literature. Auerbach and Slemrod (1997) argue that tax reform leads to
a hierarchy of responses, ranging from first order effects on the timing of transactions to higher order effects on real
decisions.




                                                                                                                      8
benefit payment terminates if the surviving spouse remarries. Benefits are re-instated, however,

if this subsequent marriage ends in divorce or the new spouse also dies.10

         The benefits payable are based on the deceased’s retirement pension, calculated at the

time of death, but vary with the age and family circumstances of the surviving spouse. The

formulas in the 1980s, prior to the reforms removing the marriage penalties, are as follows. If

the surviving spouse is aged 65 or older, s/he would receive the greater of a) 37.5 percent of the

deceased’s retirement pension plus 100 percent of her or his own retirement pension, or b) 60

percent of the deceased’s retirement pension plus 60 percent of her or his own retirement

pension, with an upper cap equal to the maximum retirement pension payable in that year. If the

surviving spouse is younger than 65, and is disabled or has dependent children, the payment is

37.5 percent of the deceased’s retirement pension plus a flat rate benefit which varies by year,

and between the CPP and QPP programs. For surviving spouses younger than age 35, the

payments only continue while the children are dependent: up to age 18, or age 25 if they are in

school. Finally if the surviving spouse is younger than 65 and is not disabled or has no

dependent children, the same formula is used except that the benefit is reduced by 1/120 for each

month the surviving spouse is younger than age 45, so that no benefit is payable to individuals

aged 35 or younger.11 There are also separate orphan’s benefits for surviving dependent

children.

         The flat rate component of these benefits in the 1980s, payable to surviving spouses

under age 65, is presented in table 1. Note that the rates are generally much higher in the QPP

than the CPP. This difference between the CPP and QPP emerged in 1973 when the QPP rate


9
  Applications for survivors benefits can be rejected if death occurs within one year of marriage.
10
   In this latter case, the surviving spouse can collect survivor’s benefits on the basis of any of her deceased spouses’
records.
11
   Note, however, these excluded individuals are eligible for a survivor’s benefits upon reaching age 65.


                                                                                                                       9
roughly tripled. Additional disparity between the two programs emerges in 1984 when a new

higher rate is established for surviving spouses between the ages of 55 and 64 in the QPP.

         More general information about the CPP and QPP is available elsewhere.12 Suffice it to

say, it is a contributory public retirement and disability pension plan, financed by both employee

and employer contributions. Retirement benefits are payable starting at age 65 at the beginning

of the 1980s, although by the end of the 1980s benefit receipt can be initiated anytime between

age 60 and 70 subject to an actuarial adjustment. While there are many similarities to the US SS

system, a major point of difference is that the CPP/QPP programs pay out smaller benefits and,

at least historically, have been financed by smaller payroll taxes. The maximum benefit in the

1980s averaged somewhat less than 25 percent of a moving average of the industrial aggregate

wage.13 The smaller scale of the CPP/QPP is offset by three other Income Security (IS) programs

for seniors: the Old Age Security (OAS) pension, the Guaranteed Income Supplement (GIS) and

the Spouse’s Allowance (SPA). In the period of study, the OAS is a benefit paid to all

individuals aged 65 or older and is financed out of general tax revenues. The GIS is an income

tested benefit again available at age 65 and financed out of general tax revenues. Finally, the

Spouse’s Allowance (SPA) is a program that allows individuals to collect OAS and GIS benefits

as early as age 60 if they are married to someone aged 65 or older.14 In 1986, eligibility was

extended to 60-64 year old widows creating a new, albeit transitory, marriage penalty for this

group.15 To provide some context, in 1985 the maximum CPP/QPP benefit was $435.42 per

month, the OAS pension was $282.94 per month and the maximum GIS available to a singles



12
   See for example, Burbidge (1987), Baker and Benjamin (1999) and CCH Canadian Ltd. (2000).
13
   The maximum now tracks exactly 25 percent of a moving average of the industrial aggregate wage.
14
   In this case the entire benefit (OAS plus GIS) is means tested, and at a higher rate. A more complete description
of this program is contained in Baker (2002).
15
   Any effect of this marriage penalty should be absorbed in the estimating equation by common year effects. We
discuss these effects below and in footnote 20.


                                                                                                                  10
was $338.95 per month. In the Appendix, we present an overview of Canadian IS programs in

the 1980s.

A Comparison to Survivors Benefits in other Countries

         The structure of the Canadian survivor benefits incorporates features that are present in

whole or in part in the survivor benefits of public pension plans in other countries. For example,

many plans condition benefit receipt for some widows on the presence of dependent children

(e.g., Belgium, Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Sweden, the United Kingdom and the US). In

the absence of children, benefits in some plans are available only to older widows (e.g., France,

Netherlands, the United Kingdom and the US) while others permit some (or all) childless,

younger widows to benefit (e.g., Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Germany, Italy, Norway and

Spain). Because we perform the analysis separately by age groups who face these different

program rules, the results can potentially be informative for program design in these other

countries.

The Reforms of the CPP and QPP That Eliminated the Marriage Penalties

         In 1984, a package of reforms was introduced to the QPP that included the introduction

of flexible retirement provisions permitting retirement benefit initiation anytime between ages 60

and 70 subject to an actuarial adjustment, as well as the reform of interest here, the elimination

of re-marriage as a cause for the termination of survivor benefits.16 In addition, surviving spouses

who had previously lost their benefits due to remarriage were eligible to have them reinstated

with the passage of the law. Reforms of the CPP were made in 1987 that in many dimensions

mirrored the 1984 reforms of the QPP. In particular they included the elimination of the



16
  This reform also included increasing in the flat-rate portion of disability benefits, providing disability pensions to
individual aged 60 to 64 who are no longer able to carry on their current employment and raising the flat rate portion
of the survivor benefit for surviving spouses aged 55 to 64.


                                                                                                                    11
marriage penalty for surviving spouses, and the reinstatement of benefits for those who had

remarried previously.17 18

         The political economy of these reforms is outlined in Baker and Benjamin (1999). They

were mentioned periodically in the press and most of the coverage focused on the general level

of benefits and solvency of the plans. Likewise, parliamentary discussion of the reforms focused

on elements other than the elimination of the marriage penalties (e.g., Standing Committee on

National Health and Welfare 1986). There is no evidence on record that the reforms were

tailored to some well-known trend in the marriage behaviour of widows.

         There is direct evidence, however, that widowed individuals were aware of the reforms.

In figure 2 we graph the fiscal year over year growth rate of CPP/QPP survivor pension

beneficiaries in Quebec and the ROC. There are spikes in the growth rates in each jurisdiction in

the years corresponding to the relevant reforms. These would be due to applications for the

reinstatement of benefits by individuals who had previously lost their benefits due to remarriage.

The Predicted Effects of the Removal of the Marriage Penalties

         The elimination of the marriage penalty from the CPP and QPP raises non-labour income

in the married state. The single state is unaffected as survivor benefits are available both pre and

post reform. Therefore, “full income” in marriage increases both absolutely and relatively,

which, all else equal, should raise the incentive to marry.

         Some information on the size of the penalty and thereby the potential financial benefit

from the reforms, is presented in tables 2 and 3. In table 2 we report the average monthly


17
   They also included the introductory of flexible retirement provisions, the increase in the flat-rate portion of the
disability benefit, changes to the minimum contributory period for disability benefits, an increase in the ceiling for
combined survivor’s and disability benefits, new rules for orphans benefits and new rules for splitting pension
credits upon divorce or annulment.
18
   This sequence of reforms has been used previously by Baker and Benjamin (1999) to examine the impact of early
retirement provisions on retirement behaviour and by Gruber (2000) to examine the effect of disability payments on
labour supply.


                                                                                                                   12
survivor pension in payment, by age and sex, in the month preceding the repeal of the marriage

penalty from the QPP (December 1983) and CPP (December 1986), in year 2001 Canadian

dollars. The differences by sex and age make sense given the benefit formulas. For example, the

higher benefits for females under age 65 likely reflect the superior earnings histories of their

(male) deceased spouses, which determine part of the benefit they receive. The sex difference is

larger for 65-69 year olds, who also receive smaller benefits on average. There is no flat rate

component for this group and so the deceased’s earnings history plays a greater role. Finally,

there are substantial differences in benefits across jurisdictions for individuals under age 65. One

source of this disparity is the higher flat rate benefits for these individuals in the QPP (table 1).

         An estimate of the average size of the marriage penalties is presented in table 3. We

calculate the present value (2001 CDN dollars) of the average survivor pension taken from table

2 at selected ages. This is the amount of benefits widows give up on remarriage. We discount

future benefit receipt by sex specific survival probabilities (Statistics Canada 1984), and assume

a real interest rate of 3 percent. We also assume that benefits remain constant in real terms in the

future, which is consistent with the indexing provisions of the CPP and QPP. Finally, for the

estimates at age 30 we assume the widow has one child, aged 5, who will not remain in school

past age 18. Therefore, the survivor benefits are received for the next 13 years.19

         The estimated costs are not trivial for prime aged females, ranging from $75,000 to

$130,000. The sex differences evident in table 2 are preserved here as the base differences in

monthly benefits are accentuated by sex differences in longevity. Therefore, females in receipt

of a pension face a larger penalty and thus disincentive to marry. The penalty is also clearly



19
  The estimates for this age can vary substantially depending on the assumptions made about any dependent
children. For example the present value of the penalty is as high as $97,000 for females if we assume the child is
currently 1 year old and remains in school until age 25.


                                                                                                                     13
larger for individuals under age 65 in Quebec. Finally, the penalty is similar across jurisdictions

and quite small for individuals aged 65 or older.

        We have also calculated a more complex accounting of the full IS cost of remarriage

prior to the reforms.20 The “marriage penalty” is defined as the difference between the present

discounted value of IS benefits flowing to the widow if s/he remains single and the value if s/he

remarries. The results of this exercise (available on request) are consistent with the story told by

table 3. In particular, the magnitudes are very similar reflecting the fact the greater part of the IS

marriage penalty is the loss of the surviving spouse pension captured in table 3. The one

difference is the penalties are larger in the rest of Canada (ROC) reflecting the additional

marriage penalty imposed by the extension of the SPA to widows mentioned above.

        An estimate of the incidence of the penalties—the proportion of widows or widowers in

receipt of surviving spouse’s pensions—in the years preceding the two reforms is presented in

table 4. These are calculated from administrative data on the number of CPP or QPP survivor

pensions in payment by age and estimates of the population of widows of that age taken from

Statistics Canada’s CANSIM database. Receipt is clearly higher for females than for males and

would appear to decline with age. The relationship with age may be cohort effects, however, as

the CPP/QPP system was initiated in 1966, so the deceased spouses of some of the oldest


20
  We take account of the sum of CPP/QPP survivor pensions, CPP/QPP retirement pensions, as well as OAS, GIS
and SPA benefits received in the married versus single states, accounting for any effects of marital status on the
benefits received from these programs (through means testing on family income—see the Appendix). The flows are
defined by the benefits flowing directly to the widow. We therefore assume there is no sharing in the married state.
Additional inputs to this calculation include the amount of the retirement pension or non pension income any new
spouse brings into a marriage, as well as the non-pension income of the widow (note for these calculations we must
make assumptions about the age and economic circumstances of any new spouse. We also take account of a reform
of the SPA in 1986 that extended benefits to widows who had not remarried. This added another marriage penalty
for widows in the two jurisdictions, although only in a present value sense for those under age 60. Note that this
second marriage penalty is not necessarily severe for widowed females. By remarrying they lose access to the
widow benefits of the SPA starting at age 60. Assuming that they marry someone older, however, as is typical, they
will qualify for SPA benefits under its original provisions sometime between age 60 and 64. For example if their
new spouse is 3 years older they would qualify for the SPA starting at age 62—a two year difference from the age
they qualify as a widow.


                                                                                                                 14
individuals in these years may have had very little participation in the program. The lower

receipt rate for males likely reflects the fact that females have lower labor market participation

rates, and therefore are less likely to have a CPP/QPP earnings history to generate a benefit for

their surviving spouses. The rates are also marginally higher in the ROC than in Quebec, but this

is to be expected since incidence is growing over time and the ROC data are from a later period.

Data

       The main variable of interest is the remarriage rate of widowed females and males, by

province, over the period. The numerator of this rate is constructed from special tabulations

from the vital statistics marriage file maintained by Statistics Canada.   This file contains the

information on marriage certificates for all marriages occurring within a given year. Each

marriage certificate provides information on the age of the bride, the age of the groom, the

previous marital status of the bride and the previous marital status of groom, and the year and

province of marriage. The ages of the bride and groom are reported in five-year intervals, with

15 age intervals in total. Previous marital statuses are single, divorced and widowed. Grouping

these data within Quebec and by province within the ROC, and within the age groups specified

below, we divide the number of widows or widowers remarrying in a given year by the

corresponding stock of widows or widowers in these same geographic/age cells, which are

available through the Statistics Canada CANSIM database. We construct these rates for the

period 1975 through 1995 inclusive.

       A key advantage of these data is that we can analyze flows into marriage by previous

marital state. This is exactly the information we need to examine the impact of the reforms.

Many previous studies examine the stock of individuals in a given marital state. The effects of

marriage penalties may only manifest in the stock over time. A weakness is that there little




                                                                                                     15
additional information on the widows. Therefore we do not know the magnitude of the survivor

benefits they were entitled to or much about their demographic and economic characteristics.

An Overview of the Empirical Strategy and Identification

       We estimate changes in the remarriage rates of widowed females and males in Quebec

(the ROC) as the marriage penalty is removed, using the rates in the ROC (Quebec) as a control.

The estimating equation is

(1)     RMRit = β 0 + β 1QU i + β 2 REF 84 t + β 3 QU i ⋅ REF 84 t + β 4 REF 87 t +

                β 5 QU i ⋅ REF 87 t + ηX it + ε it

where i indexes provinces, t indexes time, QUt is a dummy variable for Quebec, REF84t is a

dummy variable for the years 1984 and after, REF87t is a dummy variable for the years 1987 and

after and Xit is a vector of other control variables. The parameters β 3 and β 5 capture the relative

difference in the change in remarriage rates, RMRit, in Quebec and the ROC as the reforms take

place. A priori, we expect β 3 to be positive and β 5 to be negative if the removal of the marriage

penalty encouraged remarriage among widows.

       The equation is estimated separately for males and females, and for the age groups <35,

35-44, 45-59, 60-64 and 65+. One reason for the age splits is that preferences and/or

opportunities for marriage may vary systematically with age due to, for example, fertility or

cohort effects. A second is that the formula for calculating survivor benefits makes distinctions

by many of these age groupings. For example, survivor benefits are reduced for childless

surviving spouses between the ages of 35 and 44. Finally, changes in other marriage penalties

over the period directly affect specific age groups. For example, after 1986 the widowed SPA

has immediate consequences for those aged 60 to 64.




                                                                                                  16
         The control variables, Xit, are province and year effects and measures of marriage market

conditions. The latter are estimates of the ratio of unmarried females to unmarried males in the

age groupings listed above constructed from Statistics Canada CANSIM database.21

         Equation (1) is estimated by weighted least squares using the number of widows in the

corresponding province/age group cell as weights. Standard errors are corrected for

heteroskedasticity. Estimates of the first through third order autocorrelation parameters of the

residuals were calculated, and indicate autocorrelation is not a significant problem in this

instance.22 Finally, while the linear specification in (1) facilitates comparisons of the estimates

to graphical evidence of changes in RMRit over the period, it does not obey the restriction

0 ≤ RMRit ≤ 1 . We have estimated a logistic specification of RMRit by non-linear least-squares

and both the magnitudes and statistical significance of the estimated parameters are in agreement

with the results presented below.23

         The assumptions for identification in this framework are now well known. In addition to

the linear functional form, any time trends must be common to both groups and there can be no

jurisdiction specific shock coincident with the reform. Furthermore, in the absence of an

assumption of a homogeneous treatment effect, we estimate the average effect of the marriage

penalty on remarriage for individuals whose marriage decision is affected by the remarriage

provisions of the CPP and QPP.




21
   While the age groupings are not necessarily appropriate delineations for marriage market opportunities, the
estimates of β 3 and β 5 are not overly sensitive on this margin. For example, the results are very similar if we only
include the sex ratio for the age group that the dependent variable (marriage rate) is defined for.
22
   The parameters are estimated by regressions of the current residual on the relevant lagged residual, pooling the
data across provinces. The estimates are almost always small (0.2 or less) and statistically insignificant for both
males and females (largest estimate is –0.32). Even accounting for the probable bias of estimating these parameters
from a short panel (Solon 1984), they provide little evidence of substantive autocorrelation.
23
   Where there are disagreements, the estimates from the non-linear model indicate larger effects of the reforms.


                                                                                                                   17
         One change in the marriage market over the sample period is the 1986 reform of the

divorce act. This reform removed the requirement of fault as grounds for divorce. Corak (2001)

presents evidence of a transitory dip and spike in the aggregate divorce rate around 1986, as

some individuals delayed seeking a divorce until the new law came into place. A corresponding

dip and spike in the remarriage rate of divorcees can be seen around this time in figure 1. To the

extent that these divorced individuals remarried widows the widowed population becomes

indirectly treated by the change in the divorce act.

         We perform three checks for these sorts of effects or other jurisdiction specific trends that

may bias our inference. First, we examine the time series of remarriage rates in the two

jurisdictions in the period proceeding our sample period. Second, we estimate variants of

equation (1) that include province specific linear or quadratic trends. Third, we use, alternatively

the marriage rates of singles and divorcees in the corresponding age groups to form a triple

difference estimator.24

An Overview of the Data

         In table 5 we present an overview of widows and widowers in Quebec and the ROC,

prior to the reforms, using 1981 Canadian census data. There are many similarities between

these groups in the two jurisdictions. Widows in the ROC are more likely to work, however,

and their educational attainment is higher, although the latter point may be partly semantic as

there are fundamental differences in the structure of education in the two jurisdictions.




24
  We also investigated the possibility of using the remarriage rates of American widows and widowers as an
additional control. Vital statistics on the remarriages of widows and widowers are available for a subset of states
over our sample period. To calculate remarriage rates we constructed estimates of the eligible population of widows
and widowers in these states using CPS data. Unfortunately these estimates are very noisy, such that the majority of
the variation of the constructed remarriage rates is attributable to variation in its denominator. Since our analysis
depends on identifying “jumps” in remarriage rates, and we have little reason to believe that the population of
widows or widowers would display such behaviour, this line of inquiry was abandoned.


                                                                                                                  18
           Table 5 also reports the proportions who migrated from Quebec to the ROC, or vice

versa, over the preceding 5 years. An implicit assumption of the analysis is that widows in a

given jurisdiction are not indirectly treated by the reform in the other jurisdiction. This

assumption would clearly be false if all widows in Canada are in the same marriage market. To

directly test this hypothesis would require the migration rates of the married population by

(previous) marital status in the origin province, or marriage rates by the previous residence of the

spouses. This information is not available. Therefore, the fact that table 5 reveals very little

inter-jurisdictional migration by widowed males and females over the past five years is

supportive of the assumption but not definitive. More generally, Quebecers are much less likely

to make cross-provincial moves than English Canadians. Among widowed females (males) in

the ROC, 2.4 (2.4) percent reported moving across province in the previous 5 years versus 0.4

(0.4) percent of those in Quebec.25 For the entire female (male) population, aged 16+, the rates

are 6.3 (6.9) percent for those in the ROC and just 1.0 (1.0) for those in Quebec.26 These

ROC/Quebec differences likely reflect the underlying differences in language and culture

between the two parts of the country.

           Our first check for jurisdiction specific trends is presented in figure 3 where we graph the

remarriage rates of widowed females and males in the two jurisdictions between 1956 and 1975.

Since annual population by marital status is not available for this period, we use total population

in the denominator to calculate these rates. For females, the trends in Quebec and the ROC

appear identical, the levels differing by a constant. This is confirmed in regressions of the

difference in remarriage rates on a constant and up to a quintic in time: the estimates of the

parameters of the polynomial are consistently small and both individually and jointly statistically


25
     Note that inter-jurisdictional and inter-provincial migration are the same for individuals in Quebec.
26
     In the underlying samples Quebecers made up 27 percent of the male and female samples.


                                                                                                             19
insignificant. For males there are some differences in the time series, although primarily in the

first part of the period. This is confirmed in the regressions, as the parameters of the polynomial

are jointly significant using the full sample, but not when we delete the data from the 1950s.

       In figures 4 and 5 we graph remarriage rates, by age, of widowed females and males in

the two jurisdictions over the sample period. These are the dependent variables for our

regressions. In figure 4 there is evidence of a downward trend in the marriage rates of all

females over the period. There is also clear sequential evidence of an effect of the QPP and CPP

reforms for females aged 15 through 59. For example, the remarriage rate of females aged 45-59

jumps up in Quebec in 1984 as the marriage penalty is removed from the QPP. A corresponding

jump is visible in the remarriage rate in the ROC in 1987 as the penalty is removed from the

CPP. In succeeding years the marriage rates in both jurisdictions continue to decline, but from a

new higher base. In each case there is also evidence of spikes in the exact years of the reforms.

These are consistent with either timing effects—some individuals postponing their marriages

once the reforms were made public—or with stock effects—there was a stock of widows who

did not marry due to the penalty, who then married as soon as the reform became law. Timing

effects may be the less likely explanation as benefits were reinstated for all widows who had

remarried once the rules changed. The elevated levels of the rates that persist after the spikes,

however, suggest that the marriage penalties had a longer term effect on marriage activity.

       The evidence for females aged 60+ is not as conclusive. For females aged 60 to 64 there

are spikes in the years of the reforms, but less evidence of elevated remarriage rates thereafter.

The remarriage rates of those 65 and older display little correspondence with the reforms.

       One might be tempted to relate the Quebec/ROC differences in the remarriage rates by

age group to the information in table 3: remarriage rates are lower in Quebec because the




                                                                                                     20
marriage penalties are larger, and the differential declines with age in tandem with the

differential in the penalty. While the inter-jurisdictional difference in the marriage penalties may

contribute to the corresponding difference in marriage rates it cannot be the only cause. Single

and divorced Quebecers also have lower marriage rates than their counterparts in the ROC.27

Therefore, some part of the ROC/Quebec differential in the remarriage rates for widows in this

period should be attributable to a common, lower propensity for marriage in Quebec, rather than

a marriage penalty differential per se. This is a graphic example of the potential biases in cross

section evidence of the relationship between marriage penalties and marriage rates.

        The graphs for widowed males aged 45-59, 60-64 and 65+ (figure 5) are similar to the

graphs for their female counterparts. There is clear evidence of a persistent effect of the reform

for those 45-59, some evidence of a transitory effect (i.e., spikes) for those 60-64, and little

evidence of any effect for those 65+.

        In contrast, the graphs for the youngest males paint a confusing picture. While there are

spikes in the expected years, there are also spikes in the Quebec rates in the years between 1986

and 1989. Graphs of the numerator of the these remarriage rates reveal dramatic increases (200

to 300 percent) in the number of widowers remarrying at these ages in these years, followed by

offsetting dramatic decreases. One possible source of this activity are the previously mentioned

reforms of Canada’s divorce laws that led to a transitory surge in the remarriages of divorces

starting in 1987 (figure 1). If female divorcees primarily married widowed males, this could

account for the pattern in remarriage we see in figure 5. If this were true, however, we would

expect to see corresponding jumps in remarriage in the ROC as divorce reforms affected all parts


27
  For example, the remarriage rate of widowed females, aged 45-59, averaged 0.93 percentage points or 105 percent
higher in the ROC than in Quebec over the period 1975-1983. Over the same period, the marriage rate of 45-59 year
old singles averaged 0.36 percentage points or 54 percent higher in the ROC. Finally, for divorced females in this
age group the marriage rate averaged 2.2 percentage points or 72 percent higher!


                                                                                                               21
of the country. Also, examination of the disaggregate data reveals the surge in marriages is

through unions with single females. The other possibility is some sort of coding error. We have

contacted Statistics Canada about this hypothesis but they report no obvious problem with the

data. As we cannot confirm an explanation of these patterns in the data, we report results for

these age groups but we focus on the estimates for the older males.28

Estimates of the Effect of the QPP and CPP Marriage Penalties

         Estimates of equation (1) are reported in the first panel of table 6. The results for

widowed females are strongly consistent with the story told in figure 4. For females under the

age of 60, there is a clear evidence of a statistically significant and almost symmetric effect of

the reforms on the remarriage rates in Quebec and the ROC. There is also evidence of a

statistically significant effect for females aged 60 to 64, although in this case it is almost double

the size in the ROC. Finally, there is little evidence of an effect of the reform for females aged

65+. In each of these cases the regression results display a remarkable congruency with the

evidence in figure 4, highlighting the transparency of the identification.

         To provide an indication of the economic significance of the results we normalize the

estimated increase in the remarriage rates by the average rate in the three years preceding the

reforms (1981-83 for Quebec and 1984-1986 for the ROC). The results are reported in the

square brackets in table 6. These calculations highlight the lower base remarriage rates in

Quebec. For example, the estimated increase of 0.013 for females aged 35-44 in Quebec is from

a base of 0.013 in 1981-1983. Therefore, the remarriage rate effectively doubles for this group.

The jump of 0.009 for females of this age in the ROC is from a higher base of 0.038 in 1984-

1986 implying a much smaller 24 percent increase. More generally, for females under the age of

28
  Another explanation is that these remarriage rates are based on the smallest cell sizes observed, often fewer than
40 or 50 individuals. That said, if this were measurement error we would expect a less systematic pattern, which is


                                                                                                                  22
65 the removal of the marriage penalty increased the remarriage rates between 24 and 100

percent.

        In the second panel, we present a set of estimates that attempt to net out any timing or

stock effects of the reforms—the spikes in 1984 and 1987. We add an interaction between the

Quebec dummy variable and year effects for 1984 and 1987 in (1). These should absorb any

extra jump in the rates in these years. The result for females aged 15-59 is modest decreases in

the estimated effect of the penalty that preserve the relative magnitudes across jurisdictions. The

estimates continue to imply sizable increases in remarriage rates ranging from 21 to 108 percent.

        The results for widowed males are presented in the second half of each panel. Given the

vagaries of the data for younger widowers from Quebec, we focus on the results for those 45

years and older. The patterns of statistical significance of the parameter estimates are very

similar to the results for females. Significant effects are found for males aged 45-59. Widowed

males have higher remarriage rates than widowed females, so the larger point estimates for this

group do not imply larger proportional effects. The proportionate responses to the reforms in the

first panel are 55 percent in Quebec and 22 percent in the ROC. Netting out timing or stock

effects (panel 2) results in very marginal changes. The estimates for males 60-64 and 65+ are

small, sometimes wrong signed, often statistically insignificant, and sensitive to specification.

        The final two checks for jurisdiction specific trends are reported in tables A2 through A4

of the Appendix. Table A2 contains estimates when we add province specific quadratic trends

(results for linear trends are very similar and available on request). For widows aged 15-59 and

widowers aged 45-59 the estimates are very robust to this innovation. Tables A3 and A4 contain

the triple difference estimates using singles and divorcees, respectively, as additional controls.

Most of the results are again very similar to those in table 6 for the age groups of interest. The


exactly what we observe in the remarriage rates of younger males in other provinces.

                                                                                                     23
exceptions are the estimates for the youngest females in the ROC, especially when the divorcees

are used as a control. Because of the reform of the divorce laws almost corresponds with the

1987 reform of the CPP, it not clear the much larger estimates for widows aged 15 through 35 in

Table A4 deserve much weight.29

        A consistent result for both females and males is that the estimated effect of the penalties

is larger in the province of Quebec. An explanation of this result is that marriage penalties are

much larger for prime aged males and females in this province (tables 1 through 3). In the top

panel of figure 6 we plot the responses of widows aged 15-64 and widowers age 45-64 from the

top panel of table 6 against the estimated marriage penalty for each group from table 3. We also

plot the predicted values of a simple linear regression of the responses on the penalties. The

relationship between the responses and penalties is positive: the slope of the regression line is

2.16e-06 with a t-value of 3.60.

        In the second panel of figure 6 we attempt to account for the differences in “treatment”

across widows and widowers of different ages documented in table 4. If we assume the reforms

have no effect on widows and widowers who are not receiving a survivor pension, we can divide

the estimated behavioral response for each group by the proportion of the group that is receiving

a pension.30 The figure in the second panel uses the proportions from 1983 and 1986. The slope

of the regression line is now 4.91e-06 with a t-value of 2.47, again confirming the inference.

Context and Interpretation

        Our estimates contrast with many in the literature. To draw comparisons we focus on

previous studies that also use a time series-cross section empirical framework. Moffitt (1998)

29
  An explanation of the smaller estimates for these age groups in table A3 is that singles are the most common
partners of young widows who remarry.




                                                                                                                 24
identifies three studies examining the relationship between state level welfare benefits and

marriage or female headship in the US using this approach. Direct comparison is complicated

because each of these studies examines the effects of the welfare system’s marriage penalty on

net changes in the stock of female heads, while the focus here is on gross flows into the married

state. Furthermore, the stock of female headship is the result of both a fertility decision of single

females and a union decision of parents. That said, in two cases, Moffitt (1994) and Hoynes

(1997), the authors report no effect of the marriage penalties on the behavior of white females.

Moffitt (1994) finds some effect for African American females, although the evidence from

Hoynes (1997) suggests that this may result from his inability to control for individual fixed

effects. Lichter et al (1997), however, report statistically significant effects of these marriage

penalties using county level data from the 1980 and 1990 US censuses. A $100 increase in

welfare benefits leads to a 0.838 percentage point increase in the county female headship rate.

Given the “long changes” (10 years) used to identify the behavioral effect, it seems plausible that

some part of the estimated response could due to migratory responses to benefit differentials

(Moffitt 1998).31 Also, a recent study of the 1970, 1980 and 1990 census data reports no effect

of welfare benefits on female headship in a model including MSA level fixed effects and time

trends (Blau et al 2002).

         Grogger and Bronars (2001) study the impact of welfare based marriage penalties on the

flow into married state, modeled as a hazard. Their identification strategy exploits variation in

marriage penalties induced by twin births. Their sample is unwed mothers who have had one



30
   This assumption will be incorrect if treated widows and widowers remarry untreated widowers and widows.
Across all sample years just under 10 percent of widows/widowers aged 20-29 remarried other widowers/widows.
This proportion rises to roughly 37 percent for those aged 50-59.
31
   Also, the estimates of the standard errors in this study are potentially biased by “group effects”, as the welfare
benefit variables are defined at the state level while the dependent variable is defined at the county level. The
reported behavioral response has a t-value of 3.92 (Lichter et al 1997, table 3 column 3).


                                                                                                                    25
birth, and the hazard is defined in terms of duration from this first birth to marriage. The results

indicate that a 10 percent decrease in welfare benefits leads to a 5.7 percent increase in the

percentage of white females married after 1 year and a 3.5 percent increase after 5 years. The

estimated responses for African American females are not statistically significant.

        Given differences in samples and dependent variables across these studies, a qualitative

rather than quantitative comparison of results is probably the most useful. In the current case the

reduction in the marriages penalty was 100 percent, so the estimated percentage changes in

marriage rates in table 6 (square brackets) can be interpreted directly as (discrete) elasticities.

For prime age female widows these estimates are closer to one than to zero. Furthermore, if we

adjust them for the fact that less than 100 percent of widows in any age groups were in receipt of

a survivor pension (as in figure 6), the estimates for both prime age females and male widows

would be greater than one. In contrast, most existing time series-cross section estimates are of a

zero or at best a fairly inelastic response.32

        What leads to this difference in results? One possibility is the identification strategy used

here combined with the magnitude of the marriage penalties we analyze. Another is the higher

level of “treatment”. In most age groups more than 60 percent of widowed females were in

receipt of a survivor pension at the time of the reforms. Although the samples used in previous

studies differ, the percentage of females potentially affected by AFDC regulations would

presumably be lower in many instances. That said, the proportion of widowed males aged 45-49

in receipt of a survivor pension is only about one-third (table 4), and we find evidence that the

marriage penalties had a substantive effect on their behavior.



32
  We are not aware of any time series-cross section studies of marriage penalties in income tax systems for
comparison. For example, Alm and Whittington (1999) use panel data, but exploit both the time series and cross
individual variation in the estimation because they do not include individual level fixed effects.


                                                                                                                 26
           Still another explanation is our focus on the gross flows of individuals into the married

state, rather than net changes in the stock of individuals who are widows. Changes in marriage

penalties will affect gross flows more quickly than stocks, particularly when the absolute levels

of the flows are small. Small flows and/or a low baseline incidence of the marital state of interest

can preclude precise identification of stock effects given the sample sizes of popular data sets.

These considerations are clearly important here. The age groups with the highest remarriage

rates have the lowest incidence of widowhood and vice versa. In table 7 we report estimates of

equation (1) when the dependent variable is a 0/1 indicator that an individual is widowed. We

use the 1976-1995 Labor Force Surveys (LFS), sampling all males or females of all marital

statuses in the indicated age categories.33 Given the results in table 6, we expect β 3 to be

negative and β 5 to be positive in these results. The estimates indicate no systematic effects of

the marriage penalties on the stock of widows, as almost all the estimated parameters are

statistically insignificant. The sample sizes for these regressions are between 125,000 and

1,000,000 observations.

           Finally, our analysis focuses on a different part of the population. Many previous studies

analyze penalties that affect beneficiaries of income-tested programs. Marriage penalties in the

US federal income tax system affect a wider segment of the population, but financially are rather

modest.

           What might this matter? Some would argue that the focus in previous studies is ideal.

Marriage penalties impose a larger proportionate cost on low-income individuals. That said, the

benefits of marriage for these same individuals may be very small. This is because the

alternative of co-habitation, which offers many of the traditional benefits of marriage such as

33
     We use the April and October samples in each year to ensure no repeated observations on individuals. There is no



                                                                                                                  27
companionship and economies of scale in household production, is growing in acceptance and

popularity. In fact, this alternative is relatively common within the low-income population

(Moffitt et al 1998).

        Admittedly, co-habitation is an imperfect substitute for marriage. For example,

cohabiting relationships are less stable (Bumpass and Lu 2000). 34 Also, because of the explicit

contract that it provides, marriage confers a different set of rights and obligations on the parties.

Cohabiting partners are often denied the rights of spouses in government and private sector

income support, benefit and retirement programs, although this differential treatment is

disappearing in many developed economies. Cohabitants and spouses can also find themselves

in different positions if the relationship ends either through separation/divorce or the death of a

partner.

           There are specific differences in these rights in Canada (see Holland 1990). For

example, in most provinces cohabitants do not have occupational rights in the family home and

all provinces exclude them from intestacy provisions. During the 1980s cohabitants were not

equivalent to spouses for the purposes of the Income Tax Act.35 This meant that cohabitants

were not eligible for, among other things, the spouse deduction and could not contribute to their

partner’s Registered Retirement Savings Plans (RRSP’s, a tax subsidized retirement savings

plan) as married partners could.36 Property rights upon dissolution of the relationship have

different bases in law. For married individuals the basis is matrimonial property legislation

under which both spouses are assumed to have contributed equally to the marriage and so the



public use data for the 1975 LFS. The LFS is similar to the US Current Population Survey.
34
   Recent research on cohabitation includes Moffitt, Reville and Winkler (1998) and Bumpass and Lu (2000) and the
references therein.
35
   Under revisions made in the 1990s, co-habitants and spouses are now treated the same for this purpose.
36
   The incentive to contribute to the partner’s RRSP is income splitting on retirement to minimize tax payments.
Canada has an individual based tax system.


                                                                                                              28
default is an equal division of family property. Also, assets are broadly interpreted to include

family property, business property, pensions rights and even increases in the value of assets

acquired prior to marriage. In contrast, property rights for cohabitants are founded on the

principle of “unjust enrichment”, and so the onus is on the litigant to prove the defendant has

been unjustly enriched. Furthermore, cases are typically restricted exclusively to family property.

        If these are the primary benefits of marriage relative to cohabitation, it might be expected

that cohabitation is more common in the low-income population. These benefits have value in

relationships where there are income and assets at state. Accentuating this effect are rules

limiting partner benefits in government and private benefit plans to married individuals. These

rights will have value to individuals in well paying, stable jobs.

        Are these considerations relevant here? One possibility is the CPP/QPP marriage

penalties prevented unattached widows from participating in the marriage market. Once

removed, these individuals re-entered the market and found mates. While this explanation may

played some role in the new long run steady state, if marriage search takes time it is unlikely

these types of people contributed to the initial response. More likely it was individuals who had

identified partners, and were perhaps cohabiting with them, that made up the initial wave of

remarriages.37

        We investigate this issue using data from the 1990 and 1995 General Social Surveys

(GSS). The GSS is an annual, nationally representative survey of the Canadian population that

focuses on different social issues. The 1990 and 1995 surveys contain information to construct

the marriage histories of respondents extending back three marriages. This allows us to view the

37
  The law only mentions marriage and not cohabitation as a reason for termination of survivor benefits. That said,
one might imagine that in practice cohabitation was treated symmetrically to marriage for this purpose. Discussions
with individuals at Human Resources Development Canada suggest there was no program of enforcement of such an




                                                                                                                29
marriage behavior of widowed individuals over the period the reforms took place. The number

of widowed individuals captured in these data is small, however, so our analysis must necessarily

be exploratory and speculative.

        We select individuals who had a marriage end by the death of their spouse. We require

that the deceased spouse could potentially have contributed to the CPP/QPP for at least 5 years to

ensure that there is a survivor pension at stake. This produces a sample of 2179 individuals, 1723

of whom are females. Some summary statistics are reported in the top panel of table 8. Two

notable characteristics are the rather low level of completed education of the sample and the

cumulative remarriage rate of 12 percent.

        Most of the characteristics of the individuals captured in the GSS are for the survey date,

which is January through March 1990 or January through December 1995. Since we are

interested in the characteristics of these individuals at the time of any remarriage, we focus on

attributes that are unlikely to change considerably over time. We investigate 0/1 indicators of

educational attainment, and home ownership as a proxy for wealth. We also examine an

indicator of whether any remarriage was preceded by cohabitation. These characteristics are

used as dependent variables in the equation

(2)      Yit = α 0 + α 1QU it + α 3QU it ⋅ REM 84 it + α 5 QU it ⋅ REM 87 it + λt + φX it + ν it

where Yit is the binary variable for individuals’ education, home ownership or cohabitation,

REM 84 and REM 87 are dummy variables that equal one if the individual remarries

respectively, in 1984 or 1987 (or later), t is a dummy variable equal to 1 for observations from

the 1995 survey, and Xit is a vector of other control variables: quartics in the individual’s age and

their age when their spouse died, a quartic in the year their spouse died, a quartic in the year of


effective rule during this period. Furthermore, since cohabitation was not recognized for most purposes under the



                                                                                                                30
any remarriage, and dummy variables for females and individuals who remarry. 38 This equation

has a similar structure to (1), with α 3 and α 5 playing analogous roles to β 3 and β 5 . The main

difference is that time (and age) effects are modeled as quartics rather than unrestricted dummy

variables as a concession to the small sample size.39 All estimation is by weighted least-squares

using GSS sample weights and standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.

          The regression results are reported in the lower panels of table 8. We report estimates

for both the full sample and the smaller sample of widows. In the first four rows we examine

measures of educational attainment. In either sample the signs of the estimates indicate a relative

increase in the educational attainment of individuals marrying after the removal of the marriage

penalty in the QPP, which is subsequently offset as the penalty is removed from the CPP. Note,

that the only statistically significant estimates are from the sample of widows. The signs of the

estimates for home ownership, as a proxy for wealth, indicate greater resources among those

marrying post reform. Finally, the signs of the estimates in the sixth row of each panel indicate

that the post reform remarriages were more likely to be preceded by cohabitation.

        These results provide some evidence, therefore, that it was more educated and wealthier

individuals who responded to the removal of the marriage penalties. This is consistent with the

hypothesis that there are very small incremental benefits of marriage over cohabitation for the

low-income population. There is also evidence that cohabitation prior to remarriage was more

likely after the reforms. That said, the results are based on small samples and many of the point

estimates are not statistically significant.



income tax act of this time, there were few alternative administrative methods to identify this state.
38
   We have also estimated specifications that include interactions between the remarriage dummy and the quartics in
age at spouse’s death and the year the spouse died. These interaction terms are typically jointly insignificant, and
the effect of this change in specification on the parameters of interest is negligible.
39
   We have replicated the analysis using this alternative specification and retrieved point estimates that are
qualitatively similar to those reported below.


                                                                                                                 31
Conclusions

        Marriage penalties are a controversial feature of many government programs. While they

may be found deficient in a variety of dimensions, the evidence that they cause behavioural

distortions is quite mixed. This is surprising because economic theory predicts that these

penalties provide a clear incentive to remain single (or cohabitate). In this paper we provide new

evidence that marriage penalties matter. Previous studies may have been limited by problematic

identification strategies and/or by applications in which either the penalties are too small to make

much of a difference or in which marriage is an institution of decreasing attraction for the

affected population. We examine the marriage penalties in the surviving spouse pensions of the

Canadian Income Security system. These penalties are monetarily substantial. Also, we focus

on reforms—that removed the penalties—which provide a simple and transparent basis for

identification.

        Our primary contribution is evidence that these marriage penalties had large and

persistent effects on the remarriage rates of widows aged 15-59 and prime age widowers.

Importantly, the inference is robust to a variety of checks for spurious inference, and varies

across age groups and jurisdictions in expected ways.

        A secondary contribution, albeit based on small samples, is evidence that suggests the

behavior of individuals with characteristics correlated with higher wealth was affected by the

penalties. This is perhaps surprising because it is low-income individuals who bear the greater

proportionate cost from marriage penalties. We argue, however, that the incremental benefits of

marriage over cohabitation may be very small for these individuals. This is because many of the

benefits are found in laws covering the treatment of assets and income.




                                                                                                  32
       These results potentially have important welfare implications. The largest and most

robust estimated effects are for widowed females under the age of 60.      Data (1981 Canadian

census) from a year just prior to the reforms reveals that 56 percent of widows in this age group

had children at home, so the marriage penalties potentially denied these children any benefits of

growing up in a household with married adults. There are also implications for the survivor

benefits in the public pension plans of other countries that condition receipt for some widows on

the presence of dependent children. The incentives for these beneficiaries match up with the pre-

reform incentives faced by Canadian surviving spouses, with dependent children, who were less

than 35 years old. We estimate that the remarriage rates of all widowed females under age 35

increased by between 20 and 40 percent once the marriage penalties were removed. More

generally, the results provide a basis for suspicions that marriage penalties in their various

manifestations affect behavior.




                                                                                                 33
       References


Auerbach, Alan J. and Joel Slemrod, “The Economic Effects of the Tax Reform Act of 1986”,
      Journal of Economic Literature, 35, June 1997, 589-632.

Alm, James and Leslie Whittington, “Does the Income Tax Affect Marital Decisions?”, National
       Tax Journal, 48, December 1995, 361-372.

-----------, “The Rise and Fall and Rise…of the Marriage Tax”, National Tax Journal, 49, 1996a,
         571-589.

-----------, “Income Taxes and the Timing of Marital Decisions”, Journal of Public Economics,
         64, 1996b, 219-240.

-----------, “For Love or Money? The Impact of Income Taxes on Marriage”, Economica, 66,
         1999, 297-316.

Alm, James, Dickert-Conlin, Stacey and Leslie A. Whittington, “Policy Watch: The Marriage
       Penalty”, Journal of Economic Perspectives, 13, Summer 1999, 193-204.

Baker, Michael, “The Retirement Behavior of Married Couples: Evidence From the Spouse's
       Allowance”, Journal of Human Resources, 37, Winter 2002, 1-34.

Baker, Michael and Dwayne Benjamin, “Early Retirement Provisions and the Labor Force
       Behavior of Older Men: Some Evidence from Canada”, Journal of Labor Economics, 17,
       October 1999, 724-756

Becker, Gary S., “A theory of marriage: Part I”, Journal of Political Economy 81(4), 1973, 813–
       846.

-----------, “A theory of marriage: Part II”, Journal of Political Economy 82(2, Part 2), 1974,
         S11–S26.

Bitler, Marianne, Gelbach, Jonah, Hoynes, Hilary, and Madeline Zavodny, “The Impact of
        Welfare Reform on Marriage and Divorce”, UC-Davis, June 2002.

Blau, Francine D., Kahn, Lawrence M. and Jane Waldfogel, “The Impact of Welfare Benefits on
       Single Motherhood and Headship of Young Women: Evidence from the Census”,
       National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9338, November 2002.

Brien, Michael J., Dickert-Conlin, Stacy and David A. Weaver, “Widows Waiting to Wed?
       (Re)Marriage and Economic Incentives in Social Security Widow Benefits”,
       Mimeograph, 2000.




                                                                                                  34
Bumpass L. and H. Lu, “Trends in Cohabitation and Implications for Children’s Family Context
     in the United States”, Population Studies, 54(1), 2000, 29-41.

Burbidge, John, Social Security in Canada: An Economic Appraisal, Canadian Tax Paper No.
      79, Toronto: Canadian Tax Foundation, 1987.

CCH Canadian Limited, Canadian Employment benefits and Pension Guide Reports, North York
     ON: CCH Canadian Limited, 2001.

Canada Pension Plan, Statistical Bulletin, v18 n4, Ottawa: Ministry of National Health and
      Welfare, 1987.

Corak, Miles, “Death and Divorce: The Long Term Consequences of Parental Loss on
       Adolescents”, Journal of Labor Economics, 19, 2001, 682-715.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacey, “Taxes and Transfers: Their Effects on the Decision to End a Marriage”,
       Journal of Public Economics, 73, 1999, 217-240.

Dickert-Conlin, Stacey and Amitabh Chandra, “Taxes and the Timing of Births”, Journal of
       Political Economy, 107, 1999, 161-177.

Dooley, Martin, Gascon, Stephanne, Lefebvre, Pierre and Phillip Merrigan, “Lone Female
      Headship and Welfare Policy in Canada”, 2001.

Gelardi, Alexander M.G., “The Influence of Tax Law Changes on the Timing of Marriages: A
       Two-Country Analysis”, National Tax Journal, 49, 1996, 17-30.

Grogger Jeff, and Stephen G. Bronars, “The Effect of Welfare Payments on the Marriage and
      Fertility Behavior of Unwed Mothers: Results from a Twins Experiment”, Journal of
      Political Economy, 109, June 2001, 529-545.

Gruber, Jonathan, “Disability Insurance Benefits and Labour Supply”, Journal of Political
       Economy, 108, December 2000, 1162-1183.

Holland, Winifred H., “Cohabitation : the law in Canada”, in W.H. Holland and B.E. Stalbecker
       (eds.), Cohabitation : the law in Canada, Toronto: Carswell, 1990

Hoynes, Hilary Williamson, “Does Welfare Play any Role in Female Headship Decisions”,
      Journal of Public Economics, 65, 1997, 89-117.

Human Resources Development Canada, Social Security Statistics, Canada and the Provinces,
     1970-71 to 1994-95, Ottawa: Minister of Supply and Services Canada, 1994.

Lichter, Daniel T., McLaughlin, Diane K. and David Ribar, “Welfare and the Rise of Female
       Headed Families”, American Journal of Sociology, 102, 1997, 112-143.




                                                                                             35
Moffitt, Robert, “Incentive Effects of the US Welfare System: A Review”, Journal of Economic
       Literature, 30, March 1992, 1-61.

Moffitt, Robert, “Welfare Effects on Female Headship with Area Effects”, Journal of Human
       Resources, 29, 1994, 621-636.

Moffitt, Robert, “The Effect of Welfare on Marriage and Fertility”, in R. Moffitt (ed.) Welfare,
       The Family and Reproductive Behavior, Washington D.C.: National Research Council,
       1998, 50-97.

Moffitt, R., R. Reville and A.E. Winkler, “Beyond Single Mothers: Cohabitation and Marriage in
       the AFDC Program”, Demography, 35, 1998, 259-278.

Nault, Francois, “Twenty Years of Marriages”, Health Reports, Statistics Canada, Autumn 1996,
       39-47.

Nechyba, Thomas J., “Social Approval, Values and AFDC: A Reexamination of the Illegitimacy
      Debate”, Journal of Political Economy, 109, June 2001, 637-672.

Regie des rentes du Quebec, Statistics Outlook, Quebec: Direction des communications, Regie
       des rentes du Quebec, 1985.

Sjoquist, David L. and Mary Beth Walker, “The Marriage Tax and the Rate and Timing of
       Marriage”, National Tax Journal, 48, December 1995, 547-558.

Standing Committee on National Health and Welfare, Minutes, 33rd Parliament, 1st Session,
       March-June 1986, No. 1-7, Ottawa: Supply and Services Canada, 1986.

Statistics Canada, Life Tables, Canada and Provinces:1980-1982, Catalogue 84-532, Statistics
        Canada, Health Division, Vital Statistics and Disease Registries Section, May 1984.

Solon, Gary., “Estimating Autocorrelations in Fixed-Effects Models” NBER Technical Working
       Paper #32, February 1984.

Yelowitz, Aaron S., “Will Extending Medicaid to Two-Parent Families Encourage Marriage?”,
      Journal of Human Resources, 33, 1998, 833-865.




                                                                                               36
Appendix:
Table A1: Parameters of Canada’s Income Security Programs in the 1980s

               Eligibility and Funding Benefits                      Means/Earnings Tests
Old Age        - Age 65+               - Set by Parliament           - None
Security (OAS) -Universal subject to
               residency requirement
               - Financed from general
               tax revenues

Guaranteed      - Age 65+                 - Set by Parliament        - Yes, based on family
Income          - OAS pensioner           - Different “Married”      income
Supplement      - Satisfy means test      and “Single” benefits.     - Tax rate of 50% (25%
(GIS)           - Financed from general   - Not subject to regular   if spouse is not a IS
                tax revenues              income taxes               recipient)
                                                                     - Certain income is
                                                                     exempt

Spouse’s        -Ages 60-64               - Set by Parliament        - Yes, based on family
Allowance       -Spouse is OAS            - Equivalent to sum of     income
(SPA)           pensioner or (starting    OAS and relevant GIS       - Tax rate of 75% until
                1986) individual is       benefits                   OAS component gone
                widowed                   - Not subject to regular   and then like GIS
                - Financed from general   income taxes               - Certain income is
                tax revenues                                         exempt

Canada/Quebec - QPP: Age 65+ (1980-       - 25% of “Average          - None
Pension Plan  83), Age 60+ (1984+)        Pensionable Earnings”
(CPP/QPP)     - CPP: Age 65+ (1980-       over Contributory
              86), Age 60+ (1987+)        Period up to cap
              - Contribute in at least    - Years rearing young
              one calendar year of        children (as of 1977 in
              “Contributory Period ”      QPP or 1978 in CPP),
              (starts Jan. 1 1966 or      receiving a disability
              age 18 (whichever is        pension and 15 percent
              later) and ends age 70      of remaining years can
              or commencement of          be excluded from
              pension (whichever is       calculation
              earlier)                    (Contributory Period
              - Financed by               cannot be less than 10
              employers’ and              years)
              employees’                  -Benefits subject to
              contributions               actuarial adjustments
                                          starting 1984 in QPP
                                          and 1987 in CPP




                                                                                               37
Table A2: Estimates of the Impact of the Marriage Penalties on Remarriage Probabilities
Net of Province Specific Quadratic Trends

                             Widows                                 Widowers
                QU*REF84            QU*REF87                QU*REF84        QU*REF87
Base Specification
15-34               0.017               -0.019             0.068                     0.063
                   (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.026)                    (0.32)
35-44               0.011               -0.017             0.034                    0.0001
                   (0.002)             (0.003)            (0.015)                   (0.018)
45-59               0.005               -0.006             0.014                    -0.017
                   (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.003)                   (0.003)
60-64              0.0018              -0.0022             0.003                    -0.007
                  (0.0006)            (0.0007)            (0.004)                   (0.005)
65+               -0.0001              -0.0005           -0.0000                   -0.0036
                  (0.0002)            (0.0002)           (0.0013)                  (0.0012)
Specification Including Timing Effects for 1984 and 1987
15-34               0.015               -0.019             0.095                     0.062
                   (0.005)             (0.006)            (0.034)                   (0.039)
35-44               0.011               -0.013             0.050                    -0.012
                   (0.003)             (0.003)            (0.021)                   (0.022)
45-59               0.003               -0.004             0.012                    -0.020
                   (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.003)                   (0.003)
60-64              0.0010              -0.0012            -0.001                     0.003
                  (0.0005)            (0.0008)            (0.003)                   (0.003)
65+               -0.0002              -0.0004           -0.0017                   -0.0037
                  (0.0002)            (0.0002)           (0.0011)                  (0.0011)

Notes: Source: Vital Statistics and CANSIM data. The sample period is 1975-1995. In addition
to the reported parameters, the Base Specification includes a full set of province and year effects,
and the sex ratios of unmarried individuals for the age groups 15-34, 15-44, 45-59, 60-64 and
65+ (see equation (1)) and province specific quadratic trends. The “Timing Effects” are
interactions between the dummy variable for Quebec and the year effects for 1984 and 1987, the
years the reforms took effect. All estimation by weighted least-squares using the number of
widows or widowers in the relevant age group as weights. Standard errors are corrected for
heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                 38
Table A3: Estimates of the Impact of the Marriage Penalties on Remarriage Probabilities
using the Marriage Rates of Singles as a control for Jurisdiction Specific Trends

                            Widows                               Widowers
             WID*QU*REF84 WID*QU*REF87 WID*QU*REF84 WID*QU*REF87
Base Specification
15-34               0.023               -0.006            0.052            -0.004
                   (0.004)             (0.004)           (0.031)           (0.034)
35-44               0.015               -0.006            0.020            -0.001
                   (0.002)             (0.002)           (0.017)           (0.017)
45-59               0.006               -0.005            0.011            -0.015
                   (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.003)           (0.003)
60-64              0.0013              -0.0024            0.003            -0.005
                  (0.0005)            (0.0005)           (0.003)           (0.003)
65+               -0.0001               0.0010           -0.004            0.0004
                  (0.0004)            (0.0004)           (0.002)           (0.002)
Specification Including Timing Effects for 1984 and 1987
15-34               0.021               -0.004            0.069            -0.024
                   (0.004)             (0.004)           (0.040)           (0.043)
35-44               0.015               -0.012            0.029            -0.003
                   (0.002)             (0.003)           (0.022)           (0.007)
45-59               0.005               -0.004            0.009            -0.013
                   (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.002)           (0.002)
60-64              0.0010              -0.0022           -0.001           -0.0003
                  (0.0005)            (0.0006)           (0.002)          (0.0025)
65+               -0.0002               0.0012           -0.005             0.002
                  (0.0004)            (0.0006)           (0.002)           (0.002)

Notes: Source: Vital Statistics and CANSIM data. The sample period is 1975-1995. The
estimates are based on a pooled sample of marriage rates for widows/widowers and singles. In
addition to the reported parameters, the Base Specification includes the variables in equation (1)
plus a widow effect (WID) and widow/year, widow/province and province/year effects. The
“Timing Effects” are interactions between the dummy variable for Quebec and the year effects
for 1984 and 1987, the years the reforms took effect. All estimation by weighted least-squares
using the number of widows/widowers or singles in the relevant age group as weights. Standard
errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                39
Table A4: Estimates of the Impact of the Marriage Penalties on Remarriage Probabilities
using the Marriage Rates of Divorcees as a control for Jurisdiction Specific Trends

                            Widows                               Widowers
             WID*QU*REF84 WID*QU*REF87 WID*QU*REF84 WID*QU*REF87
Base Specification
15-34               0.012               -0.062            0.048            -0.067
                   (0.015)             (0.016)           (0.024)           (0.032)
35-44               0.016               -0.022            0.039            -0.047
                   (0.003)             (0.003)           (0.024)           (0.026)
45-59               0.006               -0.007            0.021            -0.021
                   (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.003)           (0.004)
60-64              0.0018              -0.0003            0.008            -0.002
                  (0.0016)            (0.0011)           (0.003)           (0.002)
65+                0.0034               0.0012            0.009             0.008
                  (0.0024)            (0.0017)           (0.006)           (0.004)
Specification Including Timing Effects for 1984 and 1987
15-34             -0.0003               -0.053            0.057            -0.087
                  (0.0167)             (0.017)           (0.032)           (0.039)
35-44               0.015               -0.022            0.051            -0.065
                   (0.003)             (0.004)           (0.031)           (0.032)
45-59               0.005               -0.006            0.021            -0.024
                   (0.001)             (0.001)           (0.004)           (0.004)
60-64              0.0011              -0.0002            0.007           -0.0007
                  (0.0018)            (0.0013)           (0.004)          (0.0025)
65+                0.0037               0.0013            0.012             0.005
                  (0.0029)            (0.0022)           (0.006)           (0.004)

Notes: Source: Vital Statistics and CANSIM data. The sample period is 1975-1995. The
estimates are based on a pooled sample of marriage rates for widows/widowers and divorcees. In
addition to the reported parameters, the Base Specification includes the variables in equation (1)
plus a widow effect (WID) and widow/year, widow/province and province/year effects. The
“Timing Effects” are interactions between the dummy variable for Quebec and the year effects
for 1984 and 1987, the years the reforms took effect. All estimation by weighted least-squares
using the number of widows/widowers or divorcees in the relevant age group as weights.
Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                               40
Table 1: Monthly Flat Rate Component of Survivor Benefits by Year

                                             QPP                                  CPP
1980                             146.78                                          57.25
1981                             161.31                                          62.91
1982                             181.18                                          70.68
1983                             201.44                                          78.60
                              Aged <55                Aged 55-64
1984                             214.94                 275.00                   83.87
1985                             224.40                 287.10                   87.56
1986                             233.38                 298.58                   91.06
1987                             242.95                 310.82                   94.79
1988                             253.64                 324.50                   98.96
1989                             264.04                 337.80                   103.02
1990                             276.71                 354.01                   107.96

Notes: All amounts are in current Canadian dollars. Surviving spouses under age 65 receive the
flat rate component plus 37 ½ percent of the deceased spouse’s retirement pension. The benefits
for surviving spouses over the age of 64 are described in the text.


Table 2: Average Monthly Benefit of Survivor Pension in Payment in the Month of
December Preceding the Removal of the Marriage Penalty

                          QPP (December 1983)                      CPP (December 1986)
Age                      Males             Females               Males            Females
<35                     445.18              484.12               254.83            301.47
35-44                   411.24              466.88               219.43            285.63
45-59                   436.45              498.91               248.40            314.94
60-64                   447.64              497.78               237.61            309.77
65-69                    74.02              219.64               63.62             214.25

Notes: All amounts are in year 2001 Canadian dollars. Source Regie des rentes du Quebec
(1985) and Canada Pension Plan (1987).




                                                                                             41
Table 3: The Simple Present Value of the Average Monthly Benefit of Survivor Pensions in
Payment in the Month of December Preceding the Removal of the Marriage Penalty

                                    QPP                                  CPP
Age                      Males              Females            Males             Females
30                       54527              61821             31231               36947
40                       115629             131235            61713               80359
50                       105710             120839            60197               76322
60                       87949              97802             46710               60896
65                       12689              37649             10912               36748

Notes: All amounts are in year 2001 Canadian dollars. Average monthly benefits are taken from
table 2. Individuals under age 45 are assumed to have children so there is no reduction in
benefits. Individuals aged 30 are assumed to have one child aged 5 who finishes school at age
18, so benefits are received for 13 years.


Table 4: Proportion of Widows Receiving QPP or CPP Survivor Benefits

                          Females                                      Males
Age       <35    35-44     45-59    60-64    65+      <35    35-44     45-59   60-64       65+
Quebec in Years Preceding the 1984 Reform
1981     0.71     0.79     0.68     0.58     0.27     0.24    0.37     0.19    0.13       0.05
1982     0.71     0.87     0.71     0.61     0.31     0.23    0.45     0.22    0.14       0.06
1983     0.71     0.89     0.74     0.64     0.35     0.23    0.52     0.24    0.16       0.07
The ROC in Years Preceding the 1987 Reform
1984     0.67     0.89     0.83     0.65     0.33     0.17    0.40     0.36    0.26       0.12
1985     0.67     0.90     0.85     0.66     0.37     0.16    0.40     0.36    0.27       0.14
1986     0.66     0.92     0.87     0.68     0.39     0.16    0.37     0.38    0.30       0.16

Notes: Source Statistics Canada’s CANSIM database, Source Regie des rentes du Quebec
(1985) and Canada Pension Plan (1987).




                                                                                             42
Table 5: Some Characteristics of Widows and Widowers from the 1981 Canadian Census

                                              Widows                   Widowers
                                      Quebec           ROC     Quebec         ROC
All Ages (16+)
Age                                    67.6            68.8     69.3              70.9
Employed                               0.13            0.17     0.26              0.26
High School Graduate                   0.10            0.06     0.07              0.04
University Graduate                    0.01            0.02     0.02           0.04
Wages if employed                      8975            8432    12673          13439
Total Income (all individuals)         6573            7557    8933           10574
Cross Jurisdictional Mover in Past    0.004            0.006   0.004          0.005
5 years
Sample Size                            4794            14464    1006          3023
Ages 16-59
Age                                    50.9             50.7    51.0           50.4
Employed                              0.38              0.55    0.73           0.77
High School Graduate                  0.13              0.10    0.12           0.05
University Graduate                   0.02              0.03    0.03           0.07
Wages if employed                     9623              9396   14336          16816
Total Income (all individuals)        8538             10477   14093          17926
Cross Jurisdictional Mover in Past    0.008            0.006   0.005          0.006
5 years
Sample Size                            1122            2630     214               535

Notes: Source 1981 Canadian Census.




                                                                                         43
Table 6: Estimates of the Impact of the Marriage Penalties on Remarriage Probabilities

                             Widows                                 Widowers
                QU*REF84              QU*REF87              QU*REF84        QU*REF87
Base Specification
15-34               0.016                -0.017                0.056                -0.001
                  (0.003)                (0.004)              (0.022)               (0.026)
                    [0.42]               [-0.24]               [0.70]               [-0.01]
35-44               0.013                -0.009                0.025                 0.010
                  (0.002)                (0.002)              (0.015)               (0.016)
                    [1.00]               [-0.24]               [0.43]                [0.10]
45-59               0.007                -0.005                0.018                -0.013
                  (0.001)                (0.001)              (0.002)               (0.002)
                    [1.00]               [-0.38]               [0.55]               [-0.22]
60-64              0.0015               -0.0028                0.003                -0.005
                 (0.0004)               (0.0005)              (0.003)               (0.003)
                    [0.28]               [-0.44]               [0.10]               [-0.12]
65+               -0.0002               -0.0006              -0.0005               -0.0036
                 (0.0001)               (0.0001)             (0.0010)              (0.0010)
                   [-0.10]               [-0.32]              [-0.04]               [-0.26]
Specification Including Timing Effects for 1984 and 1987
15-34               0.014               -0.015             0.074                    -0.023
                   (0.004)             (0.004)            (0.029)                   (0.032)
                    [0.37]              [-0.21]            [0.94]                   [-0.23]
35-44               0.014               -0.008             0.039                    -0.001
                   (0.002)             (0.002)            (0.019)                   (0.019)
                    [1.08]              [-0.22]            [0.67]                   [-0.06]
45-59               0.005               -0.004             0.017                    -0.012
                   (0.001)             (0.001)            (0.003)                   (0.003)
                    [0.71]              [-0.31]            [0.52]                   [-0.20]
60-64              0.0009              -0.0020           -0.0006                    0.0008
                  (0.0003)            (0.0004)           (0.0018)                  (0.0016)
                    [0.17]              [-0.31]           [-0.02]                   [-0.02]
65+               -0.0003              -0.0003           -0.0018                   -0.0026
                  (0.0001)            (0.0001)           (0.0008)                  (0.0007)
                   [-0.15]              [-0.16]           [-0.13]                   [-0.19]

Notes: Source: Vital Statistics and CANSIM data. The sample period is 1975-1995. In addition
to the reported parameters, the Base Specification includes a full set of province and year effects,
and the sex ratios of unmarried individuals for the age groups 15-34, 15-44, 45-59, 60-64 and
65+ (see equation (1)). The “Timing Effects” are interactions between the dummy variable for
Quebec and the year effects for 1984 and 1987, the years the reforms took effect. All estimation
by weighted least-squares using the number of widows or widowers in the relevant age group as
weights. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.


                                                                                                 44
Table 7: Estimates of the Impact of the Marriage Penalties on the Stock of Widows

                             Widows                                Widowers
                QU*REF84              QU*REF87             QU*REF84        QU*REF87
Base Specification
15-34             -0.0008              -0.0001               -0.0000              -0.0006
                 (0.0005)              (0.0005)              (0.0004)             (0.0004)
35-44              0.0002              -0.0049               -0.0014               0.0008
                 (0.0021)              (0.0020)              (0.0011)             (0.0010)
45-59              0.0033              -0.0029               -0.0053               0.0017
                 (0.0042)              (0.0042)              (0.0022)             (0.0021)
60-64             -0.0006               0.0109               -0.0042               0.0041
                 (0.0115)              (0.0117)              (0.0065)             (0.0065)
65+                0.0033               0.0232                0.0236              -0.0144
                 (0.0092)              (0.0094)              (0.0074)             (0.0075)

Notes: Source: Labor Force Survey and CANSIM data. The sample period is 1975-1995. In
addition to the reported parameters, the estimating equation includes a full set of province and
year effects, and the sex ratios of unmarried individuals for the age groups 15-34, 15-44, 45-59,
60-64 and 65+ (see equation (1)). All estimation by weighted least-squares using LFS sample
weights. Standard errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                                45
Table 8: Evidence of the Widows and Widowers Who Responded to the Removal of the
Marriage Penalties drawn from the 1990 and 1995 General Social Surveys

Sample Characteristics
Sample Size                                                      2179
Age at Death of Spouse                                            59
Elementary Education                                             0.37
University Graduate                                              0.13
Resident in Quebec                                               0.25
Remarried in Sample Period                                       0.12
1995 survey                                                      0.55
Regression Results for Full Sample
                                       QU*REF84                      QU*REF87
Elementary Education                     -0.441                         0.156
                                        (0.111)                       (0.232)
High School Graduate                     0.423                         -0.302
                                        (0.319)                       (0.385)
Post Secondary Education                 0.149                         -0.076
                                        (0.349)                       (0.402)
University Graduate                      0.275                         -0.118
                                        (0.329)                       (0.374)
Household Member Owns                    0.180                         -0.169
Dwelling                                (0.310)                       (0.368)
Cohabitated Prior to                     0.310                         -0.474
Remarriage                              (0.299)                       (0.301)
Regression Results for Females
Elementary Education                      -0.460                        -0.022
                                         (0.096)                        (0.089)
High School Graduate                      0.758                         -0.844
                                         (0.111)                        (0.132)
Post Secondary Education                  0.378                         -0.446
                                         (0.335)                        (0.344)
University Graduate                       0.475                         -0.377
                                         (0.379)                        (0.379)
Household Member Owns                      0.628                        -0.842
Dwelling                                 (0.112)                        (0.118)
Cohabitated Prior to                       0.389                        -0.692
Remarriage                               (0.361)                        (0.372)

Notes: Source 1990 and 1995 General Social Survey. In addition to the reported parameters, the
regression equation includes quartics in age, age at spouse’s death, the year the spouse died and
the year of any remarriage, and dummy variables for Quebec, remarriage and females (where
appropriate). All estimation by weighted least-squares using GSS sample weights. Standard
errors are corrected for heteroskedasticity.




                                                                                               46
Figure 1: Marriage rates by Marital Status in Canada, 1974-1994

 0.16



 0.14



 0.12



  0.1


                                                                                                                                                                    Singles
 0.08                                                                                                                                                               Divorced
                                                                                                                                                                    W idowed


 0.06



 0.04



 0.02



   0
            1974

                   1975

                          1976

                                 1977

                                        1978

                                               1979

                                                      1980

                                                             1981

                                                                    1982

                                                                           1983

                                                                                  1984

                                                                                         1985

                                                                                                1986

                                                                                                       1987

                                                                                                              1988

                                                                                                                     1989

                                                                                                                            1990

                                                                                                                                   1991

                                                                                                                                          1992

                                                                                                                                                 1993

                                                                                                                                                        1994
                                                                                  Year


Notes: Source Nault (1996). The rates for the widowed population have been multiplied by 10
to produce a common scale.

Figure 2: Growth Rates of CPP/QPP Survivor Pension Beneficiaries

 0 .1 8

 0 .1 6

 0 .1 4

 0 .1 2

  0 .1
                                                                                                                                                               Q uebec
                                                                                                                                                               R est of C anada
 0 .0 8

 0 .0 6

 0 .0 4

 0 .0 2

        0
 19 8




 19 8

 19 9

 19 0

 19 1

 19 2

 19 3

 19 4

       5
 19 9

 19 0

 19 1

 19 2

 19 3

 19 4

 19 5

 19 6

 19 7
     /7

     /7

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /8

     /9

     /9

     /9

     /9

     /9

     /9
   77

   78

   79

   80

   81

   82

   83

   84

   85

   86

   87

   88

   89

   90

   91

   92

   93

   94
 19




                                                                       F is c a l Y e a r




Notes: Source Human Resources Development Canada (1994).


                                                                                                                                                                                  47
     Figure 3: Remarriage Rates of Widows and Widowers, 1956-1975

     Widows
                                      .6
[Remarriages/Total Population]X1000




                                      .4




                                      .2
                                           1955   1960   1965   1970   1975
                                                         Year



     Widowers
                                      .6
[Remarriages/Total Population]X1000




                                      .4




                                      .2
                                           1955   1960   1965   1970   1975
                                                         Year


               Notes: Quebec ---------, Rest of Canada –———.

                                                                              48
   Figure 4: Remarriage Rates of Widows in Quebec and the Rest of Canada, 1975-1995


                                       Females Aged 15-34                                                                             Females Aged 35-44

 0.1                                                                                                  0.06
0.09
0.08                                                                                                  0.05
0.07                                                                                                  0.04
0.06
0.05                                                                                                  0.03
0.04
0.03                                                                                                  0.02
0.02                                                                                                  0.01
0.01
   0                                                                                                    0
        1975


                   1977


                             1979


                                       1981


                                                1983


                                                         1985


                                                                 1987


                                                                         1989


                                                                                 1991


                                                                                        1993


                                                                                               1995




                                                                                                              1975


                                                                                                                      1977


                                                                                                                              1979


                                                                                                                                       1981


                                                                                                                                              1983


                                                                                                                                                     1985


                                                                                                                                                            1987


                                                                                                                                                                   1989


                                                                                                                                                                           1991


                                                                                                                                                                                   1993


                                                                                                                                                                                               1995
                                       Females Aged 45-59                                                                             Females Aged 60-64

0.025                                                                                                 0.012

 0.02                                                                                                  0.01

                                                                                                      0.008
0.015
                                                                                                      0.006
 0.01
                                                                                                      0.004
0.005                                                                                                 0.002

   0                                                                                                     0
           1975


                    1977


                              1979


                                        1981


                                                 1983


                                                         1985


                                                                 1987


                                                                         1989


                                                                                 1991


                                                                                        1993


                                                                                               1995




                                                                                                               1975


                                                                                                                       1977


                                                                                                                               1979

                                                                                                                                       1981


                                                                                                                                              1983


                                                                                                                                                     1985


                                                                                                                                                            1987


                                                                                                                                                                   1989


                                                                                                                                                                          1991


                                                                                                                                                                                  1993


                                                                                                                                                                                           1995
                                       Females Aged 65+

0.0035

 0.003
0.0025
 0.002
0.0015
 0.001
0.0005
       0
            1975

                      1977

                                1979


                                         1981

                                                  1983


                                                          1985

                                                                  1987


                                                                          1989

                                                                                 1991

                                                                                        1993


                                                                                               1995




   Notes: Quebec ---------, Rest of Canada –———.


                                                                                                                                                                                          49
  Figure 5: Remarriage Rates of Widowers in Quebec and the Rest of Canada, 1975-1995


                                 Males Aged 15-34                                                                      Males Aged 35-44

0.16                                                                                      0.14
0.14                                                                                      0.12
0.12                                                                                       0.1
 0.1
                                                                                          0.08
0.08
                                                                                          0.06
0.06
0.04                                                                                      0.04

0.02                                                                                      0.02
  0                                                                                         0
        1975


                1977


                        1979


                                1981


                                        1983


                                                1985


                                                       1987


                                                              1989


                                                                     1991


                                                                            1993


                                                                                   1995




                                                                                                 1975


                                                                                                        1977


                                                                                                               1979


                                                                                                                      1981


                                                                                                                             1983


                                                                                                                                    1985


                                                                                                                                           1987


                                                                                                                                                  1989


                                                                                                                                                         1991


                                                                                                                                                                1993


                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                 Males Aged 45-59                                                                      Males Aged 60-64

0.09                                                                                      0.06
0.08
                                                                                          0.05
0.07
0.06                                                                                      0.04
0.05
                                                                                          0.03
0.04
0.03                                                                                      0.02
0.02
                                                                                          0.01
0.01
  0                                                                                         0
        1975


                1977


                        1979


                                1981


                                        1983


                                                1985


                                                       1987


                                                              1989


                                                                     1991


                                                                            1993


                                                                                   1995




                                                                                                 1975


                                                                                                        1977


                                                                                                               1979


                                                                                                                      1981


                                                                                                                             1983


                                                                                                                                    1985


                                                                                                                                           1987


                                                                                                                                                  1989


                                                                                                                                                         1991


                                                                                                                                                                1993


                                                                                                                                                                       1995
                                  Males Aged 65+

 0.02
0.018
0.016
0.014
0.012
 0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
    0
         1975


                 1977


                         1979


                                 1981


                                         1983


                                                1985


                                                       1987


                                                              1989

                                                                     1991


                                                                            1993


                                                                                   1995




  Notes: Quebec ---------, Rest of Canada –———.

                                                                                                                                                                50
  Figure 6: The Relationship Between the Estimated Behavioral Response and the Size of the
  Marriage Penalty

  Panel A
Proportionate Change in Remarriage Rate




                                          1




                                          .5




                                          0
                                               25000   50000         75000          100000    125000
                                                          Present Value of Marriage Penalty


  Panel B
Proportionate Change in Remarriage Rate




                                          2




                                          1




                                          0
                                               25000   50000         75000          100000    125000
                                                          Present Value of Marriage Penalty


  Notes: In panel A the present values of marriage penalties and estimated behavioral responses
  are from tables 3 and 6 respectively. In the panel B the estimated behavioral responses have
  been divided by the proportion of widow(er)s in an age group receiving a survivor pension from
  table 4, to account for differences in treatment across age groups. The solid lines graph the
  predicted values of the simple regression of the behavioral responses on the marriage penalties.



                                                                                                       51
