                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                             THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS

                                             Brian J. Hall
                                            Kevin J. Murphy

                                          Working Paper 9784
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9784


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




We are grateful for research support from the Division of Research at Harvard Business School (Hall) and
USC’s Marshall School (Murphy). We thank Harry DeAngelo, Linda DeAngelo, Bradford DeLong, Michael
Waldman, Paul Oyer, Tim Taylor, Jan Zábojník and Aaron Zimmerman for helpful comments. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.
The Trouble with Stock Options
Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy
NBER Working Paper No. 9784
June 2003
JEL No. J0, J3, G3, L0, L2

                                           ABSTRACT

The trouble with options is that too many options are granted to too many people. Most options are
granted below the top-executive level, and options are often an inefficient way to attract, retain and
motivate executives and (especially) lower-level employees. Why, then, are options so prevalent?
We discuss several explanations including changes in corporate governance, reporting requirements,
taxes, the bull market and managerial rent-seeking. We also offer an alternative hypothesis that we
believe explains the over-use of options and several apparent puzzles: boards and managers falsely
perceive stock options to be inexpensive because of accounting and cash-flow considerations.



Brian J. Hall                                  Kevin J. Murphy
Harvard Business School                        Marshall School of Business
Baker Library 185                              University of Southern California
Boston, MA 02163                               kjmurphy@usc.edu
and NBER
bhall@hbs.edu
                            The Trouble with Stock Options

                                  Brian J. Hall and Kevin J. Murphy



      The most pronounced change in corporate compensation practices over the past decade

is the escalation and recent decline in executive and employee stock options. In 1992, firms

in the Standard & Poor’s 500 granted their employees options worth a total of $11 billion at

the time of grant; by 2000, option grants in S&P 500 firms increased to $119 billion.1 By

2002, option grants in the S&P 500 had fallen to $71 billion, well below their peak but still a

six-fold increase from a decade earlier. Despite—or perhaps because of—their growing

importance, employee stock options have become increasingly controversial.

      The main argument in favor of stock option plans is that they give executives a greater

incentive to act in the interests of shareholders by providing a direct link between realized

compensation and company stock-price performance. In addition, offering employee stock

options in lieu of cash compensation allows companies to attract highly motivated and

entrepreneurial employees, and also lets companies obtain employment services without

(directly) expending cash. Options are typically structured so that only employees who

remain with the firm can benefit from them, thus also providing retention incentives. Finally,

stock options encourage executive risk taking, which can mitigate problems with executive

risk aversion.




1
    Option values are in 2002-constant dollars and are based on Compustat’s ExecuComp data; see Figure 1
    below for calculation details. Data are not available for all S&P 500 firms; the total for S&P 500 firms is
    estimated as 500 times the average grant for S&P 500 firms with available data.
HALL-MURPHY                    THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 2


     But the incentives provided by stock options have also been criticized. The recent

accounting scandals at Enron, WorldCom, Global Crossing and other companies, have been

linked to excessive risk taking and an excessive fixation on stock prices, both allegedly

caused by the escalation in option grants (Cassidy, 2002; Madrick, 2003). Moreover, these

scandals have focused attention on problems with current accounting practices, which in turn

has opened a debate on the accounting treatment of employee stock options. Under current

U.S. accounting rules, companies generally do not treat options as an expense on company

financial statements. Proponents of expensing options argue that expensing will generate

more informative financial statements and improve the credibility of reported earnings.

Opponents of expensing worry that expensing will cause companies to grant fewer options,

especially to lower-level employees, which in turn will “destroy the engine that fueled the

economic growth” of the 1990s.

     In this article, we explore the trouble with stock options. We begin by describing

patterns in employee options since the early 1990s and by describing the relevant tax and

accounting rules; we later argue that these rules help explain the widespread use of option-

based pay. Next, we analyze the efficiency of providing compensation and incentives using

stock options, focusing on the fact that risk-averse and undiversified employees will value

options significantly less than they cost the company to grant. We identify several problems

with options granted to top executives and even more problems with options granted to

lower-level employees. These conclusions deepen the question of why grants of options have

increased so dramatically, especially among rank-and-file workers. We consider several

explanations for the recent trends in option practices, including changes in corporate

governance and tax laws, managerial influence over their own pay packages, the bull market
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                          PAGE 3


in equities of the 1990s and our preferred hypothesis that the perceived cost of options to

boards and managers is lower than the actual economic cost of granting such options.




A Brief Primer on Stock Options

     Employee stock options are contracts that give the employee the right to buy a share of

stock at a pre-specified “exercise” price for a pre-specified term. Most employee stock

options expire in ten years and are granted with an exercise price equal to the market price

on the date of grant. Typically a grant of stock options cannot be exercised immediately, but

only over time; for example, 25 percent might become exercisable in each of the four years

following grant. When a stock option can be exercised, then the option is said to be “vested.”

Employee options are non-tradable, and are typically forfeited if the employee leaves the

firm before vesting (although “accelerated vesting” is a commonly negotiated severance

benefit for top-level executives, especially following a change in control).

     When an employee exercises an option, the company typically issues a new share,

which increases the number of shares outstanding. Although some companies require

employees to pay exercise prices in cash, most companies offer “cashless exercise

programs,” where the employee pays nothing and simply receives the value of the spread

between the market price and the exercise price either in cash or in shares of company stock.


Trends in Stock Options Since the Early 1990s

     Figure 1 shows the average inflation-adjusted grant-date values of options granted by

the average firm in the S&P 500 from 1992-2002. Over this decade, the value of options

granted increased from an average of $22 million per company to $238 million per company
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                           PAGE 4


by 2000, falling to $141 million per company in 2002. Although the exact percentages have

varied from year to year, the chief executive officer’s (CEO’s) share of the total grant has

fallen from about seven percent of the total in the mid-1990s to under five percent in 2000-

2002. Managers and employees below the five top executives have received an increasing

share of the total grant: grants to this group have grown from less than 85 percent of the total

in the mid-1990s to over 90 percent by 2002.

     The average real pay for S&P 500 CEOs skyrocketed during the 1990s, growing from

$3.5 million in 1992 to $14.7 million in 2000. Most of this increase reflects the escalation in

stock options valued at time of grant, which grew nine-fold from an average of about

$800,000 in 1992 to nearly $7.2 million in 2000. (In contrast, other components of total

compensation merely tripled during this period.) Average real CEO pay in the S&P 500

tumbled to only $9.4 million in 2002, driven by a 40 percent two-year drop in the value of

options granted.
HALL-MURPHY                                                             THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                PAGE 5


                                                                                   Figure 1

                                                  Grant-Date Values of Employee Stock Options in the S&P 500, 1992-2002


                                    $250                                                               $238
                                                                                                              $226
Average Option Grant ($ millions)




                                    $200


                                                                                                                            CEO
                                    $150                                                        $146                 $141   (4.2% in 2002)

                                                                                                                            Other Top 5
                                                                                                                            (5.3% in 2002)
                                                                                        $101
                                    $100
                                                                                 $71
                                                                                                                            Employees
                                                                           $48                                              Below Top 5
                                     $50                                                                                    (90.5% in 2002)
                                                            $30   $34
                                           $22      $25


                                     $0
                                           1992    1993    1994   1995    1996   1997   1998    1999   2000   2001   2002

Note: Figure shows the grant-date value of options (in millions of 2002-constant dollars) granted to all employees in an
      average S&P 500 firm, based on data from S&P’s ExecuComp data. Grants below the Top 5 are estimated based on
      “Percent of Total Grant” disclosures; companies not granting options to any of their top five executives are excluded.
      Grant-values are based on ExecuComp’s Black-Scholes calculations. The number in parentheses indicates the fraction
      of the grant, on average, that is awarded to the indicated employee (or employee group). Fiscal 2002 results are based
      on the April 2003 “cut” of ExecuComp, which includes only companies with fiscal closings in December 2002 or
      earlier.

                                      The escalation in CEO pay during the 1990s is well known and highly scrutinized. Less

well recognized, but evident from Figure 1, is the fact that the escalation in option grants was

not restricted to CEOs or even to top-level executives. The increase in employee stock

options has occurred across a wide range of industries, but is especially pronounced in the

so-called                                    “new         economy”       firms   related   to    computers,     software,   the    Internet,

telecommunications or networking. The first four columns of Table 1 show option grants as a

percent of company stock for four industry groups and for companies in the S&P 500, S&P

MidCap 400 (Standard & Poor’s “representative” portfolio of 400 mid-size firms) and S&P

SmallCap 600 (Standard & Poor’s representative portfolio of 600 smaller firms). Between
HALL-MURPHY                                THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                         PAGE 6


                                                          Table 1

                 Option Grants as a Percent of Outstanding Shares and as Value per Employee,
                                            by Industry, 1993-2001

                                                                          Panel B. Average Grant-Date Value of
                     Panel A. Percent of Outstanding Shares
                                                                         Options per Employee (below top 5) for all
                       Granted in Options in Each Year
                                                                                  Employees in Industry

    Fiscal          Old          New                                      Old           New
                                            Finance      Utilities                                 Finance     Utilities
    Year          Economy      Economy                                  Economy       Economy

     1993           1.8%          4.2%        1.7%         0.9%            $522        $1,684       $1,007       $271
     1994           1.8%          4.2%        1.9%         0.9%            $633        $1,855       $1,570       $383
     1995           1.9%          4.3%        1.8%         0.9%            $655        $2,533       $1,310       $388
     1996           2.1%          5.2%        2.0%         1.0%            $904        $3,834       $2,005       $690
     1997           2.3%          6.4%        2.3%         0.9%           $1,162       $6,021       $3,365       $518
     1998           2.7%          7.1%        2.5%         1.2%           $1,376       $7,334       $5,060       $649
     1999           2.8%          6.6%        2.2%         1.5%           $2,169      $11,838       $5,259      $1,797
     2000           2.9%          7.4%        2.4%         1.5%           $2,559      $26,690       $4,806      $1,385
     2001           2.6%          6.4%        2.5%         1.4%           $2,856      $18,882       $5,562      $2,933
    Note: Data from Compustat’s ExecuComp database, and includes data from firms in the S&P 500, the S&P Mid-Cap
          400, and the S&P SmallCap 600. New economy firms defined as companies with primary SIC codes 3570, 3571,
          3572, 3576, 3577, 3661, 3674, 4812, 4813, 5045, 5961, 7370, 7371, 7372 and 7373. Old economy firms are firms
          with SIC codes less than 4000 not otherwise categorized as new economy. Financial services firms have two-digit
          SIC codes between 60 and 69; utilities have two-digit SIC code of 49. Utilities option values based on average
          value of options granted to Top 5 executives, using ExecuComp’s modified Black-Scholes methodology.


1993 and their peak in 2000, grants in “old economy” firms increased 44 percent from 1.8

percent of outstanding shares to 2.9 percent, while grants in new economy increased 75

percent from 4.2 percent to 7.4 percent; grants in financial services firms and utilities

increased by about 50 percent.

          The second four columns of Table 1 shows the inflation-adjusted dollar-value of grants

per employee in four industries, excluding grants made to each company’s five top

executives.2 Grant-values for the average employee in old economy firms increased from

2
       The average grant value is determined by dividing the total value of grants in each industry (in 2002-
       constant dollars, after excluding grants to the top five executives) by the total number of employees in the
       industry. Companies not granting options to their top five executives are excluded from this analysis.
HALL-MURPHY                    THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                           PAGE 7


$522 in 1993 to nearly $2,900 in 2001, while grant-values increased from $1,684 to nearly

$19,000 per employee in new economy firms. At their peak in 2000, the average employee in

a new economy company received options worth nearly $27,000.

     The data in Figure 1 and Table 1 do not quite reveal the increased prevalence of

“broad-based” option plans that cover all or most company employees, because the group

“below the top five” includes senior executives as well as the rank and file. However,

according to the National Center on Employee Ownership (NCEO), between seven and ten

million employees in U.S. firms held options in 2000, compared to only one million in 1992.

Oyer and Schaefer (2002) estimate that options are distributed to more than half of

employees in 43 percent of all public firms (but this covers only about six percent of public-

firm employees, since smaller companies are more likely to offer options to a broader base).


Tax Rules Affecting Stock Options

     Although economists have generally focused on the incentive aspects of employee

options, the popularity of stock options reflects in large part their favorable tax and

accounting treatments, which we believe are critical in understanding why, how and to

whom options are granted.

     Under U.S. tax rules, the granting of a stock option does not constitute a taxable event

for either the company or the employee. What happens later depends on whether the options

are “qualified” (called Incentive Stock Options or ISOs) or “non-qualified.” For non-

qualified options, the spread between the market and exercise price upon exercise constitutes

taxable personal income to the employee, and a compensation-expense deduction for the

company. For qualified options, the employee pays nothing upon exercise, and pays capital
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                            PAGE 8


gains taxes when eventually selling the stock; the corporation, however, cannot deduct the

gain on a qualified option as a compensation expense. As a result of this loss of deductibility,

combined with the fact that that qualified options involve holding requirements (recipients

must hold the stock for at least one year after exercise) and other limits and restrictions, most

employee option grants are non-qualified.

       Tax laws enacted in 1994 indirectly affected option-granting practices. Under Section

162(m) of the Internal Revenue Code, compensation in excess of $1 million paid to “proxy-

named executives” (typically the company’s five highest-paid officers) is considered

unreasonable and no longer deductible as a corporate compensation expense. However,

Section 162(m) does not impose limitations on “performance-based” compensation,

including payments from exercising options. This new law made stock options relatively less

expensive than, say, base salaries or stock grants, and may therefore help to explain the

explosion in executive option grants in the 1990s.


Option “Accounting”

     Corporations in the United States keep two separate ledgers of revenues and expenses,

one for tax purposes and one for accounting purposes. Although gains from exercising non-

qualified options are treated as an expense for tax purposes, there is usually no accounting

expense recorded for options either at time of grant or exercise.

     The accounting rules governing employee stock options are established by the

Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) and its predecessor, the Accounting

Principles Board (APB). Under APB Opinion 25, issued in 1972, the accounting charge for

stock options equals the difference between the market price of the stock and the exercise
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                           PAGE 9


price on the date that both the exercise price and the number of options becomes known or

fixed. There is no charge for options granted with an exercise price equal to (or exceeding)

the grant-date market price, because the spread is zero on the grant date. Notice that this rule

would impose a higher accounting charge for options with an exercise price indexed to the

market, because the exercise price is not immediately fixed. It would also imposed a higher

accounting charge for options that only become exercisable if certain performance triggers

are achieved, because the number of options is not immediately fixed.

     In 1995, FASB issued FAS 123, which recommended that companies expense the “fair

market value” of options granted (using Black-Scholes or a similar valuation methodology).

However, FASB also allowed firms to continue reporting under APB Opinion 25, with the

additional requirement that the value of the option grant would be disclosed in a footnote to

the financial statements. Until late 2002, only a handful of companies adopted FASB’s

recommended approach. However, by early 2003, following several accounting scandals that

focused attention on accounting problems, more than 100 companies had voluntarily begun

to expense options.

     Companies with declining stock prices have routinely “repriced” their existing

employee stock options, either by resetting the exercise price or (equivalently) by replacing

old options with new options with a lower exercise price. In December 1998, FASB imposed

“variable accounting” (where the accounting charge adjusts over the vesting period based on

realized stock prices) for companies repricing their options.
HALL-MURPHY                       THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                       PAGE 10


Are Options Efficient?

     With few exceptions, the theoretical and empirical research on employee stock options

treat options as part of an optimal incentive arrangement that mitigates agency problems

between shareholders and self-interested managers by tying pay directly to stock-price

appreciation. But most options are granted to employees well below the top-executive level,

and many firms offer options to all employees. Given the increasing prevalence of broad-

based plans, a compelling theory of employee stock options must explain not only executive

stock options but also options granted to the rank and file.

     Are options, as typically structured, the most efficient way to attract, retain and

motivate top-level executives whose actions directly affect stock prices? And, are options

plausibly an efficient way of attracting, retaining and motivating workers whose influence on

stock prices is difficult to quantify or detect? Answering these questions requires considering

the distinction between the cost of options to the firm and the value of options to executives

and employees, and analyzing the incentives that stock options provide for both top

managers and the rank and file.


The Gap Between Cost and Value of Stock Options

     The cost to a firm of granting a stock option is larger than the value of the stock option

to the employee receiving it. The economic or “opportunity” cost of an option to a firm can

be conceived in several ways. For example, the cost of options to shareholders is the amount

the company would have to pay an outside investor to accept the financial liability of options

granted to employees. Equivalently, the cost of options is the amount an outside investor

would pay for the option, assuming that the outside investor faced the same exercise and
HALL-MURPHY                         THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                  PAGE 11


forfeiture patterns of company employees. After downward adjustments for potential

forfeiture and early exercise, standard methodologies such as Black-Scholes (1973) or

binomial option pricing formulas provide reasonable estimates of what an outside investor

would pay, and therefore measure the company’s cost of granting options.3

      However, these standard models are not appropriate for determining the value of

options held by undiversified, risk-averse employees who can not freely sell or trade the

options nor hedge their risk through short-selling or other methods. In other words,

employees should have a clear preference for compensation in cash or in a diversified

portfolio of stocks rather than receiving an equal value of nontradable and undiversified

stock options. The idea that options cost companies more than they are worth to employee-

recipients is not surprising: it stems from the basic concept that individuals demand

compensating differentials for bearing risk. Indeed, if employees valued options at their cost

to the company, then employees should be paid entirely in options rather than cash as long as

options offer any positive incentive benefits.

      Press accounts sometimes claim that executives can effectively hedge or unwind the

risk of their options through financial transactions (involving derivatives) with investment

banks. But we know of no evidence showing that this practice is widespread, and our many

conversations with knowledgeable practitioners suggest that this practice is quite rare.

Although executives sometimes hedge the risk of their unrestricted stock holdings, it is more

difficult to hedge option risk because executives are legally precluded from shorting their

company stock, trading their options or “restricted stock” (stock that cannot be freely sold by

3
    Binomial models can more accurately measure the company cost of options than the Black-Scholes
    formula because the binominal approach can more flexibly take into account expected forfeitures and early
HALL-MURPHY                         THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                       PAGE 12


the executives), or pledging these securities as collateral. Moreover, Schizer (2000)

documents that significant tax disadvantages would result from hedging restricted stock or

options. Finally, even if some top executives have hedged some of their option holdings,

such schemes are not available to lower-level managers and employees who receive 90

percent of stock options granted.

     In Hall and Murphy (2000, 2002), we compare the company’s cost of granting

employee stock options to the value of the same stock options to employees using a

certainty-equivalence approach.4 For reasonable assumptions about risk aversion and

diversification, we find that employees value options that have just been granted with an

exercise price equal to the market price at only about half of their cost to the firm. This

value:cost ratio is substantially smaller if the options have an exercise price that is above the

existing market price, or if the exercise prices increases over time, or if the option has a long

vesting period.

     Thus, in determining whether stock options are an efficient method of providing

compensation, the question hinges on whether the attraction, retention and motivational

benefits of options are sufficient to justify the large compensating differential implied by the

wedge between the cost and value of options.


Attraction?

     A potential benefit of providing compensation in the form of options is that the

company can attract employees without spending cash. However, this benefit must be


   exercise, both of which reduce the expected cost of options.
HALL-MURPHY                        THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                PAGE 13


weighed against the compensating differential demanded by option-holding employees.

Companies paying options in lieu of cash are effectively borrowing from employees,

receiving employment services today in return for highly variable (and often non-existent)

payouts in the future. But risk-averse undiversified employees are unlikely to be efficient

sources of capital, especially compared to banks, private equity funds, venture capitalists and

other investors who specialize in managing risk and providing capital.

      The empirical evidence that companies grant options to conserve cash is mixed. Core

and Guay (2001) find greater use of employee options in firms facing financial constraints.

However, in a study of new economy firms, Ittner, Lambert and Larcker (2003) find that

companies with greater cash flows use options more extensively. Indeed, option-intensive

companies like Microsoft, Intel and Cisco are well known for paying cash compensation

above competitive levels, and Microsoft and others routinely use their excess cash to

repurchase shares to reduce the dilution caused by large option grants.

      The euphoria surrounding the bull market of the late 1990s led many employees to

clamor for stock options, which might suggest that companies could attract workers by

offering options while reducing other components of compensation. But, “clamoring” does

not obviously translate into willingness to pay: most broad-based option plans are added on

top of existing competitive pay packages. As shown in Table 1, the average employee in a

new economy firm received options costing shareholders almost $27,000 in 2000. It is not

surprising that employees clamor for such options when they are largely add-ons. But since

employees are unwilling to pay close to the full cost of their options, broad-based options are

4
    See also Lambert, Larcker and Verrechia (1991). Meulbroek (2001) uses a non-utility-based approach to
    distinguish between cost and value, and obtains similar results.
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                           PAGE 14


an inefficient substitute for cash compensation and therefore an inefficient way to attract

employees.

     Paying options in lieu of cash compensation will affect the type of employees the

company can attract. For example, highly motivated and entrepreneurial employees who

believe they can increase company stock prices will be attracted to companies offering

relatively more option-based compensation. Whether this benefit justifies the compensating

differential “charged” by employees for accepting risky compensation depends on the

strength and value of this sorting and on the availability of other (less costly) measures of

managerial characteristics. In any case, this rationale for stock options as an attraction device

is limited to top managers and perhaps to some key engineering or technical employees who

can directly affect company stock prices, and these individuals account for a small fraction

of the option grants.

     For lower-level positions in the corporate hierarchy, paying options in lieu of cash

compensation will attract employees who are relatively less risk-averse. However, if

attracting less risk-averse employees is an important objective, offering bonus plans tied to

performance measures in the employee’s “line of sight” can provide both sorting and

incentives, while payments to lower-level workers based on stock prices will provide sorting

but not incentives.

     In summary, it is difficult to justify using options to achieve objectives related to

attraction. At best, paying in stock options may help the company attract entrepreneurial top

managers or some key engineering or technical employees, but it is difficult to tell a

compelling story about the benefits of using stock options to attract lower-level employees.
HALL-MURPHY                    THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                          PAGE 15


Retention?

     Employee stock options provide retention incentives through restrictions on vesting

that lapse with the passage of time, together with provisions that unvested options are

forfeited when an employee leaves. The retention incentives created by employee options are

highest when the stock price is already well above the exercise price of the options and when

the employee must remain in the job before being able to exercise the option. Retention

incentives are lowest when options are “underwater” and essentially valueless, especially

when alternative employers are willing to make a new grant of more-valuable options.

      Options clearly provide retention incentives, but do they do so in the most efficient

manner? Retention incentives can be created by any compensation mechanism that makes it

worthwhile for employees to stay with their current employer rather than to accept an outside

offer. For example, retention incentives can be provided by deferred compensation or

pensions that depend on remaining with the firm, or by paying employees less than their

marginal product early in their career but more later (Lazear, 1979). Alternatively, firms can

offer explicit “retention bonuses” to critical employees staying a specified period of time;

indeed, such retention bonuses are quite common in situations where a firm is in financial

distress. Since risk-averse employees value cash more than options, it seems plausible that

explicit cash retention bonuses are a more cost-effective method than options of inducing

continued employment.

     In addition, it is not obvious to us that retention incentives should optimally vary with

company stock prices. Suppose, for example, that all firms in an industry offer identical

compensation packages consisting of a base salary and an option grant with an exercise price

equal to the grant-date market price. In a bull market, stock prices rise above the exercise
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 16


price of the options and all workers will find it advantageous to stay with their current

employers. But, in a bear market, stock prices fall below the exercise prices and workers will

rationally leave their current firm to join a competitor offering a fresh compensation

package. This latter scenario is currently plaguing much of Corporate America, where

option-based retention incentives have evaporated along with shareholder returns.


Motivation?

      The potential motivational benefits of tying top-executive pay to the performance of

company stock are clear enough. But, given that 90 percent of stock options are granted

below the top-executive level, the relevant question is: are options an efficient way of

providing incentives for lower-level managers and employees?

      Conceptually, it seems implausible that stock options provide meaningful incentives to

lower-level employees. Although employees may hold a substantial fraction of their wealth

in a firm (both through firm-specific human capital and through stock in 401(k) plans), they

can be granted at most a trivial fraction of the outstanding shares. Thus, a free-rider problem

exists: even if employees can increase the value of the firm, their share of that gain through

their option holdings is very small. Combining this enormous free-rider problem with the

risk imposed on employees through stock-based pay, it seems obvious that cash-based

incentive plans based on objective or subjective performance measures can provide stronger

and more efficient pay-performance incentives. (See Oyer and Schaefer, 2002, for a detailed

analysis of this assertion.)

      Tying employee pay to company stock-price performance may provide indirect

incentive benefits to the company. For example, stock-based pay may help communicate the
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 17


corporate objective of maximizing shareholder wealth, increase employee morale and

encourage workers to engage in mutual monitoring. Although we are unaware of compelling

empirical research that supports these claims, we note that these benefits (if they exist) have

surely backfired in the current bear market, as mutual-monitoring incentives and the morale

of option-holders have plummeted along with stock prices.


Are Traditional Options Efficient For Top Executives?

     Although options are clearly an inefficient way of attracting, retaining and motivating

lower-level employees, the case for options for top executives is more compelling. For

example, options may help attract entrepreneurial managers and also provide top managers

with incentives to take actions that increase the stock price. But even for top managers, there

are good reasons to question whether the “traditional stock option”—that is, a ten-year

option with relatively short vesting and an exercise price equal to the grant-date market

price—represents the most efficient way to provide stock-based incentives.

     Many economists embrace the idea that option exercise prices should be “indexed” to

the market (for example, Rappaport, 1999). Since executives holding indexed options are

rewarded only to the extent that their performance exceeds the market, these plans utilize a

less-noisy performance measure, protect executives from market shocks and also protect

shareholders from rewarding poorly performing executives in bull markets. In spite of these

advantages, indexed options are virtually nonexistent.

     We believe the nonexistence of indexed options reflects two factors. First, as discussed

further in the next section, grants of indexed options must be expensed in accounting

statements (resulting in smaller reported income), while traditional options are not expensed.
HALL-MURPHY                         THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                  PAGE 18


Second, traditional options are much more likely than indexed options to end up with a stock

price that exceeds the exercise price. For example, the probability that a traditional option is

in the money after ten years is approximately 80 percent.5 In contrast, the probability that an

indexed option is in the money after ten years is significantly less than 50 percent, because

stock returns are skewed to the right (since the minimum return is minus 100 percent but the

maximum return is unbounded), and therefore less than half of the firms in an index will

have returns that exceed the average. Thus, indexing reduces the company’s cost of granting

an option, but it reduces the executive’s value even more because risk-averse executives

attach very low values to options likely to expire worthless. Therefore, to deliver the same

value to the executive, it costs the company more to grant indexed options rather than

traditional options.

      Our argument runs counter to the conventional wisdom, which often asserts that

options where the exercise price is indexed to market must be a Pareto improvement to

traditional options both for firms and for risk-averse employees. However, in an analysis of

indexed options based on our Hall-Murphy (2002) methodology, we find that indexed

options dominate traditional options only if the indexed options are granted with exercise

prices that are well below market value at time of grant, to offset the major disadvantage of

reduced payout probabilities.

      More generally, options that are likely to expire worthless provide weak incentives for

risk-averse executives since the incentive-value of options is related to how the executive’s

value changes with incremental increases in the stock price. This is why “premium

5
    This estimate is based on the capital-asset pricing model assuming no dividends, expected appreciation of
    12.5 percent, and volatility of 30 percent.
HALL-MURPHY                      THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                        PAGE 19


options”—which have an exercise price above the current stock price and are advocated by

many shareholder activists who desire to create tougher performance standards for top

executives—are poor incentive devices. Increasing the exercise price above the grant-date

market price saves the company some money, but it also reduces the marginal value of a

change in the stock price to the executive since premium options are more likely to expire

underwater. Indeed, with premium options, even significant increases in the stock price may

bring little value to the executive, resulting in weaker incentives per dollar spent on

compensation by the firm.

     In Hall and Murphy (2002), we find that incentives per dollar spent on compensation to

risk-averse executives are maximized by granting options with exercise prices that are below,

not above, the market price at the grant date.6 This ensures that the executive faces an

immediate marginal change in wealth for both rises and falls in the stock price. In one

situation—namely, when the company offers additional stock-based compensation and

simultaneously reduces cash compensation to leave the initial expected utility of the

executive unchanged—we find that incentives are maximized through grants of nontradable

restricted stock rather than options.

     Restricted stock has several advantages over stock options in providing incentives to

top executives. Requiring top executives to hold company stock provides relatively stable

incentives regardless of the stock price, whereas with stock options the incentive value of

options depends on the market price of the stock relative to the exercise price. In particular,

options where the market price is well above the exercise price provide incentives similar to
HALL-MURPHY                          THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                    PAGE 20


those provided by stock holdings, but options lose incentive value (and retention value) once

the stock price falls sufficiently below the exercise price that the executive perceives little

chance that they will ever provide a significant payoff. Option-granting companies with

“underwater options” are under constant pressure to lower the exercise price on outstanding

options or to grant additional options to effectively replace the underwater ones (see, for

example, Hall and Knox, 2002). The difficult pressures resulting from the underwater-

options problem are avoided by granting restricted stock.

      Granting restricted stock rather than options also affects managerial incentives to

engage in risky investments. An executive holding out-of-the-money options, where the

exercise price is above the current market price, will have incentives to undertake riskier

investments than will an executive holding in-the-money options; in contrast, investment

incentives are roughly independent of stock prices for executive holding stock (unless the

price is sufficiently low that the risk from bad outcomes is shifted to debtholders).7 In

addition, executives holding restricted stock rather than options have better incentives to

pursue an appropriate dividend policy. Since options reward only stock-price appreciation

and not total shareholder returns (which include dividends), executives holding options have

strong incentives to avoid dividends and to favor share repurchases—and several studies

have found evidence that managers have responded to this incentive (for example, Lambert,

Lanen and Larcker, 1989; Lewellen, Loderer and Martin, 1987; Jolls, 2002; Fenn and Liang,

6
    The degree of risk aversion matters here. For risk-neutral executives, for example, incentives per dollar of
    compensation are maximized by granting an infinite number of options at an infinite exercise price (Hall
    and Murphy, 2000).
7
    Hirshleifer and Suh (1992) argue that option plans (or other plans with “convex” payouts) help mitigate the
    effects of executive risk aversion by giving managers incentives to adopt rather than avoid risky projects.
    However, it is not obvious why the optimal “mitigation” should depend on whether options are in or out of
    the money.
HALL-MURPHY                         THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                   PAGE 21


2002).8

      Finally, we note that no performance measure, including the stock price, represents a

perfect measure of firm value. The advantages of tying executive compensation to the stock-

price rather than to accounting returns are premised on the assumption that stock prices

incorporate most or all publicly available information and managers cannot take advantage

of “too much” private information. In the recent accounting scandals, some executives

allegedly boosted stock prices by reporting fraudulently high earnings. Financial market

inefficiencies—in this case, private information that accounting data were misleading—not

only reduce the effectiveness of stock-based incentives, but also provide incentives to top

managers to exploit these inefficiencies, gaming stock-based pay in the same way that they

sometimes game accounting-based bonuses. This outcome is somewhat ironic since stock-

based pay was, in part, put forward as a solution to the gaming of pay plans based on

accounting measures—providing evidence once again that incentives can sometimes have

the problem of motivating too well, rather than too little. Although the gaming of stock-

based pay became more prevalent in the waning years of the bull market of the 1990s as

executives struggled to meet unrealistic shareholder expectations,9 we believe that the

discipline of investors makes stock-based pay generally less vulnerable to gaming than pay

based on highly manipulable accounting measures.



8
    A small number of companies offer “dividend protection” for employee stock options, usually
    accomplished by paying the employee accumulated dividends (plus interest) upon exercise of the
    underlying options. Although this practice is rare, we expect it will increase if personal income taxes on
    dividends are reduced.
9
    Jensen and Fuller (2002) argue that overpriced equity during the bull market had large “agency costs,”
    motivating managers to make value-destroying (and sometimes unethical and/or illegal) decisions in order
    to meet the unreasonable expectations of investors.
HALL-MURPHY                    THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                          PAGE 22


So Why Do Companies Really Grant Stock Options?

     “Properly designed” stock-based compensation plans are (by definition) an efficient

way of tying pay to corporate performance. However, our analysis reveals problems in the

design of top-executive options, and suggests that options are a highly inefficient way of

attracting, retaining and motivating lower-level employees. If these conclusions are right,

then why, really, do companies grant options, especially to lower-level employees?

Moreover, what explains the trends in option grants over the last decade?

     In this section, we discuss several possible explanations for the recent escalation in the

granting of stock options, including changes in corporate governance, reporting

requirements, taxes, the bull market and managerial rent-seeking. These explanations are not

mutually exclusive, and all may have contributed to increased grants for top executives

(although we are most skeptical of the rent-seeking explanation). However, none of these

factors provide a satisfactory explanation for the escalation in broad-based grants to lower-

level employees. Thus, we offer an alternative hypothesis that we believe explains why

companies grant so many options to so many people: boards and managers are convinced

that stock options are cheap to grant because there is no accounting cost and no cash outlay,

and granting decisions are based on this inaccurate “perceived cost” rather than the much-

higher economic cost of options.


A New Emphasis on Shareholder Value

     If option grants were largely limited to top executives, we believe the escalation could

be explained in part by a renewed emphasis on shareholder value reflected by dramatic

changes in corporate governance (Holmstrom and Kaplan, 2001). By the early 1990s,
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                           PAGE 23


shareholder groups like the United Shareholders Association, the Council of Institutional

Investors and several large state pension funds had become critical of existing executive pay

practices that were largely independent of company performance. These concerns were

amplified by academic research (especially Jensen and Murphy, 1990a,b) showing that chief

executive officers of large companies received small rewards for superior performance and

even smaller penalties for failures. Companies responded to these pressures by granting more

stock options to their executives. However, in part because risk-averse executives place low

values on options, these grants largely came without reductions in any other form of pay,

leading to a significant increase in the overall level of executive compensation.

     Contemporaneous changes in disclosure and tax rules reinforced stronger linkages

between stock performance and executive pay. In late 1992, the Securities and Exchange

Commission (SEC) issued new disclosure rules that required company compensation

committees to describe company pay practices and justify in detail how they determined the

pay of the chief executive officer, and also required companies to prepare a chart showing

the company’s five-year shareholder returns compared to the market and an industry peer

group. Although the new rules made option grants significantly more transparent—which

would lead companies to grant fewer options to the extent that options are used to “hide”

compensation—we believe that the rules on net encouraged increased grants. The

shareholder-returns chart endorsed the idea that the company’s primary objective is to create

shareholder value, and pay for a top executive is more easily justified if it is demonstrably

tied to company performance. Moreover, in the primary compensation table that summarizes

payments to the top five executives, only the number rather than the value of options is

reported. In contrast, the value of restricted stock grants is reported, and therefore restricted
HALL-MURPHY                    THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 24


stock is naturally added to other pay components to derive “total compensation.”

     In 1994, the new tax rule disallowing deductions for “non-performance-based”

compensation in excess of $1 million became effective. Research testing whether the new

rule can explain the increase in option pay has been inconclusive (for example, Rose and

Wolfram, 2002; Hall and Liebman, 2000; Perry and Zenner, 2001). We are skeptical of this

explanation because the explosion in grants of stock options was already underway in the

1980s (Hall and Liebman, 1998; Murphy, 1999), and because the law only applies to the top-

five executives who in turn account for only about ten percent of all option grants. However,

the new rule constituted an implicit government “blessing” of stock options as appropriate

performance-based pay, and this implicit endorsement may have further fueled the escalation

in options.
HALL-MURPHY                                                           THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                        PAGE 25


                                                                                     Figure 2

                                                  Dow Jones Industrial Average and the Ratio of Average CEO Pay to
                                                          Average Pay for Production Workers, 1970-2002


                                 600                                                                                    12,000
Ratio of CEO Pay to Worker Pay




                                 550                                                            Dow Jones Industrials




                                                                                                                                 Dow Jones Industrials Average
                                              Ratio of Average CEO Total Pay (including              Average
                                 500                                                                                    10,000
                                            options valued at grant-date) to Average Annual
                                 450                Earnings of Production Workers

                                 400                                                                                    8,000
                                 350
                                              Ratio of Average CEO Salary and Bonus to
                                 300        Average Annual Earnings of Production Workers                               6,000
                                 250
                                 200                                                                                    4,000
                                 150
                                 100                                                                                    2,000
                                 50
                                  0                                                                                     0
                                   1970 1972 1974 1976 1978 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000 2002

Note: Dow Jones Industrials based on monthly closing averages. CEO sample is based on all CEOs included in the S&P
      500, using data from Forbes and ExecuComp. CEO total pay includes cash pay, restricted stock, payouts from long-
      term pay programs and the value of stock options granted using ExecuComp's modified Black-Scholes approach.
      (Total pay prior to 1978 excludes option grants, while total pay between 1978 and 1991 is computed using the
      amounts realized from exercising stock options during the year, rather than grant-date values.) Worker pay
      represents 52 times the average weekly hours of production workers multiplied by the average hourly earnings,
      based on data from the Current Employment Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics.



The Bull Market

                                       The trend in option grants over the past three decades has closely tracked general

stock-market indices. Figure 2 documents the correlation between the Dow Jones Industrial

Average and the ratio of the pay of the CEO to the average worker between 1970 and 2002.

In 1970, the average CEO of a S&P 500 firm made about 30 times the pay of the average

production worker. By 2002, the average S&P 500 CEO received cash compensation nearly

90 times greater than the average earnings for production workers, and total compensation

(defined as cash compensation plus the grant-date value of stock options) of over 360 times

the earnings for production workers (down from a peak of 570 in 2000). Most importantly
HALL-MURPHY                          THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                 PAGE 26


for present purposes, CEO cash compensation is weakly correlated with the Dow Jones

Average but CEO total compensation is strongly correlated with the stock market.10 There

are several reasons to expect that the correlation is more than coincidental.First, as stock

prices increased sharply during the 1990s, many executives and employees holding options

and stock became wealthy. As stories of the riches gained by option holders spread through

the media and word-of-mouth, an option frenzy grew. Second, options may indeed have

worked: corporate boards and top managers began to associate option grants with successful

company performance, especially during the high-tech and internet boom of the late 1990s.

Indeed, the increase in options coupled with the renewed focus on shareholder value creation

may help explain the overall growth in stock market since the early 1990s. Empirical

evidence directly linking option grants to subsequent company performance has been largely

inconclusive, however, reflecting the inherent difficulty of conducting convincing tests of the

issue. For example, if financial markets are efficient, we would not expect high-option

companies to realize systematically higher shareholder returns than those realized by low-

option companies. In addition, even ignoring market efficiency, increasing option grants

would lead to improved performance only if “too few” options were awarded initially.

Designing and testing the right experiment on how option grants affect firm performance

remains the most important research opportunity in the area.

       Third, companies are often reluctant to decrease the number of options granted after the

stock price increases; indeed, many companies have explicit policies where the grant size

10
     The total compensation data in Figure 3 prior to 1992 are based on amounts realized from exercising
     options, but options were relatively unimportant during this period and average amounts realized during
     the year were closely correlated with average amounts granted. From 1992 forward the total compensation
     data are based on grant-date option values using Black-Scholes values, and there is no mechanical reason
     why options would increase with the market.
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                       PAGE 27


(measured in number of shares rather than dollars) remains constant over time. Since the

value of an option increases with the price of the underlying stock, granting a constant

number of options will lead to a higher value being granted. Even companies without “fixed

share” policies will be affected, since the value of fixed-share grants are included in

benchmarking surveys used by compensation-consulting firms. The net result is a ratcheting

of the value of option grants during an escalating stock market, and a fall in the value of

grants in a declining market.


Managerial Rent-Seeking

     The escalation in executive pay, largely driven by options, may reflect inefficient

transfers of wealth from shareholders to greedy executives. This view has been espoused by

Bebchuk, Fried and Walker (2002; see also Bebchuk and Fried in this issue), who argue that

the escalation in executive stock options reflects the actions of incumbent executives who

can raise their own pay by exercising influence over hand-picked directors. Rent-seeking

executives increase their pay through options rather than cash in an attempt to camouflage

pay to mitigate external scrutiny and criticism. Bebchuk, Fried and Walker argue that rent

extraction can explain both trends in pay levels and several features of option plans,

including why exercise prices are set at grant-date market prices and are not indexed to

general market movements, why options are often reset following market declines, and why

firms allow executives to exercise early and diversify (or otherwise hedge the risk of their

option and stock holdings).

     We are sympathetic to the view that executive pay decisions are typically not made by

truly independent boards in truly arms-length negotiations. However, we do not believe that
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 28


rent extraction provides a compelling explanation for the escalation in stock options (and the

consequent increase in pay of CEOs), for several reasons.

     First, by virtually all accounts, corporate boards have become more rather than less

independent over the past decade. Board sizes have declined, and the fraction of outside

relative to inside board members has increased (Holmstrom and Kaplan, 2001). Most

companies now have compensation committees comprised of two or more independent

outside directors; in earlier years the CEO and other insiders often sat on the compensation

committee (if the company even had a separate compensation committee). Although

corporate governance can surely improve further, changes over the last decade have

strengthened board governance and seem inconsistent with an increased ability of executives

to extract rents from captive boards.

     Second, the managerial rent-extraction hypothesis applies to incumbent executives, and

not to executives hired from outside the firm who are more likely to be hired in arms-length

transactions. But executives changing companies during the 1990s received large pay

increases, indicating that alleged “rents” were transferable—which suggests they are not

rents at all (Fee and Hadlock, 2003; Murphy, 2002). Indeed, the existence of outside

succession is largely inconsistent with the rent-extraction view, because systematic rents

above competitive pay levels will make executives less likely to leave voluntarily, and make

attracting executives from other firms more expensive. But, as documented by Murphy and

Zábojník (2003), companies in the 1990s (when rent-extraction was supposedly high) were

much more likely to hire chief executive officers from outside the company than in the 1980s

or 1970s.
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 29


     Third, risk-averse and undiversified executives prefer cash over options of equal value

to the company. However, the managerial-power hypothesis holds that rent-seeking

executives will choose options over cash because options are less transparent to

shareholders, politicians, the media or others who would criticize high cash payments.

However, the SEC disclosure rules introduced in 1992 were focused in large part on

providing better details on stock-option compensation, thus making it harder for top

executives to camouflage compensation by granting options. Although we agree that the cost

of options is less transparent to shareholders than cash pay, the fact that option compensation

became much more transparent during the 1990s—and that grants continued unabated

following better disclosure—contradicts the claim that rent-seeking combined with

camouflage explains the option explosion.

     The managerial rent-extraction hypothesis is, at best, an explanation for the very top

executives. As we have emphasized in this article, the escalation in stock options has not

been a CEO-specific phenomena: in 2002, for example, more than 90 percent of options

granted in the S&P 500 went to executives and employees below the top five. A compelling

explanation for the escalation in stock option grants must be consistent with the increased

use of options throughout the company.


The Perceived-Cost Hypothesis

     An alternative explanation for the growth of option-granting in the 1990s is that

decisions over options are made based on the “perceived cost” of options rather than on their

economic cost (Murphy, 2002). When a company grants an option to an employee, it bears

an economic cost equal to what an outside investor would pay for the option. But it bears no
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                          PAGE 30


accounting charge and incurs no outlay of cash. Moreover, when the option is exercised, the

company (usually) issues a new share to the executive, and receives a tax deduction for the

spread between the stock price and the exercise price. These factors make the “perceived

cost” of an option much lower than the economic cost.

     The result of making decisions based on perceived rather than economic costs is that

too many options will be granted to too many people, and options with favorable accounting

treatment will be preferred to (perhaps better) incentive plans with less favorable accounting.

From an economic-cost standpoint, options may be an inefficient way to convey

compensation and to attract, retain and motivate employees. But from a perceived-cost

standpoint, options may seem an efficient way to achieve these objectives.

     In many respects, the perceived-cost view of options is analogous to the motivation for

the Economic Value Added (EVA) approach (Stern, Stewart and Chew, 1995). EVA is

defined as operating profit after a charge for the capital required to earn that profit. The key

idea behind EVA is that managers perceive the cost of equity capital to be small, and make

decisions based on this erroneous perceived cost rather than on the much higher economic

cost. Basing pay on EVA forces managers to recognize the cost of equity capital, leading to

better decisions and a more efficient use of capital.

     The perception that options are nearly free to grant is readily acknowledged by

practitioners and compensation consultants, but is usually dismissed by economists because

it implies systematic suboptimal decision-making and a fixation on accounting numbers that

defies economic logic. But managers often respond to accounting concerns in ways that seem

irrational to economists. For example, when FASB imposed a current accounting charge for
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 31


anticipated post-retirement health-care liabilities beginning in 1993, managers predicted that

stock prices would fall with reported income. Stock prices did not fall because markets are

reasonably efficient and the economic liability was already incorporated in stock prices

(Amir, 1993; Espahbodi, Strock and Tehranian, 1991), but companies nonetheless made

dramatic cutbacks in the medical benefits for retirees (Mittelstaedt, Nichols and Regier,

1995). The new accounting rule apparently increased the perceived cost of these benefits,

putting them more in line with their actual economic cost, and as a result the company

reduced the level of the benefits.

     The disappearance of option repricing also illustrates how companies respond to

accounting rules that have no affect on company cash flows. This common, but

controversial, practice virtually disappeared after December 1998, when FASB imposed an

accounting charge for repriced options (see Murphy, 2003, and Carter and Lynch, 2003).

Many companies with declining stock prices circumvented the accounting charge on repriced

options by canceling existing options and re-issuing an equal number of options after waiting

six months or more (Zheng, 2003). But this replacement is not neutral. It imposes substantial

risk on risk-averse employees since the exercise price is not known for six months and can

conceivably be above the original exercise price. In addition, canceling and reissuing stock

options in this way provides perverse incentives to keep the stock-price down for six months

so that the new options will have a low exercise price. All of this scrambling to avoid an

accounting charge!

     From the perspective of many boards and top executives who perceive options to be

nearly costless, the relevant “cost” of options in practice is the trouble associated with
HALL-MURPHY                         THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                 PAGE 32


obtaining shareholder approval for additional grants coupled with the cost of additional

dilution. Advisory firms often base their shareholder voting recommendations primarily on

the option “overhang” (that is, the number of options granted plus options remaining to be

granted as a percent of total shares outstanding), and not on the economic cost of the

proposed plan. In addition, the number of options granted is included in fully diluted shares

outstanding and therefore increased grants will decrease fully diluted earnings per share.

These perceived costs vary with the number of options granted, and not with the dollar-value

of the grants.

       We believe that the perceived-cost view of options explains why options are granted in

such large quantities to large numbers of workers, and also explains why grant-date values

rose dramatically and subsequently declined with the stock market (see Figures 1 and 2). We

speculate that as grants for top executives increased (for reasons offered above), companies

faced growing pressure to push grants down throughout the organization (see, for example,

Flanigan, 1996). Employees clamored for broad-based grants, as long as other components of

their compensation were not lowered. Boards readily succumbed, since (prior to changes in

exchange listing requirements in mid-2003) shareholder approval was required for plans

concentrated among top executives but was not required for broad-based plans. In addition,

several bills that encouraged broad-based stock option plans were introduced in Congress.11

As a result of these pressures, the number of options granted (expressed as a fraction of



11
     For example, H.R. 5242 “To amend the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 to encourage the granting of
     employee stock options” (introduced July 2002; currently in committee); S. 2877 “To amend the Internal
     Revenue Code of 1986 to ensure that stock options are granted to rank-and-file employees as well as
     officers and directors” (introduced August 2002; in committee); and H.R. 2788 “To amend the Internal
     Revenue Code of 1986 to promote the grant of incentive stock options to non-highly compensated
     employees” (introduced October 1997; in committee).
HALL-MURPHY                         THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                                 PAGE 33


outstanding shares) grew modestly (see Panel A of Table 1). But, the economic cost of these

grants followed general stock-market movements, growing dramatically through 2000.


The Case for Expensing Stock Options

       The recent accounting scandals have renewed a heated public debate on the accounting

treatment of options. In March 2003, FASB announced it would consider mandating an

accounting expense for options, hoping for a final rule by early 2004. Proposals that stock

options must be recorded as an expense—in the jargon, that options be “expensed”—have

been endorsed by FASB’s international counterpart (the International Accounting Standard

Board) and also by Alan Greenspan, Warren Buffett and a growing number of business

journalists and academics. Opposition has come from the Bush Administration, the Business

Roundtable, TechNet (the nation’s largest high-tech trade association), the National

Association of Manufacturers, the U.S. Chamber of Commerce and the International

Employee Stock Options Coalition (an industry group created explicitly to oppose an

accounting charge). Congress has been divided on the issue.12

       Imposing an accounting charge on stock options would not affect current or future cash

flow, but parties on both sides of the debate agree that such a change would result in granting

fewer options, especially to rank-and-file workers. One common argument for why fewer

options would be granted is that companies fear a backlash in the stock market if investors

understood the true cost of the options. But this explanation—that investors do not currently

12
     For example, in 2003 Senators McCain and Levin reintroduced a bill that would disallow corporations
     from deducting option costs from taxable profits unless companies also expensed their options on their
     income statements. However, 15 other senators (including Senators Kennedy and Lieberman) have
     opposed mandatory option expensing, arguing that it would inflict a “fatal blow” on broad-based option
     plans. In March 2003, the “Broad-Based Stock Option Transparency Act” was introduced in the House;
     this bill would forbid FASB from imposing an accounting charge on options for at least three years.
HALL-MURPHY                     THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                         PAGE 34


understand the cost of options—has been studied and rejected by most academic research

(see, for example, Aboody, 1996, and Aboody, Barth and Kasznik, 2001). Current

accounting rules require companies to disclose the value of options granted in a detailed

footnote to company accounting statements. Several studies have shown that the costs of

options are indeed reflected in stock prices, which suggest that increasing disclosure by

making it more detailed and more frequent is unlikely to affect practice.

     However, the fact that financial markets see through the “veil of accounting” does not

imply that accounting considerations are irrelevant, since accounting rules affect—and

sometimes distort—managerial decisions. As we have argued, part of the reason that

managers and boards have been so willing to grant options is that they are making decisions

based on the artificially low perceived cost of options rather than on their economic cost.

This insight provides a strong case for a requirement that options be expensed. The overall

effect of bringing the perceived costs of options more in line with economic costs will be that

fewer options will be granted to fewer people: stock options are likely to be reduced and

concentrated among those executives and key technical employees who can plausibly affect

company stock prices.

     In addition, we predict that expensing will lead to compensation decisions that are

better designed to attract, retain and motivate a productive workforce. For example, current

accounting rules create a bias in favor of stock options and against other types of stock-based

compensation plans, including restricted stock, options where the exercise price is set below

the current market value, options where the exercise price is indexed to industry or market

performance and performance-based options that vest only if key performance thresholds are
HALL-MURPHY                      THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                          PAGE 35


achieved. Also, current rules are biased against cash incentive plans that can be tied in

creative ways to increases in shareholder wealth. As long as stock options appear to be “free”

relative to sensible alternatives that trigger accounting charges, these alternatives will rarely

receive appropriate consideration.

      The root of the trouble with options, we believe, is that decisions to grant such options

are based on a perceived cost of options that is substantially lower than the economic cost.

Mitigating perceived-cost problems involves both educating managers and boards on the true

economic costs of stock options and eliminating the asymmetries between the accounting

and tax treatment of stock options and other forms of compensation. Proposals to impose an

accounting charge for option grants will close the gap between perceived and economic costs

and are a step in the right direction.
HALL-MURPHY                  THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                      PAGE 36




References

   Aboody, David. 1996. “Market Valuation of Employee Stock Options.” Journal of
Accounting and Economics. 22, pp. 357-391.

  Aboody, David, Mary E. Barth and Ron Kasznik. 2001. “SFAS 123 Stock-Based
Compensation Expense and Equity Market Values.” Working paper.

   Amir, Eli. 1993. “The Market Valuation of Accounting Information: The Case of
Postretirement benefits other than Pensions.” The Accounting Review. 68:4, pp. 703-724.

   Bebchuk, Lucian, Jesse Fried, and David Walker. 2002. “Managerial Power and
Executive Compensation.” University of Chicago Law Review. 69.

   Bebchuk, Lucian, and Jesse Fried. 2003. “Executive Compensation as an Agency
Problem.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. (this issue).

   Black, Fisher and Myron Scholes. 1973. “The Pricing of Options and Corporate
Liabilities.” Journal of Political Economy. 81, pp. 637-59.

   Carter, Mary Ellen and Luann J. Lynch. 2003. “The Consequences of FASB’s 1998
Proposal for Stock Option Repricing.” Journal of Accounting and Economics (forthcoming).

   Cassidy, John. 2002. “The Greed Cycle.” The New Yorker. September 23.

   Core, John and Wayne Guay. 2001. “Stock Option Plans for Non-Executive Employees.”
Journal of Financial Economics. 61:2, pp. 253-287.

    Espahbodi, Hassan, Elizabeth Strock and Hassan Tehranian. 1991. “Impact on Equity
Prices of Pronouncements Related to Nonpension Postretirement Benefits.” Journal of
Accounting and Economics. 14, pp. 323-346.

    Fee, Edward and Charles Hadlock. 2003. “Raids, Rewards and Reputations in the Market
for CEO Talent.” Review of Financial Economics. (Forthcoming).

   Fenn, George and Nellie Liang. 2001. “Corporate Payout Policy and Managerial Stock
Incentives.” Journal of Financial Economics. 60, pp. 45-72.

   Flanigan, James. 1996. “It’s Time For All Employees To Get Stock Options.” Los
Angeles Times. April 21.

   Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 1998. “Are CEOs Really Paid Like Bureaucrats?”
Quarterly Journal of Economics. 113, August, pp. 653-691.
HALL-MURPHY                   THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                        PAGE 37


    Hall, Brian J. and Jeffrey B. Liebman. 2000. “The Taxation of Executive Compensation.”
in Tax Policy and the Economy, NBER volume edited by James Poterba, MIT Press, Vol. 14.

   Hall, Brian J. and Kevin J. Murphy. 2000. “Optimal Exercise Prices for Risk Averse
Executives.” American Economic Review. May, pp. 209-214.

   Hall, Brian J. and Kevin J. Murphy. 2002. “Stock Options for Undiversified Executives,”
Journal of Accounting and Economics. 33, pp. 3-42.

   Hall, Brian J. and Thomas A. Knox. 2002. “Managing Option Fragility.” NBER Working
Paper 9059, July.

   Hirshleifer, David and Y. Suh. 1992. “Risk, Managerial Effort, and Project Choice.”
Journal of Financial Intermediation. 2, pp. 308-345

    Holmstrom, Bengt and Steven Kaplan. 2001. “Corporate Governance and Takeovers in
the U.S.: Making Sense of the 80s and 90s.” Journal of Economic Perspectives. Spring, pp.
121-144.

   Ittner, Christopher D., Richard A. Lambert, and David F. Larcker. 2003. “The Structure
and Performance Consequences of Equity Grants to Employees of New Economy Firms.”
Journal of Accounting and Economics. 34, pp. 89-127.

  Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990a. “Performance Pay and Top-
Management Incentives.” Journal of Political Economy. 98:2, pp. 225-64.

  Jensen, Michael C. and Kevin J. Murphy. 1990b. “It’s Not How Much You Pay, but
How.” Harvard Business Review. May.

    Jensen, Michael C. and Joseph Fuller. 2002. “Just Say No To Wall Street: Putting a Stop
to the Earnings Game.” Journal of Applied Corporate Finance. 14, pp. 41-46.

   Jolls, Christine. 2002. “Stock Repurchases and Incentive Compensation.” Working
paper.

   Lambert, Richard A., William Lanen, and David F. Larcker. 1989. “Executive Stock
Option Plans and Corporate Dividend Policy.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis. 24:4, pp. 409-425.

    Lambert, Richard A., David F. Larcker, F. and Robert E. Verrecchia. 1991. “Portfolio
Considerations in Valuing Executive Compensation.” Journal of Accounting Research. 29:1,
pp. 129-49.

   Lazear, Edward P. 1979. “Why Is There Mandatory Retirement?” Journal of Political
Economy. 87, December, pp. 1261-1264.
HALL-MURPHY                   THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                      PAGE 38


   Lewellen, Wilbur, Claudio Loderer and Kenneth Martin. 1987. “Executive Compensation
and Executive Incentive Problems: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of Accounting and
Economics. 9, pp. 287-310.

   Madrick, Jeff. 2003. “A Theory of Corporate Greed.” New York Times. February 20.

    Meulbroek, Lisa K. 2001. “The Efficiency of Equity-Linked Compensation:
Understanding the Full Cost of Awarding Executive Stock Options.” Financial Management
30, pp. 5-30.

   Mittelstaedt, Fred, William Nichols and Philip Regier. 1995. “SFAS No.106 and Benefit
Reductions in Employer-Sponsored Retiree Health Care Plans.” The Accounting Review.
70:4, pp 535-556.

   Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Executive Compensation,” in Orley Ashenfelter and David
Card, eds., Handbook of Labor Economics, Vol. III, North Holland.

    Murphy, Kevin J. 2002. “Explaining Executive Compensation: Managerial Power versus
the Perceived Cost of Stock Options.” University of Chicago Law Review. Summer, 69:3, pp.
847-869.

   Murphy, Kevin J. 2003. “Stock-Based Pay in New Economy Firms,” Journal of
Accounting and Economics. 34, pp. 129-147.

  Murphy, Kevin J. and Jan Zábojník. 2003. “Managerial Capital and the Market for
CEOs.” Unpublished manuscript.

  Oyer, Paul and Scott Schaefer. 2002. “Why Do Some Firms Give Stock Options to All
Employees?: An Empirical Examination of Alternative Theories.” Working Paper.

    Perry, Tod and Marc Zenner. 2001. “Pay for Performance? Government Regulation and
the Structure of Compensation Contracts.” Journal of Financial Economics. 62:3, pp. 453-
488.

   Rappaport, Alfred. 1999. “New Thinking on How to Link Executive Pay with
Performance.” Harvard Business Review. March/April, pp. 91-101.

   Rose, Nancy L. and Catherine Wolfram. 2002. “Regulating Executive Pay: Using the
Tax Code to Influence Chief Executive Officer Compensation.” Journal of Labor
Economics. April, 20, pp. 138-175.

   Schizer, David M. 2000. “Executives and Hedging: The Fragile Legal Foundations of
Incentive Compatibility.” Columbia Law Review. 100, pp. 440-468.

  Stern, Joel M., G. Bennett Stewart and Donald H. Chew. 1995. “The EVA Financial
Management System.” The Journal of Applied Corporate Finance. 8:3.
HALL-MURPHY                THE TROUBLE WITH STOCK OPTIONS                 PAGE 39


   Zheng, Liu. 2003. “Six-Month-One-Day Option Exchange: The Impact of the
Accounting Rule on Stock Option Repricing.” Unpublished manuscript, University of
Southern California.
