NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GOVERNMENT FINANCE IN THE WAKE OF CURRENCY CRISES
Craig Burnside
Martin Eichenbaum
Sergio Rebelo
Working Paper 9786
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9786
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003

We are grateful for an NSF grant through the National Bureau of Economic Research and a grant from the
World Bank. The opinions in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Chicago or the World Bank. We thank Martin Bodenstein, Yuliya Mescheryakova and
Jeffrey Wood for valuable comments and Selim Elekdag, Su Youne Lee and Mi Hwa Park for invaluable
assistance with data. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo. All rights reserved. Short sections of text
not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
© notice, is given to the source.

Government Finance in the Wake of Currency Crises
Craig Burnside, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo
NBER Working Paper No. 9786
June 2003
JEL No. F31
ABSTRACT
This paper addresses two questions: (i) how do governments actually pay for the fiscal costs
associated with currency crises; and (ii) what are the implications of different financing methods for
post-crisis rates of inflation and depreciation? We study these questions using a general equilibrium
model in which a currency crisis is triggered by prospective government deficits. We then use our
model in conjunction with fiscal data to interpret government financing in the wake of three recent
currency crises: Korea (1997), Mexico (1994) and Turkey (2001).

Craig Burnside
Department of Economics
University of Virginia
114 Rouss Hall
P.O. Box 400182
Charlottesville, VA 22904-4182
Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL. 60208
Sergio Rebelo
Kellogg School of Management
Leverone Hall
Northwestern University
Evanston, IL 60208-2001

1. Introduction
A classical view of currency crises is that they arise because governments print money to
Þnance ongoing or prospective deÞcits.1 Models embodying this view generally predict that
seigniorage should rise signiÞcantly in the aftermath of a currency crisis. Table 1, which
reports data for six recent currency crises, indicates that this prediction is inconsistent with
the data. This evidence raises two questions:
• How do governments actually pay for the Þscal costs associated with currency crises?
• What are the implications of diﬀerent Þnancing methods for post-crisis rates of inßation
and depreciation?

We address these questions using a general equilibrium model in which a currency crisis
is triggered by prospective government deÞcits.2 We then use our model in conjunction with
Þscal data to interpret government Þnancing in the wake of three recent currency crises:
Korea (1997), Mexico (1994), and Turkey (2001).
Generating empirically plausible answers to our two questions requires that we adopt
a formulation of the government’s budget constraint that is more realistic than the highly
stylized representations typically used in the literature. Standard models assume, for convenience, that the only source of depreciation-related revenue available to a government is
seigniorage. In reality governments have access to other types of depreciation-related revenue. First, they can deßate the dollar value of outstanding nonindexed debt.3 Second,
they can engage in what we call an ‘implicit Þscal reform’. Such a reform arises when some
government expenditures are denominated in units of the local currency. As long as the
government does not raise these expenditures at the rate of depreciation their dollar value
declines. This ‘implicit Þscal reform’ can be quantitatively important even if government
1

See, for example, Krugman (1979), Flood and Garber (1984), Obstfeld (1986), Calvo (1987), Drazen
and Helpman (1987), Wijnbergen (1991), Corsetti, Pesenti and Roubini (1999), Burnside, Eichenbaum and
Rebelo (2001), and Lahiri and Végh (2003).
2
Burnside, Eichenbaum and Rebelo (2003) provides a preliminary discussion of these questions using
a simple reduced form model featuring a Cagan (1956) money demand function, a simpliÞed government
budget constraint, and preliminary data from Korea and Mexico.
3
The importance of nonindexed debt has been emphasized in the literature on the Þscal theory of the
price level. Sims (1994), Woodford (1995) and Cochrane (2001) discuss the Þscal theory in a closed economy
context. Dupor (2000), Daniel (2001), and Corsetti and Mackowiak (2002) analyze the implications of the
Þscal theory for open economies.

1

expenditures rise at the same rate as domestic inßation. This is because post-crisis inßation
rates are often much lower than the rate of depreciation (see Table 2).
Our empirical analysis indicates that debt deßation and implicit Þscal reforms are more
important than seigniorage, at least in the Þrst few years after a crisis. Our theoretical
analysis shows that, once these sources of revenue are incorporated into the model, we can
account for government Þnancing in a way that is consistent with post-crisis rates of inßation
and depreciation.
We consider a standard small open economy model populated by a representative, inÞnitely lived agent who can borrow and lend at a Þxed interest rate in world capital markets.
Agents in the economy consume tradable and nontradable goods and receive endowments of
both goods. In addition to allowing for nonindexed public debt and government spending, we
assume that some government spending is on nontradable goods. This is important because
in reality the dollar price of nontradable goods falls dramatically in the aftermath of a currency crisis (see Table 3). This fall has two eﬀects on the government’s intertemporal budget
constraint. First, it lowers the dollar value of taxes collected from the nontradable sector.
This eﬀect underlies the conventional wisdom that a devaluation leads to a deterioration of
the government’s Þscal position.4 Second, the fall in the dollar price of nontradables reduces
the dollar value of government expenditures on nontradable goods. This second eﬀect, which
has not been stressed in the literature, leads to an improvement of the government’s Þscal
position. Since most governments’ expenditures are on nontradable goods (e.g. health and
education), the latter eﬀect may, in practice, be very important.
Consistent with the data, we also assume that nontradable prices are sticky for a brief
period of time. In addition, we suppose that distributing tradable goods requires the use of
nontradable distribution services (retailing, wholesaling, and transportation). Given these
assumptions, the model implies that the rate of depreciation in the Þrst year after the crisis
is larger than the rate of inßation. The presence of this wedge magniÞes the post-crisis
reduction in the dollar value of transfers and government purchases. This decline goes a long
way toward oﬀsetting the fall in the dollar value of taxes.
We show that a version of our model calibrated to Korean data is consistent with the postcrisis behavior of inßation and depreciation rates in Korea. In terms of government Þnance,
seigniorage accounts for less than 15 percent of the Þscal costs associated with the crisis.
4

This deterioration may be less severe in countries where taxes on commodity exports are an important
source of revenue. See Pinto (1990), Easterly and Schmidt-Hebbel (1994), and Morris (1995) for a discussion.

2

The balance is paid for through a reduction in the dollar value of transfer payments and,
to a lesser extent, debt deßation. The model implies that if all debt and transfer payments
had been indexed to the dollar, Korea’s post-crisis inßation would have been dramatically
diﬀerent. SpeciÞcally, in the Þrst year of the crisis inßation would have been more than twice
as high, while long run inßation would have risen by a factor a ten.
The central feature of our model is that governments have at their disposal a menu of
depreciation-related revenues. To assess the importance of these alternative revenue sources
we conduct detailed case studies of how Korea, Mexico and Turkey Þnanced the costs associated with their recent currency and banking crises.5 In practice this is a diﬃcult task
because one must compare actual revenues and expenditures with what they would have been
absent the crisis. While our precise quantitative results are sensitive to these assumptions,
we have conÞdence in the basic qualitative patterns that emerge. These can be summarized
as follows. First, none of these countries has fully paid for all of the costs associated with
their currency crisis. Second, in no case has seigniorage been the dominant source of revenue. Third, for all three countries, debt deßation has been more important than seigniorage.
Fourth, consistent with conventional wisdom, there was a substantial decline in the dollar
value of tax revenues after the crisis in all three countries. However, the decline in the dollar
value of government purchases was important in oﬀsetting the tax revenue decline. Finally,
there were large declines in the dollar value of transfers. Indeed, these declines were the
single most important source of revenue in Korea and Mexico.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses the government
budget constraint. Section 3 embeds this budget constraint into a general equilibrium model
of a currency crisis. Section 4 presents the properties of the model. In section 5 we summarize
the results of our case studies. Finally, section 6 contains concluding remarks.

2. The Government Budget Constraint
Explicit default aside, a government must satisfy its lifetime budget constraint. In this
section, we derive a version of this constraint that is useful for discussing the diﬀerent
strategies that a government can use to pay for the Þscal costs associated with a currency
crisis. This requires distinguishing between traded and nontraded goods. Since the prices of
5

See Persson, Persson and Svensson (1998) for a careful analysis of the eﬀects of inßation on the budget
constraint of the Swedish government that considers inßation-related sources of revenue other than seigniorage.

3

these goods play an important role in our analysis, we begin by laying out our notation and
assumptions about purchasing power parity (PPP).
Purchasing Power Parity Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2002) argue that for large
devaluations PPP is a reasonable assumption for the producer price of tradable goods. In
light of this we assume that:
P̄tT = St P̄tT ∗ .

(2.1)

Here P̄tT and P̄tT ∗ denote the domestic and foreign producer price of tradable goods, respectively. The variable St denotes the exchange rate deÞned as units of local currency per
dollar. For convenience, we abstract from foreign inßation so P̄tT ∗ = 1 and P̄tT = St .
It is well known that PPP does not hold at the level of the CPI. Here we emphasize two
reasons for this failure of PPP: nontradable goods and distribution costs associated with the
sale of tradable goods. With nontradable goods the CPI is given by:
Pt = (PtT )ω (PtN )1−ω .

(2.2)

Here ω is the weight of tradable goods in the index, PtN is the price of nontradable goods,
and PtT is the retail price of tradable goods.
We introduce distribution costs (wholesaling, retailing, and transportation) by assuming
that selling one unit of the tradable good requires using δ units of the nontradable good.6
Given perfect competition in the retail sector, the retail price of tradable goods is:
PtT = P̄tT + δPtN .

(2.3)

As long as δ > 0, PPP does not hold at the retail level.
The Government’s Flow Budget Constraint Government spending, other than on
interest payments, consists of purchases of tradable and nontradable goods as well as transfer
payments. In period t, the government purchases gtT units of tradables and gtN units of
nontradables. We assume that the government purchases goods at producer prices.7 Total
government purchases of goods and services, measured in dollars, are:
gt =

P̄tT gtT + PtN gtN
.
St

6

(2.4)

See Burstein, Neves and Rebelo (2002), Corsetti and Dedola (2002), and Burstein, Eichenbaum and
Rebelo (2002).
7
This is consistent with the empirical Þndings of Burstein, Neves, and Rebelo (2002).

4

The government makes two types of transfers to domestic households: transfers indexed
to the CPI, v̂t , and transfers indexed to the exchange rate, ṽt . Total domestic transfer
payments, in local currency, are Pt v̂t + St ṽt . The government also transfers vt∗ dollars to
foreigners. Given these assumptions, total government transfers, measured in dollars, are:
vt =

Pt v̂t
+ ṽt + vt∗ .
St

(2.5)

The government Þnances its expenditures by collecting taxes, printing money, and issuing
debt. We assume that the government collects taxes on the output at rate τ y . The dollar
value of tax revenues at time t, τ t , is given by:
τt = τy

P̄tT ytT + PtN ytN
+ τ Lt .
St

(2.6)

Here ytT and ytN denote exogenous endowments of output in the tradable and nontradable
sectors, respectively, and τ Lt represents lump-sum taxes.
The stock of domestic money is denoted by Mt . The government’s seigniorage revenue
at date t is Mú t in local currency or Mú t /St in dollar terms. Throughout the paper xú t denotes
dx/dt. Real money balances measured in dollars are denoted by mt ≡ Mt /St .

The government can borrow and lend in dollars at a Þxed interest rate, r. The stock of

dollar-denominated bonds at time t is denoted by bt . We assume that before agents foresee
any possibility of a devaluation the government issues a Þxed stock of consols with a face
value of B units of local currency and coupon rate r.
The government’s ßow budget constraint is:
∆bt = −∆mt ,
if t ∈ I,
úbt = rbt + rB/St + gt + vt − τ t − Mú t /St , if t ∈
/ I.

(2.7)

As in Drazen and Helpman (1987), (2.7) takes into account the possibility of discrete changes
in mt and bt at a Þnite set of points in time, I. Below we list the points in time at which
these discrete changes might occur.
The Government’s Lifetime Budget Constraint The ßow budget constraint, (2.7),
together with the condition limt→∞ e−rt bt = 0, implies the following intertemporal budget
constraint:
Z
b0 +

∞
0

rB −rt
e dt =
St

Z

0

∞

−rt

(τ t − gt − vt )e

5

dt +

Z

∞
0

X
Mú t −rt
e dt +
e−ri ∆mi .
St
i∈I

(2.8)

This constraint requires that the initial dollar value of the debt plus the present value of
consol payments measured in dollars be equal to the present value, in dollars, of primary
surpluses plus seigniorage revenue.
A Sustainable Fixed Exchange Rate Regime We assume that, for all t < 0, St = S
and agents believe that this Þxed exchange rate regime is sustainable. In particular, we suppose agents anticipate that the government will satisfy its intertemporal budget constraint,
(2.8), without abandoning the Þxed exchange rate at any date t ≥ 0. Given PPP, (2.1),

this is equivalent to agents believing that the government will pursue Þscal and monetary
policies consistent with zero inßation in the producer price of tradables.
To simplify, we assume that for all t < 0, gtT = g T , gtN = g N , v̂t = v̂, ṽt = ṽ, vt∗ = v∗ = 0,
τ Lt = τ L , ytT = y T , and ytN = y N . These assumptions imply that in equilibrium the price
of nontradables, the CPI, and the nominal money supply are also constant: PtN = P N ,
Pt = P = (S + δP N )ω (P N )1−ω and Mt = M . Agents believe that these variables will
continue to be constant for t ≥ 0. Under these assumptions the government’s lifetime
budget constraint reduces to:

b0 +

B
τ −g−v
=
.
S
r

(2.9)

Here τ , g, and v are constants given by (2.4), (2.5), and (2.6). Equation (2.9) requires that
the present value of current and future real primary surpluses equals the initial real net
liabilities of the government.
A Crisis At t = 0 agents learn that the government will have to increase its future dollar
transfers to domestic residents and foreigners, say, because of loan guarantees to the creditors
of failing banks. We denote by φ the dollar present value of these increased transfers:
Z ∞
φ=
(ṽt − ṽ + vt∗ − v ∗ )e−rt dt.
0

We assume that these new transfers will not be Þnanced with an explicit Þscal reform. By
such a reform we mean changes in gtT , gtN , v̂t , or τ y that would oﬀset the eﬀects of the increase
in dollar transfers. As shown below, this implies that the Þxed exchange rate regime must
be abandoned.
At time zero agents also learn the new paths of tradable and nontradable output. We
assume that tax rates, as opposed to tax revenues, remain constant. This assumption is

6

consistent with the observation that explicit tax reforms are relatively minor in the aftermath
of currency crises.
To see the impact of the crisis on the government’s lifetime budget constraint we use
(2.9) to re-write (2.8) as:
Z
Z ∞
−rt
(τ t − τ )e dt +
φ =
0

·

B
+
−
S

Z

0

∞

¶
P v̂ Pt v̂t −rt
(g − gt )e dt +
e dt
−
S
St
0
0
#
¸ "Z ∞ ú
X
rB −rt
Mt −rt
e dt +
e dt +
e−ri ∆mi .
St
S
t
0
i∈I
∞

−rt

Z

∞µ

(2.10)

According to (2.10), the present value of the increase in transfers must be Þnanced by
changes in the dollar value of: (i) tax revenues; (ii) government expenditures; (iii) CPIindexed transfers; (iv) nonindexed debt; and (v) seigniorage revenues. We discuss each of
these components in turn.
Since we excluded explicit Þscal reforms, the only way in which the government can
satisfy its intertemporal budget constraint is to use monetary policy to generate depreciationrelated revenues.8 To see this, suppose for the moment that the Þxed exchange rate could
be sustained once new information about higher deÞcits arrived. Then the money supply
would never change and the government could not collect any seigniorage revenues. This
in conjunction with the fact that the price level would be Þxed, implies that all of the
terms on the right hand side of (2.10) would equal zero.9 But then the government’s budget
constraint would not hold which contradicts the assumption that the Þxed exchange rate
regime is sustainable. We conclude that the government must at some point move to a
ßoating exchange rate system or, at least, abandon its peg at the Þxed rate S.

8

The government can also explicitly default on outstanding debt. We ignore this possibility since we
are interested in episodes in which explicit default did not occur. International bailouts are an additional
source of crisis Þnancing, but in practice the value of these bailouts is not very signiÞcant. See Jeanne and
Zettelmeyer (2000) who show that the subsidy component of IMF programs is quite small.
9
This statement assumes that tax revenue does not change absent a devaluation.

7

Tax Eﬀects
The change in the present value of tax revenues is given by:
Z ∞
Z ∞
−rt
(τ t − τ )e dt =
e−rt [τ y (ytT + ytN PtN /St ) + τ Lt ]dt − τ /r.
0

(2.11)

0

Recall that we assumed tax rates are constant. If ytN , ytT , and τ Lt were constant and PtN /St
did not change, this term would be zero. We do not expect either of these conditions to
hold, in general. First, large devaluations are typically followed by signiÞcant changes in
the output of the tradable and nontradable sectors. Second, as documented in Table 3,
devaluations are also followed by large drops in the dollar price of nontradable goods. These
eﬀects can lead to either a Þscal improvement or a Þscal deterioration. For example, a drop
in the value of nontradable output (PtN ytN /St ) induces a decline in real tax revenues, thus
exacerbating the Þscal consequences of the initial crisis. On the other hand, if most tax
revenue comes from the tradable sector and this sector booms after a devaluation, there
could be a net rise in the present value of tax revenues.
Government Purchases Eﬀects
The change in the present value of government purchases is given by:
¶
Z ∞
Z ∞µ
P N N PtN N −rt
−rt
T
T
(g − gt )e dt =
g − gt +
g −
g
e dt.
S
St t
0
0

(2.12)

Suppose that gtT and gtN remain constant at their pre-crisis values. If PtN /St also remained
constant then the term above would be zero. But a drop in PtN /St generates an automatic
decline in the dollar value of government spending on nontradable goods. This type of
automatic Þscal reform is important because most government purchases are on nontradables,
such as health and education.
Government Transfers Eﬀects
The change in the present value of CPI-indexed government transfers is given by:
¶
Z ∞µ
P v̂ Pt v̂t −rt
e dt.
−
(2.13)
S
St
0
Suppose v̂t remained constant at its pre-crisis value. If Pt /St also remained constant then
the term above would be zero. But any drop in Pt /St generates an automatic decline in the
dollar value of CPI-indexed transfers.
8

Nonindexed Debt Eﬀects
The reduction in the dollar value of nonindexed debt is given by:
Z ∞
B
rB −rt
e dt.
−
S
St
0

(2.14)

Other things equal, a devaluation generates an implicit Þscal reform by reducing the value
of this debt. This channel has been emphasized in the literature on the Þscal theory of the
price level.10
Seigniorage Eﬀects
The dollar value of seigniorage is given by:
Z ∞
X
Mú t /St e−rt dt +
e−ri ∆mi .
0

(2.15)

i∈I

Post-Crisis Inßation
The post-crisis behavior of inßation depends critically on the Þnancing mix chosen by
the government. For example, suppose that the government could pay for most of its Þscal
costs by reducing the dollar value of outstanding nominal debt with a devaluation at time
zero. Then the currency crisis would be associated with little future money growth or longrun inßation. In contrast, suppose that the government Þnanced most of the new transfers
with seigniorage revenues. This Þnancing strategy would have very diﬀerent implications for
money growth and inßation.
It is also clear that post-crisis inßation rates depend on the types of goods that the
government purchases and on the nature of the tax system. Suppose, for example, that the
government raises most of its tax revenues from the nontradable sector and the dollar value
of production in this sector falls precipitously after a devaluation. Then a devaluation would
magnify the initial Þscal crisis so that money growth rates and inßation would be higher than
otherwise. In contrast, suppose that most government spending is devoted to nontradable
goods. Then a crisis which leads to a decline in PtN /St generates a Þscal improvement.
To go beyond these general statements and formally analyze the implications of diﬀerent Þnancing strategies, we must embed the government’s budget constraint into a fully
articulated model.
10

See footnote 3 for related references.

9

3. The Model
The representative agent maximizes lifetime utility, deÞned as:
Z ∞ T ω N 1−ω 1−σ
[(ct ) (ct ) ]
− 1 −ρt
U=
e dt.
1−σ
0

(3.1)

Here cTt and cN
t denote the consumption of tradables and nontradables, respectively. In
addition ρ > 0 is the discount factor and σ > 0 is the inverse of the elasticity of intertemporal
substitution.
The representative agent can borrow and lend in international capital markets at a constant real interest rate r. To eliminate trends in the current account we assume that r = ρ.
The representative agent’s ßow budget constraint for t ≥ 0 is given by:
∆ft = −∆mt
if t ∈ I,
ú
fút = rft + rB/St + yt + v̂t Pt /St + ṽt − (PtT cTt + PtN cN
)/S
−
τ
−
M
/S
/ I.
t
t
t
t if t ∈
t

(3.2)

Here ft denotes the net foreign assets held by the representative agent and yt = ytT +ytN PtN /St
represents the dollar value of the household’s endowments of tradable and nontradable goods.
As with the government, the household’s budget constraint (3.2) takes into account the
possibility of discrete changes in mt and ft at a Þnite set of points in time, I. The ßow
budget constraint, together with the condition limt→∞ e−rt ft = 0, implies the following
intertemporal budget constraint for the household:
Z ∞
f0 +
e−rt (yt + Pt v̂t /St + ṽt + rB/St )dt =
Z ∞ 0
X
ú t /St )dt +
e−rt (PtT cTt /St + PtN cN
/S
+
τ
+
M
e−ri ∆mi .
t
t
t
0

(3.3)

i∈I

According to (3.3), when measured in dollars, the household’s initial assets plus the present
value of endowment and transfer income must equal the present value of expenditures inclusive of taxes and changes in money balances.
Finally, the representative agent faces the following continuous time analogue to a cashin-advance constraint on consumption purchases:11
η(PtT cTt + PtN cN
t ) ≤ Mt .

(3.4)

The constant η allows the model to generate empirically plausible predictions for average
velocity. Since the nominal interest rate is positive in all the scenarios that we consider,
(3.4) holds with strict equality.
11

See Feenstra (1985) for a discussion of cash-in-advance constraints in continuous time models.

10

The problem of the representative household is to maximize (3.1) subject to (3.2) and
N
T
(3.4) by choice of time paths for cTt , cN
t , mt and ft given known time paths for St , Pt , Pt

and Pt .12
The market clearing condition for nontradable goods is:
T
N
ytN = cN
t + δct + gt ,

(3.5)

where δcTt are the nontradable goods used in the process of distributing tradable goods.
Using this equation and consolidating the resource constraints of the government and the
household, we obtain the aggregate intertemporal resource constraint for tradable goods:
Z ∞
Z ∞
−rt T
f0 − b0 +
e yt dt =
e−rt (cTt + gtT + vt∗ )dt.
(3.6)
0

0

3.1. The Exchange Rate Crisis
Prior to time zero, agents anticipate zero inßation and the economy is in a steady state with
constant values of S, y T , y N , g T and g N . In the Technical Appendix we show that this
implies that PtN , cTt and cN
t are constant over time. At time zero agents learn about the new
government transfers that make the Þxed exchange rate regime unsustainable.
To characterize the time at which the Þxed exchange rate regime collapses and the postcrisis behavior of the economy, we make particular assumptions about government policy.
Here there are two possibilities. First, we can specify a post-crisis monetary policy and a rule
for abandoning the Þxed exchange rate. Second, we can specify a path for the exchange rate
and then reverse engineer a path for monetary policy that can support the exchange rate
path as an equilibrium. Computing this reverse mapping is diﬃcult in our context since we
have to ensure that the government’s intertemporal budget constraint holds. For this reason
we followed the Þrst strategy which has the additional advantage of preserving a tight link
with the large literature on currency crises.
Abandoning the Fixed Exchange Rate
We assume that the government ßoats the currency at the Þrst point in time, t∗ , when
net debt reaches some Þnite upper bound or, equivalently, when the domestic money supply
falls by χ percent of the initial money supply. We work with this rule for three reasons.
12

In the Technical Appendix we describe the solution to a discrete time version of the household’s problem
which limits to the solution of the continuous time problem as the interval between time periods goes to 0.

11

First, it is a good description of what actually happens in a currency crisis. Second, it can
be interpreted as a short-run borrowing constraint on the government. Finally, Rebelo and
Végh (2002) show that this rule can be optimal for an interesting class of economies.
Post-Crisis Monetary Policy
For simplicity we assume that the government will raise seigniorage revenues by a combination of a one time increase in the stock of money at time T to a level MT and growth in
the money supply at rate µ from period T on. So the path of Mt is given by:
Mt = MT eµ(t−T ) , for t ≥ T .

(3.7)

Given T , the pair (MT , µ) must satisfy the government’s budget constraint.
Computing the Time of the Speculative Attack
In order to solve for the time of the speculative attack, we must compute the dynamic
perfect foresight equilibrium. Our procedure is as follows. First, we Þx the parameters of
monetary policy (χ, T , MT and µ). Second, we derive the equilibrium paths of consumption, inßation, and the exchange rate. Third, we check whether the government’s budget
constraint is satisÞed. If not, we adjust either MT or µ and recompute the equilibrium. We
repeat this procedure until we have converged upon a solution. Details of this procedure are
provided in the Technical Appendix. In computing the equilibrium we allow for discontinuities in consumption, real balances, and government debt at the following points: (i) time
zero, when the new information arises; (ii) the time of the speculative attack (t∗ ); and (iii)
the time at which monetary policy changes (T ).

4. Properties of the Model
In this section we discuss the properties of a version of our model calibrated to Korean data.
We do so with four objectives in mind. First, we ascertain whether this model can generate
low inßation rates in conjunction with high rates of depreciation. Second, we use the model
to study the implications of diﬀerent Þnancing strategies for the government. Third, we
deconstruct the model to understand how it accounts for post-crisis inßation and exchange
rates. Finally, our analysis serves as a useful backdrop for our case study of Korea.

12

4.1. Calibration of the Model
Table 4 summarizes our assumptions about parameter values. We set σ = 1, so that utility
is logarithmic. We set r equal to 0.055.13 We normalize the initial exchange rate to S = 1.
Without loss of generality we set y T = y N = 1. This implies that the level of real GDP is
y = 1 + pN , where pN = P N /S is the dollar price of nontradable goods.
Our data for Korea suggest that the share of tradable goods in GDP, sT , is roughly 0.35.14
Since the share of tradable goods in GDP is sT = 1/(1 + pN ), pN must be equal to 1.86.
Between 1993 and 1997 government purchases averaged about 15.3 percent of GDP in
Korea. So we set g = 0.153y. We estimate that roughly 13.2 percent of government purchases
are tradable goods, implying g T = 0.132g and g N = (g − g T )/pN . We set initial transfers
to foreigners, v ∗ , equal to 0. In the Technical Appendix we show that the steady state
value of net foreign assets, f0 , the consumption of tradables, cT , and the consumption of
nontradables, cN , are uniquely pinned down given the values of y T , y N , g T , g N , v ∗ , and pN
that we have already chosen.
In the four years prior to Korea’s crisis, the average ratio of the monetary base to GDP
was 0.067. We set η so that the ratio of the monetary base to GDP in the initial steady
state is consistent with this value.15
Below we argue that the pre-crisis ratio of taxes to GDP in Korea was roughly 0.213.
Accordingly, we set τ y = 0.213. The ratio of spending on transfers to GDP averaged 0.043
for the period 1993 to 1997. So we set steady state transfers, v, equal to 0.043y. We assume
that total transfers, vt , represent 4.3 percent of GDP in the steady state (v = 0.043y), which
corresponds to the average ratio of transfers to GDP from 1993 to 1997. The steady-state
value of CPI-indexed transfers (P v̂/S) is set equal to 0.027y, or 2.7 percent of GDP. This
allows the model to generate an amount of revenue from the reduction in the dollar value of
transfers that is consistent with our empirical estimates for Korea presented in section 5.
To calibrate b0 we used data on the real consolidated foreign debt of the government
and central bank. The Korea Institute for International Economic Policy (http://kiep.go.kr)
estimates that the foreign debt of the public sector in June 1997 was equal to 2 trillion won.
According to the International Financial Statistics (IFS), the value of the central bank’s net
13

Calibrating the dollar interest rate for Korea is diﬃcult because most internal lending is denominated
in won for regulatory reasons. We found that, across a wide variety of domestic instruments, the dollar rate
of return, while volatile, averaged between 5 and 6 percent in the period 1991 to 2002.
14
This is the average share of agriculture, forestry, mining, and manufacturing in Korean GDP for 1993—97.
15
The value of η is given by η = 0.067y/[(1 + δpN )cT + pN cN ].

13

foreign assets was approximately 28 trillion won. This suggests that the net foreign assets
of the consolidated public sector was roughly equal to 26 trillion won or 5.7 percent of 1997
GDP. So we set b0 equal to −0.057y.

Nominal debt in the model (B) is a perpetuity, so its duration is diﬀerent from that of

Korea’s debt. For this reason it is not appropriate to use the measured stock of nonindexed
debt on the eve of the crisis to calibrate B. We set B = 0.075y so that the revenue from debt
deßation is commensurate with our empirical estimates described in section 5. We choose
the level of lump sum taxes, τ T , to ensure that the government’s lifetime budget constraint,
(2.9), holds in the initial steady state of our model.16
We now turn to the parameters that govern post-crisis monetary policy. We identify
period zero as the end of June 1997, when the Thai banking crisis culminated in a currency
crisis. Like Thailand, Korea was undergoing a severe crisis in its banking industry. For our
purposes it seems reasonable to assume that the outbreak of the Thai crisis led Koreans to
anticipate that they too would undergo a currency crisis.17 This crisis occurred at the end of
October 1997, roughly 4 months after the Thai crisis. Given the diﬃculty of obtaining direct
evidence on the value of χ we set this parameter so that the speculative attack occurs four
months after time zero. We set the time at which there is a remonetization, T , to 0.5 (this
corresponds to the end of December 1997). To abstract from month-to-month variation in
the monetary base we set MT /M = 1.12. This value corresponds to the ratio of the average
monetary base in November 1997—January 1998 to the average monetary base in May—July
1997. Finally, we solve the model to endogenously determine the steady state money growth
rate, µ, that is consistent with the government’s intertemporal budget constraint.
According to Standard and Poor’s (2000) the cost of the banking sector bailout was about
24 percent of 1997 GDP. In our case study of Korea below, we estimate that: (i) output
losses due to the recession induced losses of tax revenue amounting to 10.2 percent of GDP;
(ii) to date, explicit Þscal reforms have equaled roughly 11.9 percent of GDP; and (iii) future
explicit Þscal reforms will yield an additional 8.8 percent of GDP. Once we add these costs
to the bailout costs and net the Þscal reforms from this total, the amount that needs to
be Þnanced from depreciation-related revenue is about 13.5 percent of GDP. Hence we set
φ = 0.135y.
We set ω = 0.5 to match the weight that tradables receive in the Korean CPI. Nontradable
16
17

SpeciÞcally, τ L is given by τ L = r(b0 + B/S) + g + v − τ y (yT + pN y N ).
See Corsetti, Pesenti, and Roubini (1999) and Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2001).

14

goods aﬀect the predictions of the model only if there is a change in the dollar price of
nontradable goods after a crisis. Here we pursue a simple strategy to generate such a change:
consistent with the data, we assume that the domestic currency price of nontradables remains
constant for two months after the crisis and then starts growing at the rate of depreciation.18
In the presence of these nominal rigidities the market for nontradable goods does not clear–
there is excess demand for nontradable goods. We make the simplifying assumption that
nontradables are rationed and there is no resale market for these goods. While admittedly
stark, this modeling strategy allows us to capture, in a parsimonious way, the eﬀects of a fall
in the price of nontradable goods without fully modeling the production side of the economy.
Finally, we set the distribution cost parameter δ to 0.5. This implies that the pre-crisis
distribution margin is 50 percent which is within the range of estimates presented in Burstein,
Neves, and Rebelo (2002).19
4.2. The Benchmark Model
Figure 1(a) depicts the equilibrium paths for the exchange rate, the CPI, the rate of depreciation, the rate of inßation, the level of the money supply, and real balances. Four key features
of Figure 1(a) are worth noting. First, as in Burnside, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2001), the
speculative attack happens after agents learn about deÞcits, but before new monetary policy
is implemented. So the attack is unpredictable on the basis of classical fundamentals such
as past deÞcits or inßation. Second, inßation rises in the wake of the exchange rate collapse,
well before the change in monetary policy. As in Sargent and Wallace (1981), this reßects
agents’ anticipation of the increase in money supply that takes place at time T . Third,
there is a discrete drop in the money supply at the time of the attack. This reßects agents’
decisions to exchange their domestic money holdings for dollars at the Þxed exchange rate.
It is this drop in the money supply that triggers the threshold rule and leads the government
to abandon the Þxed exchange rate regime. Fourth, there is a large wedge between the rate
18

There are several mechanisms through which a fall in the dollar price of nontradables can occur. In
Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2002) the dollar price of nontradables falls because of a drop in consumption after a currency crisis that is induced by a tightening of agents’ external borrowing constraints. In
their model agents reduce the production and consumption of nontradable goods and use the corresponding
resources to increase the production of exported goods. Because certain factors like capital are Þxed in the
short run, the marginal (dollar) cost of producing nontradable goods is an increasing function of total output.
Other things equal, the fall in the production of nontradable goods induces a decline in their dollar price.
More generally, any negative wealth eﬀect associated with a currency crisis could generate similar eﬀects.
19
The distribution margin is the fraction of the retail price that represents distribution costs. In our
notation this is given by: δPtN /(P̄tT + δPtN ).

15

of inßation and the rate of depreciation.
Table 5(a) summarizes the key implications of the model for inßation, depreciation, and
government Þnancing in the wake of the crisis. A number of results are worth noting. First,
inßation in the Þrst year after the crisis is only 12.7 percent, while long run inßation is only
2.0 percent. Inßation in the Þrst year is higher than the 7.2 percent observed in the data.
However, Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2002) argue that there was a signiÞcant downward bias in measured Korean inßation.20 While it is diﬃcult to provide precise measures of
this bias, it is clear that taking it into account would move the model closer into conformity
with reality. Second, despite the low rate of inßation the rate of depreciation in the model
is 46.5 percent, more than three times higher than inßation in the Þrst year after the crisis.
In terms of government Þnancing seigniorage accounts for only 2.0 percent of pre-crisis
GDP, or less than 10 percent of total depreciation-related revenues. By far the most important source of depreciation-related revenues is the fall in the dollar value of transfers (11.1
percent of pre-crisis GDP). This decline reßects the large wedge between the CPI and the
exchange rate that arises in the immediate aftermath of the crisis.
Viewed overall our results imply that the government can satisfy most of its Þnancing
needs by relying on an implicit Þscal reform. We conclude that the model is consistent with
the observation that many large devaluations are associated with low rates of inßation and
that seigniorage plays a modest role in government Þnancing.
4.3. Implications of Alternative Financing Scenarios
In this subsection we use the benchmark model to assess the implications of three alternative
Þnancing scenarios. First, suppose that there is no outstanding nominal debt at the onset
of the crisis (B = 0) so that there are no revenues from debt deßation. In addition, assume
that the government makes up for this shortfall in revenue by increasing the steady state
growth rate of money. As Table 5 indicates, this alternative Þnancing scenario implies a
modest rise in short-run inßation (from 12.7 to 16.4 percent) and to a twofold increase in
long run inßation (from 2 to 6 percent).
20

According to Burstein, Eichenbaum, and Rebelo (2002) the bias in the oﬃcial Þgures reßects the fact that,
after contractionary currency crises, consumers switch from high quality imports to lower quality domestic
substitutes. In principle this ‘ßight from quality’ should not aﬀect measured inßation since the CPI measures
the price of a Þxed bundle of goods. However, in practice, the individual items that comprise the CPI basket
are replaced to reßect changes in consumption patterns. This can impart a signiÞcant downward bias in
measured inßation.

16

Second, suppose that all transfers are indexed to the dollar. In this case the government
does not beneÞt from a reduction in the dollar value of transfers. As above, we assume that
the government makes up for this shortfall in revenue by raising the steady state growth rate
of money. Table 5 shows that this alternative Þnancing scenario leads to markedly diﬀerent
implications for post-crisis inßation and exchange rates. Relative to the benchmark scenario
inßation in the Þrst year after the crisis rises from 12.7 to 22.5 percent. Steady state inßation
rises from 2 to 12.7 percent. The rate of depreciation in the Þrst year after the crisis climbs
from 46.5 to 60.3 percent.
Third, for completeness we eliminate revenues from both debt deßation and reductions
in the dollar value of transfers. Not surprisingly, under this scenario, inßation is very large
both in the Þrst year after the crisis (29.2 percent) and in the long run (20.1). Moreover the
rate of exchange rate depreciation rises to almost 70 percent.
These experiments make clear that post-crisis rates of inßation and depreciation depend
critically on the sources of depreciation-related revenue available to a government. In this
sense the model is consistent with heterogeneity in post-crisis inßation and devaluation rates.
4.4. Deconstructing the Benchmark Model
In this subsection we use a sequence of numerical examples to document which features of
our model allow it to account for the post-crisis behavior of inßation, exchange rates and
seigniorage.
A Simple Textbook Model
We begin by eliminating all the features that distinguish our model from the simple
textbook setup. SpeciÞcally, we assume that there is no local currency debt (B = 0), all
goods are tradable (ω = 1), prices are perfectly ßexible, and there are no distribution costs
(δ = 0). Given these assumptions PPP holds at the level of the CPI, so that the price level
coincides with the exchange rate. Also, the only depreciation-related source of revenue is
seigniorage.
Figure 1(b) depicts the equilibrium paths for the exchange rate, the CPI, the rate of
depreciation, the rate of inßation, the level of the money supply, and real balances. Table
5(e) summarizes the key implications of the model. A number of results are worth noting.
First, the rate of inßation in the Þrst year after the crisis is counterfactually large: 23.3

17

percent. Second, the long run rate of inßation, 11.5 percent, is also counterfactually large.
Third, inconsistent with the data, the rate of inßation coincides with the rate of depreciation.
Introducing Nominal Debt
Table 5(f) displays the impact of incorporating nominal government debt into the simple
textbook model. Inßation in the Þrst year after the crisis falls from 23.3 percent in the
benchmark model to 19.6 percent. Long run inßation declines from 11.5 percent to 7.3
percent. Mirroring these results, seigniorage is now 9.1 percent of GDP, or about two-thirds
of total depreciation-related revenues. While this version of the model performs better
than the simple textbook model, it still suﬀers from important shortcomings: inßation is
counterfactually large and the rate of depreciation is too low relative to the data.
Introducing Nontradable Goods with Sticky Prices
We now incorporate nontradable goods into the previous model. As in our benchmark
analysis, we assume that the price of these goods is sticky. Table 5(g) summarizes the
properties of this version of the model. The key diﬀerence between this example and the
previous case is that the rates of depreciation and inßation are no longer the same. Now the
rate of depreciation in the Þrst year after the crisis (34.2 percent) is much larger than the
rate of inßation during the same period (20.3 percent).
Introducing CPI-indexed Transfers
We now add, to the previous version of the model, government transfers that are indexed to the CPI [see Table 5(h)]. The key impact of this change is that the importance
of seigniorage as a source of government Þnance drops–it now amounts to 6.2 percent of
pre-crisis GDP. Since seigniorage is less important, inßation declines to 16.4 percent in the
Þrst year after the crisis and to 5.4 percent in the new steady state. The problem is that the
rate of depreciation in the Þrst year declines to only 29.7 percent.
Introducing Distribution Costs
Once we add distribution costs we are back to our benchmark model. Distribution costs
improve the performance of the model along two key dimensions. First, the model does a
much better job of accounting for the wedge between the rate of inßation and the rate of
depreciation. Second, seigniorage plays a much smaller role in government Þnancing while
the fall in the dollar value of the transfers plays a large role.
18

Summary
To summarize, introducing nonindexed debt and CPI-indexed transfers allows the model
to generate low inßation rates, especially in the steady state. This is because these sources
of revenue reduce the government’s need to rely on seigniorage revenues. Introducing nontradable goods and distribution costs allows the model to generate large devaluations along
with low rates of inßation. In combination these features allow the model to account for the
salient features of data on post-crisis seigniorage, inßation and devaluation rates.

5. Case Studies: Korea, Mexico, and Turkey
We now turn to three case studies to assess how governments actually Þnanced the Þscal
costs associated with currency crises. We use these results to assess the plausibility of our
model’s predictions for post-crisis rates of inßation and depreciation.
In our theoretical analysis, the government Þnances crisis costs via a combination of: (i)
seigniorage revenues; (ii) debt deßation; (iii) reductions in the dollar value of government
transfers; and (iv) reductions in the dollar value of the government’s purchases net of tax
revenue. In reality two other factors come into play: (v) explicit Þscal reforms that raise
tax revenue or reduce spending; and (vi) revenue losses associated with post-crisis declines
in real activity.
It is diﬃcult to precisely quantify the importance of (i)-(vi). The basic problem is that
one must compare actual revenues and expenditures with what they would have been absent
the crisis. Inevitably, this requires relying on debatable assumptions about how economic
aggregates would have evolved if a crisis had not occurred. In practice we found that the
breakdown of Þscal reforms between explicit and implicit reforms is particularly sensitive to
these assumptions. Even seigniorage calculations can be sensitive to the assumptions made
about what money growth and depreciation rates would have been in the absence of a crisis.
Nevertheless we think that our calculations are informative.
Before we turn to the details of our calculations we brießy summarize the main Þndings
for the three countries that we study: Korea, Mexico, and Turkey. First, none of these
countries have fully paid for all the costs associated with their currency crises. According
to our estimates, Korea, Mexico, and Turkey have paid for roughly 43, 52 and 54 percent
of the costs of their crises, respectively. Second, to date, in none of these countries has
seigniorage been the dominant source of revenues. Its importance has varied from 7 percent
19

of net crisis costs in the case of Mexico to roughly 10 percent in the case of Turkey. Third,
debt deßation has been more important than seigniorage in all three countries, ranging from
a low of 7.2 percent of the total cost in Mexico to a high of 38 percent of the total cost in
Turkey. Fourth, in all cases there was a substantial decline in the dollar value of tax revenues
after the crisis. but the decline in the dollar value of government purchases was important
in oﬀsetting the tax revenue decline. Finally, our estimates suggest that there were large
declines in the dollar value of transfers. Indeed, in the case of Korea and Mexico this was
the single most important source of revenue.
We now take to the details of our analysis and discuss our assumptions and procedures
with reference to the Korean case. We then turn to the Mexican and Turkish episodes.
5.1. Case Study of Korea
Timing and Interest Rates We denote the month and year in which the crisis occurred
by tm and ta , respectively. For the Korean case we set tm to October 1997 and ta to 1997.
We make this distinction because some data is available at the monthly frequency (e.g.
seigniorage revenue) while other data (e.g. government purchases of goods and services) is
available only at an annual frequency.
To simplify, we assume a constant annual dollar interest rate, r, equal to an estimate of
the average dollar interest rate for government debt. Consistent with our discussion above
we set r = 0.055 in the Korean case.
Seigniorage Revenue Recall that in our model the government cannot raise seigniorage
revenue under a Þxed exchange rate regime because the demand for real and nominal balances
is constant. In reality governments can raise seigniorage revenues under a Þxed exchange
rate since the demand for real balances grows if output expands.
We measure actual seigniorage revenue, Mt − Mt−1 , using data on the monetary base,

Mt . The dollar value of seigniorage revenue, (Mt − Mt−1 )/St , is computed using the monthly
average exchange rate. We assume that, in the absence of a crisis, the money stock would
have grown at a constant rate µm , so that the monetary base would have been expected to
e
be Mte = Mtm (1 + µm )t−tm . Hypothetical seigniorage revenue is given by Mte − Mt−1
. We

convert these ßows to dollars using a forecast of what the monthly exchange rate would have
been in the absence of the crisis, Ste . We assume that Ste = Stm (1 + δ m )t−tm , where δ m is set
equal to a forecast of what the average depreciation rate of the currency would have been in
20

the absence of the crisis.21 The increase in the present value of seigniorage revenue is given
by:
Change in seigniorage =

Tm
X

−(t−tm )

(1 + rm )

t=tm +1

µ

e
Mt − Mt−1 Mte − Mt−1
−
St
Ste

¶

.

Here Tm denotes the last period for which we have monthly data on the monetary base and
the exchange rate, i.e., August 2002.
In the Korean case we set µm = 0.0005, which corresponds to the average monthly
money growth rate for the period October 1993 through October 1997. In addition we set
δ m = 0.0008, which corresponds to the average monthly depreciation rate of the won between
1980 and 1997.22
Given our assumptions, the increase in Korean seigniorage revenue between November
1997 (tm + 1) and August 2002 (Tm ) was 8.1 billion dollars, or 1.7 percent of Korea’s GDP
in 1997.
Debt Deßation To estimate the revenue from debt deßation we must measure the change
in the dollar value of outstanding domestic debt as a result of the crisis. This requires data
on the maturity structure of debt. Table 6 summarizes the value of the diﬀerent bonds
outstanding in Korea at the end of October 1997, along with information on maturities.
We do not have detailed data on the maturity of each bond. For bonds with multiple
maturities we assume that there were equal quantities of each maturity outstanding in October 1997.23 Within each maturity we assume that the number of bonds within 1 month of
their maturity date is the same as the number of bonds within 2 months, 3 months, etc., of
their maturity dates.24
Given these assumptions, we construct a schedule of debt payments on Korean domestic
21

Many countries that experience currency crises do not literally have Þxed exchange rates. So, for these
countries, we must estimate a rate of depreciation that would have been consistent with the prior exchange
rate regime.
22
This assumption implies that in the absence of the crisis the dollar would have been worth about 1003
won at the end of 2001, compared to its actual value of 1314 won and its value of 844 won at the end of
1996.
23
For example, within “Grain Securities” we assume that roughly 1.62 trillion won worth of the outstanding
bonds were of 1 year, 3 year, and 5 year maturity, implying a total of 4.87 trillion won.
24
For example, for 1 year “Grain Securities” we assume that there were bonds worth roughly 0.135 trillion
won that were 1 month, 2 months, . . . , 12 months from their maturity date at the end of October 1997. All
bonds are treated as zero coupon bonds.

21

debt outstanding as of October 1997. Total revenue from debt deßation is given by:
Debt deßation =

Ts
X

−(t−tm )

(1+rm )

t=tm +1

Bt

µ

¶ µ
¶ X
Tb
1
1
1
1
−
+ e −
(1+rm )−(t−tm ) Bt .
Ste St
STm
STm t=T +1
s

Here Bt denotes the debt payment to be made in month t. The variable Tb denotes the
period when all the outstanding debt will be paid oﬀ. The last term in the previous formula
reßects revenue from debt deßation associated with debt maturing after Ts , which is equal
to November 2002, the last date for which we have data on St .
According to our data, the total value of outstanding Korean domestic debt at the end
of October 1997 was roughly 73.9 trillion won, or 16.3 percent of 1997 GDP. Our estimates
imply that revenue from debt deßation was about 16.6 billion dollars or 3.5 percent of GDP.
Figure 2 illustrates the time series of Korea’s revenue from debt deßation from 1997 through
2001. Note that most of the revenue from debt deßation accrued in the Þrst few months
after the crisis. This fact suggests that our calculations are not very sensitive to either the
precise maturity structure of the debt or the fact that our data ends before all the domestic
debt has been redeemed.
Changes in Tax Revenues To measure the change in taxes due to the crisis, we compute
the diﬀerence between actual tax revenues, Tt , and what taxes would have been in the absence
of the crisis, Tte . We assume that actual dollar tax revenue is given by Tt = TtL +τ pt Yt , where
TtL denotes lump sum taxes, Yt is real GDP, pt = Pt /St , and Pt is the GDP deßator.25 The
presence of lump-sum taxes allows us to capture, in a simple way, the fact that tax revenues
are not perfectly correlated with GDP. We assume that, up to an i.i.d. error, lump-sum
taxes are proportional to trend GDP, i.e., TtL = (τ L + ²Lt )p̄t Ȳt , where p̄t and Ȳt are the Þtted
values from log-linear trends Þt to pt and Yt over the period 1980—97.
We assume that in the absence of the crisis, tax revenue would have been expected to be
Tte = (τ L + τ )petYte . Here pet and Yte denote the pre-crisis expected values of pt and Yt . For
Korea we set pet and Yte equal to the projections implied by log-linear trends Þt to pt and Yt
over the period 1980—97. These projections are illustrated in Figures 3(a) and 3(b).
The total change in tax revenue due to the crisis is deÞned as:
∆(T ) =

Ta
X

(1 + r)−(t−ta ) (Tt − Tte ).

t=ta +1
25

Notice that pt Yt is GDP measured in current dollars.

22

Here Ta denotes the last period for which we have annual Þscal data, 2001.
To compute ∆(T ) we need estimates of τ L and τ . Assuming that ²Lt is uncorrelated
with (pt Yt )/(p̄t Ȳt ), we can estimate τ L and τ by regressing Tt /(p̄t Ȳt ) on a constant and
(pt Yt )/(p̄t Ȳt ). Doing so over the period 1980-97 yields τ L = 0.047 and τ = 0.166.
Next, we decompose ∆(T ) into three components: (i) an output eﬀect; (ii) a relative
price eﬀect; and (iii) a residual eﬀect that we ascribe to explicit Þscal reform. We deÞne the
change in tax revenue due to changes in output as follows:
∆(T, Y ) =

Ta
X

(1 + r)−(t−ta ) τ pet (Yt − Yte ).

t=ta +1

Note that in this expression changes in tax revenue are due solely to the eﬀect of the crisis
on output. We deÞne the change in tax revenue due to changes in relative prices as:
∆(T, p) =

Ta
X

(1 + r)−(t−ta ) τ (pt − pet )Yt .

t=ta +1

This expression isolates the impact on tax revenue of changes in pt associated with the crisis.
The residual component, or explicit Þscal reform, is given by:
∆(T, e) = ∆(T ) − ∆(T, Y ) − ∆(T, p).
Figure 4(a) illustrates the actual path of government revenue in Korea along with the
projected path implied by our calculations. Consistent with conventional wisdom, we Þnd
that the crisis led to a large decline in the dollar value of tax revenues, both because of
the output eﬀect and the relative price eﬀect. SpeciÞcally, we estimate that through 2001
Korean tax revenues fell by 192.5 billion dollars as a result of the crisis. Of this total, 48.7
billion dollars were due to output losses and 174.0 billion dollars were due to the change
in relative prices. These two eﬀects were oﬀset by explicit revenue increases amounting to
about 30.1 billion dollars.
Changes in Government Purchases of Goods and Services Let Gt denote the dollar
value of the actual ßow of government purchases of goods and services. We assume that in
the absence of the crisis the dollar value of the ßow of government purchases would have
been Get ≡ gpet Yte . Here, g represents a trend share of government purchases to GDP. The
change in the value of government purchases of goods and services due to the crisis is:
∆(G) =

Ta
X

(1 + r)−(t−ta ) (Gt − Get ).

t=ta +1

23

For Korea, we set g = 0.153 which corresponds to the ratio of government purchases to GDP
in the period 1993—97.
We decompose the change in government purchases into two components: (i) a relative
price eﬀect; and (ii) a residual eﬀect that we ascribe to explicit Þscal reform. The change in
government purchases due to changes in relative prices is given by:
∆(G, p) =

Ta
X

e
(1 + r)−(t−ta ) g(pG
t − pt )Ȳt .

t=ta +1

G
G
Here pG
t = Pt /St and Pt is the deßator for government purchases from the national income

accounts.26 Note that this expression isolates the changes in government purchases that
are due to movements in relative prices. The residual component, or explicit change in
government purchases, is:
∆(G, e) = ∆(G) − ∆(G, p).
Figure 4(c) illustrates the actual path of government purchases in Korea along with the
projected path implied by our calculations. We estimate that through 2001 the Korean
government saved 191.6 billion dollars on its purchases as a result of the crisis. Of this total,
159.2 billion dollars were due to the change in relative prices, while 32.4 billion dollars were
due to explicit cuts in spending.
These calculations demonstrate the quantitative importance of the fall in the relative
price of nontradables on the government’s Þscal position. In the Korean case this eﬀect goes
a long way in oﬀsetting the impact of the crisis on tax revenues emphasized in the literature.
Focusing on the tax eﬀects while ignoring the expenditure eﬀects greatly overstates the
adverse eﬀect of the crisis on the government’s Þscal position.
Changes in Spending on Transfers Let vt be actual spending on transfers measured
in dollar terms. Recall that in the model we assumed that some transfers are explicitly
denominated in dollars while others are explicitly denominated in local currency. Here we
assume that total transfer spending (measured in dollar terms) is given by:
¶
¶
µ
µ
P̄t
S̄t
v
v
vt = ψ̄ p̄t + ψ
Ȳt + p̄t Ȳt ²t = ψ̄ + ψ + ²t p̄t Ȳt ,
St
St
where P̄t and S̄t are the Þtted values from log-linear trends Þt to Pt and St over the period
1980—97. Recall that p̄t is the log-linear trend for pt . We assume that vt is proportional
26

We rescale PtG so that it is equal to Pt in the year prior to the crisis.

24

to trend real GDP to capture the fact that transfers are not very cyclically sensitive in
industrializing countries. Our speciÞcation also captures a key feature of our theoretical
model: some transfers are sensitive to changes in relative prices, while others are not. Since
we do not have any data that distinguishes between these two types of transfers, we use the
following procedure to estimate ψ and ψ̄. We assume that ²vt is uncorrelated with S̄t /St and
estimate ψ̄ and ψ by regressing vt /(p̄t Ȳt ) on a constant and S̄t /St . Using Korean data for
the period 1980—97 we obtained ψ = 0.0415 and ψ̄ = 0.0007.
We assume that, in the absence of the crisis, expected total transfers (measured in dollars)
are vte = (ψ̄ + ψ)pet Yte. The total change in transfer spending due to the crisis is:
∆(v) =

Ta
X

(1 + r)−(t−ta ) (vt − vte ).

t=ta +1

We decompose ∆(v) into two components: (i) a relative price eﬀect; and (ii) a residual
eﬀect that we ascribe to explicit Þscal reform. We deÞne the change in transfers due to
changes in relative prices as:
∆(v, p) =

Ta
X

(1 + r)−(t−ta ) ψ(Ste /St − 1)pet Yte .

t=ta +1

Here Ste is set equal to the projection implied by a log-linear trend Þt to St over the period
1980—97. This projection and the implied projection Pte = pet Ste are illustrated in Figures
3(c) and 3(d).
The residual component, or explicit change in transfers, is:
∆(v, e) = ∆(v) − ∆(v, p).
Figure 4(e) illustrates the actual path of government transfers in Korea, along with
the trend path implied by our calculations. We estimate that through 2001, the Korean
government saved 30.0 billion dollars on its transfers as a result of the crisis, most of which
(35.6 billion dollars) was due to the change in relative prices.
Korea Case Study: Summary In summary, our results for Korea are as follows. The
Þscal cost of the banking sector bailout was approximately 114.4 billion dollars or 24.0 percent
of Korea’s GDP in 1997. Lost revenue due to the post-crisis recession was roughly 48.7 billion
dollars or 10.2 percent of GDP. Explicit Þscal reforms amounted to 56.9 billion dollars or
25

11.9 percent of GDP. Taken together these results imply that the Korean government had
to raise 106.1 billion dollars or 22.3 percent of GDP, to pay for the remaining Þscal costs.
Table 7 summarizes our estimate of how much has been Þnanced until now. To date the
government has raised 42.9 billion dollars (9.6 percent of GDP) of the costs associated with
the crisis. Most of these resources were raised through a substantial decline in the dollar value
of transfers amounting to 7.5 percent of GDP. Oﬀsetting this was the decline in government
revenue net of government purchases of goods and services, which amounted to −3.1 percent
of GDP. Because the Korean government had only modest amounts of won-denominated

debt, only 3.5 percent of GDP was raised by deßating its dollar value. Additional seigniorage
contributed only 1.7 percent of GDP in new revenue. So total depreciation-related revenue
so far adds up to about 9.6 percent of GDP. Given our estimates, the government must
still pay for 57.1 percent of the Þscal cost, or 12.7 percent of pre-crisis GDP. Our model
can account for the large depreciation and modest post-crisis inßation rates in Korea under
the assumption that much of the remaining Þscal cost of the crisis will be Þnanced through
future explicit Þscal reforms, and implicit declines in the dollar value of transfers.
We conclude by emphasizing that, in both the data and our model, seigniorage, the source
of Þnancing most emphasized in the literature, plays a relatively minor role. In reality the
two most important sources of Þnancing are large reductions in both the dollar value of
government purchases and transfer payments.
5.2. Case study: Mexico
Timing and Interest Rates For Mexico the month and year in which the crisis occurred,
tm and ta , are given by November 1994 and 1994, respectively. So we measure seigniorage and
debt deßation beginning with December 1994, and changes in government revenue, purchases,
and transfers beginning in 1995. We set the annual dollar interest rate to r = 0.109. This
corresponds to the average EMBI (Mexico) dollar spread plus the US 3-month T-bill rate
between December 1994 and January 2003.
Seigniorage Revenue We measured actual seigniorage revenue (Mt − Mt−1 )/St using the
same method as in the Korean case. As above we assumed that, in the absence of a crisis,

the money stock would have been Mte = Mtm (1 + µm )t−tm and the exchange rate would have
been Ste = Stm (1 + δ m )t−tm . We set µm = 0.0114 and δ m = 0.003, which are the average
monthly rates of money growth and depreciation between June 1991 and June 1994. The
26

last period for which we have monthly money stock data for Mexico (Tm ) is November 2002.
According to our estimates, the increase in the Mexican government’s seigniorage revenue
between December 1994 (tm + 1) and November 2002 (Tm ) was 6.7 billion dollars, or 1.7
percent of Mexico’s GDP in 1994.
Debt Deßation Our data on Mexico’s outstanding domestic debt is summarized in Table
6, which indicates the quantities of two types of bonds outstanding (net of central bank
holdings) at the end of November 1994 along with information on their maturities. Cetes
are peso denominated bonds similar to T-bills and Ajustabonos are bonds indexed to the
CPI. Mexico also issued domestic securities called Tesabonos and Bondes prior to the crisis.
However, Tesabonos were indexed to the dollar and Bondes had adjustable interest rates.
For this reason we ignore these securities in our calculations. For each type of bond, we
assume that equal quantities of each maturity were outstanding in November 1994. As for
Korea, within each maturity we assume that there are equal numbers of bonds within 1
month of their maturity date as there are within 2 months, 3 months, etc., of their maturity
date. We also treat all bonds as if they were zero coupon bonds.
All Cetes and Ajustabonos outstanding at the end of November 1994 would have been
paid back by Tb = November 1999. So, for Cetes we measure debt deßation as:
Debt deßation =

Tb
X

−(t−tm )

(1 + rm )

BtC

t=tm +1

µ

1
1
−
e
St
St

¶

.

Here BtC represents the number of Cetes maturing at date t. For Ajustabonos we measure
debt deßation as:
Debt deßation =

Tb
X

−(t−tm )

(1 + rm )

t=tm +1

BtA
Ptm

µ

Pte Pt
−
Ste
St

¶

.

Here BtA represents the number of Ajustabonos maturing at date t, Pt represents the CPI,
and Pte = Ptm (1 + πm )t−tm is an estimate of what the CPI would have been in the absence of
the crisis. We set π m = 0.0086, the average monthly CPI inßation rate between June 1991
and June 1994.
For Mexico, the total value of all outstanding Cetes and Ajustabonos at the end of
November 1994 was roughly 71.7 billion pesos, or 5.1 percent of 1994 GDP. We estimate
that revenue from debt deßation was about 6.9 billion dollars or 1.7 percent of GDP. Figure
5 illustrates the time series of Mexico’s revenue from debt deßation from 1994 through 1999.
27

As in the Korean case, much of the revenue from debt deßation accrued in the Þrst six
months after the crisis.
Changes in Tax Revenues To measure the change in taxes due to the crisis, we use the
same method as in the Korean case. Our Mexican data set spans the period 1980—2002.
Over this period, the Mexican economy experienced substantially more volatility than the
Korean economy. For this reason, we used Hodrick-Prescott trends rather than simple linear
trends to construct the p̄t and Ȳt series used in the estimation of τ L . Using data for the
period 1980—2002 we estimate τ L = 0.015. We chose τ = 0.213 so that the implied ratio of
taxes to GDP along the trend path would be equal to 0.228, the ratio of taxes to GDP in
1994.27
To project tax revenue beyond the crisis we set Tte = (τ L + τ )pet Yte . We computed the
projections pet and Yte by assuming that pt and Yt were expected to increase by 6.6 and 3.3
percent per year, respectively, from their 1994 values. These growth rates correspond to the
average growth rates of pt and Yt in the period 1991—94. These projections are illustrated
in Figures 6(a) and 6(b). Given the values of τ L and τ , and the series Tt , pt , and Yt , we
compute the change in tax revenue due to the crisis–and its decomposition into output,
relative price, and explicit reform components–as we did for Korea.
Figure 7(a) illustrates the actual path of government revenue in Mexico along with the
trend path implied by our calculations. We estimate that through 2001 Mexican tax revenues
fell by 216.3 billion dollars as a result of the crisis. Of this total, 25.9 billion dollars were
due to output losses and 159.8 billion dollars were due to the change in relative prices.
In addition, we estimate that there were explicit tax cuts amounting to about 30.5 billion
dollars.
Changes in Government Purchases of Goods and Services We set the trend share of
government purchases to GDP, g, equal to the ratio of government purchases to GDP in 1994,
0.143. We then decomposed the change in government purchases into a relative price eﬀect
and explicit Þscal reform using the same method as for Korea. Figure 7(c) illustrates the
actual path of government purchases in Mexico along with the projected path, Get , implied
by our calculations. We estimate that through 2001 the Mexican government saved 173.8
27

If we estimate τ with the same procedure used to estimate τ L , we Þnd τ = 0.231. This value of τ, along
with our estimate of τ L ,implies a ratio of taxes to GDP along the trend path equal to 0.246 . This ratio is
considerably higher than the actual ratio of taxes to GDP in the years 1991—94.

28

billion dollars on its purchases as a result of the crisis. Of this total, 102.4 billion dollars
were due to the change in relative prices, while 71.3 billion dollars were due to explicit cuts
in spending.
Changes in Spending on Transfers For Ste, we assumed that the exchange rate was
projected to rise at 3.8 percent per year, which was the peso’s average depreciation rate in
the period 1991—94. The path for Ste and the implied path for Pte (given by Pte = pet Ste ) are
displayed in Figures 6(c) and 6(d).
Our estimate of ψ̄, obtained using data for the period 1980—2002, is 0.003. The value of
ψ was chosen so that the trend value of transfers to GDP coincides with the actual value
of the ratio of transfers to GDP in 1994 (6.2 percent). This yields a value of ψ equal to
0.0614. Figure 7(e) illustrates the actual path of government transfers in Mexico along with
the trend path implied by our calculations.
We estimate that through 2001 the Mexican government saved 43.2 billion dollars on its
transfers as a result of the crisis through a combination of 93.9 billion dollars due to changes
in relative prices and explicit Þscal reforms of −50.8 billion dollars (i.e., there were explicit
increases in transfers in Mexico).

Mexico Case Study: Summary In summary, our results for Mexico are as follows. The
Þscal cost of the banking sector bailout was approximately 60.1 billion dollars or 15.0 percent
of Mexico’s GDP in 1994. Lost revenue due to the post-crisis recession was roughly 25.9
billion dollars or 6.5 percent of GDP. Explicit Þscal reforms amounted to −10.0 billion dollars

or −2.5 percent of GDP. Taken together these results imply that the Mexican government
had to raise 96.0 billion dollars, or 23.9 percent of GDP, of depreciation-related revenues.

To date, the government has raised 52.2 percent (12.5 percent of GDP) of the costs
associated with the crisis, as summarized in Table 7. Most of these resources were raised
through a substantial decline in the dollar value of transfers amounting to 23.4 percent
of GDP, but these were oﬀset by a substantial decline in the dollar value of government
revenue net of government purchases of goods and services: −14.3 percent of GDP. Because
the Mexican government had only modest amounts of peso-denominated debt, only 1.7

percent of GDP was raised by deßating its dollar value. Additional seigniorage contributed
1.7 percent of GDP in new revenue. Given our estimates, the government must still pay for
the remaining 47.8 percent of the Þscal costs (11.4 percent of pre-crisis GDP).
29

Absent any indication of large impending Þscal reforms, it seems reasonable to suppose
that much of the remainder of the Þscal costs will be paid for with seigniorage revenues.
We estimate that if, from November 2002 on, the monetary base grew at the same monthly
rate as under the counterfactual, µm = 0.0114, and the peso depreciated at the same rate as
under the counterfactual, the government would raise 12.5 percent of pre-crisis GDP from
additional seigniorage. This would be slightly more revenue than the government would need
to fully Þnance the remaining costs associated with the crisis. Of course, if Mexico prints
money more quickly or the peso depreciates less slowly than under our assumptions, then
the government will be able to cover the Þscal costs of the crisis more quickly.
The key point is that, absent any sign of explicit Þscal reforms, it seems quite likely
that the bulk of the costs will be covered via explicit seigniorage revenues. Our model would
predict that with this much Þnancing coming from seigniorage, the rate of inßation in Mexico
would be considerably higher than it would have been had the implicit Þscal reforms or the
initial domestic debt been larger.
5.3. Case study: Turkey
Timing and Interest Rates For Turkey, the month and year prior to the occurrence
of the crisis, tm and ta , are given by January 2001 and 2000, respectively. So we measure
seigniorage and debt deßation beginning with February 2001 and changes in government
revenue, purchases, and transfers beginning in 2001. We set the annual dollar interest rate
to r = 0.1066. This corresponds to the average EMBI+ (Turkey) dollar spread plus the US
3-month T-bill rate between February 2001 and January 2003.28
Seigniorage Revenue We measured actual seigniorage revenue (Mt − Mt−1 )/St using the

same method as in the Korean case. As above we assumed that, in the absence of a crisis,

the money stock would have been Mte = Mtm (1 + µm )t−tm and the exchange rate would have
been Ste = Stm (1 + δ m )t−tm . We set µm = 0.0238 and δ m = 0.0175, which are the average
monthly rates of money growth and depreciation between January 2000 and January 2001.
The last period for which we have monthly money stock data for Turkey (Tm ) is October
2002.
According to our estimates, the increase in the Turkish government’s seigniorage revenue
28

Between the inception of the EMBI+ for Turkey in August 1999 and the end of January 2001 this rate
averaged 10.63 percent.

30

between February 2001 (tm +1) and October 2002 (Tm ) was 3.7 billion dollars, or 1.8 percent
of Turkey’s GDP in 2000.
Debt Deßation Table 6 summarizes our data on Turkey’s outstanding securitized domestic debt. This table indicates the quantities and maturity of diﬀerent types of bonds
outstanding at the end of January 2001. Turkey had only very small amounts of indexed
domestic debt, from which we abstract.
We assume that for each type of bond there were equal quantities outstanding in each
month beginning in February 2001 and ending at the month corresponding to twice the
average maturity date given in Table 6. We treat all bonds as if they were zero coupon
bonds.
We use the same expression for debt deßation that we used for Korea. In this case, all
government debt outstanding at the end of January 2001 should be paid back by Tb = April
2009. The last date for which we have data on St , denoted Ts , is equal to December 2002.
For Turkey, the total value of all domestic debt not held by the public sector at the end
of January 2001 was roughly 35.5 quadrillion Turkish lire, or 28.5 percent of 2000 GDP.
We estimate that revenue from debt deßation was about 14.6 billion dollars or 7.3 percent
of GDP. Figure 8 illustrates the time series of Turkey’s revenue from debt deßation from
2001 projected out to 2009. As in the Korean and Mexican cases, much of the revenue from
debt deßation accrued in the Þrst year after the crisis. Notice, however, that the amount of
revenue raised by debt deßation is much larger in the Turkish case.
Changes in Tax Revenues To project tax revenue beyond the crisis we used a simpler
model than for Korea and Mexico. We set Tte = τ pet Yte and set τ = 0.271, the ratio of taxes
to GDP in 2000. Since pt had been relatively stable in Turkey for many years we assume
that agents expected it to remain constant at its value in 2000. We set the annual growth
rate of Yte to 3.7 percent. This corresponds to the average growth rate of Yt in the period
1987—2000. These projections are illustrated in Figures 9(a) and 9(b). Given the value of τ
and the series Tt , pt , and Yt , we compute the change in tax revenue due to the crisis and its
decomposition into output, relative price, and explicit components as we did for Korea.
Figure 10(a) illustrates the actual path of government revenue in Turkey along with the
trend path implied by our calculations. We estimate that through 2002 Turkish tax revenues
fell by 19.3 billion dollars as a result of the crisis. Of this total, 8.7 billion dollars were due
31

to output losses and 14.2 billion dollars were due to the change in relative prices. In addition
we estimate that there were explicit tax increases amounting to about 3.6 billion dollars.
Changes in Government Purchases of Goods and Services We set the trend share of
government purchases to GDP, g, equal to 0.201, which is the ratio of government purchases
to GDP in 2000. We then decomposed the change in government purchases into a relative
price eﬀect and explicit Þscal reform using the same method as for Korea. Figure 10(c)
illustrates the actual path of government purchases in Turkey along with the projected path,
Get , implied by our calculations. We estimate that through 2002 the Turkish government
saved 15.3 billion dollars on its purchases as a result of the crisis. Of this total, 6.0 billion
dollars were due to the change in relative prices, while 9.3 billion dollars were due to explicit
cuts in spending.
Changes in Spending on Transfers For Ste, we assumed that the exchange rate was
projected to rise at 21.2 percent per year, which was the Turkish Lira’s depreciation rate
in the period January 2000–January 2001. The path for Ste and the implied path for Pte
(given by Pte = petSte ) are displayed in Figures 9(c) and 9(d).
We set ψ̄ = 0 and ψ = 0.074 so that the trend value of transfers to GDP coincides with
the actual value of the ratio of transfers to GDP in 2000 (7.4 percent). Figure 10(e) illustrates
the actual path of government transfers in Turkey along with the trend path implied by our
calculations.
We estimate that, through 2002, the Turkish government enacted explicit increases in
transfers worth 6.3 billion dollars. At the same time, the government beneÞted from an
automatic reduction in the dollar value of transfers due to changes in relative prices worth
10.5 billion dollars. The net result was a reduction in the value of transfers of 4.3 billion
dollars.
Turkey Case Study: Summary In summary, our results for Turkey are as follows. The
Þscal cost of the banking sector bailout was approximately 36.2 billion dollars or 18.2 percent
of Turkey’s GDP in 2000. Lost revenue due to the post-crisis recession was roughly 8.7 billion
dollars or 4.4 percent of GDP. Explicit Þscal reforms amounted to 6.7 billion dollars or 3.3
percent of GDP. Taken together these results imply that the Turkish government had to
raise 38.3 billion dollars, or 19.2 percent of GDP, of depreciation-related revenues.
32

To date we estimate that the government has raised 53.8 percent (10.3 percent of GDP) of
the costs associated with the crisis, as summarized in Table 7. Most of these resources were
raised through a substantial decline in the dollar value of Turkey’s domestic debt amounting
to 7.3 percent of GDP and through increased seigniorage revenues (1.8 percent of GDP).
The dollar value of transfers declined by 5.3 percent of GDP, but these were oﬀset by a
decline in the dollar value of government revenue net of government purchases of goods and
services of −4.1 percent of GDP. Based on this evidence we conclude that the Turkish case

is quite diﬀerent than the Korean and Mexican cases. First, while all three countries have so
far Þnanced about 50 percent of the net Þscal costs associated with their crises, Turkey has
done so much more quickly (2 years for Turkey versus 5 and 8, respectively for Korea and
Mexico). Second, the Turkish government has relied much more on seigniorage and debt
deßation, while the Korean and Mexican governments have relied more on implicit Þscal
reform.

6. Conclusion
This paper explored the implications of diﬀerent strategies for Þnancing the Þscal costs
associated with a currency crisis for inßation and depreciation rates. We argue that models
based on the assumption that seigniorage is the only depreciation-related source of revenue
lead to misleading predictions about post-crisis rates of inßation and depreciation. We then
show that models that incorporate an empirically plausible menu of depreciation-related
revenues can account for the high depreciation rates and low inßation rates that are often
observed in the aftermath of currency crises.
Our case studies indicate that diﬀerent governments pursue diﬀerent Þnancing strategies. For example, debt deßation played a more important role in Turkey than in Korea or
Mexico. In contrast, the reduction in the dollar value transfers played a very large role in
Mexico. This paper is silent on why these governments chose diﬀerent strategies. In our
view, understanding the political economy considerations that underlie these choices is an
important topic for future research.

33

TABLE 1
Seigniorage
(Average of 2 Years Before and After Each Country’s Crisis, % of GDP)
Country
Korea
Thailand
Philippines
Mexico
Brazil
Turkey
∗

Before
Crisis
0.1
1.5
2.7
0.4
0.6
3.5

Estimate based on data through Oct. 2002.

34

After
Crisis
0.6
2.7
2.1
0.9
0.7
2.8∗

TABLE 2
Inflation and Depreciation Rates
(percent)
Cumulative
Exchange Rate
Depreciation
50.9
31.8
67.1
45.4
54.2
44.7
94.8
101.5
52.9
62.9
103.2
144.3

Country
Korea

Sep. 97–Sep. 98
–Sep. 99
Thailand
June 97–June 98
–June 99
Philippines June 97–June 98
–June 99
Mexico
Nov. 94–Nov. 95
–Nov. 96
Brazil
Dec. 98–Dec. 99
–Dec. 00
Turkey
Jan. 01–Jan. 02
–Dec. 02

Cumulative
CPI
Inßation
6.9
7.7
15.5
14.2
17.0
23.7
47.2
88.0
8.9
15.5
73.2
118.8

Notes: The rate of depreciation is calculated as 100(St+j /St − 1), where St is the monthly
average exchange rate.

35

TABLE 3
Change in the Relative Price of Nontradables
(percent)

Country
Korea
Sep. 97–Sep. 98
Thailand
June 97–June 98
Philippines June 97–June 98
Mexico
Nov. 94–Nov. 95
Brazil
Dec. 98–Dec. 99
Turkey
Jan. 01–Jan. 02

36

Change in Dollar
Price of
Nontradables
−30.3
−33.2
−27.7
−38.4
−30.0
−18.9

TABLE 4
Model Parameters
(a) Benchmark case
σ=1
inverse of elasticity of intertemporal substitution
ω = 0.5
share of tradables in CPI
r = 0.055
real interest rate
S=1
initial exchange rate
output of tradables
yT = 1
N
y =1
output of nontradables
pN = 1.86
initial relative price of nontradables
T
N N
y = y + p y = 2.86 initial GDP (in dollars)
g = 0.153y
initial government purchases (in dollars)
T
g = 0.132g
initial government purchases of tradables
N
T
N
g = (g − g )/p
initial government purchases of nontradables
v = 0.043y
initial total transfers (in dollars)
v∗ = 0
initial transfers to foreigners (in dollars)
P v̂/S = 0.027y
initial CPI-indexed transfers (in dollars)
(M/S)/y = 0.067
initial ratio of base money to GDP
T
N
τ = τ = 0.213
tax rates on tradable and nontradable goods
b0 = −0.057y
initial government dollar debt level
B = 0.075y
government nominal debt
φ = 0.135
amount Þnanced by devaluation-based revenues
t∗ = 0.33
time of the speculative attack
T = 0.5
time of switch to new monetary policy
ratio of base money at time T to initial base money
MT /M = 1.12
δ = 0.5
distribution cost of tradables
(b) Without nominal debt: same as (a) except B = 0
(c) Without CPI-indexed transfers: same as (a) except v̂ = 0
(d) Without nominal debt and CPI-indexed transfers: same as (a) except B = v̂ = 0
(e) Basic textbook model: same as (a) except ω = 1, y N = g N = v̂ = B = δ = 0,
y = y T , g T = g, pN and τ N undeÞned.
(f) . . . adding nominal debt: same as (e) except B = 0.075y
(g) . . . adding nontraded goods with sticky prices: same as (a) except δ = 0 and v̂ = 0
(h) . . . adding CPI-indexed transfers: same as (a) except δ = 0
Note: The alternative models are described in the text. The letters and cases correspond to
those in Table 5.

37

TABLE 5
Korea Calibration, Numerical Results

a) Benchmark model

∗

Inßation
Deprec.
Financing (percent of GDP)
Yr 1 Long-run
Yr 1
Seig. Nominal
Implicit
Debt
Fiscal Reforms
Deßation g − τ Transfers
12.7
2.0
46.5
2.0
3.6
−3.1
11.1

Alternative Financing Scenarios
b) Benchmark without nominal debt
c) Benchmark without CPI-indexed transfers
d) Benchmark without both

16.4
22.5
29.2

6.0
12.7
20.1

51.7
60.3
69.9

5.5
11.0
16.7

0
5.7
0

−3.1
−3.2
−3.2

11.2
0
0

Deconstructing the Model
e) Simple textbook model
f) Textbook model adding nominal debt
g) Case (f) adding nontraded goods with sticky prices
h) Case (g) adding CPI-indexed transfers

23.3
19.6
20.3
16.4

11.5
7.3
9.7
5.4

23.3
19.6
34.2
29.7

13.5
9.1
10.4
6.2

0
4.4
5.1
4.3

0
0
−2.0
−2.0

0
0
0
4.9

Empirical Estimates

7.2∗

2.5†

45.0∗

1.8‡

3.5‡

−3.1‡

7.5‡

Oct. 1997–Oct. 1998.
Average rate between Nov. 1998 and Aug. 2002.
‡
Seigniorage is measured monthly through Sep. 2002. Debt deßation is measured monthly
through Nov. 2002, and includes an estimate of future debt deßation. The implicit Þscal
reforms are measured annually through 2001.
†

TABLE 6
Outstanding Domestic Debt
Value
Outstanding
(a) Korea, End of October 1997

4.9
3.0
12.7
4.0
5.8

Monetary stabilization bonds

26.4

Industrial Þnance debentures

17.1

Cetes
Ajustabonos
(c) Turkey, End of January 2001
Government Bonds (cash)

Government Bonds (noncash)
Treasury Bills (cash)

Treasury Bills (noncash)

Average Mos.
to Maturity

1, 3 and 5 yrs.
3 yrs.
5—10 yrs.
1—5 yrs.
1—10 yrs.
0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4.5,
6, 12, 18 mos.
1—10 yrs.

n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.

1, 3, 6 and 12 mos.
3 and 5 yrs.

n.a.
n.a.

1 Yr.
Irregular 1–2 Yrs
2 Yrs.
Irregular 2–3 Yrs.
3 Yrs.

5.9
7.0
11.7
18.3
18.3
50.0
1.6
3.7
5.4
5.6
4.9
1.0

(trillion won)

Grain securities
Subway construction bond
National housing bond
FX stabilization fund bonds
Treasury bonds

(b) Mexico, End of September 1994

Maturities

n.a.
n.a.

(billion pesos)
42.2
29.5
(quadrillion TL)
0.7
14.7
2.9
2.0
1.1
11.4
0.8
0.1
0.9
0.1
0.9
0.0

Sources: See Data Appendix.

39

3 Mos.
Irregular 3–6 Mos.
6 Months
Irregular 6–9 Mos.
Irregular 9–12 Mos.

TABLE 7
New Sources of Government Finance
% of GDP % of Total Cost
(a) Korea
Seigniorage
Debt deßation
Implicit decline in transfers
Implicit decline in purchases—taxes
TOTAL FINANCING TO DATE

1.7
3.5
7.5
−3.1
9.6

7.6
15.7
33.6
−13.9
42.9

1.7
1.7
23.4
−14.3
12.5

7.0
7.2
97.9
−59.8
52.2

1.8
7.3
5.3
−4.1
10.3

9.6
38.2
27.5
−21.6
53.8

(b) Mexico
Seigniorage
Debt deßation
Implicit decline in transfers
Implicit decline in purchases—taxes
TOTAL FINANCING TO DATE
(c) Turkey
Seigniorage
Debt deßation
Implicit decline in transfers
Implicit decline in purchases—taxes
TOTAL FINANCING TO DATE

40

FIGURE 1
EQUILIBRIUM PATHS IMPLIED BY THE MODEL
(a) Benchmark Model
Exchange Rate and CPI

Depreciation and Inflation
(year-on-year)

50
40

Exchange Rate

1.4

percent

pre-crisis = 1

1.6

1.2
CPI

1

Depreciation

30
20
10

0.8

Inflation

0
-1

-0.5

0

time

0.5

1

1.5

-1

Monetary Base

0.5

time

1

1.5

1

1.5

1

1.5

1

1.5

(dollars)

1.1

pre-crisis = 1

pre-crisis = 1

0

Monetary Base

(local currency units)

1.3

-0.5

1.1
0.9
0.7

0.9
0.7
0.5

-1

-0.5

0

time

0.5

1

1.5

-1

-0.5

0

0.5

time

(b) Basic Textbook Model
Depreciation and Inflation

1.6

50

1.4

40

percent

pre-crisis = 1

Exchange Rate and CPI

1.2
1

(year-on-year)

30
20
10

0.8

0
-1

-0.5

0

time

0.5

1

1.5

-1

Monetary Base

time

0.5

(dollars)

1.1

pre-crisis = 1

pre-crisis = 1

0

Monetary Base

(local currency units)

1.3

-0.5

1.1
0.9
0.7

0.9
0.7
0.5

-1

-0.5

0

time

0.5

1

1.5

-1

-0.5

0

time

0.5

Note: The benchmark model (a) is our full model with nontradable goods, distribution
costs, sticky prices, nominal debt, and CPI-indexed transfers. The basic textbook
model (b) has none of these features.

41

FIGURE 2
REVENUE FROM DEBT DEFLATION IN KOREA, 1997–2007

16
14
billions US$

12
10
8
projected revenue
2003-07

6
4
2
0
97-IV 98-I 98-II 98-III 98-IV 99

00

Debt maturing

01

02

03

04

05

06

07

Debt deflation

Notes: The quantity of debt maturing is sum of the face values (in won) of all debt
maturing within each time period divided by the exchange rate (won/dollar). Debt
deflation is unanticipated revenue from the decline in the dollar value of domestic debt.
See the text for the details of the calculations and data.

42

FIGURE 3
ESTIMATED TREND PATHS FOR KOREAN TIME SERIES
(b) GDP Deflator / Exch. Rate (p )
-1.7

13.3
Projection

13.1

log of index

tril. 1995 won (log)

(a) Real GDP (Y )

12.9
12.7
12.5
12.3

Projection

-1.9
-2.1
-2.3
-2.5
-2.7

89

91

93

95

97

99

01

89

5.2

7.2

5.0

log of index

won/$ (log)

7.4

7.0
6.8

89

91

93

95

97

95

97

99

01

99

01

Projection

4.8
4.6
4.4
4.2

Projection

6.4

93

(d) GDP Deflator (P )

(c) Exchange Rate (S )

6.6

91

4.0
99

01

89

91

93

95

97

Notes: Real GDP is measured in trillions of constant 1995 won, and expressed in
logarithms in the chart. The GDP deflator is an index number equal to 100 in 1995 and
expressed in logarithms in the chart. The exchange rate is measured in won per dollar
and is expressed in logarithms in the chart. The trends were calculated as described in
the text.

43

FIGURE 4
GOVERNMENT SPENDING, REVENUE AND FISCAL REFORMS IN KOREA
(a) Government Revenue
Projection

5.0

bill. $

bill. $ (log)

5.5

(b) Revenue Changes due to Crisis

4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
89

91

93

95

97

99

98

01

00

p Effect

01

Explicit Reform

(d) Decline in Purchases due to Crisis

5.5

80
Projection

60
bill. $

5.0
4.5
4.0

40
20

3.5

0

3.0

98
89

91

93

95

97

99

01

4.0

00

01

Explicit Reform

(f) Decline in Transfers due to Crisis
15

Projection

10
bill. $

3.5

99
p Effect

(e) Government Transfers

bill. $ (log)

99

Y Effect

(c) Government Purchases

bill. $ (log)

40
20
0
-20
-40
-60
-80

3.0
2.5

5
0

2.0

-5

1.5

98
89

91

93

95

97

99

01

99
p Effect

00

01

Explicit Reform

Notes: The trends in government revenue, purchases and transfers were estimated as
described in the text. Negative “revenue changes” indicate an additional fiscal cost to the
government. Positive “declines” in purchases and transfers indicate additional financing
for the government. Calculations used in defining the time series in (b), (d) and (f) are
described in the text.

44

FIGURE 5
REVENUE FROM DEBT DEFLATION IN MEXICO, 1994–1999

3.50

billions US$

3.00
2.50
2.00
1.50
1.00
0.50
0.00
94-IV

95-I

95-II

95-III

95-IV

Debt deflation

96

97

98

99

Debt maturing

Notes: The quantity of debt maturing is sum of the face values (in pesos) of all debt
maturing within each time period divided by the exchange rate (pesos/dollar). Debt
deflation is unanticipated revenue from the decline in the dollar value of domestic debt.
See the text for the details of the calculations and data.

45

FIGURE 6
ESTIMATED TREND PATHS FOR MEXICAN TIME SERIES

(b) GDP Deflator / Exch. Rate (p )
4.0

7.5
7.4

Projection

7.3
7.2
7.1

log of index

bill. 1993 pesos (log)

(a) Real GDP (Y )

7.0
6.9

Projection

3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
3.0
2.8

88

90

92

94

96

98

00

88

92

94

96

98

00

(d) GDP Deflator (P )

(c) Exchange Rate (S )
6.5

2.5
2.0

log of index

peso/$ (log)

90

1.5
1.0

6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0

Projection

Projection

3.5

0.5
88

90

92

94

96

98

88

00

90

92

94

96

98

Notes: Real GDP is measured in billions of constant 1993 pesos, and expressed in
logarithms in the chart. The GDP deflator is an index number equal to 100 in 1993 and
expressed in logarithms in the chart. The exchange rate is measured in pesos per dollar
and is expressed in logarithms in the chart. The trends were calculated as described in
the text.

46

00

FIGURE 7
GOVERNMENT SPENDING, REVENUE AND FISCAL REFORMS IN MEXICO
(b) Revenue Changes due to crisis

(a) Government Revenue
Projection

5.0

bill. $

bill. $ (log)

5.3
4.7
4.4
4.1
3.8
88

90

92

94

96

98

95

00

Y Effect

Projection
bill. $

bill. $ (log)

4.9

4.1
3.7
3.3
2.9
88

90

92

94

96

98

97

p Effect

98

99

00

01

Explicit reform

35
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
95

00

96

97

p Effect

98

99

00

01

Explicit reform

(f) Decline in Transfers due to Crisis

(e) Government Transfers

30

4.4

Projection
bill. $

3.9
bill. $ (log)

96

(d) Decline in Purchases due to Crisis

(c) Government Purchases

4.5

10
0
-10
-20
-30
-40
-50

3.4
2.9
2.4

20
10
0
-10
-20
-30

1.9
1.4
88

90

92

94

96

98

95

00

96

97

p Effect

98

99

00

01

Explicit reform

Notes: The trends in government revenue, purchases and transfers were estimated as
described in the text. Negative “revenue changes” indicate an additional fiscal cost to the
government. Positive “declines” in purchases and transfers indicate additional financing
for the government. Calculations used in defining the time series in (b), (d) and (f) are
described in the text.

47

FIGURE 8
REVENUE FROM DEBT DEFLATION IN TURKEY, 2001-2009

4

billions US$

3
projected revenue
2003-09

2

1

0
01-I

01-II

01-III 01-IV

02-I

02-II

02-III 02-IV

Debt maturing

03

04

05

06

07

08

09

Debt deflation

Notes: The quantity of debt maturing is sum of the face values (in TL) of all debt
maturing within each time period divided by the exchange rate (TL/dollar). Debt
deflation is unanticipated revenue from the decline in the dollar value of domestic debt.
See the text for the details of the calculations and data.

48

FIGURE 9
ESTIMATED TREND PATHS FOR TURKISH TIME SERIES
(b) GDP Deflator / Exch. Rate (p )

(a) Real GDP (Y )

-1.6
Projection
log of index

bil. 1987 TL (log)

11.8
11.7
11.6
11.5

-1.8
-1.9
-2.0
-2.1

96

97

98

99

00

01

02

96

15
log of index

14
13
Projection

12
11
96

97

98

99

00

97

98

99

00

01

02

(d) GDP Deflator (P )

(c) Exchange Rate (S )

TL/$ (log)

Projection

-1.7

01

02

12.5
12.0
11.5
11.0
10.5
10.0
9.5
9.0

Projection

96

97

98

99

00

01

Notes: Real GDP is measured in billions of constant 1987 TL, and expressed in
logarithms in the chart. The GDP deflator is an index number equal to 100 in 1987 and
expressed in logarithms in the chart. The exchange rate is measured in TL per dollar and
is expressed in logarithms in the chart. The trends were calculated as described in the
text.

49

02

FIGURE 10
GOVERNMENT SPENDING, REVENUE AND FISCAL REFORMS IN TURKEY
(a) Government Revenue
5

Projection

4.0

0
bill. $

bill. $ (log)

4.2

(b) Revenue Changes due to Crisis

3.8
3.6

-5
-10

3.4

-15

3.2
96

98

00

01

02

Y Effect

bill. $

bill. $ (log)

6

3.6
3.5

4

3.4

2

3.3

0

3.2

01
96

98

00

02

p Effect

(e) Government Transfers
2.8

10

2.7

5

2.6
Projection

2.5

02
Explicit Reform

(f) Decline in Transfers due to Crisis

bill. $

bill. $ (log)

Explicit Reform

8

Projection

3.7

p Effect

(d) Decline in Purchases due to Crisis

(c) Government Purchases
3.8

02

0
-5

2.4

-10

2.3

01
96

98

00

02

p Effect

02
Explicit Reform

Notes: The trends in government revenue, purchases and transfers were estimated as
described in the text. Negative “revenue changes” indicate an additional fiscal cost to the
government. Positive “declines” in purchases and transfers indicate additional financing
for the government. Calculations used in defining the time series in (b), (d) and (f) are
described in the text.

50

References
Burnside, Craig (2002) “Debt and Fiscal Sustainability in Turkey: 1994—2002,” mimeo,
World Bank.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2001) “Prospective DeÞcits and
the Asian Currency Crisis,” Journal of Political Economy, 109, 1155—97.
Burnside, Craig, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2003) “On the Fiscal Implications
of Twin Crises,” in Michael P. Dooley and Jeﬀrey A. Frankel, eds. Managing Currency
Crises in Emerging Markets. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Burstein, Ariel, Martin Eichenbaum, and Sergio Rebelo (2002) “Why Are Rates of Inßation
So Low After Large Devaluations?” mimeo, Northwestern University.
Burstein, Ariel, Joao Neves, and Sergio Rebelo (2002) “Distribution Costs and Real Exchange Rate Dynamics During Exchange-Rate-Based Stabilizations,” forthcoming, Journal of Monetary Economics.
Cagan, Phillip (1956) “Monetary Dynamics of Hyperinßation,” in Milton Friedman, ed.
Studies in the Quantity Theory of Money. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Calvo, Guillermo (1987) “Balance of Payments Crises in a Cash-in-Advance Economy,”
Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 19, 19—32.
Caprio, Jr., Gerard and Daniela Klingebiel (1996) “Bank Insolvencies: Cross Country Experience,” Policy Research Working Paper 1620, World Bank.
Cochrane, John (2001) “Long-term Debt and Optimal Policy in the Fiscal Theory of the
Price Level,” Econometrica, 69, 69—116.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Luca Dedola (2002) “Macroeconomics of International Price Discrimination,” mimeo, University of Rome III.
Corsetti, Giancarlo and Bartosz Mackowiak (2002) “Nominal Debt and the Dynamics of
Currency Crises,” mimeo, University of Rome III..
Corsetti, Giancarlo, Paolo Pesenti, and Nouriel Roubini (1999) “What Caused the Asian
Currency and Financial Crisis?” Japan and the World Economy 11, 305—373.
Daniel, Betty (2001) “A Fiscal Theory of Currency Crises,” International Economic Review,
42, 969—88.
Drazen, Allan, and Elhanan Helpman (1987) “Stabilization with Exchange Rate Management,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102, 835—55.
Dupor, William (2000) “Exchange Rates and the Fiscal Theory of the Price Level,” Journal
of Monetary Economics, 45, 613—30.
Easterly, William and Klaus Schmidt-Hebbel (1994) “The Macroeconomics of Public Sector
DeÞcits: A Synthesis,” in W. Easterly, K. Schmidt-Hebbel and C.A. Rodriguez, eds.,
Public Sector DeÞcits and Macroeconomic Performance. New York: World Bank.
51

Feenstra, Robert (1985) “Anticipated Devaluations, Currency Flight, and Direct Trade
Controls in a Monetary Economy,” American Economic Review, 75, 386—401.
Flood, Robert and Peter Garber (1984) “Collapsing Exchange Rate Regimes: Some Linear
Examples,” Journal of International Economics, 17, 1—13.
Jeanne, Olivier and Jeromin Zettelmeyer (2000) “International Bailouts, Financial Transparency and Moral Hazard,” mimeo, International Monetary Fund.
Krugman, Paul (1979) “A Model of Balance of Payments Crises,” Journal of Money, Credit
and Banking, 11, 311—25.
Lahiri, Amartya and Carlos Végh (2003) “Output Costs, BOP Crises, and Optimal Interest
Rate Policy,” forthcoming, Journal of Political Economy.
Lindgren, Carl-Johan, Gillian G.H. Garcia and Matthew I. Saal (1996) Bank Soundness
and Macroeconomic Policy. Washington, DC: International Monetary Fund.
Morris, Stephen (1995) “Inßation Dynamics and the Parallel Market for Foreign Exchange,”
Journal of Development Economics, 46, 295—316.
Obstfeld, Maurice (1986) “Speculative Attack and the External Constraint in a Maximizing
Model of the Balance of Payments,” Canadian Journal of Economics, 29, 1—20.
Persson, Mats, Torsten Persson, and Lars E. O. Svensson (1998) “Debt, Cash Flow and
Inßation Incentives: A Swedish Example,” in Guillermo A. Calvo and Mervin King,
editors: The Debt Burden and its Consequences for Monetary Policy. New York: St.
Martin’s Press.
Pinto, Brian (1990) “Black Market Premia, Exchange Rate UniÞcation, and Inßation in
Sub-Saharan Africa,” World Bank Economic Review, 3, 321—38.
Rebelo, Sergio and Carlos Végh (2002) “When is it Optimal to Abandon a Fixed Exchange
Rate?,” mimeo, Northwestern University, March.
Sargent, Thomas J. and Neil Wallace (1973) “The Stability of Models of Money and Growth
with Perfect Foresight,” Econometrica, 41, 1043—8.
Sims, Christopher (1994) “A Simple Model for the Determination of the Price Level and
the Interaction of Monetary and Fiscal Policy,” Economic Theory, 4, 381—99.
Standard and Poor’s (2000) “Global Financial System Stress: 15 Display Troubled Credit
Quality,” RatingsDirect, July 31.
Wijnbergen, Sweder Van (1991) “Fiscal DeÞcits, Exchange Rate Crises and Inßation,”
Review of Economic Studies, 58, 81—92.
Woodford, Michael (1995) “Price Level Determinacy Without Control of a Monetary Aggregate,” Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy, 43, 1—46.

52

Data Sources
Exchange Rates For monthly and annual data we used the International Monetary Fund’s
International Financial Statistics (IFS) series AE...ZF (end-of-period) and AF...ZF (periodaverage) which are measured in local currency units per U.S. dollar. We used end-of-period
Þgures when converting end-of-period stocks measured in units of local currency to dollar
measures. We used period-average Þgures when converting local currency ßows to dollars.
CPI For monthly data we used the IFS series 64...ZF.
Monetary Base For monthly end-of-period data we used the IFS data series reserve
money, 14...ZF.
Interest Rates For Korea we used data from the IFS on the money market interest rate
(60B..ZF), time deposits at deposit money banks (60L..ZF), lending rates of deposit money
banks (60P..ZF), and yields on national housing bonds (61...ZF). These data all pertain to
won-denominated assets. We computed equivalent dollar returns using our exchange rate
data for Korea.
For Mexico and Turkey we used data on Emerging Market Bond Index (EMBI) and
EMBI+ spreads. We used the EMBI spread for Mexico and the EMBI+ spread for Turkey
(there is no EMBI spread for Turkey). Our source for these data was Bloomberg. The data
pertain to the spreads over US interest rates on dollar-denominated assets. We combined
the spread information with information on 3-month US Treasury Bill rates from the Board
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System Release H.15 (http://www.federalreserve.gov/
releases/) in order to generate dollar interest rates.
Cost of the Banking Sector Bailout For Korea, we use the estimate provided by
Standard and Poor’s (2000). As of December 1999, they estimated that the Þscal cost of the
banking crisis would be roughly 24 percent of 1997 GDP, or 114.4 billion dollars.
For Mexico, Lindgren, Garcia, and Saal (1996) estimate the Þscal cost of the crisis to be
6.5 percent of GDP, which amounts to 27 billion dollars. On the other hand, Caprio and
Klingebiel (1996) estimate the cost to be between 12 and 15 percent of GDP, with the upper
bound translating into 63 billion dollars.
For Turkey we use the estimate provided by Burnside (2002), 36.2 billion dollars, which
is based on a detailed analysis of the changes in Turkey’s “noncash” domestic debt stock
between January and December 2001.
National Income Accounts Data We use national income accounts data to get measures of real and nominal GDP, their expenditure and production components, and the
relevant deßators. Our data for Korea were obtained from the Bank of Korea website,
http://www.bok.or.kr/, Statistics, Statistics Database, National Accounts page, HLHA,
HLHB, HLHC, and HLHD sections. Our data for Mexico were obtained from the website of
Instituto Nacional de Estadística, Geografía e Informática (INEGI), http://www.inegi.gob.mx
/difusion/espanol/Þecons.html. For Turkey our data were obtained from the Bank of Turkey’s
Electronic Data Delivery System (EDDS) website, http://tcmbf40.tcmb.gov.tr/cbt.html,
General Statistics, “GNP at Current Prices,” and “GNP at Fixed Prices” pages.
53

Fiscal Data For Korea we measured government purchases as the sum of the government
consumption and government capital formation series in the national income accounts (described above). For revenue, we used the series “revenue of general government” from the
“Income/outlay of general government” table on the National Statistical Oﬃce’s website
http://www.nso.go.kr/eng/. For transfer spending, we used the sum of the series “subsidies,” “social security beneÞts,” “social assistance beneÞts,” and “current transfers N.E.C.”
from the same table.
For Mexico we measured government purchases as the average of two series: (i) the sum
of the government consumption expenditure and government investment expenditure series
in the national income accounts (described above) and (ii) the sum of the series for current
expenditures (excluding transfers and interest) and capital expenditure provided by Banco de
Mexico at http://www.banxico.org.mx/siteBanxicoINGLES/eInfoFinanciera/FSinfoFinanciera.html. For revenue, we used the series “consolidated budgetary revenues” from the same
Banco de Mexico website. For Mexico we used the sum of two series from the same website:
(i) “net transfers” and (ii) a fraction of “revenue sharing to state and local governments” corresponding to the share of federal transfer spending in federal spending other than transfers
to state and local governments.
For Turkey we measured government purchases as the sum of government consumption
expenditure and public sector investment expenditure as deÞned in the national income
accounts (described above). For revenue we used the series “revenues” from the page “Consolidated Budget (Treasury)” at the Bank of Turkey EDDS website (describe above). For
transfers we used the series “other transfers” from the same page.
Data on Nominal Debt Our data on Korea’s stocks of diﬀerent domestic debt instruments were obtained from the National Statistics Oﬃce website, http://www.stat.go.kr/cgibin/bbs/imain.cgi, and were originally sourced from the Bank of Korea and the Ministry of
Finance and Economy.
Our data for Mexico’s stocks of diﬀerent domestic debt instruments were obtained from
the Ministry of Finance and Public Credit (SHCP): http://www.shcp.gob.mx/english/eofp
/cuadros/E01I1994.html.
Our data for Turkey’s stocks of diﬀerent domestic debt instruments at the end of January 2001 were obtained from the Turkish Treasury website, http://www.treasury.gov.tr/
english/debtstat.htm, 2001 spreadsheet, Table 4: Maturity Composition of Outstanding
Debt.

54

Technical Appendix
A Discrete Time Approximation to the Model In this section we describe a discrete
time approximation to our model. We divide time into small intervals each of length n
years. So, for example, n = 1/12 would imply that time was being measured in months. The
variable t is used here to index these time intervals. All ßow variables deÞned in the main
text are measured as ßows per small interval but are expressed at annual rates.
The Representative Household The representative agent maximizes lifetime utility,
deÞned as:
∞
X
c1−σ − 1
(1 + ρn)−t n t
max
1−σ
t=0
where

1−ω
ct = (cTt )ω (cN
.
t )

(6.1)

The household’s disposable income is
ytD = yt +

rB Pt
+ v̂t + ṽt − τ t .
St
St

(6.2)

The representative agent’s ßow budget constraint for t ≥ 0 is given by:
at = (1 + nr)at−1 + Zt −
where

Mt − Mt−1
St

¡
¢
N
Zt = n ytD − pTt cTt − pN
.
t ct

(6.3)

(6.4)

N
T
T
N
Here pN
t = Pt /St , pt = Pt /St = 1 + δpt , and Zt /n represents household saving, measured
at annual rates.
Iterating on the ßow budget constraint starting at time 0, we have
µ
¶
M0 − M−1
−1
−1
Z0 −
a−1 = (1 + nr) a0 − (1 + nr)
S0
µ
¶
t−1
X
Mj − Mj−1
−t
−(j+1)
(1 + nr)
Zj −
.
= (1 + nr) at−1 −
S
j
j=0

Imposing the condition limt→∞ (1 + nr)−t at−1 = 0, we obtain the intertemporal budget
constraint:
∞
∞
X
X
Mt − Mt−1
a−1 +
(1 + nr)−(t+1) Zt =
(1 + nr)−(t+1)
.
(6.5)
S
t
t=0
t=0
The cash-in-advance constraint is

η(PtT cTt + PtN cN
t ) ≤ Mt .

55

(6.6)

Solving the Household Problem The Lagrangean for the household’s problem is
£ T ω N 1−ω ¤1−σ
∞
X
(c ) (ct )
−1
L = max
(1 + ρn)−t n t
+
1−σ
t=0
·
¸
∞
X
Mt − Mt−1
Λt (1 + nr)at−1 + Zt −
− at
+
S
t
t=0
·
¸
∞
X
Mt
T T
N N
+
Θt
− η(pt ct + pt ct )
St
t=0
subject to (6.4).
The Þrst-order conditions, other than the constraints, are
£
¤
1−ω 1−σ
(1 + ρn)−t n (cTt )ω (cN
ω(cTt )−1 = (Λt n + Θt η)pTt
cTt :
t )
£ T ω N 1−ω ¤1−σ
−t
−1
cN
:
(1
+
ρn)
n
(ct ) (ct )
(1 − ω)(cN
= (Λt n + Θt η)pN
t
t )
t
at :
Λt = Λt+1 (1 + nr)
St
Λt = Λt+1
+ Θt
Mt :
St+1
It is convenient to deÞne: λt = Λt (1 + ρn)t and θ t
have:
£
¤
1−ω 1−σ
n (cTt )ω (cN
ω(cTt )−1
t )
¤
£
1−ω 1−σ
−1
n (cTt )ω (cN
(1 − ω)(cN
t )
t )
λt
λt

= Θt (1 + ρn)t . Noting that r = ρ we then
= (λt n + θt η)pTt

(6.7)

= (λt n + θt η)pN
t
= λt+1
St
= λt+1
/(1 + ρn) + θt
St+1

(6.8)
(6.9)
(6.10)

The Government Budget Constraint The government’s ßow budget constraint is:
bt = (1 + nr)bt−1 + Xt −
where

Mt − Mt−1
St

(6.11)

µ
¶
Pt
B
T
N N
∗
Xt = n gt + pt gt + v̂t + ṽt + vt − τ t + r
.
St
St

Here Xt /n represents the government’s primary surplus.
The government’s lifetime budget constraint at time 0 is given by
∞
∞
X
X
Mt − Mt−1
−(t+1)
b−1 +
(1 + nr)
Xt =
(1 + nr)−(t+1)
.
St
t=0
t=0

56

(6.12)

Aggregate Resource Constraint The equilibrium condition for nontradables is given
by:
T
N
(6.13)
ytN = cN
t + δct + gt .
If we aggregate (6.3) and (6.11) we get a ßow resource constraint for tradables:
at − bt = (1 + nr)(at−1 − bt−1 ) + Zt − Xt ,
or
ft = (1 + nr)ft−1 + Zt − Xt ,

(6.14)

where ft = at − bt is the country’s net foreign asset position. Notice that
Zt − Xt = (nytT − gtT − cTt − vt∗ ).
The lifetime resource constraint for tradables is
∞
X
f−1 +
(1 + nr)−(t+1) (Zt − Xt ) = 0.

(6.15)

t=0

The Sustainable Fixed Exchange Rate Regime We assume that the government holds
the exchange rate constant at some level S. We also assume that gtT = g T , gtN = g N , ytT = y T ,
ytN = y N , τ Lt = τ L , v̂t = v̂, ṽt = ṽ, vt∗ = v ∗ , and Mt = M for all t. We conjecture that the
solution to the model in this case has the property that PtN = P N for all t and, therefore,
N
N
T
T
N
that Pt = P T = S + δP N for all t. It follows that pN
t = p = P /S and pt = p = 1 + δp
N
T
T
for all t. We also have cN
t = c , ct = c , and at = a−1 for all t.
>From (6.13) the consumption of nontradables is given by
cN = y N − g N − δcT .

(6.16)

The lifetime resource constraint for tradables, (6.15), combined with (6.13) implies
cT = rf−1 + y T − g T − v∗ .

(6.17)

From these it is convenient to solve for
c = (cT )ω (cN )1−ω .

(6.18)

Next consider the household’s problem. Notice that the household’s Þrst-order condition
for at implies λt = λ for all t. From this result and the Þrst-order condition for Mt we have
θt = ρnλ/(1 + ρn) for all t. Eliminating θ, the household’s Þrst-order conditions for cT and
cN can be rewritten as
¡
¢
ρn
η) 1 + δpN
nc1−σ ω/cT = λ(n +
1 + ρn
ρn
nc1−σ (1 − ω)/cN = λ(n +
η)pN
1 + ρn
Given our previous results, the unknowns in these two equations are λ and pN . Taken
together the two equations imply
pN =

(1 − ω)cT
.
ωcN − (1 − ω)cT δ
57

(6.19)

and P N = pN S. Hence
pT = 1 + δpN

(6.20)

and P T = pT S.
When we calibrate the model we choose the arbitrary normalization y T = y N = 1 and
set the relative price of nontradables to a value pN consistent with the share of nontradables
in GDP in the model, pN /(1 + pN ), being equal to the corresponding value in our data set.
We set g T and g N consistent with the data, and set v ∗ = 0. Notice that this implies that
(6.16), (6.17), and (6.19) then form a system of three equations which can be solved for three
unknowns: cT , cN , and f−1 .
Our results thus far can be used to determine the steady state values of
λ=

n(1 − ω)
c1−σ
ρn
(n + 1+ρn
η)pN cN

(6.21)

and
θ = ρnλ/(1 + ρn).

(6.22)

Notice that at this point we can pin down the money supply from the cash-in-advance
constraint:
M = η(P T cT + P N cN ).
(6.23)
We have τ t = τ = τ T y T + τ N pN y N + τ L , gt = g T + pN g N , and vt = v = v̂P/S + ṽ + v∗ .
Hence, the government’s lifetime budget constraint implies that
τ = rb−1 + g + v + rB/S.

(6.24)

The Crisis We assume that the crisis involves an increase in the present value of transfers.
In particular, we assume that
½
ṽt + vt∗ = ṽ + v ∗ for 0 ≤ t < T 0 ,
ṽt + vt∗ > ṽ + v ∗ for t ≥ T 0 ,
and that

∞
∞
X
X
ṽ
v∗
−(t+1)
(1 + nr)
nṽt = + φ̃,
(1 + nr)−(t+1) nvt∗ =
+ φ∗ .
r
r
t=0
t=0

Here φ = φ̃ + φ∗ represents the total cost of a bailout of the banking sector.
The government sets the money supply equal to Mt = MT (1 + µn)t−T for t ≥ T . Once
the information about the increase in prospective deÞcits arrives at time 0, the money supply
is initially Þxed at some level M in order to keep the exchange rate Þxed. Date t∗ is the Þrst
date at which, with the exchange rate still Þxed at S, the demand for money falls from M
to M (1 − χ), with χ > 0. At that point the government abandons the Þxed exchange rate
regime and leaves the money supply unchanged until date T . To summarize, we have

0 ≤ t < t∗
 M
M (1 − χ)
t∗ ≤ t < T
Mt =

MT (1 + µn)t−T t ≥ T.
58

The implications of the crisis for the government’s lifetime budget constraint are as
follows. Notice that under the sustainable Þxed exchange rate regime we had
¶
µ
B
,
Xt = X = n g + v − τ + r
S
Mt = M , and consequently that b−1 + X/(nr) = 0. We can substitute for b−1 and then note
that the government’s lifetime budget constraint can now be rewritten
∞
∞
X
X
X
Mt − Mt−1
−(t+1)
(1 + nr)
Xt −
(1 + nr)−(t+1)
.
=
nr
S
t
t=0
t=0

(6.25)

Some Assumptions We will establish that the economy enters a post-crisis steady state
at a date we deÞne as T̄ + 1. In the case of ßexible prices we will show that T̄ = T . In our
model of sticky prices, we assume PtN = P N for t ≤ Tp . For t > Tp we assume that PtN
moves in proportion to the exchange rate. In particular, we let PtN = (P N /STp )St , implying
N
N
29
that pN
We will show that this
t = p̄ = P /STp for t > Tp . We assume that Tp ≥ T + 1.
implies T̄ = Tp − 1.
We assume ytT = y T , ytN = y N , gtT = g T and gtN = g N for all t.
The Post-Crisis Steady State: t ≥ T̄ Equation (6.9), above, implies λt = λ for all t.
We do not yet solve for the constant λ. Instead we conjecture a solution in which cTt = c̄T
for t ≥ T̄ + 1. Our algorithm for solving the model begins with an outer loop in which we
guess the value of c̄T .
Given our assumptions about ytN and gtN , it follows from (6.13) that
N
N
N
T
cN
t = c̄ ≡ y − g − δc̄ , for t ≥ T̄ + 1.

(6.26)

It follows that ct = c̄ ≡ (c̄T )ω (c̄N )1−ω for t ≥ T̄ + 1. We conjecture that St+1 /St = 1 + µn
for t ≥ T̄ + 1. DeÞning N ≡ (1 + ρn)(1 + µn), we then have, from (6.10),
θt = θ̄ = λ

N −1
, for t ≥ T̄ + 1.
N

The Þrst-order condition for cTt , (6.7), implies
¶
µ
¡
¢
N −1
1−σ
T
nc̄ ω/c̄ = λ n +
η 1 + δ p̄N .
N

(6.27)

(6.28)

Flexible Prices

N
When nontradable prices are ßexible, the Þrst-order condition for cN
t , (6.8), implies pt =
N
is a constant p̄ for t ≥ T̄ + 1, where
µ
¶
N −1
1−σ
N
η p̄N .
(6.29)
nc̄ (1 − ω)/c̄ = λ n +
N

PtN /St

29

We do this for technical reasons. If we assumed otherwise, the model would be much harder to solve for
t < t ≤ T.
∗

59

Notice that (6.28) and (6.29) can be solved for λ and p̄N :
(1 − ω)c̄T
ωc̄N − δ(1 − ω)c̄T

(6.30)

nN c̄1−σ (1 − ω)
.
[nN + (N − 1)η] p̄N c̄N

(6.31)

p̄N =
and
λ=

Sticky Prices
When nontradable prices are sticky they do not clear the market for nontradables after
the crisis. In particular, there will usually either be excess demand, in which case nontradables are rationed to households (whose Þrst-order conditions don’t hold), or there will
be excess supply, in which case resources are wasted. In our examples, the relative price
eﬀects “underprice” nontradables for t ≥ T̄ + 1. Hence we want to look at cases where the
household’s Þrst-order condition for nontradables is violated.
The cash-in-advance constraint tells us
£
¤
MT̄ +1 = η (ST̄ +1 + δPT̄N+1 )cTT̄ +1 + PT̄N+1 cN
T̄ +1 .

We know that cTT̄ +1 = c̄T , cN
= c̄N , MT̄ +1 = MT (1 + µn)T̄ +1−T , and PT̄N+1 = PTNp = P N . In
T̄ +1
this case we can write
£
¤
MT (1 + µn)T̄ +1−T = η ST̄ +1 c̄T + (δc̄T + c̄N )P N ,
or

ST̄ +1 =

MT (1 + µn)T̄ +1−T − η(δc̄T + c̄N )P N
.
ηc̄T

(6.32)

Then we have p̄N = P N /ST̄ +1 . From (6.28) we can solve for λ:
λ=

nN c̄1−σ ω/c̄T
.
[N n + (N − 1)η] (1 + δ p̄N )

(6.33)

In both cases, θ̄ can then be determined using (6.27). It is useful to note that real
balances, Mt /St = m̄, a constant, for t ≥ T̄ + 1, where
m̄ = η[(1 + δ p̄N )c̄T + p̄N c̄N ].

(6.34)

Hence, St = Mt /m̄ for t ≥ T̄ + 1. This, of course, veriÞes our guess that St+1 /St = 1 + µn
for t ≥ T̄ + 1, since Mt+1 /Mt = 1 + µn for t ≥ T and T ≤ T̄ .
The Pre-Crisis Period: 0 ≤ t < t∗
know λt = λ for all t, we have
θt = θ = λ

We assume St = S for 0 ≤ t ≤ t∗ . Given that we
ρn
for 0 ≤ t < t∗ .
1 + ρn
60

(6.35)

N
Given our other assumptions, we conjecture a solution in which cTt = cT , cN
t = c , and
N
N
∗
Pt = p S for 0 ≤ t < t . The resource constraint for nontradables and the Þrst-order
conditions for cTt and cN
t then imply:

£
¤1−σ
n (cT )ω (cN )1−ω
ω(cT )−1 = (λn + θη)(1 + δpN )
£
¤1−σ
n (cT )ω (cN )1−ω
(1 − ω)(cN )−1 = (λn + θη)pN
cN = y N − g N − δcT .

(6.36)
(6.37)
(6.38)

When nontradable prices are ßexible, all of these equations hold. When nontradable prices
are sticky, either (6.37) or (6.38) does not hold.
Flexible Prices
We can write cN as cN (cT ) using (6.38) and then use (6.37) to write pN as pN (cT ). We
can then solve (6.36) as a nonlinear equation in cT :
£
¤1−σ
n (cT )ω cN (cT )1−ω
ω(cT )−1 = (λn + θη)[1 + δpN (cT )].

(6.39)

Once one has the solution for cT , it is straightforward to again use (6.38) and (6.37) to solve
for cN and pN .
Sticky Prices
N
= pN = P N /S for
Since we assume that PtN = P N for t ≤ Tp , we have pN
t = p
0 ≤ t ≤ t∗ . To solve for cT and cN we Þrst assume that (6.36) and (6.37) hold and that
(6.38) does not hold with equality. Solving (6.36) and (6.37) for cT and cN we get:

"

(λn + θη)(1 + δpN )
cT =
nω

# (ω−1)σ−ω
·
σ

·

n(1 − ω)
(λn + θη)pN

n(cT )ω(1−σ) (1 − ω)
cN =
(λn + θη)pN

¸(ω−1) σ−1
σ

1
¸ ω+(1−ω)σ

(6.40)

(6.41)

Using these solutions we check whether y N − g N − δcT − cN ≥ 0. If it is we stop.
If the condition we checked in the previous paragraph is violated, then we abandon the
household’s Þrst order condition for cN
t , (6.37), and impose the resource constraint, (6.38),
instead. Combining (6.36) and (6.38) we get the following nonlinear equation for cT :
£
¤1−σ
nω (cT )ω (y N − g N − δcT )1−ω
= (λn + θη)(1 + δpN )cT .

(6.42)

We then use (6.38) to solve for cN .
For either ßexible or sticky prices we use the cash-in-advance constraint to solve for
£
¤
Mt = M ≡ η (1 + δpN )cT + pN cN S, for t < t∗
(6.43)
61

The Transition Period: t∗ ≤ t ≤ T̄ We have Mt = M (1 − χ) for t∗ ≤ t < T and
Mt = MT (1 + µn)t−T for t ≥ T . We will recursively generate St starting from t∗ , where we
have assumed St∗ = S. We will then work forward, allowing us to take St as given when
N
solving for the other variables. Starting from t = t∗ , we then solve for θt , cTt , cN
t , pt , and
from these determine the next value of St .
Flexible Prices
Under ßexible prices we use the cash-in-advance constraint, (6.6), the two consumption
Þrst-order conditions, (6.7) and (6.8), and the resource constraint for nontradables, (6.13),
N
to solve for cTt , cN
t , pt , and θ t . If we rearrange (6.13), (6.6), and (6.8) we have
cN
= y N − g N − δcTt
t
Mt /St − ηcTt
=
pN
t
η(δcTt + cN
)
¶
µ 1−σ t
n ct (1 − ω)
θt =
−λ ,
N
η
pN
t ct

(6.44)
(6.45)
(6.46)

1−ω
where ct = (cTt )ω (cN
.
t )
T
T
For any ct , we can think of (6.44), (6.45), and (6.46) deÞning implicit functions cN
t (ct ),
T
T
pN
t (ct ), and θ t (ct ). Therefore, implicitly we can solve (6.7):
T 1−ω 1−σ
T
T
nω{(cTt )ω cN
}
= [λn + θt (cTt )η][1 + δpN
t (ct )
t (ct )]ct

for cTt .
Sticky Prices
When prices are sticky we will use (6.6), (6.7), and either (6.8) or (6.13) to solve for θt ,
and cN
t . Assuming that (6.13) is the equation that does not hold with equality, we can
N
T
solve for θt , cTt , and cN
t as follows. Implicitly (6.6) deÞnes ct in terms of ct :

cTt ,

cN
t =

Mt − η(St + δP N )cTt
.
ηP N

T
We can then use (6.8) to obtain θt in terms of this solution for cN
t and the value of ct :
¾
½
n £ T ω N 1−ω ¤1−σ
N −1 St
θt =
(1 − ω)(ct )
−λ .
(ct ) (ct )
η
PN

Then we can solve the remaining equation, (6.7), for cTt , using the same method described
above for the ßexible price case.
If at any point (6.13) is violated, in that cN
t is too large, we must let the Þrst-order
N
condition for ct be violated. In this case we solve (6.6), (6.7), and (6.13) for θt , cTt , and cN
t .
Notice that (6.6) and (6.13), are linear in cTt and cN
,
and
do
not
involve
θ
.
Hence,
we
can
t
t
solve
µ
¶
µ
¶
µ
¶
η(St + δP N ) ηP N
cTt
Mt
=
δ
1
cN
yN − gN
t
62

or

µ

cTt
cN
t

¶

=

·

Mt − ηP N (y N − g N )
η(St + δP N )(y N − g N ) − δMt

¸

/(ηSt ).

We then solve for θt using (6.7):
£
¤
1−ω 1−σ
ω(cTt )−1 − λn(1 + δP N /St )
n (cTt )ω (cN
t )
.
θt =
η(1 + δP N /St )
N
Regardless of whether prices are sticky or ßexible, once we have θt , cTt , cN
t , and pt , we
can generate St+1 using
St
λ
St+1 =
.
(6.47)
λ − θt 1 + ρn

Iterating on χ When we are done generating the data for the transition period we will
have a sequence {St } for t∗ < t < T̄ + 1. Notice that the ST̄ +1 generated this way may
not match the ST̄ +1 we generated in the section on the post-crisis steady state. If it does
not match, then the value of χ must be changed. If the “transition period” value of ST̄ +1 is
greater than the “steady-state” value of ST̄ +1 , then we make χ smaller.
Iterating on c̄T The lifetime budget constraint of the household, (6.5), must be satisÞed.
We have assumed that
∞
X
ṽ
(1 + nr)−(t+1) nṽt = + φ̃.
r
t=0
We can rewrite the lifetime budget constraint as
·
¸
∞
ṽ X
Pt rB
−(t+1)
T
N T
N N
N
a−1 + φ̃ + +
(1 + nr)
n y − (1 + δpt )ct + pt (y − ct ) − τ t + v̂ +
.
r t=0
St
St
∞
X
Mt − Mt−1
(1 + nr)−(t+1)
=
St
t=0

(6.48)

The right hand side of (6.48), which I will denote by RHS, is seigniorage. Notice that
RHS = (1 + nr)−1
T̄
X

M −M
Mχ
MT − M (1 − χ)
∗
− (1 + nr)−(t +1)
+ (1 + nr)−(T +1)
+
S
S
ST

(1 + nr)−(t+1)

t=T +1

Mt − Mt−1
µm̄
+ (1 + nr)−(T̄ +1)
.
St
(1 + µn)r

We can compute the relevant pieces of the left-hand side as follows. DeÞne LHS1 ≡
nr)−(t+1) Z1t , where
£
¡ T T
¢¤
T
N
N
N
N N N
L
)c
+
p
(y
−
c
)
−
τ
y
+
τ
y
p
+
τ
.
Z1t = n y T − (1 + δpN
t
t
t
t
t

63

P∞

t=0 (1+

Since
Z 1 for 0 ≤ t < t∗
Z̄1 for t ≥ T̄ + 1.
©
ª
= n (1 − τ T )y T − (1 + δpN )cT + pN [(1 − τ N )y N − cN ] − τ L
©
ª
= n (1 − τ T )y T − (1 + δ p̄N )c̄T + p̄N [(1 − τ N )y N − c̄N ] − τ L ,

Z1t =
Z1
Z̄1
we have

½

T̄

−t∗

LHS1 = [1 − (1 + nr)
We also have LHS2 ≡
LHS2 =

P∞

t=0 (1

X
Z
(1 + nr)−(T̄ +1)
] 1+
(1 + nr)−(t+1) Z1t +
Z̄1 .
nr t=t∗
nr

(6.49)

+ nr)−(t+1) nrB/St so that

T̄
X
∗
B
(1 + nr)−(T̄ +1)
[1 − (1 + nr)−(t +1) ] + nrB
.
(1 + nr)−(t+1) /St + nrB
S
(N
−
1)M
/
m̄
T̄
∗
t=t +1

We have LHS3 ≡

P∞

t=0 (1

+ nr)−(t+1) nv̂Pt /St so that
−t∗

LHS3 = [1 − (1 + nr)

T̄
X
v̂P /S
Pt (1 + nr)−(T̄ +1) PT̄ +1
]
+n
(1 + nr)−(t+1) v̂ +
v̂
r
St
r
ST̄ +1
t=t∗

If we Þnd that the household’s lifetime budget constraint in not satisÞed, we change our
guess for c̄T .
Iterating on µ Here we must evaluate the government’s lifetime budget constraint, given
by (6.25). Notice that (6.25) can be rewritten as
µ
¶
1 N N
P
rB
G
G
N N N
φ + LHS1 + LHS2 + LHS2 + LHS3 −
p g − τ y p + v̂ +
= RHS
r
S
S
P
P∞
−(t+1)
N
G
−(t+1)
npN
nτ N y N pN
where LHS1G ≡ ∞
t g and LHS2 ≡ −
t . We
t=0 (1 + nr)
t=0 (1 + nr)
G
N
G
N N
can show that LHS1 = Γg and LHS2 = −Γτ y where
−t∗

Γ = [1 − (1 + nr)

T̄
N
pN X
−(T̄ +1) p̄
]
+
(1 + nr)−(t+1) npN
.
t + (1 + nr)
r
r
t=t∗

If the government’s lifetime budget constraint is not satisÞed, we adjust our guess for µ.

64

