NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

SHORT-RUN PAIN, LONG-RUN GAIN:
THE EFFECTS OF FINANCIAL LIBERALIZATION
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Sergio L. Schmukler
Working Paper 9787
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9787
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003

We have received insightful comments from Tom Glaessner, Gian Maria Milesi-Ferretti, Raghu Rajan, and
Linda Tesar, as well as participants at presentations held at the American Economic Association 2002
Meeting, the Deutsche Bundesbank, the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, the Federal Reserve Board, the
International Monetary Fund, the Society for Economic Dynamics 2002 Meeting (New York University), the
LACEA 2002 Meeting (Madrid), Stanford University, and the World Bank. We are grateful to Tatiana Didier,
Federico Guerrero, Cicilia Harun, José Pineda, Arun Sharma, Akiko Terada, Francisco Vazquez, Chris van
Klaveren, and Kevin Wang, who helped us with excellent research assistance at different stages of the project.
This paper has been previously circulated under the title “On Booms and Crashes: Financial Liberalization
and Stock Market Cycles.” The Research Committee and the Latin American Regional Studies Program of
the World Bank kindly provided financial support. The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors
and should not be interpreted as reflecting those of the World Bank. The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Graciela L. Kaminsky and Sergio L. Schmukler. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to
exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Short-Run Pain, Long-Run Gain: The Effects of Financial Liberalization
Graciela L. Kaminsky and Sergio L. Schmukler
NBER Working Paper No. 9787
June 2003
JEL No. F30, F32, F33, F34, G12, G15
ABSTRACT
We examine the short- and long-run effects of financial liberalization on capital markets. To do so,
we construct a new comprehensive chronology of financial liberalization in 28 mature and emerging
economies since 1973. We also construct an algorithm to identify booms and busts in stock market
prices. Our results indicate that financial liberalization is followed by more pronounced boom-bust
cycles in the short run. However, financial liberalization leads to more stable markets in the long
run. Finally, we analyze the sequencing of liberalization and institutional reforms to understand the
contrasting short- and long-run effects of liberalization.
Graciela L. Kaminsky
Department of Economics
George Washington University
Washington, DC 20052
and NBER
graciela@gwu.edu
Sergio Schmukler
World Bank
Washington, DC 20433
sschmukler@worldbank.org

I. Introduction
The crises of the 1990s have claimed several victims.

Banking systems in many

countries collapsed, roaring growing economies suddenly faced sharp recessions, and the
booming international capital flows of the mid 1990s dwindled to a trickle. This is not all.
Another important casualty of these crises has been the support for the liberalization of financial
systems. In the aftermath of the Asian crisis, many have argued that globalization has gone too
far, leading to erratic capital markets and causing costly crises. This has prompted some to
suggest a return to the old order of financial controls. For example, Stiglitz (1999) clamors for
developing countries to put some limits on capital inflows to moderate “excessive” boom-bust
patterns in financial markets.1 Even controls on capital outflows, not long ago dismissed as
ineffective, have been recommended again. Krugman (1998), for example, argues that capital
controls might help in managing, at least temporarily, an otherwise disorderly retreat of
investors. Rodrik (1998) and (2000) argues that financial liberalization can lead to financial
crashes and that capital controls might be beneficial given the boom-bust nature of capital flows.
The debate has reached the general public, with Soros (2002) and Stiglitz (2002) broadly
criticizing the functioning of the international financial system.

With many economists

supporting intervention in financial markets, long gone seem to be the days of an indiscriminate
advocacy of financial integration.2
Interestingly, in what seems to be a parallel world, many still praise the advantages of
liberalization. It is claimed that financial liberalization helps to improve the functioning of
financial systems, increasing the availability of funds and allowing cross-country risk
diversification. For example, Obstfeld (1998) argues that international capital markets can
channel world savings to their most productive uses, irrespective of location. Stulz (1999) and
Mishkin (2001) claim that financial liberalization promotes transparency and accountability,
reducing adverse selection and moral hazard while alleviating liquidity problems in financial
markets.

They argue, moreover, that international capital markets help to discipline

policymakers, who might be tempted to exploit an otherwise captive domestic capital market.
1

These overreactions in capital markets are often explained by information asymmetries. With imperfect and costly
information, investors may act as a herd and overreact to shocks, withdrawing from countries at the smallest signs of
problems, even when fundamentals do not warrant it. See, for example, Calvo and Mendoza (2000).
2
See, for example, Eichengreen and Wyplosz (1993) and Wyplosz (2001).

1

Others even claim that financial liberalization and the financial development it triggers tend to
greatly facilitate economic growth.3 As with the group that favors more repression, the group
supporting deregulation has also been growing in numbers.4
The empirical research, so far, has not helped to resolve the conflicting views. The
findings in the crisis literature suggest that excessive booms and busts in financial markets are at
the core of currency crises and that these large cycles are triggered by financial deregulation.5
On the contrary, the findings in the finance literature tend to support the claim that deregulation
is beneficial, with liberalization reducing the cost of capital.6 Perhaps, the inability to settle this
debate is due to the fact that the various lines of empirical research focus either on the short-run
or on the long-run effects of deregulation, without studying the possible time-varying effects of
financial liberalization.

Moreover, the existing empirical literature has not provided a

comprehensive analysis of the liberalization process. It has concentrated alternatively on the
liberalization of the domestic financial sector, the capital account, or the stock market, even
when liberalization reforms have entailed the progressive opening of the three sectors.
The goal of this paper is, first, to provide a better understanding of the liberalization
process and, second, to explain both the link between liberalization and crises as well as the
relation between deregulation and more stable financial markets. To do so, we first assemble a
new, more comprehensive database on financial liberalization for 28 countries for the period
January 1973-June 1999. By itself, this is an important contribution because this database
improves over the existing ones in several respects.

First, the new dataset looks at the

experiences of a wide set of countries, both developed and developing. Second, it captures with
a similar framework various aspects of liberalization, namely the deregulation of the capital
account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock market. Third, the chronology covers an
extended period in which several regulatory changes occurred, including deregulations and
impositions of new controls.

Fourth, the new data provide information on the degrees of

liberalization.
3

The evidence on the benefits of financial deregulation seems to be quite strong with, for example, output growth
rates estimated to have increased about one percentage point following liberalization (as shown in Bekaert, Harvey,
and Lundblad 2001).
4
See, for example, King and Levine (1993), Jayaratne and Strahan (1996), Rajan and Zingales (1998), and Levine
(2001).
5
See, for example, Corsetti, Roubini, and Pesenti (1998), McKinnon and Pill (1997), Kaminsky and Reinhart
(1999), and Schneider and Tornell (2001).
6
See, for example, Henry (2000).

2

We also construct an anatomy of stock market cycles by applying algorithms designed to
identify business cycles. With this technique, we study the duration and magnitude of upturns
and downturns. Since financial cycles would be spurious if markets were efficient, we test the
null hypothesis of a random walk.7 We then study whether booms and busts change with
financial liberalization. Though financial liberalization is expected to affect different parts of the
financial system, we find it useful to concentrate on stock market fluctuations. First, stock
market prices are one of the few financial variables for which one can obtain meaningful long
time series across countries. Thus, the time span of these data allows us to analyze the effects of
financial liberalization. Second, the finance literature has extensively study the behavior of
world stock market prices, providing a benchmark for our results. We finally analyze the
possibility that financial deregulation triggers forces that favor changes in institutions, which can
ultimately promote financial stability and growth.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section II describes the new data on
financial liberalization and examines the patterns of deregulation. Section III characterizes
booms and busts in the different regions. Section IV examines whether domestic financial
liberalization and capital controls can explain the changing nature of financial cycles. Section V
relates financial liberalization to institutional reform. Section VI concludes.
II. The Evolution of Global Financial Liberalization
One of the most prolific areas of empirical research in international economics and
finance has been that of the analysis of the effects of controls and financial liberalization on
financial markets, investment, and growth. Surprisingly, in spite of the great interest of several
disciplines on the effects of deregulation of financial markets, the information on the evolution
of financial regulations is still very fragmented.

Below is a brief review of the existing

measures.

7

Some empirical evidence in the last two decades has undermined the belief in efficient markets. Now many
economists believe that imperfections in asset markets trigger bubbles and protracted and predictable bull and bear
markets. See for example, De Long, Shleifer, Summers, and Waldmann (1990), Allen and Gorton (1993), and
Allen, Morris, and Postlewaite (1993).

3

Information on capital account controls is mostly based on indicators published by the
International Monetary Fund (IMF) in Exchange Arrangements and Exchange Restrictions.8 For
the period 1975-1995, this publication reports a single indicator classifying only two capital
account regimes: a “no controls” regime, which includes episodes with full liberalization of the
capital account, and a “controls” regime, which includes both episodes with minor restrictions to
the free flow of capital as well as episodes with outright prohibition of all capital account
transactions. This indicator does not distinguish between controls on capital inflows and controls
on capital outflows. Only in 1996, the IMF began to publish a more comprehensive report on
capital account controls, which still does not capture the intensity of controls.9
Information on regulations of the domestic financial sector is even more fragmented.
There is no institution compiling systematic cross-country information over time and researchers
have relied on varied sources. One of them is Williamson and Mahar (1998), which dates
liberalization according to five distinct dimensions of financial liberalization: existence of credit
controls, controls on interest rates, entry barriers to the banking industry, government regulation
of the banking sector, and importance of government-owned banks in the financial system. Most
researchers construct their own liberalization chronology. For example, Demirguc-Kunt and
Detragiache (1999) date liberalization for 53 countries since 1980. In that study, liberalization of
the domestic financial sector is interpreted as liberalization of domestic interest rates.
Information on the liberalization of domestic stock markets is also still quite partial. The
International Financial Corporation (IFC) provides this information just for emerging markets.
Again, this index (as the IMF index for the capital account) only captures two regimes: a
“liberalization” regime and a “restricted” regime. The liberalization dates are determined based
on whether foreigners are allowed to purchase shares of listed companies in the domestic stock
exchange and whether there is free repatriation of capital and remittance of dividends and capital
gains. Others, such as Bekaert and Harvey (2000), construct their own chronologies of stock
market liberalization to date liberalization episodes for emerging markets, using information

8

See Quinn and Inclan (1997) for an alternative measure.
The new indicators evaluate restrictions on 11 types of capital account transactions: (1) capital market securities,
(2) money market instruments, (3) collective investment securities, (4) derivatives and other instruments, (5)
commercial credits, (6) financial credits, (7) guarantees, sureties, and financial backup facilities, (8) direct
investment, (9) liquidation of direct investment, (10) real estate transactions, and (11) personal capital movements.

9

4

compiled by the IFC and the establishment of new investment vehicles like country funds and
depositary receipts.10
The existing chronologies share some limitations. One limitation is that they do not
distinguish between different intensities of liberalization/repression. Since deregulation tends to
change slowly, valuable information is lost when the indicators only try to assess whether or not
the liberalization has occurred.11 Another limitation is that most chronologies analyze financial
liberalization episodes as if they were permanent. Still, many countries have undergone several
liberalization reversals, particularly following currency crises.12 Naturally, these limitations call
for a more comprehensive analysis of the various aspects of financial controls.
A. New Measures of Financial Liberalization
The new measures of financial liberalization introduced in this paper try to overcome part
of the shortcomings of previous chronologies discussed above. Thus, our database captures to
some degree the intensity of financial liberalization episodes as well as episodes of liberalization
reversals. Our chronology also tries to address some of the limitations of the empirical research
on the effects of financial liberalization.

First, most of the empirical research focuses on

emerging markets, perhaps because most concerns are associated with liberalization episodes in
developing countries, with even the most averse critics of capital account liberalization still
supporting the financial deregulation of mature markets. A comprehensive picture of the effects
of financial liberalization requires the analysis of deregulation episodes in both developed and
developing countries, which the new database covers. Second, most of the previous studies
focus on the elimination of controls on just one particular financial sector, be it the capital
10

There is a very large related literature that studies the extent of financial and economic integration from
observable economic variables, not from government regulations. See, for example, Frankel (2000), Obstfeld and
Rogoff (2001), Edison and Warnock (2002), and Obstfeld and Taylor (2002).
11
For example, Chile introduces restrictions on capital inflows at the beginning of the 1990s. Controls are
reinforced in the mid-1990s in the midst of the capital inflow episode. In 1998, under the threat of a contagious
speculative attack against the Chilean peso, controls are eliminated. Similarly, domestic financial deregulation may
take several years to be complete. For example, the deregulation of the domestic banking sector in Colombia is
initiated in August 1974. Only in the 1980s, credit controls are finally eliminated.
12
For example, Argentina implements a broad liberalization of financial markets in 1977, which is later reversed in
1982. Again, in the late 1980s, a new wave of financial liberalization affects the domestic financial sector, the
capital account, and the stock market. This time around the liberalization attempt is longer lasting. Still, again in
2001, in the midst of Argentina’s crisis, the government reintroduces controls on interest rates and restrictions on
capital account transactions.

5

account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock market. This focus on the opening of just
one financial market may result in a biased picture, since controls in one sector can also affect
the behavior of other parts of the financial system, which may or may not be directly under any
type of restrictions.13 The new chronology deals with the regulations in three sectors.
The new database includes 28 countries for the period 1973-1999.14 We classify the
sample into four (mostly regional) country groupings: the G-7 countries, which are comprised of
Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom, and the United States; the Asian
region, which includes Hong Kong, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, (South) Korea, Taiwan,
and Thailand; the European group, which excludes those countries that are part of the G-7, and
includes Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Norway, Portugal, Spain, and Sweden; and the Latin
American sample, which consists of the largest economies in the region, Argentina, Brazil,
Chile, Colombia, Mexico, Peru, and Venezuela. We work with these countries due to the
availability of rich data covering both their processes of financial liberalization and the long run
behavior of their stock markets.15
To capture the liberalization of the capital account, we evaluate the regulations on
offshore borrowing by domestic financial institutions, offshore borrowing by non-financial
corporations, multiple exchange rate markets, and controls on capital outflows. The first two
indicators reflect restrictions on capital inflows. Restrictions on capital inflows can take various
forms, with the most extreme restriction being an outright prohibition to borrow overseas.
Milder controls include restrictions of minimum maturity on capital inflows and non-interest
reserve requirements on foreign borrowing.
To measure the liberalization of the domestic financial system, we analyze the
regulations on deposit interest rates, lending interest rates, allocation of credit, and foreign13

This problem may be particularly important because the complete deregulation of financial systems is not
accomplished in just one round, and the time span between the deregulation of one market and the elimination of
controls across the board takes, in most cases, several years. For example, the data show that, in the 1970s,
domestic financial repression is widespread not only in emerging markets, but also in several mature financial
markets. Governments start lifting the various restrictions gradually. In many cases, the liberalization reform starts
in the banking sector with the deregulation of domestic interest rates. The elimination of interest rate controls not
only affects the market for bank loans and deposits, but also attracts international capital flows (when these flows
are not strictly prohibited). Also, the stock market flourishes as the extent of credit rationing diminishes.
14
In fact, since Hong Kong and Taiwan are part of China, the database has fewer countries. Still, for simplicity we
refer to those economies as countries.
15
Other possible countries were not included in the dataset to make the study feasible, in light of the large amount of
work needed to collect all the data. Nevertheless, we believe that no particular selection bias was introduced in the
process of choosing the countries.

6

currency deposits. As additional information, we also collect data on reserve requirements. To
set the liberalization dates, we focus mainly on the first two variables, the price indicators.
However, we complement that information with the regulations on the last three variables, those
on quantities, to have a better picture of the degree of repression of the domestic financial sector.
Finally, to track the liberalization of stock markets, we study the evolution of regulations on the
acquisition of shares in the domestic stock market by foreigners, repatriation of capital, and
repatriation of interest and dividends.
For each sector, the chronology identifies three regimes: “fully liberalized,” “partially
liberalized,” and “repressed.” The criteria used to determine whether the capital account, the
domestic financial sector, and the stock market are fully or partially liberalized, or repressed, are
described in detail in Appendix Table 1. We established these criteria after collecting all the
regulations and carefully studying the range of restrictions adopted throughout countries and
years. We believe that these criteria characterize well the degrees of financial liberalization.
The chronology of restrictions compiled for each country and sector are described in Annex
Table 1. The complete list of references used to construct the chronology is reported in Annex
Table 2.16
Table 1 reports the dates of partial and full financial liberalization for all the countries in
the sample. The first three columns of dates display the liberalization of the capital account, the
domestic financial sector, and the stock market. The last two columns report dates of partial and
full liberalization taking into account the three sectors analyzed. A country is considered to be
fully liberalized when at least two sectors are fully liberalized and the third one is partially
liberalized. A country is classified as partially liberalized when at least two sectors are partially
liberalized.
B. Pace and Dynamics of Liberalization
Figures 1-3 and Table 2 summarize the information in Table 1 by displaying the timeseries and cross-sectional variation of liberalization.
16

Figure 1 plots the index of financial

The sources of information include the IMF publications Exchange Rate Arrangements and Restrictions and
Recent Economic Developments (country reports), the IFC publication Emerging Markets Database, and the
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) publication Economic Surveys. We also use

7

liberalization in emerging and mature markets. This index jointly evaluates the liberalization of
the capital account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock market. It can take values
between one and three, with one indicating fully liberalized and three indicating fully repressed
financial systems. As expected, mature financial markets are on average less regulated. The
index for mature markets averages 1.7 over the sample, while for emerging markets, it averages
2.3. Interestingly, across all regions there is a gradual lifting of restrictions, with the index of
liberalization declining from an initial value of 2.5 for mature markets and 2.9 for emerging
economies to one and 1.2, respectively, toward the end of the sample. Still, there is also a
regional pattern in the dynamics of financial liberalization, with emerging markets suffering
liberalization reversals in the early 1980s, following the debt crisis. In contrast, the pace of
liberalization in mature markets, while also gradual, is uninterrupted.
Figures 2 and 3 examine separately the sequencing of liberalization of the capital
account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock market. Figure 2 shows the index of
liberalization for each sector for both emerging and mature markets. Stock markets in developed
countries are liberalized earlier, with the index for this sector oscillating around 1.5 in the early
1970s. In contrast, both the domestic financial sector and the capital account tend to be severely
repressed until the early 1980s. In the early 1970s, the indexes for both sectors are on average
above 2.5. Financial markets across the board are heavily repressed in developing countries in
the early 1970s. But in the mid and late 1970s, many emerging economies liberalize the
domestic sector and the capital account. The liberalization reform is short-lived. Controls are
re-imposed in the aftermath of the 1982 debt crisis. Overall, restrictions in stock markets remain
in place until the late 1980s when a liberalization wave occurs in Asia and Latin America.
While Figure 2 provides information on the average level of restrictions in the various
financial markets in the two regions, it may still mask individual country experiences. For
example, a medium value of the index in one region may reflect that all the countries in that
region are partially liberalized, or that some countries are fully liberalized while the rest of the
countries are completely repressed. Figure 3 presents another perspective of the sequencing of
liberalization across countries. This figure reports the proportion of countries with (at least)
partial liberalization of the capital account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock market,

various reports by the Economist’s Intelligence Unit, the World Bank, annual reports of central banks, as well as
research papers with chronologies on financial market restrictions.

8

again examined separately for emerging markets and mature markets. By the early 1970s, about
80 percent of stock markets in mature markets are already liberalized. In mature markets, the
liberalization of the domestic financial sector also predates the opening of the capital account,
with about all countries liberalizing, at least partially, the domestic financial sector by the mid
1980s. It is only in the late 1980s and the beginning of the 1990s, in part driven by the
movement toward the formation of the European Monetary Union, that capital account
liberalization reaches all mature markets.
Liberalization follows a different path in emerging markets. Only a small proportion of
countries implement reforms before the early 1970s. This proportion increases in the late 1970s
and then again in the mid and late 1980s. By early 1990s, all the sectors of the financial system
are finally liberalized. There are two episodes of financial liberalization. The first one is in the
late 1970s. In this episode, all the action centers in the domestic sector and the capital account,
with the stock market continuing to be out of the reach for foreign investors. This liberalization
episode ends following the debt crisis in 1982. The second wave of liberalization starts in the
late 1980s. This time around, basically both the domestic sector and the stock market are jointly
deregulated, predating capital account liberalization that only starts in the early 1990s.
Table 2 examines even further the sequencing of liberalization by analyzing the strategies
and duration of liberalizations in Asia, Europe, G-7 countries, and Latin America. The top two
panels show the proportion of episodes in which the capital account, the domestic financial
sector, or the stock market is liberalized first. The top panel focuses on partial liberalization
episodes, the panel below examines full liberalization episodes. The bottom two panels display
the duration of liberalization episodes; they report the number of months from the time the first
market is deregulated until liberalization is implemented in all markets. The top two panels
reveal that the paths toward financial reform differ across regions.

Basically all the G-7

countries deregulate the stock market first. European countries implement a somewhat mixed
strategy toward deregulation, with 25 percent of the countries liberalizing the domestic financial
sector first and basically all the rest deregulating the stock market first. On the other hand, Latin
American countries overwhelmingly adopt liberalization of the domestic financial sector first,
while Asian countries follow a mixed strategy, with some countries opting for deregulating the
domestic sector first and some others focusing on the stock market first. Capital account
liberalization in all Asian countries is mostly introduced at a latter stage.

9

The bottom panels reveal that liberalization reforms take a long time to be completed.
On average, 66 months elapse from the time the first market is liberalized until all markets are
deregulated. Interestingly, the time to completion of the liberalization reform is far longer in
Asia than in Latin America. Finally, liberalization episodes that are first implemented in the
stock market are the ones that become completed the fastest. The variety of experiences in
financial reforms indicates that it is important to examine not just the responses to liberalization
in one particular financial market, but that it is important to examine the effects of the
sequencing of the deregulation reform.
III. Financial cycles
As discussed above, to understand better the conflicting stylized evidence on the effects
of financial liberalization, it is useful to study the short- and long-run response of financial
markets to deregulation.

This section sets the groundwork to reconcile the evidence by

constructing an anatomy of booms and busts (crashes) in stock markets.
A. Methodology for Identifying Financial Cycles
There is a long tradition in macroeconomics in analyzing economic fluctuations in terms
of business-cycle phases. Economists have examined the behavior of output in expansions and
recessions, with particular attention to asymmetries in the two phases and to the possible
changing nature of those fluctuations.

For the United States, there is also an “official”

classification of the cycle in expansions and contractions. No similar interest has flourished in
characterizing boom-bust cycles in financial markets. Most studies in financial markets are
focused on examining the relation between dividends, interest rates, and stock prices to evaluate
whether markets are efficient. Other papers analyze the time-varying volatility in financial
markets using ARCH-GARCH models. A third line of research looks at the domestic and global
factors that influence prices.17 In contrast, there seem to be no studies on the behavior of stock
prices over financial cycles. This lack of evidence on the amplitude and duration of booms and

17

For a review see, for example, Karolyi and Stulz (2002).

10

busts seems particularly notable in light of the evidence that links booms and busts in credit and
asset prices with financial crises.
Perhaps, the lack of interest in booms and busts in stock prices steams from the idea that
in efficient markets prices should follow random walk processes.

In this case, cycles are

meaningless. However, the interest in booms and busts in international financial markets has
been growing, following the performance of stock markets in recent years.18 Also, as Cecchetti,
Lam, and Mark (1990) show, even in efficient markets stock prices can follow mean-reverting
processes, with cycles in the stock market replicating cycles in output. Moreover, cycles could
be magnified by the increasing presence of institutional investors, which tend to follow
momentum-based fads (buying stocks that are past winners and selling past losers), and by the
presence of asymmetric information that leads to herding.19
This paper concentrates on the fluctuations of stock prices without trying to quantify the
possible imperfections in financial markets. The latter would not be an easy task due to the lack
of agreement about the empirical counterpart to any definition of equilibrium stock prices.
However, while we do not isolate the effects of fundamentals and fads on financial cycles, the
characterization of stock market cycles will allow us to start understanding the behavior of
financial markets.

In particular, we will be able to have a reading on whether financial

liberalization has magnified the boom-bust cycles in financial markets.
The question now is how to identify historical cycles in stock prices. There is no general
agreement on the techniques to isolate fluctuations of variables at business cycles frequencies.
The first approach was that pioneered by researchers at the National Bureau of Economic
Research (NBER).20 The business cycle turning points were identified retrospectively and on an
ongoing basis by the NBER.

Although initially these turning points were determined

judgmentally, the process can be well approximated by a computer algorithm developed by Bry
and Boschan (1971). The NBER continues to use this methodology to identify what has become
to be known as the official business cycles dating in the United States.21

18

See, for example, Tornell and Westermann (2002) and Ventura (2002).
See, for example, Grinblatt, Titman, and Wermers (1995).
20
These researchers include Mitchell (1927), Mitchell and Burns (1938), and Burns and Mitchell (1946).
21
Other researchers of the business cycle have used linear filters to distinguish between the trend and cyclical
components of time series. However, there has not been any agreement on whether variables are trend stationary or
difference stationary or what is the best filter to isolate the fluctuations at different frequencies. As examined in
Stock and Watson (1998), these considerations have led econometricians to find methods that better isolate the
19

11

In this paper, we follow the approach used by the NBER to construct an algorithm that
identifies turning points. We examine stock market fluctuations at intermediate frequencies,
since financial crises tend to follow boom-bust cycles in financial markets of an intermediate
duration, between two and three years. According to Bry and Boschan (1971), the first step in
the determination of cycles is the identification of cyclical turning points. This technique and the
algorithms that we apply look for clearly defined swings in stock market prices in each country.
We work with the same order of duration as business cycles, that is swings that are longer than
two years. This is the only identifying restriction. We are not imposing any other restrictions
such as minimum amplitude of cycles. Essentially, the algorithm isolates local minima and
maxima in a time series, subject to the constraint that the duration of upturns and downturns
cannot be less than 12 months.22
The cycles we identify would be spurious if stock prices followed random walk
processes. However, there are a number of papers that argue that the null hypothesis of random
walk can be rejected in both developed and developing countries, though the debate is still
open.23 Here, we confirm that conclusion using our methodology, which provides evidence that
the random walk does not capture the basic properties of our data on stock prices. To do so, we
estimate random walks with drift using parameters calculated from the actual data. For each
country, we simulate a specific model 1,000 times. Since some of the series on stock prices do
not span the whole sample, the number of months for each country simulation is the same as the
number of months in the actual data. We then filter the simulated data with the algorithm and
compare the cycles generated by random walk processes and those generated by the actual data.
B. Empirical regularities
Figure 4 reports monthly log stock price indexes for the 28 countries in the sample.
Stock prices are measured in 1993 U.S. dollars (Appendix Table 2 reports the indexes used as
cyclical component of economic time series with some researches proposing using the Hodrik-Prescott (1997) filter
and others arguing in favor of the Baxter and King’s (1995) band-pass filter.
22
The algorithm dates contractions and expansions using each country’s stock price series, rather than the detrended series. Therefore, busts correspond to sequences of absolute declines in stock prices rather than periods of
slow growth relative to the trend.
23
See, for example, Fama and French (1988), Lo and MacKinlay (1988), Poterba and Summers (1988), Frennberg
and Hansson (1993), and Urrutia (1995). For a debate on how the results vary according to the sample period, see
Lo and MacKinlay (1999).

12

well as their sources.).24 Figure 4 also identifies the booms and crashes obtained using the
algorithm described above. The algorithm identifies 146 cycles. The shaded areas denote
expansions. The series show well-defined swings with an average duration of about 44 months.
Table 3 examines the characteristics of stock cycles in the 28 countries in the sample and
compares them to the behavior of the random walk simulations. This table provides mean values
and tests of whether the differences between the actual and simulated samples are statistically
significant. Columns 2-3 and 5-6 report the mean amplitude and duration of cycles using the
actual and simulated data. Columns 4 and 7 report the significance level of tests of the null
hypothesis that mean cycles from the actual and simulated data are equal. The depth of the
contraction (height of the expansion) is measured as the change between the peak (trough) and
the following trough (peak), as a percent of the mid value of the peak and trough. This measure
puts the amplitude of expansions and contractions on an equal foot. Finally, the duration of a
contraction (expansion) is defined as the number of periods between a peak (trough) and the
following trough (peak).
According to Table 3, booms across all regions oscillate around 74 percent. The typical
contraction in stock markets is about 61 percent. The data reveal that contractions tend to be
short-lived relative to expansions. The mean duration of contractions is around 18 months, while
the mean duration of expansions is around 26 months and statistically different from the duration
of contractions at all conventional significance levels. From the table, it is clear that there are
significant differences between the amplitude of booms and crashes in the actual data relative to
the one that is observed under the null hypothesis of a random walk. The amplitude of booms
for the actual data is about 15 percent larger than the average amplitude for the simulated data.
Similarly, the average duration of booms for the actual data is about 20 percent longer than the
average duration for the simulated data. Analogous comparisons can be made for contraction
episodes. Again, contractions obtained from the actual data are significantly more protracted
than those obtained from random walk processes.
To provide another picture of the differences between the actual and simulated data,
Figure 5 reports the frequency distribution of the amplitude and duration of booms and crashes.
24

As it is common in the international finance and finance literature, we look at stock returns from the point of view
of investors with portfolios comprising assets in various countries. This is why, we study returns in one
international currency. Alternatively, we could have focused on prices in domestic currency deflated by the

13

The horizontal axis in each figure shows the size or duration of booms and crashes, the vertical
axis shows the frequencies in percent. If stock prices followed a random walk process, the
frequency distribution of the amplitude and duration of each phase of the cycle for the actual and
the simulated data would be equal.

From this figure, it is clear that there are significant

differences in the amplitude and duration of booms and crashes relative to what one would
expect if stock prices followed random walks. Booms and crashes are more pronounced and
protracted than those generated under the null hypothesis of a random walk. KolmogorovSmirnov tests are used to evaluate the null hypothesis of equal frequency distributions of the size
and duration of booms and crashes in the actual and random walk data. As shown by the p-value
at the bottom of each panel, we reject the null hypothesis that stock prices follow random walk
processes.
Figure 6 examines the characteristics of the typical cycle in the four regions. The top
panel reports the mean amplitude and duration of booms and crashes in Asia, Europe, the G-7
countries, and Latin America. The bottom panel plots the typical cycle in each region. The
horizontal axis in the figure records the number of months before and after the peak of the cycle.
The horizontal axis contains 26 months for expansions and 18 months for contractions. These
are the durations of the two phases for the typical cycle in our sample. The vertical axis reports
the value of the stock index. To obtain the typical cycle, the value of the stock index in each
cycle is normalized to 100 at the peak. Each line in this panel represents the average value of the
stock index during the 44 months around the peaks of the four regions.
Figure 6 shows that cycles are more pronounced in Latin America. On average, the
amplitude of cycles in this region is about twice as large as the amplitude of cycles in the G-7
countries. As expected, the most developed countries, the G-7, have milder stock market cycles,
with the Asian and the other European stock market cycles being of intermediate magnitudes.
The Asian cycles are larger than the European ones. In contrast to the disparities concerning the
amplitude of cycles, the duration of booms and busts is similar across regions, though the ones
from developed countries tend to be longer, making the larger amplitudes for emerging markets
even more striking. This evidence of more pronounced booms and busts in less developed

domestic price index. Our results do not change substantially when using prices in domestic currency from those
discussed in the text.

14

economies is consistent with the argument presented in Ventura (2002), according to which
bubbles tend to appear in countries with relative low productivity.
IV. Stock market cycles and financial liberalization
To examine the claim that financial liberalization triggers more protracted and deeper
booms and busts in asset markets, we examine the characteristics of financial cycles during
episodes of financial repression and liberalization. Our first approach is in the event study
tradition, analyzing the behavior of stock markets in the aftermath of liberalization relative to
their functioning in repression times, those years before deregulation occurs. To examine the
conflicting views that liberalization triggers financial excesses but also contributes to less
volatile financial markets, we compare the characteristics of financial cycles in the short run and
long run following liberalization. We then report regression results that control for other factors
and study the sequencing of the openings. Those results examine whether liberalization creates
larger cycles when the first market opens or whether each consecutive opening triggers
substantial increases in booms and crashes.

The regressions also test whether financial

turbulences are just the product of liberalization episodes that start with opening first the capital
account, the domestic sector, or the stock market.
A. Event Studies
Figure 7 examines the characteristics of financial cycles around the time of the overall
partial liberalization of financial markets, that is, when at least two sectors are partially
liberalized. We classify financial cycles in three categories, those that occur during repression
times, those that occur in the short run after liberalization, and those that occur in the long run
following liberalization. The short run is defined as the four years after liberalization. The long
run includes the fifth year after liberalization and the years thereafter, conditional on the
deregulation not being reversed.25 The top panel in Figure 7 shows the average amplitude of
booms and crashes for all countries in our sample during repression times (the striped bars), the

25

Since the choice of the short-run window is ad-hoc, we also examined the robustness of the results to different
definitions of window size. The results for three- and six-year windows are quite similar.

15

short-run effects of liberalization (the white bars), and the long-run effects of liberalization (the
gray bars). It also reports the characteristics of cycles separately for emerging and mature
markets since the evidence from these two groups of countries might differ. The bottom panel
examines whether the differences of amplitudes across regimes are statistically significant.
The evidence for the 28 countries in the sample indicates that the amplitude of booms
substantially increases in the immediate aftermath of liberalization (about 20 percent higher than
during repression times). But equity markets stabilize in the long run if liberalization persists,
with the amplitude of booms about 25 percent smaller than in repression times. Similarly, the
amplitude of crashes increases in the immediate aftermath of liberalization (about 15 percent
higher than during repression times), but declines to about 60 percent of its size during
repression times if liberalization persists in the long run. As shown in the bottom panel, these
differences are statistically significant at conventional levels.
The evidence for the 28 countries, however, obscures important differences across
emerging and mature markets. When examined separately, we note that the short-run effects of
liberalization in emerging markets are more striking, with booms and crashes in the immediate
aftermath of liberalization increasing by about 35 percent over their size during repression. Still,
if liberalization persists, financial cycles become less pronounced, with booms about 30 percent
smaller than during repression times, and crashes about 90 percent of their size during repression
times. On the other hand, the evidence from mature markets indicates that if liberalization
triggers more volatile stock markets in the short run, booms and busts do not increase as much as
in the case of emerging markets. Moreover, on average, crashes do not increase relative to their
value during repression times.

Still, liberalization seems to generate more stable financial

markets in the long run, with crashes averaging only about 60 percent of their size in repression
times.
B. Accounting for domestic and external shocks
While the evidence in Figure 7 suggests that financial liberalization influences the size of
expansions and contractions in financial markets, stock price fluctuations also reflect changes in
other market fundamentals. For example, stock prices respond to expansions and recessions in

16

the domestic economy. They also react to world economic conditions.26 The omission of these
variables may bias our results, especially since the timing of liberalization may not be fortuitous.
In fact, we have described in Section I that Latin American countries reintroduce controls on
domestic interest rates and credit and re-impose controls on capital flows following the hikes in
interest rates in industrial countries in the early 1980s. Also, many emerging markets liberalize
their financial markets when international capital flows resume in the late 1980s. Insofar as
countries react to “bad times” by adopting capital controls and to “good times” by relaxing them,
there is the danger that we may ascribe the increase in the size of booms to liberalization and the
amplification of crashes to capital controls, when in fact it is the world market condition the one
fueling changes in stock prices.
To account for these factors, the event study analysis is complemented with regressions
that control for domestic and world economic conditions. In particular, we examine the role of
growth in domestic and world economic activity and changes in world real interest rates. We
estimate the following equation by least squares with heteroskedastic-consistent standard errors,
amplitudei = α ' Χ i + ρ1d ir + β1d isr + λ1d ilr + ε i ,

where amplitudei is the amplitude of expansion (contraction) i.

(1)
Χi is a matrix of control

variables that includes the change in world real interest rate, the world output growth, and the
domestic output growth during each expansion (contraction). d ir is a dummy variable equal to
one if the cycle occurs during “repression” times, and zero otherwise.

d isr is a “short-run”

dummy variable equal to one if the cycle occurs in the immediate aftermath of financial
liberalization (four-year window), and zero otherwise.

d ilr is a “long-run” dummy variable

equal to one if the cycle occurs after four years have elapsed from the time of financial
liberalization, and zero otherwise. The world real interest rate is proxied with the U.S. federal
funds real interest rate, world output is the average of the industrial production indexes of the G3 countries, and domestic output is captured by the index of industrial production in the domestic
economy. All data come from the IMF’s International Financial Statistics.
The results from this estimation are shown in Table 4. As in Figure 7, this table
examines the effects of overall partial financial liberalization (when at least two sectors have
26

For example, Calvo, Leiderman, and Reinhart (1993) argue that decreases in U.S. interest rates trigger large
capital flows to emerging markets, which in turn fuel increases in asset prices.

17

been partially liberalized). As expected, fluctuations in the world interest rate affect stock
market cycles as does output growth, with a one percentage point increase in the world real
interest rate leading to a five percentage point contraction in the amplitude of stock market
expansions. Similarly, booms and crashes in stock markets are also explained by upturns and
recessions in the domestic economy. Even after accounting for these other determinants of
fluctuations in stock prices, financial liberalization still matters. Financial liberalization triggers
larger cycles in the short run and stabilizes financial markets in the long run. Interestingly, once
we control for the state of the economy (domestic and foreign) and for interest rate fluctuations,
the short-run effects of financial liberalization become even more pronounced. For example, in
the immediate aftermath of liberalization, booms increase by about 40 percent in emerging
markets and by 55 percent in mature markets relative to repression times. Similarly, crashes in
emerging markets increase by 30 percent in the immediate aftermath of liberalization vis-à-vis
repression times.
Note that the results in Figure 7 and Table 4 suggest two tales about the aftermath of
liberalization reforms. While larger booms follow liberalization in both emerging and mature
markets, it is only in emerging markets that crashes are more severe following liberalization.
The average short-run experience in emerging markets seems to support the evidence from the
crisis literature that concludes that liberalization leads to excessive financial booms and crashes.
Liberalization episodes do not seem to bring (on average) this short-run pain to mature markets;
larger booms are not followed by larger crashes, suggesting that larger booms may just reflect
the reduction in the cost of capital once deregulation takes place, as the finance literature
argues.27 Still, financial liberalization brings more stable financial markets in both emerging and
mature market economies in the long run. In Section V, we examine possible explanations for
the varied short-run effects of liberalization as well as for the long-run gains across countries.
C. Sequencing of Liberalization
So far we have studied the liberalization across all markets. Now we turn to examine
whether the short-run increase in boom-bust amplitudes occurs every time a new sector is

27

As always averages may hide exceptions, Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden suffer financial collapses and
banking crises in the early 1990s following liberalization.

18

deregulated and whether the sequencing of the openings matters. Table 5 examines whether the
short-run increase in booms and busts occurs every time a new sector is deregulated. We limit
our search to the deregulation of the first two sectors. We define repression times as those
episodes in which all sectors are closed. The short-run liberalization periods are the four years
after the opening of the first sector and the four years after the opening of the second sector. The
long-run liberalization episode includes the fifth year after the opening of the second sector and
the following years if the liberalization reform is not reversed.
We estimate the following regression,
amplitudei = α' Xi + ρ1d ir + β1d isr ,1, 2 + β 2 d isr , 2 + λ1d ilr , 2 + ε i . (2)

The new variable disr ,1, 2 is a dummy variable equal to one if the cycle occurs in the immediate
aftermath of financial liberalization (four-year window after the first sector is deregulated and
four-year window after the second sector is deregulated), and zero otherwise. d isr , 2 is a dummy
variable equal to one if the cycle occurs in the four years after the deregulation of the second
sector, and zero otherwise. d ilr , 2 is a dummy variable equal to one if the cycle occurs after four
years have elapsed from the time of the liberalization of the second sector, and zero otherwise.
Thus, the average amplitude of booms (crashes) in the aftermath of the first opening is captured
by β1 , while that of the second market opening is captured by β1 + β 2 .
While the evidence on short- and long-run effects of financial liberalization is not
reversed, the focus on the first and second openings reveals some important differences.
Interestingly, the increase in the amplitude of booms is similar following the first and second
opening, but crashes in the immediate aftermath of the first opening are smaller than those
observed during repression times. The amplitude of crashes in emerging markets only increases
following the opening of the second sector. Again, this evidence is consistent with the results
from the crisis literature, which finds that booms of credit persist for several years following the
deregulation of financial markets with these booms in turn fueling protracted bull markets.
Table 6 examines the effects on financial markets of various types of sequencing of the
deregulation process. We estimate the following regression,
amplitudei = α' X i + ρ1d ir + β1d isr ,1, 2 + β 2 d isr , 2 + β 3d iCA + β 4 d iSM + λ1d ilr , 2 + ε i .

(3)

The variables d iCA and d iSM help to capture the possible differential effect on booms and crashes
of opening respectively the capital account and the stock market first. These dummy variables
19

are equal to one if the cycle occurs during the four years after that particular sector is liberalized,
and zero otherwise. The average amplitude of booms (crashes) in the aftermath of the first
opening, when the liberalization reform is initiated with the deregulation of the domestic
financial sector, is captured by β1 . If the liberalization reform starts with the opening of the
capital account (stock market), the amplitude of booms or crashes in the four years after the first
opening is captured by β 1 + β 3 (β 1 + β 4 ) .
Our results indicate that the ordering of liberalization does not matter in general.
Opening the capital account or the stock market first does not have a different effect than
opening the domestic financial sector first. But one exception exists; crashes seem to be larger in
emerging markets if the capital account opens up first. This might provide some mild support to
the usual claim that the capital account should be opened last.
In sum, our results suggest that we gain from examining the effects of deregulation of
different sectors. In particular, we find that crashes become more pronounced not at the onset of
the liberalization reform but after some years have elapsed. Interestingly, the sequencing of
financial liberalization does not seem to matter when evaluating the effects on financial cycles.
Finally, as also shown in the previous section, the experiences of mature and emerging markets
look different in the aftermath of financial liberalization. We analyze these differences next.
V. Financial liberalization and institutional reform
Our findings necessarily provoke several questions. What is the essential ingredient for
more stable financial markets in the long run? Is it just financial liberalization? Or, does
liberalization trigger some other changes that in turn deliver more stable financial markets in the
long run? Can we explain the differences in the aftermath of financial liberalization in mature
and emerging markets? And, is it possible to avoid the short-run pain following liberalization?
These questions have generated an intense debate on the sequencing of liberalization and
institutional reform.28

29

Many have argued that it is very risky to open up financial systems.

28

There is a related literature that studies the link between capital controls and institutions. See, for example,
Alesina, Grilli, and Milesi-Ferretti (1993).
29
Note that the sequencing mentioned here discusses the optimal order between financial liberalization and other
financial sector reforms. While the sequencing mentioned in the previous section deals with the order of
liberalization of the stock market, the domestic financial sector, and the capital account.

20

During financial repression, banks tend to have poor balance sheets.30 Protected from outside
competition, badly regulated, and badly supervised banks do not have the pressure to run
efficiently. Liberalization in this scenario unveils a new problem, as protected domestic banks
suddenly get access to new sources of funding, triggering protracted financial booms. Moreover,
financial liberalization brings competition and lowers bank profits, eroding banks’ franchise
values and lowering their incentive for making good loans. Naturally, this worsens problems of
moral hazard.31 Based on these views, a standard recommendation on sequencing is to first clean
up domestic financial institutions and change government institutions, then deregulate the
industry and open up the capital account.
This discussion about sequencing may be irrelevant if the timing is such that reforms
never predate liberalization, with institutional changes happening mostly as a result of financial
deregulation. To shed new light on this sequencing debate, we collect data on the quality of
institutions as well as data on the laws governing the proper functioning of financial systems.
Then, we compare the timing of financial liberalization and institutional reforms. The data on
the quality of institutions is captured by the index of law and order.32 To better assess the
functioning of the financial system, we use information on the existence and enforcement of
insider trading laws, constructed by Bhattacharya and Daouk (2002). Appendix Table 3 reports
the time of improvement in the law and order index, the time when the insider trading law is
passed, and the time when insider trading starts to be prosecuted.

We characterize as an

improvement in the quality of government institutions when the index of law and order increases
by one unit and this change is maintained for at least two years.
The top panel in Table 7 examines the sequencing of liberalization and reform in our
sample of 28 countries. It shows the probabilities that financial liberalization occurs conditional
on reforms having already been implemented. In particular, we look at whether reforms to
institutions occur prior to the partial or full liberalization of the financial sector. If governments
clean up financial institutions and improve the quality of institutions prior to deregulating the
financial sector, one would expect this probability to be close to one.

30

This is shown, for example, in Rojas-Suarez and Weisbrod (1994).
See Akerlof and Romer (1993) and Hellman, Murdok, and Stiglitz (2000).
32
This index is published in the International Country Risk Guide (ICRG). The law sub-index assesses the strength
and impartiality of the legal system, while the order sub-index assesses the popular observance of the law. Each
index can take values from one to three, with lower scores for less tradition for law and order.
31

21

The evidence for emerging and mature markets displayed in Table 7 suggests that
reforms to institutions occur mostly after liberalization is implemented. For example, in the case
of emerging markets, in only 18 percent of the cases, law and order improves prior to the partial
liberalization of financial markets. Also, while in 62 percent of the cases, the laws prosecuting
insider trading exist prior to partial financial liberalization, insider trading starts to be prosecuted
in only 11 percent of the cases before the partial deregulation of the financial sector.
Interestingly, law and order improves substantially following partial liberalization. By the time
the financial sector becomes fully liberalized, the quality of institutions, as measured by the law
and order index, has improved in 64 percent of the cases. Also, insider trading prosecution is
enforced in 44 percent of the cases before the full liberalization of the financial sector.
This evidence casts doubts on the notion that governments tend to implement institutional
reforms before they start deregulating the financial sector.

On the contrary, the evidence

suggests that partial liberalization fuels institutional reforms. The evidence for mature markets is
less compelling. Still, insider trading prosecution is only enforced in 17 percent of the cases
prior to the partial liberalization of the financial sector, but in this case, in 44 percent of the
cases, institutions improve prior to the full liberalization of the financial sector. Again, both
indicators show that reforms continue following partial liberalization.
There are several reasons that can explain why financial liberalization might prompt
institutional reforms. First, as discussed in Rajan and Zingales (2001), well-established firms
may oppose reforms that promote financial development because it breeds competition. These
firms can even be hurt by financial development as financial development implies better
disclosure rules and enforcement (reducing the importance of these firms’ collateral and
reputation) and permits newcomers to enter and compete away profits.

We can add that

incumbents may oppose the removal of capital controls as capital can flow away to more
attractive destinations, limiting their sources of funds. However, opposition may be weaker in
the presence of worldwide abundance of trade and cross-border flows. In these times, free
access to international capital markets will allow the largest and best-known domestic firms to
tap foreign markets for funds, with the support for financial liberalization becoming stronger.
But financial liberalization sows the seeds of destruction of the old protected and inefficient
financial sector, as foreign and domestic investors (now with access to international capital
markets) require better enforcement rules.

22

Second, as mentioned before, the liberalization and the gradual integration of emerging
markets with international financial markets by itself may help to fortify the domestic financial
sector.

Foreign investors have overall better skills and information and can thus monitor

management in ways local investors cannot. Liberalization, moreover, allows firms to access
mature capital markets. Firms listing on foreign stock markets are also in the jurisdiction of a
superior legal system and have higher disclosure standards.
Third, the integration with world markets and institutions tends to speed up the reform
process to achieve a resilient financial system. Capital markets can help supervise domestic
financial institutions, imposing stricter market discipline, increasing transparency and the
diffusion of information, and even pushing governments into guaranteeing that its financial
system is well supervised and regulated.33
To have a sense of the effects of changes in institutions on financial booms and busts, we
estimate the following regression,
amplitudei = α 'Χ i + ρ1d ir + β1d isr + λ1d ilr + τ 1d iL & O + τ 2 d iITA + τ 2 d iITE + ε i .

(4)

This regression is the same as regression (1) but also evaluates the possible effects of changes in
government institutions. d iL & O is a dummy variable equal to one if the boom (crash) occurs
when the law and order index has improved or it is at its highest level, and zero otherwise. diITA
is a dummy variable equal to one if the boom (crash) occurs following the approval of the law
prosecuting insider trading, and zero otherwise. d iITE is a dummy variable equal to one if the
boom (crash) occurs when insider trading prosecution is enforced and zero otherwise.
The results are also reported in Table 7. Note that improvements in the law and order
index trigger more stable financial markets, with the amplitude of booms and crashes declining
about 18 and 9 percentage points, respectively. This evidence provides one possible explanation
of why mature markets, with better government institutions, do not experience the larger crashes
observed in emerging markets in the aftermath of liberalization.34

33

See Gourinchas and Jeanne (2002) for a model on the link between financial liberalization and social
infrastructure.
34
For more discussion on this issue, see Martin and Rey (2002).

23

VI. Conclusions
This paper presented a new approach to understand the effects of financial liberalization
by introducing a novel database on liberalization and by focusing on booms and busts in stock
market prices. Our main results can be summarized as follows.
First, our chronology of financial liberalization indicates that domestic and international
financial liberalization is a process in which different types of restrictions are removed over time.
Moreover, while liberalization has been an uninterrupted process in most mature markets, it has
been characterized by reversals in emerging markets, in which capital controls and restrictions
are at times reintroduced. We also found that the pattern of liberalization varies across regions,
with developed countries liberalizing first their stock markets and developing economies opening
first their domestic financial sector.
Second, with regard to the possible changing nature of financial cycles, our analysis
showed that stock market booms and busts have not intensified in the long run after financial
liberalization. In fact, despite the claim that financial integration leads to volatile capital markets
around the world, stock market cycles become less pronounced after liberalization. Still, in the
short run, we found that financial liberalization does tend to trigger larger cycles. Interestingly,
the short-run effects of liberalization vary across mature and emerging markets. The evidence
from emerging markets, with larger booms and crashes in the immediate aftermath of
liberalization, provides some support to the arguments of excessive financial cycles following
liberalization. In contrast, the evidence from mature markets, with larger bull markets but less
pronounced bear markets in the aftermath of deregulation, supports the view that liberalization is
beneficial even in the short run.
Third, to explain the contrasting short- and long-run effects of financial liberalization, we
explored the dynamics of liberalization and institutional reform. We collected information on
the quality of institutions as well as data on the laws governing the functioning of the financial
system. The evidence suggests that institutional reforms do not predate liberalization. Most of
the times, government reforms are implemented within a few years after the partial opening of
financial markets.

As the quality of institutions improves, financial cycles become less

pronounced. Perhaps due to lack of correct incentives, countries do not tend to improve their
financial systems before liberalization, disregarding the typical policy prescriptions.

24

To conclude, this paper opened several avenues for future research. First, the new dataset
will allow researchers to understand better the link between financial liberalization and financial
development, investment, and growth. Second, the richness of the data will allow researchers to
better comprehend the channels through which financial deregulation impacts economies. Third,
more research on whether financial liberalization can be a first step to institutional reforms
would be welcome. Last but not least, the relation between financial liberalization and reforms
leaves unanswered the question of whether countries can deregulate financial systems without
becoming vulnerable to crises.

25

References
Akerlof, G. and P. Romer. 1993. “Looting: The Economics Underworld of Bankruptcy for
Profit.” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, September, pp. 1-60.
Alesina, A., V. Grilli, and G. Milesi-Ferretti. 1993. “The Political Economy of Capital Controls,”
in L. Leiderman and A. Razin, eds., Capital Mobility: New Perspectives, Cambridge
University Press.
Allen, F. and G. Gorton. 1993. “Churning Bubbles.” Review of Economic Studies Vol. 60(4), pp.
813-836.
Allen, F., S. Morris, and A. Postlewaite. 1993. “Finite Bubbles with Short Sale Constraints and
Asymmetric Information.” Journal of Economic Theory Vol. 61(2), pp. 206-229.
Baxter, M. and R. King. 1995. “Measuring Business Cycles: Approximate Band-Pass Filters for
Economic Time Series.” Review of Economics and Statistics Vol. 81(4), pp. 575-93.
Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey. 2000. “Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets.” Journal
of Finance Vol. 55(2), pp. 565-613.
Bekaert, G., C. Harvey, and C. Lundblad. 2001. “Does Financial Liberalization Spur Growth?”
NBER Working Paper No. 8245.
Bhattacharya, U. and H. Daouk. 2002. “The World Price of Insider Trading.” Journal of Finance
Vol. 57(1), pp. 75-108.
Bry, G. and C. Boschan. 1971. Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected Procedures and
Computer Programs. New York: Columbia University Press for the NBER.
Burns, A. and W. Mitchell. 1946. Measuring Business Cycles. NBER Studies in Business Cycles
No.2, New York: National Bureau of Economic Research.
Calvo, G., L. Leiderman, and C. Reinhart. 1993. “Capital Inflows and Real Exchange Rate
Appreciation in Latin America: The Role of External Factors.” IMF Staff Papers No. 40,
pp. 108-51.
Calvo, G. and E. Mendoza. 2000. “Rational Contagion and the Globalization of Securities
Markets.” Journal of International Economics Vol. 51(1), pp. 79-113.
Cecchetti, S., P. Lam, and N. Mark. 1990. “Mean Reversion in Equilibrium Asset Prices.”
American Economic Review Vol. 80(3), pp. 398-418.
Corsetti, G., N. Roubini, and P. Pesenti. 1999. “What Caused the Asian Currency and Financial
Crisis?” Japan and the World Economy Vol. 11(3), pp. 305-73.
De Long, J. B., A. Shleifer, L. H. Summers, and R. J. Waldmann. 1990. “Noise Trader Risk in
Financial Market.” Journal of Political Economy Vol. 98(4), pp. 703-738.
Demirguc-Kunt, A. and E. Detragiache. 1999. “Financial Liberalization and Financial Fragility.”
In Annual World Bank Conference on Development Economics, World Bank, DC, pp.
303-31.
Edison, H. and F. Warnock. 2002. “A Simple Measure of the Intensity of Capital Controls.”
Forthcoming, Journal of Empirical Finance.
Eichengreen, B. and C. Wyplosz. 1993. “The Unstable EMS.” Brookings Papers on Economic
Activity No. 1, pp. 51-144.
Fama, E. and K. French. 1988. “Permanent and Temporary Components of Stock Prices.”
Journal of Political Economy Vol. 96, pp. 246-273.
Frankel, J.. 2000. “Globalization of the Economy.” NBER Working Paper No. 7858.
Frennberg, P. and B. Hansson. 1993. “Testing the Random Walk Hypothesis on Swedish Stock
Prices: 1919-1990.” Journal of Banking and Finance Vol. 17, pp. 175-191.
26

Gourinchas, P. and O. Jeanne. 2002. “On the Benefits of Capital Account Liberalization for
Emerging Economies.” Mimeo, Princeton University.
Grinblatt, M., S. Titman, and R. Wermers. 1995. “Momentum Investment Strategies, Portfolio
Performance, and Herding: A Study of Mutual Fund Behavior.” American Economic
Review Vol. 85(5), pp. 1088-1105.
Hellman, T., K. Murdock, and J. Stiglitz. 2000. “Liberalization, Moral Hazard in Banking, and
Prudential Regulation: Are Capital Requirements Enough?” American Economic Review
Vol. 90(1), pp. 147-165.
Henry, P. 2000. “Stock Market Liberalization, Economic Reform, and Emerging Market Equity
Prices.” Journal of Finance Vol. 55(2), pp. 529-563.
Hodrick, R. and E. Prescott. 1997. “Post-War U.S. Business Cycles: An Empirical
Investigation.” Journal of Money, Credit, and Banking Vol. 29(1), pp. 1-16.
Jayaratne, J. and P. Strahan. 1996. “The Finance-Growth Nexus: Evidence from Bank Branch
Deregulation.” Quarterly Journal of Economics Vol. 111(3), pp. 639-670.
Kaminsky, G. and C. Reinhart. 1999. “The Twin Crises: The Causes of Banking and Balance-ofPayments Problems.” American Economic Review Vol. 89(3), pp. 473-500.
Karolyi, A. and R. Stulz. 2002. “Issues in International Asset Pricing.” Forthcoming, Handbook
of the Economics of Finance, G. Constantinides, M. Harris, and R. Stulz, eds., NorthHolland .
King, R. and R. Levine. 1993. “Finance and Growth: Schumpeter Might Be Right.” Quarterly
Journal of Economics Vol. 108(3), pp. 717-737.
Krugman, P. 1998. “Saving Asia: It’s Time to Get Radical.” Fortune, September 7, pp. 74–80.
Levine, R. 2001. “International Financial Liberalization and Economic Growth.” Review of
International Economics Vol. 9(4), pp. 684-98.
Lo, A. and C. MacKinlay. 1988. “Stock Market Prices Do Not Follow Random Walks: Evidence
From a Simple Specification Test.” Review of Financial Studies Vol. 1, pp. 41-66.
Lo, A. and C. MacKinlay. 1999. A Non-Random Walk Down Wall Street. Princeton, N.J.:
Princeton University Press.
McKinnon, R. and H. Pill. 1997. “Credible Economic Liberalizations and Overborrowing.”
American Economic Review Vol. 87(2), pp. 189-93.
Martin, P. and H. Rey. 2002. “Financial Globalization and Emerging Markets: With or Without
Crash.” Mimeo, Princeton University.
Mishkin, F. 2001. “Financial Policies and the Prevention of Financial Crises in Emerging Market
Countries.” NBER Working Paper No. 8087.
Mitchell, W. 1927. Business Cycles: The Problem and its Setting. New York: National Bureau of
Economic Research.
Mitchell, W. and A. Burns. 1938. Statistical Indicators of Cyclical Revivals. NBER Bulletin Vol.
69, New York, reprinted as Chapter 6 of G. H. Moore, ed., Business Cycle Indicators,
1961, Princeton University Press, Princeton, NJ.
Obstfeld, M. 1998. “The Global Capital Market: Benefactor or Menace?” Journal of Economic
Perspectives Vol. 12(4), pp. 9-30.
Obstfeld, M. and K. Rogoff. 2001. “Perspectives on OECD Economic Integration: Implications
for U.S. Current Account Adjustment.” In Global Economic Integration: Opportunities
and Challenges. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City.

27

Obstfeld, M. and A. Taylor. 2002. “Global Capital Markets.” Bordo, M., Taylor A., and
Williamson, J., eds., Globalization in Historical Perspective. Forthcoming, University of
Chicago Press.
Poterba, J. M. and L. H. Summers. 1988. “Mean-Reversion in Stock Prices: Evidence and
Implications.” Journal of Financial Economics Vol. 22, pp. 7-59.
Quinn, D. and C. Inclan. 1997. “The Origins of Financial Openness: A Study of Current and
Capital Account Liberalization.” American Journal of Political Science Vol. 41(3), pp.
771-813.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales. 1998. “Financial Dependence and Growth.” American Economic
Review Vol. 88(3), pp. 559-86.
Rajan, R. G. and L. Zingales. 2001. “The Great Reversals: The Politics of Financial
Development in the 20th Century.” Forthcoming, Journal of Financial Economics.
Rodrik, D. 1998. “Who Needs Capital Account Convertibility?” In S. Fischer and others, eds.,
Should the IMF Pursue Capital-Account Convertibility?, Essays in International Finance
No. 207, Department of Economics, Princeton University, May.
Rodrik, D. 2000. “Governing the Global Economy: Does One Architectural Style Fit All?”
Brookings Trade Forum 1999, Brookings Institution.
Rojas-Suarez, L. and S. Weisbrod. 1994. “Financial Market Fragilities in Latin America: from
Banking Crisis Resolution to Current Policy Challenges.” IMF Working Paper 94/117.
Schneider, M. and A. Tornell. 2001. “Boom-Bust Cycles and the Balance Sheet Effect.” Mimeo,
UCLA.
Soros, G. 2002. On Globalization. Public Affairs.
Stiglitz, J. 1999. “Bleak Growth for the Developing World.” International Herald Tribune, April
10–11, pp. 6.
Stiglitz, J. 2002. Globalization and Its Discontents. W.W. Norton & Company.
Stock, J. and M. Watson. 1998. “Business Cycle Fluctuations in U.S. Macroeconomic Time
Series.” NBER Working Paper No. 6528.
Stulz, R. 1999. “Globalization of Capital Markets and the Cost of Capital.” Journal of Applied
Corporate Finance Vol. 12(3), pp. 8-25.
Tornell, A. and F. Westermann. 2002. “Boom-Bust Cycles in Middle Income Countries: Facts
and Explanations.” NBER Working Paper No. 9219.
Urrutia, J. 1995. “Tests of Random Walk and Market Efficiency for Latin American Emerging
Equity Markets.” Journal of Financial Research, Vol. 18 (3), pp. 299-309.
Williamson, J. and M. Mahar. 1998. “A Survey of Financial Liberalization.” Essays in
International Finance No. 211. Department of Economics, Princeton University.
Ventura, J. 2002. “Bubbles and Capital Flows.” Mimeo, MIT.
Wyplosz, C., “How Risky is Financial Liberalization in Developing Countries?” Mimeo.
September 2001

28

Table 1
Liberalization Dates
Country
Asia
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia

Capital Account

Domestic Financial Sector

Stock Market

Partial Liberalization

Full Liberalization

Jan 73 Jan 78p/Jan 88 - Feb 91
Jan 93p/Jan 96 Jun 79p - Dec 93
Sep 94 - Aug 98
Jan 76p - Dec82
Jan94p Jan 87p/Jan 97 Jan 79p - Dec 81
Jan 92/Aug 95p - Apr 97
Jan 98 -

Aug 94p/May 00 Jan 78p/Jan 83 Jan 88p/Jan 95 Oct 78p - Sep 85
Feb 91 Jul 81p/Dec 82 -

Pre 73 Dec 88p/Aug 89Jan 91p/May 98 July 73/Jan 75p/84 - Dec 97

Jan 73 Jan 83 Jan 93 Jun 79 - Aug 98

Mar 86p/Jan 94 -

Mar 86 -

Aug 94 Dec 88 - Feb 91
Jan 96 Feb 91 - Dec 93
Sep 94 - Dec 97
Jan 94 -

Sep 84p/Jul 89 Jun 89p/Jun 92 -

Jan 87p/Apr 98 Jan 88p/Jan 90 -

Jan 87 Jan 90 -

Jan 97 Jan 92 - Apr 97
Jan 98 -

Oct 88 -

Pre 73 -

Jan 73 - Dec 75
Mar 79 Jan 87 May 85 Sep 85 -

Oct 88 -

Portugal

Jan 87p/Jun 89 Jan 79p/Jan 92 Jan 80p - Dec 81
Jan 85p/Jan 88 Sep 89p /Aug 92 -

Jan 73p - Jan 75
Mar 79p/Jan 81 Jan 86p/ Jan 90 May 85p/Feb 86 Jan 79 - Dec 79
Sep 85p/Jan 88 Jan 84p/Mar 90 -

Mar 90 -

Jan 75p/Jan 80/Jun 88p/Dec 92 Jan 84p/Jan 89 -

Jan 74p/Jan 81 Jan 78p/Jan 85 -

Pre 73 - Dec 75
Jan 86 Pre 73 Pre 73p/ Jan 80 -

Jan 86 -

Spain
Sweden

Jan 74 Jan 80 -

Jan 80 Jan 85 -

G-7
Canada
France
Germany
Italy

Pre 73p/Mar 75 Jun 85p/Jan 90 Pre 73p/Mar 81 May 87p/Jan 92 -

Pre 73 Pre 73 Pre 73 Pre 73 -

Jan 79p/Jul 80 Oct 73p/Oct 79 Jul 73 -

Jan 73 Jan 85 Jan 73 Jan 74 - Dec 74
Jan 81 Jul 80 Oct 73 Jan 73 -

Jan 73 Jun 85 Jan 73 May 87 -

Japan
United Kingdom
United States

Pre 73 Jan 85 Pre 73 Jan 74 - Dec 74
Jan 81Jan 79p/Dec 91 Jan 81Pre 73p/Jan 82 -

Jan 77 - Mar 82
Jan 89 Jan 76 - Jan 79
Jan 89 Jun 79 - Nov 82
Jan 87 Jan 91 -

Dec 78 - Mar 82
Dec 89 Jun 91 - Dec 93
Mar 95 Apr 90 - May 91
Jan 92 Sep 98 Nov 91 -

Jan 92 -

Jan 74 - Jul 82
Apr 89 Jan 91 -

Jan 77 - Dec 87
Jan 90 - Jun 93
Jun 95 -

Jan 77 - Jan 84
Mar 89 - Dec 93
Apr 96 -

Aug 81 - Jan 83
Jan 90 - Jun 93
Apr 96 -

Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand

Europe
Denmark
Finland
Ireland
Norway

Latin America
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Venezuela

Apr 76p/Dec 78 - Mar 82
Dec 89 Jan 90p - Dec 93
Mar 95p Jun 79p - Dec 82
Apr 90/Jun 91p/Sep 98 Jan 91p/Sep 98 Pre 73 - Jul 82
Nov 91 Pre 73p - Dec 86
Jan 91 Pre 73 - Jan 83
Mar 89 - Dec 93
Apr 96 -

Jan 77 - Jun 82
Oct 87 Jan 76 - Dec 78
Jan 88p/Jan 89 Jan 74p/May 75 - Nov 82
Jan 84p/Jan 85 Aug 74p/Sep 1980 - Dec 85
Jul 86 Jan 74p - Aug 82
Oct 88p/Apr 89 Pre 73p - Dec 81
Jan 91 Aug 81 - Jan 84
Jan 89 - Aug 94
Apr 96 -

Pre 73p/Jan 90 Pre 73p/Jan 92 Jan 84p/Jan 89 -

Jan 85 Pre 73 Pre 73 -

Jan 77p - Mar 82
Jan 89 Pre 73 p/Jun 91 Jan 87p/Jan 92 Jan 91p Jan 89p/Jan 91 -

Jan 90 Jan 92 Jan 88 -

Jan 85 Jan 81 Jul 73 -

Jan 92 -

This table reports the dates of partial and full liberalization of financial markets. The first three columns provide information by sector: capital account, domestic financial sector, and
the stock market. The last two columns provide information on an integral measure of financial liberalization. The dates are based on the criteria displayed in Appendix Table 1. A
country is considered to be fully liberalized when at least two sectors are fully liberalized and the third one is partially liberalized. A country is considered to be partially liberalized if
at least two sectors are partially liberalized. Otherwise, the country is considered to be financially repressed. If there is no information about the month of liberalization, we use January
(December) if the corresponding report indicates that liberalization is implemented at the beginning (end) of the year. "-" followed by a blank means that it covers the period until June
1999. Pre 73 (Pre 73p) means that the sector is already fully (partially) liberalized at that time, with no significant measures taken at that date.

Number of Months between
the Opening of the First Sector
and the Third Sector
108
55
61
38
66
Number of Months between
the Opening of the First Sector
and the Third Sector
107
58
47

Regions
Asia
Europe
G-7
Latin America
All Regions

First Sector to Open
Capital Account
Domestic Financial Sector
Stock Market

Duration of the Liberalization Reform

Proportion of Episodes in Which a Particular Sector Fully Liberalized First
(in percent)
Capital Account
Domestic Financial Sector
Stock Market
0
55
43
13
25
63
20
0
80
15
77
8

Proportion of Episodes in Which a Particular Sector Partially Liberalized First
(in percent)
Capital Account
Domestic Financial Sector
Stock Market
33
33
33
0
25
75
0
0
100
25
58
17

The bottom panel reports the duration of the liberalization reform measured as the number of months between the partial opening
of the first sector and the partial opening of the third sector.

Asia
Europe
G-7
Latin America

Regions

Asia
Europe
G-7
Latin America

Regions

Strategies of Liberalization

Table 2
Sequencing of Liberalization

Table 3
Characteristics of Stock Market Cycles

Phase
Booms
Crashes

Random Walk
(mean)
65
(0.10)
55
(0.86)

Amplitude
Actual Data Difference of Means
P-Value
(mean)
74
0.01
(3.59)
61
0.05
(3.62)

Random Walk
(mean)
22
(0.04)
15
(0.03)

Duration
Actual Data Difference of Means
P-Value
(mean)
26
0.00
(1.24)
18
0.04
(1.26)

The table shows the average amplitude and duration of booms and crashes in stock prices for the actual data and for the simulated data,
under null hypothesis that stock prices follow a random-walk process. The stock market indexes start in January 1975 and end in June 1999.
The filter used identifies 146 stock market cycles. To estimate the average amplitude of booms and crashes under the null hypothesis of a
random walk, we first estimate a random walk with drift model for each country. We simulate those models 1,000 times. Since the stock
market series for several countries do not span the whole sample, the length of the simulated random walk series for each country is the
same as the length of the actual series. Amplitude is expressed in percent, calculated as a deviation from the mid point between the peak and
the trough. Duration is expressed in months. Standard errors are in parentheses.

141
0.73

0.00

Short-Run Liberalization > Long-Run Liberalization

0.00

0.00

61
0.82

0.00

0.06

0.03

0.02

0.25

0.08

P-Value
Emerging Markets
Booms
Crashes

60
0.88

Amplitude
Emerging Markets
Crashes
Booms
-4.909
6.821
[3.170]
[2.445] ***
1.842
2.331
[1.024] *
[1.555]
0.662
-1.257
[0.290] **
[0.552] **
70.415
74.449
[10.090] ***
[10.334] ***
96.218
95.449
[11.761] ***
[10.619] ***
52.547
65.572
[8.772] ***
[9.560] ***
80
0.78

0.00

0.36

0.03

0.03

0.00

0.91

Mature Markets
Booms
Crashes

80
0.84

Mature Markets
Booms
Crashes
-4.10
-0.51
[1.269] ***
[1.260]
1.67
0.07
[0.801] **
[0.671]
1.07
-0.60
[0.310] ***
[0.451]
41.37
59.98
[10.276] ***
[6.326] ***
63.92
47.82
[9.089] ***
[6.616] ***
38.07
34.22
[5.945] ***
[3.206] ***

The top panel shows regressions of the amplitude of booms (crashes) in stock markets on changes in the world real interest rate, world output growth, domestic output growth, a
dummy for "repression" effects, a dummy for "short-run liberalization" effects, and a dummy for "long-run liberalization" effects. The bottom panel reports hypothesis tests on
the regression coefficients. A country is considered to be partially liberalized if at least two sectors are partially liberalized. Otherwise, the country is considered to be financially
repressed. The change in world real interest rate, the change in world output, and the change in domestic output are growth rates from the beginning to the end of the
corresponding boom or crash. "Repression" is a dummy variable equal to one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs during repression times, and zero otherwise. "Short-run
liberalization" is a dummy variable that equals one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs in the immediate aftermath of partial financial liberalization (four-year window),
and zero otherwise. "Long-run liberalization" is a dummy variable equal to one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs after four years have elapsed from the time of the partial
financial liberalization, and zero otherwise. Standard errors are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.

0.01

Repression > Long-Run Liberalization

0.12

All Markets
Booms
Crashes
0.01

Hypothesis Tests

140
0.85

All Markets
Booms
Crashes
-5.03
3.878
[1.255] ***
[1.428] ***
1.348
0.871
[0.613] **
[0.850]
0.984
-0.84
[0.200] ***
[0.409] **
60.878
66.865
[7.078] ***
[6.642] ***
80.466
77.896
[7.110] ***
[7.037] ***
44.106
44.087
[5.006] ***
[4.462] ***

Repression < Short-Run Liberalization

Observations
R-squared

Long-Run Liberalization

Short-Run Liberalization

Repression

Domestic Output Growth

World Output Growth

Change in the World Real Interest Rate

Independent Variables

The Effects of Partial Liberalization

Table 4
Determinants of Booms and Crashes

Table 5
Determinants of Booms and Crashes
The Effects of Sequencing

Short-Run Liberalization
Sector One and Two

All Markets
Booms
Crashes
-4.649
4.3
[1.252] ***
[1.485] ***
1.426
0.85
[0.613] **
[0.895]
1.102
-0.847
[0.199] ***
[0.426] **
51.087
69.221
[8.127] ***
[8.208] ***
80.389
56.276
[10.059] ***
[11.098] ***

Amplitude
Emerging Markets
Booms
Crashes
-4.851
9.506
[3.068]
[2.250] ***
1.676
2.522
[1.008]
[1.467] *
0.905
-1.455
[0.277] ***
[0.525] ***
57.701
84.147
[11.533] ***
[11.446] ***
98.122
44.119
[15.870] ***
[16.507] **

Mature Markets
Crashes
Booms
-3.64
-0.57
[1.329] ***
[1.394]
1.77
-0.02
[0.833] **
[0.737]
1.08
-0.60
[0.320] ***
[0.495]
38.61
60.19
[11.859] ***
[8.105] ***
57.37
54.89
[13.187] ***
[9.726] ***

Short-Run Liberalization
Sector Two

-7.951
[11.641]

-12.258
[18.227]

-0.71
[15.180]

Independent Variables
Change in the World Real Interest Rate
World Output Growth
Domestic Output Growth
Repression

Long-Run Liberalization

Observations
R-squared

40.147
[5.196] ***
132
0.85

Hypothesis Tests

23.229
[13.196] *
44.96
[4.794] ***
133
0.73

All Markets
Booms
Crashes

47.606
[8.595] ***
58
0.89

59.247
[19.044] ***
63.974
[8.963] ***
59
0.85

P-Value
Emerging Markets
Booms
Crashes

34.98
[6.472] ***
74
0.84

-7.10
[11.976]
33.58
[3.564] ***
74
0.78

Mature Markets
Booms
Crashes

Repression < Short-Run Liberalization
First Sector
Second Sector

0.01
0.01

0.83
0.17

0.01
0.02

0.98
0.10

0.12
0.09

0.66
0.88

Repression > Long-Run Liberalization

0.08

0.00

0.21

0.07

0.37

0.00

Short-Run Liberalization > Long-Run Liberalization
First Sector
Second Sector

0.00
0.00

0.17
0.00

0.00
0.00

0.86
0.00

0.05
0.01

0.02
0.04

This table analizes whether the sucessive liberalizations of the three sectors trigger more unstable financial markets (larger booms and crashes) in the short run. The top panel
shows regressions of the amplitude of booms (crashes) in stock markets on the change in the world real interest rate, world output growth, domestic output growth, a dummy for
"repression" effects, two dummies for "short-run liberalization" effects, and a dummy for "long-run liberalization" effects. The change in world real interest rate, the change in
world output, and the change in domestic output are growth rates from the beginning to the end of the corresponding boom or crash. "Repression" is a dummy variable equal to
one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs during repression times, and zero otherwise. "Short-run liberalization sector one and two" is a dummy variable that equals one if
the particular phase of the cycle occurs in the immediate aftermath of financial liberalization of the first or second sectors (four-year window), and zero otherwise. "Short-run
liberalization sector two" is a dummy variable that equals one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs in the immediate aftermath of financial liberalization of the second sector
(four-year window), and zero otherwise. "Long-run liberalization" is a dummy variable that equals one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs after four years have elapsed
from the time of financial liberalization of the second sector, and zero otherwise. The bottom panel reports hypothesis tests on the regression coefficients. "Short-run
liberalization first (second) sector" corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis that the opening of the first (second) sector does not trigger larger booms and crashes relative to
repression times or long-run liberalization, alternatively. If the stock market is liberalized before 1973, only the capital account and the domestic financial sector are being
considered in the analysis. Standard errors are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.

Table 6
Determinants of Booms and Crashes
The Effects of Sequencing
Independent Variables
Change in the World Real Interest Rate
World Output Growth
Domestic Output Growth
Repression
Short-Run Liberalization
Sector One and Two
First Sector to Open: Capital Account
First Sector to Open: Stock Market
Short-Run Liberalization
Sector Two
Long-Run Liberalization

Observations
R-squared

All Markets
Booms
Crashes
-4.706
4.37
[1.265] ***
[1.518] ***
1.356
0.89
[0.619] **
[0.914]
1.097
-0.847
[0.199] ***
[0.430] *
51.738
69.078
[8.159] ***
[8.287] ***
81.618
56.46
[10.113] ***
[11.244] ***

Amplitude
Emerging Markets
Booms
Crashes
-4.756
8.079
[3.092]
[2.227] ***
1.86
2.953
[1.073] *
[1.687] *
0.888
-1.635
[0.282] ***
[0.508] ***
56.71
82.268
[11.743] ***
[11.306] ***
97.193
45.445
[16.076] ***
[15.955] ***

Mature Markets
Crashes
Booms
-3.85
-0.10
[1.356] ***
[1.402]
1.75
0.19
[0.841] **
[0.743]
1.08
-0.64
[0.323] ***
[0.489]
39.11
58.72
[11.974] ***
[8.062] ***
56.55
58.78
[13.546] ***
[9.892] ***

-9.449
[13.011]
-26.004
[20.553]
-3.94
[12.028]

-26.611
[23.260]
-7.518
[38.317]
-6.473
[19.058]

7.86
[15.298]
-17.65
[23.957]
1.20
[15.865]

40.749
[5.218] ***
132
0.86

Hypothesis Tests

-3.216
[16.044]
-6.09
[24.398]
24.453
[13.952] *
44.893
[4.837] ***
133
0.73

All Markets
Booms
Crashes

47.186
[8.679] ***
58
0.89

64.331
[25.551] **
40.558
[45.599]
43.828
[19.286] **
64.876
[8.788] ***
59
0.87

P-Value
Emerging Markets
Booms
Crashes

35.00
[6.558] ***
74
0.84

-21.95
[13.539]
-26.94
[18.863]
0.52
[12.528]
33.42
[3.524] ***
74
0.79

Mature Markets
Booms
Crashes

Repression < Short-Run Liberalization
Domestic Financial Sector
Capital Account
Stock Market

0.01
0.11
0.44

0.82
0.78
0.75

0.01
0.32
0.22

0.97
0.20
0.47

0.14
0.11
0.50

0.50
0.91
0.89

Repression > Long-Run Liberalization

0.08

0.00

0.23

0.10

0.35

0.00

Short-Run Liberalization > Long-Run Liberalization
Domestic Financial Sector
Capital Account
Stock Market

0.00
0.03
0.26

0.17
0.33
0.42

0.00
0.22
0.15

0.87
0.08
0.33

0.06
0.06
0.44

0.01
0.41
0.53

This table shows whether the short-run effects of liberalization depend on which sector is deregulated first. The top panel shows regressions of the amplitude of booms
(crashes) in stock markets on changes in the world real interest rate, world output growth, domestic output growth, a dummy for "repression" effects, two dummies for "shortrun liberalization" effects, a dummy for the capital account opening if this is the first sector to open, a dummy for the stock market opening if this is the first sector to open,
and a dummy for "long-run liberalization" effects. The change in world real interest rate, the change in world output, and the change in domestic output are growth rates from
the beginning to the end of the corresponding boom or crash. "Repression" is a dummy variable equal to one if the particular phase of a cycle occurs during repression times,
and zero otherwise. "Short-run liberalization sector one and two" is a dummy variable that equals one if the particular phase of a cycle occurs in the immediate aftermath of
financial liberalization of the first and second sectors (four-year window), and zero otherwise. "Short-run liberalization sector two" is a dummy variable that equals one if the
particular phase of the cycle occurs in the immediate aftermath of financial liberalization of the second sector (four-year window), and zero otherwise. "Long-run
liberalization" is a dummy variable that equals one if the particular phase of the cycle occurs after four years have elapsed from the time of financial liberalization of the
second sector, and zero otherwise. "First sector to open: capital account (stock market)" is a dummy variable equal to one if the first sector to open is the capital account
(stock market), and zero otherwise. The bottom panel reports hypothesis tests on the regression coefficients. "Short-run liberalization domestic financial sector (capital
account/stock market)" corresponds to the test of the null hypothesis that opening first the domestic financial sector (capital account/stock market) does not trigger larger
booms and crashes relative to repression times or long-run liberalization, alternatively. If the stock market is liberalized before 1973, only the capital account and the
domestic financial sector are being considered in the analysis. Standard errors are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.

Table 7
Financial Liberalization and Institutional Reforms
Panel A
Sequencing
Mature Markets
Type of Financial Liberalization
Partial Liberalization
Full Liberalization
Hypothesis Test (P-Value)
Partial Liberalization = Full Liberalization

Probabilities of Liberalization Conditional on
Insider Trading Laws Insider Trading Laws
Law and Order
Existence
Enforcement
36 **
64 ***

17
25 *

0.04

0.34

44 ***
50 ***

0.33

Emerging Markets
Type of Financial Liberalization
Partial Liberalization
Full Liberalization
Hypothesis Test (P-Value)
Partial Liberalization = Full Liberalization

Probabilities of Liberalization Conditional on
Insider Trading Laws Insider Trading Laws
Law and Order
Existence
Enforcement
62 ***
77 ***

11
44 **

0.17

0.08

18
64 ***

0.02

Panel B
Effects of Liberalization and Institutional Reforms on Financial Cycles
Amplitude
All Markets

Independent Variables
Change in the Real Interest Rate
World Output Growth
Domestic Output Growth
"Repression Times" Dummy
Short-Run Dummy
Long-Run Dummy
Law and Order
Insider Trading Laws
Existence
Enforcement

Observations
R-squared

Booms
-4.496
[1.245] ***
1.498
[0.609] **
0.963
[0.199] ***
63.696
[7.376] ***
83.329
[8.245] ***
53.259
[7.781] ***
-18.316
[6.178] ***

Crashes
4.05
[1.442] ***
1.033
[0.863]
-0.876
[0.415] **
69.188
[7.176] ***
80.368
[8.558] ***
50.923
[8.139] ***
-8.984
[7.005]

2.159
[7.005]
0.543
[7.560]

-0.627
[7.821]
-1.732
[8.422]

140
0.86

141
0.73

Panel A shows the probability of financial liberalization conditional on the existence and enforcement of insider trading
laws and on the dummy for law and order. Panel B reports the regression reported in Table 4 with the inclusion of the
institutional variables: law and order, existence of insider trading laws, and enforcement of insider trading laws. "Law and
order" is a dummy variable that equals one in periods in which there is a "permanent" improvement in the International
Country Risk Guide's index of law and order or the index is at its highest level. The improvement periods in this index are
characterized by at least one point increase in the index from its two-year period average, and the maintainance of the index
above this average for at least another two years. "Insider trading laws" are dummy variables that equal one after the
existence or enforcement of those laws. The data come from Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000). See Appendix Table 3.
Standard errors are in brackets. *, **, *** mean significance at 10, 5, and 1 percent, respectively.

Figure 1
Index of Financial Liberalization
Less
3.5
Liberalization

Emerging Markets

3
2.5
2
1.5
Mature Markets
1

1998

1997

1996

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

More
Liberalization 0.5

The index of financial liberalization jointly evaluates the liberalization of the capital account, the domestic financial sector,
and the stock market. The index is a cross-country average. The value three means repression, two means partial
liberalization, and one means full liberalization. Mature markets include: Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany,
Ireland, Italy, Japan, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. Emerging markets include:
Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand,
and Venezuela.

Figure 2
Indexes of Financial Liberalization by Sector
Capital Account
Less
Liberalization

3
Emerging Markets
2.5
2
1.5

Mature Markets

1
More
Liberalization
1995

1996

1997

1998

1995

1996

1997

1998

1996

1997

1998

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

0.5

Domestic Financial Sector
3
Less
Liberalization
2.5
Emerging Markets
2
1.5
Mature Markets
1

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

0.5
1973

More
Liberalization

Stock Market
Less
Liberalization

3
Emerging Markets

2.5
2
1.5
1

Mature Markets

1995

1994

1993

1992

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

0.5
1973

More
Liberalization

The three indexes evaluate separately the liberalization of the capital account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock
market. The indexes are a cross-country average. The value three means repression, two means partial liberalization, and one
means full liberalization. Mature markets include: Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan,
Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. Emerging markets include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Colombia, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, and Venezuela.

Figure 3
The Sequencing of Financial Liberalization
Proportion of Emerging Markets with Partial Liberalization
(in percent)
100%
Capital Account
80%

60%

40%

20%

Stock Market
Domestic Financial Sector
1992

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1993

1994

1995

1996

1997

1998

1991

1992

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

0%

Proportion of Mature Markets with Partial Liberalization
(in percent)
Stock Market
100%

80%
Domestic Financial
Sector

60%

Capital Account
40%

20%

1991

1990

1989

1988

1987

1986

1985

1984

1983

1982

1981

1980

1979

1978

1977

1976

1975

1974

1973

0%

The panels show the proportion of countries with (at least partially) liberalized capital account, domestic financial sector, and
stock market. Mature markets include: Canada, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Ireland, Italy, Japan, Norway, Portugal,
Spain, Sweden, United Kingdom, and United States. Emerging markets include: Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Hong
Kong, Indonesia, Korea, Malaysia, Mexico, Peru, Philippines, Taiwan, Thailand, and Venezuela.

1975
1978

Argentina

Canada

Denmark

1981
1985

1991

1991

1991

1988

1988

1988

1988
1991

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

Brazil

France

Finland

1981

Indonesia

1988

1988

1988

1985
1988
1991
1995
1998

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

1975
1978

Chile

Germany

Ireland

1981
Korea

1988

1988

1988

1985
1988
1991
1995
1998

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

120
100
80
60
40
20
0

0

50

100

150

Colombia

Latin America

Italy

Norway

Europe

1978
1981

Malaysia

G-7 Countries

1975

1975
1978
1981
1985
1988

1985
1988

Asia

1988

1988

Hong Kong

1981
1985

1995

1995

1975

1975

1975

1975

1981
1985

1991

1991

1991

1975

1975

1975

1981
1985

1991

1991

1991

1991

1991

1991

1991

1998

1998

1995

1995

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

1975
1978

Mexico

Japan

Portugal

Philippines

1988

1988

1988

150

1975

1975

1975

1981

1985
1991

1991

1991

1985
1988
1991
1995
1998

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

1975

150

1975
1978
1981

Spain

Peru

United Kingdom

1978
1981
1985

1985

0

50

100

150

0

50

0

50

100

150

0

50

100

Venezuela

Sweden

Thailand

United States

1975

1975

1981
1985

1995

1995

1995

1995

1991

1991

1991

1991

1988

1988

1988

1988

150

100

1988

1988

1988

1988

150

1991

1991

1991

1991

1978

1978
1981
1985

Taiwan

1975

1975

Figure 4
Stock Markets Indexes

Stock market indexes are in constant U.S. dollars (in logs). Base 1993 = 100. The sample covers from January 1975 to June 1999. Peaks are calculated using +/- 12 months windows. The shaded areas mark the
identified expansion episodes.

0

50

100

150
0

50

100

150

0

50

100

1975

1975

150

1978

1978
1981
1985

1995

1995

1978

1978

1978

1978

1985

1995

1995

1995

1978

1978

1978

1985

1995

1995

1995

1975
1978
1981
1985

1995

1995

1978

1978

1978

1985

1995

1995

1995

1978

1978

1985

1995

1995

1995

1995

1975

1975

1981
1985

200
150
100
50
0

1975
1978
1981
1985

1998

1998

1998

1998

1981

1981
1985

1998

1998

1998

1981

1981
1985

1998

1998

1998

1975
1978
1981
1985

1998

1998

1981

1981

1981
1985

1998

1998

1998

1981

1981
1985

1998

1998

1998

1998

1978

1978
1981
1985

1998

1998

1998

1998

Figure 5
Frequency Distribution of the Amplitude and Duration of Stock Market Booms and Crashes
Amplitude of Booms
Actual

Random Walk

0.15

0.15

0.1

0.1

0.05

0.05
0

0
10

40

70

100

130

160

10

190

40

70

100

130

160

190

160

190

Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution functions: P-value 0.01
Amplitude of Crashes
Random Walk

Actual
0.2
0.15
0.1

0.2
0.15
0.1
0.05
0

0.05
0
10

40

70

100

130

160

10

190

40

70

100

130

Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution functions: P-value 0.10
Duration of Booms
Random Walk

Actual
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
10

30

50

70

90

110

10

130

30

50

70

90

110

130

Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution functions: P-value 0.00
Duration of Crashes
Random Walk

Actual
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0

0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
10

30

50

70

90

110

10

30

50

70

90

110

Two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov test for equality of distribution functions: P-value 0.18
The figures report the frequency distribution of the amplitude and duration of booms and crashes for the actual and simulated
data, assuming random walk processes with drift. The horizontal axis in each figure shows the size or the duration of booms
and crashes, the vertical axis shows the frequencies in percent. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is used to evaluate the null
hypothesis of equality of the frequency distribution of the amplitude and duration of booms and crashes in the actual and
generated data.

Figure 6
Characteristics of Regional Cycles
Emerging Markets
Asia
Phase
Booms
Crashes

Amplitude
75
60

Phase
Booms
Crashes

Europe
Amplitude
Duration
72
29
51
21

Latin America
Amplitude
Duration
102
23
86
16

Duration
24
18

Mature Markets
G-7
Amplitude
53
37

Duration
28
16

The Regional Cycles
100

G-7
75

Europe
Latin
America

50

Asia

25
-26

-22

-18

-14

-10

-6

-2
2
6
G-7
Latin America
Asia
Europe

10

14

18

The table and figure show the average cycle per region. The sample starts in January 1975
and ends in June 1999. The total number of cycles per region is as follows: 28 for Asia; 35
for Europe; 44 for G-7; and 39 for Latin America. In the top panel, duration is expressed in
months while amplitude is expressed in percent; it is calculated as a deviation from the mid
point between the peak and the trough.

0.00

Short-Run Liberalization > Long-Run Liberalization

0.00

0.00

Mature Markets
Booms

0.00

0.01

0.03

0.01

0.31

0.03

P-Value
Emerging Markets
Booms
Crashes

Long-Run Liberalization

Emerging Markets
Crashes

0.08

0.28

0.25

0.03

0.00

0.88

Mature Markets
Booms
Crashes

Mature Markets
Crashes

The figure shows the average amplitude of booms and crashes in the different periods and markets (mature and emerging). The table shows hypothesis tests of equality of booms and
crashes during repression times and after liberalization. The repression period occurs when less than two sectors are partially liberalized. The short-run liberalization period is defined
as the immediate aftermath of partial financial liberalization (four-year window), and zero otherwise. The long-run liberalization period occurs after four years have elapsed from the
time of the partial financial liberalization.

0.00

0.13

All Markets
Booms
Crashes

Short-Run Liberalization

Emerging Markets
Booms

Repression > Long-Run Liberalization

All Markets
Crashes

0.03

Hypothesis Tests

Repression

All Markets
Booms

Repression < Short-Run Liberalization

0

10

20

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

100

110

120

130

Figure 7
Average Amplitude of Booms and Crashes
(in percent)

Appendix Table 1
Criteria to Define Liberalization Periods
Capital Account
Criteria for Full Liberalization
Borrowing abroad by banks and
corporations

Multiple exchange rates and other
restrictions
Criteria for Partial Liberalization
Borrowing abroad by banks and
corporations

Multiple exchange rates and other
restrictions
Criteria for No Liberalization
Borrowing abroad by banks and
corporations

Multiple exchange rates and other
restrictions

Banks and corporations are allowed to borrow abroad mostly freely. They may need to inform the authorities,
but the authorization is granted almost automatically. Reserve requirements might be in place but are lower
than 10 percent. The required minimum maturity is not longer than two years.
And
There are no special exchange rates for either current account or capital account transactions. There are no
restrictions to capital outflows.
Banks and corporations are allowed to borrow abroad but subject to certain restrictions. Reserve requirements
might be between 10 and 50 percent. The required minimum maturity might be between two and five years.
There might be some caps in borrowing and certain restrictions to specific sectors.
Or
There are special exchange rates for current account and capital account transactions. There might be some
restrictions to capital outflows.
Banks and corporations are mostly not allowed to borrow abroad. Reserve requirements might be higher than
50 percent. The required minimum maturity might be longer than five years. There might be caps in borrowing
and heavy restrictions to certain sectors.
Or
There are special exchange rates for current account and capital account transactions. There might be
restrictions to capital outflows.

Domestic Financial Sector
Criteria for Full Liberalization
Lending and borrowing interest rates
Other indicators
Criteria for Partial Liberalization
Lending and borrowing interest rates
Other indicators
Criteria for No Liberalization
Lending and borrowing interest rates
Other indicators

There are no controls (ceilings and floors) on interest rates.
And
There are likely no credit controls (subsidies to certain sectors or certain credit allocations). Deposits in
foreign currencies are likely permitted.
There are controls in either lending or borrowing rates (ceilings or floors).
And
There might be controls in the allocation of credit controls (subsidies to certain sectors or certain credit
allocations). Deposits in foreign currencies might not be permitted.
There are controls in lending rates and borrowing rates (ceilings and floors).
And
There are likely controls in the allocation of credit controls (subsidies to certain sectors or certain credit
allocations). Deposits in foreign currencies are likely not permitted.

Stock Market
Criteria for Full Liberalization
Acquisition by foreign investors
Repatriation of capital, dividends, and
interest
Criteria for Partial Liberalization
Acquisition by foreign investors

Repatriation of capital, dividends, and
interest
Criteria for No Liberalization
Acquisition by foreign investors
Repatriation of capital, dividends, and
interest

Foreign investors are allowed to hold domestic equity without restrictions.
And
Capital, dividends, and interest can be repatriated freely within two years of the initial investment.

Foreign investors are allowed to hold up to 49 percent of each company's outstanding equity. There might be
restrictions to participate in certain sectors. There might be indirect ways to invest in the stock market, like
through country funds.
Or
Capital, dividends, and interest can be repatriated, but typically not before two and not after five years of the
initial investment.
Foreign investors are not allowed to hold domestic equity.
Or
Capital, dividends, and interest can be repatriated, but not before five years of the initial investment.

This table describes the criteria used to determine whether the capital account, the domestic financial sector, and the stock market are fully or partially
liberalized.

Jan-90
Dec-89
Dec-75
Dec-84
Dec-84
Dec-84
Dec-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-86
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Jan-75
Feb-75
Feb-75
Dec-75
Dec-75
Dec-75
Jan-75
Dec-75
Dec-92
Dec-84

Copenhagen Stock Exchange Index
HEX-Index
ISEQ Total Index
Oslo Stock Exchange Industrial Index
Banco Totta & Acores
Madrid Stock Exchange Index
Stockholm Exchange
TSE-300
Average of 40 Largest Enterprises
CDAX
MIB Index
NK500
ASX all shares
S&P 500 Composite
Bolsa Indice General
BOVESPA Market Index
IGPA Index
Bogota Stock Index
BMV General
Indice General IGBVL
Index de Capitalization de la BVC

Beginning Date

Hang Seng
JSE Composite Index
KSE Composite
KLSE Composite
PSE Composite Index
TSE Average Index
SET Index

Stock Market Indexes

Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99

Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99

Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99

Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99
Jun-99

Ending Date

1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100

1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100

1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100

1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100
1993=100

Base Period

The table shows which stock market index is used for each country, its beginning and ending date, its base period, and its data source.

Asia
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
PhIllipines
Taiwan
Thailand
Europe
Denmark
Finland
Ireland
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
G-7
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
United States
Latin America
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Venezuela

Countries

Appendix Table 2
Stock Market Indexes and Their Sources

International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation

Bloomberg
International Finance Statistics
Bloomberg
International Finance Statistics
Bloomberg
Bloomberg
Bloomberg

International Finance Statistics
International Finance Statistics
International Finance Statistics
International Finance Statistics
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Statistics
International Finance Statistics

Federal Reserve Board
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation
International Finance Corporation

Data Source

Appendix Table 3
Institutional Reforms
Countries
Asia
Hong Kong
Indonesia
Korea
Malaysia
Philippines
Taiwan
Thailand
Europe
Denmark
Finland
Ireland
Norway
Portugal
Spain
Sweden
G-7
Canada
France
Germany
Italy
Japan
United Kingdom
United States
Latin America
Argentina
Brazil
Chile
Colombia
Mexico
Peru
Venezuela

(1)

Insider Trading Laws
Existence
(2)

Insider Trading Laws
Enforcement
(3)

Sep-93
Jun-91
Oct-91
Apr-93
Jul-92
No Change
Apr-88, Aug-92

1991
1991
n/a
1973
1982
1988
1984

1994
1996
n/a
1996
No
1989
1993

Highest Level (whole sample)
Highest Level (whole sample)
Sep-89, Apr-96
Highest Level (whole sample)
Oct-94
Dec-91
Highest Level (whole sample)

1991
1989
1990
1985
1986
1994
1971

1996
1993
No
1990
No
1998
1990

Highest Level (whole sample)
Jan-92
Highest Level (whole sample)
Aug-95
Jul-92
Sept-89, Jan-92
Highest Level (whole sample)

1966
1967
1994
1991
1988
1980
1934

1976
1975
1995
1996
1990
1981
1961

Dec-92
No Change
Apr-94
Mar-94
No Change
Sep-92
No Change

1991
1976
1981
1990
1975
1991
1998

1995
1978
1996
No
No
1994
No

Index of Law and Order

Column (1) reports the dates in which there is a "permanent" improvement in the International Country Risk Guide's index of law
and order. In this index, law and order are assessed separately, with each sub-component comprising zero to three points. The law
sub-component is an assessment of the strength and impartiality of the legal system, while the order sub-component is an
assessment of popular observance of the law. The improvement periods in this index are characterized by at least one point increase
in the index from its two-year period average, and the maintainance of the index above this average for at least another two years.
This column also shows those countries for which the index of law and order was at its highest level during all the sample. "No
change" corresponds to no permanent changes in the index. Columns (2) and (3) come from Bhattacharya and Daouk (2000). The
columns report, respectively, the dates when insider trading laws are aproved and when the first prosecution under these laws
occurs. The authors surveyed stock market participants and national regulators to obtain the answers. "n/a" means not available.
"No" means that there is no enforcement of insider trading laws.

Domestic Financial Sector
In January 1977, credit controls were abolished. Also in 1977, ceilings
on domestic (lending and deposit) interest rates were eliminated. In July
1982, new economic authorities introduced a financial reform, setting
interest rates at sharply negative real terms. Credit controls were reimposed in a large scale basis. In October 1987, most domestic interest
rate regulations were eliminated. Domestic interest rate deregulation
was completed by the end of 1989. In 1990, the process of reform of the
banking sector continued. Remaining controls on credit at the national
level were progressively eliminated until 1994.

Stock Markets
In January 1977, a new Foreign Investment Law eased previous restrictions on
foreign direct investment, provided the right of foreign investors to repatriate
capital after three years and repatriate their profits and dividends without any
central bank prior approval. Foreign investment regulations were further
liberalized in 1980. Prior approval was no longer required for investment in
any of the country's stock markets, provided that the amount did not exceed
20% of the capital of the company involved. In April 1982, the right to freely
transfer profits and dividends abroad was "temporarily" suspended. In 1989,
the Economic Emergency Law further liberalized foreign investment in the
stock exchange. Repatriation of capital, profits, and dividends was fully
liberalized in that year.

In 1973, chartered banks were allowed to borrow abroad, but subject to some Under the 1967 Bank Act, the determination of interest rates on loans In 1973, there were no controls over inward or outward portfolio investment.
Some specific restrictions existed on inward direct investment in
guidelines. Corporations were allowed to issue bonds abroad, but were subject to was left to market forces.
broadcasting, telecommunications, transportation, fishery, energy, and
some controls. No controls were in place on foreign exchange transactions. In
financial services. Capital and income could be freely repatriated.
1974, the freedom for chartered banks in conducting their foreign currency
operations was increased. In February 1975, the 1970 guideline that requested
Canadians to explore fully all available sources in the domestic market before
issuing bonds abroad was lifted.

Capital Account
In July 1980, the authorities eliminated the 1-year minimum maturity requirement
for foreign loans. In June 1981, a dual foreign exchange market was introduced. In
December, the administration that came into power returned to a more liberal
exchange system, unifying the exchange markets, eliminating the exchange
insurance and swap facilities, liberalizing sales of foreign currency, and
announcing that the peso would be allowed to float. In April 1982, all amortization
payments on loans other than import-related loans were made subject to prior
approval of the central bank. In November 1989, a free exchange rate was
introduced. In December, proceeds from all loans had to be transacted in the free
exchange market. There were no conditions on maturity, dates, or interest rates. In
1990, the special exchange rate regime for capital account transactions was
abolished.

Annex Table 1
Chronology of Financial Liberalization

In 1990, certain financial institutions were authorized to obtain resources from In 1976, ceilings on deposit and lending rates were removed. In 1979, In 1973, persons domiciled or residents abroad could purchase Brazilian
abroad through the issuance of commercial papers. Brazilian banks located abroad those ceilings were re-imposed. In 1988, some loan rates were commercial and industrial securities, provided that transactions were
were authorized to issue medium- and long-term certificates of deposits. Borrowing liberalized. In 1989, deposits rates were liberalized.
channeled through a Brazilian investment company and were effected in
abroad by corporations had a minimum maturity term of one year. In March, the
Brazilian stock exchanges. Capital was subject to registration in the central
government introduced a foreign exchange interbank market for transactions related
bank and had to remain in the country for at least three years. Remittances of
to capital repatriation and profit and dividend remittances. In May 1992, authorities
profits and dividends were subject to certain limitations. In 1979, the
banned the issuance of international bonds with maturity less than three years. In
minimum holding period for capital repatriation was reduced from three to two
June, foreign investors represented by funds and institutional investors were
years. In 1983, it was reduced again, from two years to three months. In 1987,
authorized to operate in options and futures markets. In January 1994, the
foreign portfolio investment could not exceed 5% of the voting capital and
automatic authorization of foreign loans was suspended. Renewal or extensions of
20% of the total capital of a company. New legislation gave foreign investors
exemption from domestic income tax on capital gains. In July 1989,
previous loans were also subject to a minimum term of 36 or 96 months, which
remittances abroad of profits and dividends were allowed after sixty days. In
prevailed for new loans. In March, automatic authorization for issuing bonds,
June 1990, the government announced a gradual liberalization of capital
commercial paper, and other fixed-income instruments abroad was terminated. Also
repatriation that was completed in the following year (1991). In June 1991, the
in March, the government introduced new restrictions on the constitution and
Foreign Investment Law was changed. Until that month, foreign portfolio
operation of foreign institutional investors. In October, the financial transaction tax
investors could invest in Brazil only through country funds. By then, foreign
on foreign borrowing was increased from 3% to 7%. In March 1995, financial and
investors were allowed to set up omnibus accounts which were essentially
non-financial institutions were authorized to obtain resources from abroad by
portfolios of one or more shares held in local custody. Besides, foreign
issuing commercial papers, notes, and bonds, including securities. Also in March,
ownership levels were increased. Foreign institutions could own up to 49% of
the minimum period for new foreign loans was lowered from 36 to 24 months. In
February 1996, another package of measures aimed at restricting short-term capital
voting common stock and 100% of non-voting participating preferred stock.
inflows was enacted. The minimum average term for contracting, renewing, or
Some corporate limitations applied (e.g. Petrobras common stocks was off
extending foreign loans was increased from 24 to 36 months. Banks were permitted
limits), and the voting class (ON) of banks were not available.
to buy and sell foreign exchange in the forward market without restrictions. In
1997, the minimum average term for borrowing abroad was decreased from three to
one year for new loans, and to six months for renewals or extensions. In April, the
"entrance" tax was reduced to 2%. In 1998, the special exchange rate regime for
capital account transactions was abolished.

Argentina

Brazil

Canada

Chile

Colombia

Denmark

In January 1991, a new foreign investment code, Resolution 49, came into
effect, which gave foreigners the same rights as domestic investors. Foreign
investors could not repatriate their capital within one year of registration, but
were free to do so thereafter. In October, limitations on annual transfers of
profits were abolished. Capital had to be registered with the central bank
before profits could be repatriated. In December, Resolution 52, which
allowed foreigners to purchase up to 100% of locally listed companies, came
into effect. Special regimes remained in effect in the financial, petroleum, and
mining sectors. The purchase of a 10% or more of the shares of a Colombian
financial institution required prior approval by the Superintendence of Banks.

In 1973, nonresidents could freely purchase or subscribe Danish shares,
whether officially listed in the main Copenhagen stock market or listed there
at "street" or "curb" market prices, provided the purchase did not represent a
direct investment and was not being made with a view to subsequent direct
investment in the company concerned. Capital and income repatriation was
free.

A gradual liberalization was implemented between 1967-1972, but some
controls remained, like ceilings on deposit rates. In August 1974,
interest rates on loans were liberalized and ceilings on deposit rates
were substantially raised. Policies attempting to control the amounts and
types of loans were abandoned. Also, the financing of preferential
sectors from the central bank was reduced. After September 1980, most
deposit interest rates were freely determined. In 1982, credit controls
were greatly, but not completely, eliminated. In May 1984, the central
bank increased from 8% to 15% the interest rate paid on the agricultural
bonds, which were held by banks as a forced investment equivalent to
16.5% of their loan portfolio. From January to June 1986, authorities
introduced a temporary (deposit and lending) interest rate control. In
1990, all deposits rates at commercial banks were market determined. In
1994, directed and forced lending to agricultural sector was reduced.

In January 1973, the Interest Rates Agreement that regulated interest
rates was abolished, and since then, lending interest rates have become
increasingly independent of the official discount rate. In 1975, the
Interest Margins Act of 1975 imposed a maximum between the average
of banks’ lending and deposit rates. In March 1979, this Act and ceiling
on deposit rates expired. This agreement was replaced by a new one
between the central bank and deposit money banks on lending interest
rates. Participant banks and savings banks were obliged to freeze their
lending rates at the level of the first quarter of 1979 (adjustment would
take place in accordance with changes in the discount rate). The banks
signing the agreements were offered more favorable borrowing
conditions at the central bank. In June 1981, this agreement on lending
interest rates ended.

In January 1991, under the "Apertura" program, authorities unified the exchange
rate and controls on borrowing abroad were relaxed. Authorities maintained some
controls on the capital account to reduce the volatility of capital flows, in particular
those of short-run nature. In February 1992, residents were allowed to hold foreign
stocks and other foreign portfolio investments abroad up to US$500,000. In
September 1993, authorities imposed a non-remunerated 47% deposit requirement
on most foreign borrowing. In 1994, foreign loans with maturity ranging from thirty
days to five years were subject to a non-remunerated deposit requirement ranging
from 43% to 140% of the loan. In 1996, reserve requirements of 50% were
imposed on all foreign credits with a maturity of less than five years. Since May
1997, foreign loans (all maturities) were subject to non-remunerated deposits
requirements of 30% of the loan in pesos to be held for eighteen months. In January
1998, foreign loan non-remunerated deposit requirements were reduced to 25% of
the loan in domestic currency, and the period was shortened to twelve months. In
September, foreign loan non-remunerated deposit requirements were further
reduced to 10% of the loan in domestic currency, and the period was shortened to
six months.
In 1978, the purposes for which Danish firms could raise loans abroad were
confined mainly to the financing of fixed investments and foreign trade. Financial
loans with maturities greater than five years could be raised abroad by business
firms. In 1983, authorization was given to domestic corporations to borrow abroad
without restrictions, provided that the maturity of such loans was at least five years.
Financial loans were no longer restricted to the financing of fixed business
investment, they could be raised for any business purpose. In October 1988, all
remaining foreign exchange regulations were lifted.

Stock Markets
In 1987, Law 18,657 permitted foreign capital investment funds to purchase
shares issued by Chilean corporations and other securities approved by the
securities commission, provided that such funds met certain portfolio
diversification requirements and had certain minimum paid-up capital levels.
Aggregate foreign ownership was limited to 25% of shares of a listed
company. In May 1987, a country mutual fund was introduced. In 1992,
Chilean enterprises were authorized to issue ADRs. In January, regulation
DL600 eased restrictions on foreign investment and repatriation of capital to a
minimum holding period of one year. In August 1995, authorities allowed
capital to be repatriated after one year.

Domestic Financial Sector
Liberalization of lending and deposit rates started in 1974 and was
completed by May 1975. Also in 1974, selective credits to priority
sectors were mostly eliminated. In 1976, quantitative credit controls
were abolished. In December 1982, commercial banks’ interest rates
controls were re-imposed (deposit and lending rates). In 1984, deposit
rates were mainly liberalized, but the indicative interest rate for 30-day
deposits was still in place. In 1985, loan rates were liberalized. In 1987,
the central bank eliminated its practice of announcing indicative interest
rate for 30-day bank deposits.

Capital Account
In 1973, all new foreign borrowing or refinancing of existing credits by commercial
banks, except for short-term lines of credit, were subject to prior approval of the
central bank. Corporations were allowed to borrow abroad, but were subject to
some exchange rate regulations. In 1977, the special exchange rate regime for
capital account transactions was abolished. In January 1978, a limit on external
indebtedness of commercial banks to relend in local currency (25% of capital and
reserves of each bank) was imposed. In 1979, non-interest bearing deposit
requirements on foreign borrowing were introduced: 25% for maturities less than
three years, 15% for maturities between three and four years, and 10% for
maturities between four and five years. In June, the pre-existing limit on external
indebtedness of commercial banks was eliminated. In 1982, most capital outflows
were restricted, and a special exchange rate regime for capital account transactions
was introduced. In May, authorities imposed a 20% reserve requirement on foreign
borrowing with maturity of less than 24 months. In July, authorities reduced to 5%
the reserve requirement on foreign borrowing with maturity of less than six years.
In September 1985, commercial banks were allowed to borrow abroad without any
restrictions or prior authorization. In April 1990, new regulations liberalizing
foreign exchange market operations were introduced. Previously, those operations
were prohibited unless under central bank's specific authorization. By then, all
transactions were permitted unless specifically restricted by the central bank. In
June 1991, a non-remunerated reserve requirement of 20% was imposed on direct
foreign borrowing for the first twelve months. In May 1992, reserve requirements
were raised to 30%. In September 1998, reserve requirements on capital inflows
were eliminated.

Finland

France

Germany

In 1973, participation exceeding 20% of the quoted firm's capital was
considered direct investment and required prior declaration to the ministry of
finance. French securities held in France by nonresidents could be exported,
provided that they had been deposited with an authorized bank in a foreign
dossier. French and foreign securities held under a foreign dossier could also
be sold in France and the sales proceeds could be transferred abroad with no
restriction. The transfer abroad of nonresident-owned funds in France was not
restricted. If justifying documents were presented and certain exchange control
requirements were met, authorized banks were permitted to approve, without
any limitation, applications for profits and dividends repatriation. In December
1989, restrictions regarding foreign direct investment in existing French firms
were loosened, mainly by reducing the period during which the ministry of
finance could suspend (for non-European Comunity investors) the acquisition
of participation in an existing French firm.

In 1985, (deposit and lending) interest rate ceilings were mostly
eliminated. In 1986, the ceiling and selectivity of credit policies were
abolished. Credit selectivity was replaced by explicit credit subsidies. In
January 1987, credit controls were completely removed. The
compulsory ratio for assets was abolished.

In 1985, the requirements on direct investment abroad were abolished. In June,
banks were freely allowed to contract foreign currency loans and borrow in francs
up to 50 million. In June 1989, limitations on the foreign exchange positions of
commercial banks were abolished. Effective January 1990, all remaining exchange
restrictions with respect to capital transactions were abolished. Borrowing abroad
in French francs or foreign currencies by physical or juridical persons, whether
public or private French residents, or by branches or subsidiaries in France of
juridical persons, whose registered office was abroad, was unrestricted.

In 1973, banks were subject to high minimum reserve requirements on the level of Ceilings on interest rates were abolished in 1967. And there were no In 1973, previous approval for nonresident's direct investments in Germany
and purchases of German or foreign equities was required. However,
their foreign liabilities with maturities of less than four years. Banks’ foreign credit controls since 1973.
nonresidents could freely repatriate capital and income. In 1974, this approval
currency borrowing that were immediately reinvested abroad were exempted from
was no longer required.
the minimum reserve requirements. Cash deposit requirements were applied to
certain borrowing made by residents from nonresidents. The prior approval of the
central bank was required for sales to nonresidents of all domestic money market
paper and of fixed-interest securities of german issuers with less than four years
remaining to maturity. No special exchange rate regime for capital account
transactions existed. In February 1974, Bundesbank approval requirements were
lifted for all borrowings abroad made by residents. In March 1980, Germany
lowered the minimum maturity for domestic fixed-interest securities eligible for
sale to nonresidents from four to two years, and in November, it was further
reduced further to one year. In December, the Bundesbank concluded with the
major commercial banks a gentlemen's agreement over voluntary curbs on capital
exports. In March 1981, restrictions to the sale of German money market paper and
fixed-interest securities to nonresidents were lifted. This implied a de facto
abolition of the remaining restrictions on capital transactions. The agreement over
voluntary restriction on capital exports was ended.

Stock Markets
In 1973, nonresidents could purchase bonds, debentures, or shares quoted on
the Helsinki Stock Exchange through an authorized bank, against convertible
or externally convertible currencies or by debiting a convertible Markka
account, and nonresidents were also permitted to sell them through the bank
and to freely repatriate the proceeds. No permission was needed for the
acquisition of shares with funds classified as capital accounts, however, the
proceeds could not be transferred abroad without a permission from the central
bank. In 1990, the regulations on outward and inward capital transfers were
broadly liberalized. The sale to nonresidents of derivative instruments based
on Finnish shares and warrants was permitted. However, because of
restrictions on foreign ownership, restricted shares could not be transferred to
foreign residents. In February 1990, Finnish companies were allowed to issue
shares abroad without prior authorization. Also, it was no longer necessary for
nonresidents to effect their purchases of Finnish securities through the HSE. In
1992, the act on mutual funds was amended so as to give foreigners the right
to own units in these funds. Some restrictions on foreign ownership still
applied. In 1993, the restrictions on foreign ownership (cap limits on certain
sectors and large Finnish companies) were lifted. Nonresidents were allowed
to purchase Finnish securities and to own Finnish corporations without any
restrictions.

Domestic Financial Sector
In 1986, restrictions on average lending rates were abolished. However,
lending rates remained under some constraints, since all loans were tied
to a base rate controlled by the Bank of Finland. In March 1989, the
central bank reduced its direct control over allocation of credit. Only a
set of non-binding recommendations on bank lending was issued. In
1990, the use of a base rate as a reference rate for new loans was largely
discontinued.

Capital Account
In 1973, lending to nonresidents was restricted to export credits. In 1987,
international banking activities of Finnish authorized banks were liberalized, but
subject to certain supervisory reporting requirements. In August, regulations on
foreign borrowing were eliminated for credits with maturity of at least five years. In
June 1989, regulations on foreign borrowing were eliminated for credits with
maturity of at least one year. In 1990, the regulations on outward and capital
transfers were broadly liberalized. In January 1991, all foreign exchange controls
were eliminated, except those regarding the raising of loans abroad by private
corporations. In June, the Bank of Finland eliminated all controls on overseas
borrowing by private corporations.

In December 1988, the government introduced deregulation measures to allow
foreigners to purchase shares in eight non-joint venture companies. In 1989,
investors were granted the right to repatriate capital and profits. The law
provided that no transfer permit would be issued for capital repatriation as
long as investment benefits from tax relief were being received. However,
foreign payments did not require a transfer permit. In August 1989, foreigners
were allowed to purchase up to 49% of all companies listed shares, including
foreign joint ventures, but excluding bank shares. No person could purchase
more than 1% of any collective investment security. In 1992, the exclusion of
bank shares was eased and foreigners were allowed to buy listed shares (up to
49%) in three categories of banks: private national, state owned, and foreign
joint venture. In December 1997, foreign companies were authorized to
purchase, without limit, shares issued by Indonesian nonbank companies in the
Indonesian capital market.

In 1973, purchases by nonresidents of Irish registered securities had to be
funded with foreign currency from an external account. Also, purchases in
excess of certain amount had to be notified to the central bank. Some
restrictions also applied to repatriation of capital and income. Exchange
control approval was required for all transfers of capital to nonresidents. In
1992, restrictions on acquisitions by foreigners and repatriation of capital and
income were lifted.

In 1978, private banks were allowed to set their own deposit rates, but
state banks could set rates only for rupiah deposits of three months or
less and for foreign currency deposits. In 1983, most loan rates were
liberalized, credit ceilings were abolished, and centrally oriented credit
was greatly reduced. In June, state banks were free to set their own
deposit rates on all classes of time deposits. In 1990, banks were
required to allocate 20% of loans to small businesses.

In May 1985, the central bank announced a new and more marketoriented arrangement for the determination of (lending and deposit)
interest rates by the Associated Bank. In the past, changes in interest
rates by these banks had to be approved by the central bank. Since May
1985, each bank was free to decide its lending and deposit rates subject
to a maximum permissible prime-lending rate set by the central bank. In
February 1986, the central bank suspended the arrangement governing
Associated Bank interest rates (lending and deposit rates).

In 1978, the special exchange rate regime for capital account transactions was
abolished. In 1979, the central bank suspended the 50% deposit requirement on
inflows of capital through commercial banks. In September, restrictions on
acquisition of foreign securities were eased. In 1980, exchange control approval
was required for all transfers of capital to nonresidents. In 1988, lending of Irish
currency to nonresidents began to be permitted to the extent that the nonresidents
were parties to commercial transactions with residents. Residents were allowed to
borrow foreign currency for any purpose, but an approval of the central bank had to
be obtained when the borrowing was not for the financing of trade. Since January
1992, residents were allowed to borrow in foreign currency for non-trade purposes
without restrictions. Also in January, exchange controls on outward capital
transfers were eliminated. In September, residents were prohibited from making
financial loans in Irish pound for periods of less than one year to nonresidents
without the permission of the central bank. Forward foreign exchange transactions

Capital Account
Domestic Financial Sector
Stock Markets
In 1973, there were no restrictions on borrowing abroad by corporations. In In 1973, the lending and deposit rates offered by banks were subject to In 1973, no restrictions applied on acquisitions by foreigners and on
January, the exchange control was abolished. In September, banks were free to run the interest rates arrangement of the Exchange Bank Association, but the repatriation of capital and income.
positions in any currency without any consultation.
rates offered by deposit-taking companies were not. As a result, the
deposit-taking companies were in a better condition to attract deposits
by offering better rates. Nevertheless, the rates closely followed market
conditions. There were no credit controls in place, except for some shortlived loans to small scale industries. In September 1983, following a
large fall in the stock market index and a run against the currency,
interest rates administered by the Hong Kong Association of Banks
were increased twice, in October and November. After the stabilization
of the currency, rates were reduced. In October, the withholding tax on
interest on domestic currency deposits was removed. In August 1994,
the HKAB announced a timetable for the removal of the interest rate cap
on time deposits. In October, rate caps in deposits with maturity of more
than a month were deregulated. In January 1995, interest rate caps on
deposits of more than seven days were removed. In September, the
Hong Kong Monetary Authority removed the ceiling on time deposits
fixed for seven days. It also announced no further liberalization of rates
on deposits with maturity below seven days.

In 1978, a special exchange rate regime for current account transactions was
introduced. The deposit requirements for foreign currency liabilities by
corporations were abolished. A 15% reserve requirement was applicable to foreign
currency liabilities of foreign exchange banks. In 1979, the special exchange rate
regime for current account transactions was abolished. In 1988, almost all (except
for open position limits) restrictions on borrowing abroad were lifted. In 1991, a
reduction on bank's net open position was implemented to reduce banks’ access to
foreign borrowing. In March, the central bank adopted measures to discourage
foreign borrowing. The Bank of Indonesia began to scale down its swap operations,
reducing individual bank's limits from 25% to 20% of capital. The three-month
swap premium was raised by 5%. In November, bank’s short-term foreign
exchange liabilities could not exceed 30% of their own capital. A reserve
requirement of 2% was applicable to foreign currency liabilities of foreign
exchange banks. Firms could also obtain foreign credit subject to a 30% reserve
requirement for a year. In 1992, the central bank limited banks’ short-term foreign
liabilities to 30% of capital. Borrowing abroad required a prior approval of the
central bank. In 1996, foreign exchange banks were subject to central bank
directives with respect to borrowing abroad. A prior approval of the team set in
1991 was required before the acceptance of a loan from abroad. An annual
borrowing ceiling was imposed by the central bank on foreign commercial
borrowing of more than two years of maturity. In 1998, a special exchange rate
regime for capital transactions was introduced.

Hong Kong

Indonesia

Ireland

Ireland

Italy

Japan

Korea

In January 1979, the Korean authorities revised their exchange control regulations
to permit domestic banks to lend to nonresidents, but not to borrow abroad. In
1993, a capital act liberalization plan was announced, giving greater freedom for
residents concerning capital outflows. Despite the capital act liberalization plan,
considerable restrictions remained on capital inflows: bond-holding by nonresidents
was allowed indirectly through the Korea Trust and Country Fund; direct holding
was allowed only for convertible bonds issued by small and medium enterprises;
domestic companies could use foreign commercial loans within certain limits only
for the import of capital goods and for foreign direct investment (FDI). In 1996,
long-term borrowing was forbidden in practice, but short-term foreign borrowing
was permitted under the regulations governing open exchange positions. In 1998,
borrowing abroad by high-tech foreign-financed manufacturing companies was
allowed up to 100% of the foreign invested capital. However, maturity was limited
to three years or less and limitations were imposed on the use of funds. In April,
authorities abolished regulations on usage of long-term loans with maturity of over
five years that were brought into the country by foreign manufacturers.

Capital Account
in Irish pounds for speculative purposes were prohibited. The minimum maturity of
allowable forward transactions was 21 days. In January 1993, all controls were
eliminated.
In 1982, the special exchange rate regime for capital account transactions was
eliminated, but the deposit requirement for investment abroad was still in place. In
1983, certain sectors were exempted from the 50% non-interest bearing deposit
requirement. In July 1994, a ceiling on foreign indebtedness by banks was
introduced and eliminated in December 1985, but some restrictions still remained.
In May 1987, the deposit requirement for investment abroad was abolished. In May
1990, most restrictions on borrowing abroad by banks were lifted. In 1992, there
were no controls on banks' foreign borrowing. Banks were only obliged to declare
transfers by filling out a special customs form. There were also no controls on
corporations' foreign borrowing. Residents were free to undertake financial
transactions with nonresidents, including loans.
In 1979, controls on inflows were eased. In January, the prohibition regarding
nonresidents' purchases of bonds with remaining maturity of less than five years
was entirely lifted. The Japanese authorities implemented major reforms during the
1980s. These reforms included the deregulation of cross-border transactions and
improvements on access to foreign financial institutions. Starting in July 1980,
Japanese corporations were allowed to issue bonds abroad, provided that advance
notice was given. Deregulation continued during the 1990s and it was completed by
mid 1990s.

Stock Markets

In 1988, loan rates from banks and nonbank financial intermediaries,
other than interest rates on loans subsidized by government funds, were
liberalized. Interest rates on time deposits with maturities of more than
two years at banks, postal savings, and credit unions, and on time and
savings deposits with maturities of over one year at mutual savings and
finance companies were liberalized. Short-term deposit rates were still
under the authorities' control. Bank of Korea also controlled the total
volume of credit and the minimum credit guidelines to small and
medium firms and conglomerates. In 1991, the government announced a
four-stage plan for interest rates deregulation (deposit and lending
rates). In November, short-term lending rates (bank overdrafts,
discounts of commercial paper, and trade bills) were liberalized. In
1995, all lending rates and most deposit rates were deregulated, except
government supported lending and demand deposits. In 1997, all
lending rates were freed. In July, remaining restrictions on deposit
interest rates were eliminated. In January 1998, all direct restrictions on
lending to prohibited sectors were completely abolished.

In 1979, interest rate deregulation started. In 1991, interest rates on
almost all time deposits held by corporate clients were fully liberalized
at the end of the year. Also in 1991, the share of deposits with marketdetermined interest rates amounted to 75% of total deposits. In July
1991, direct quantitative controls on credit were abolished. In June
1992, the liberalization of interest rates on time deposits was completed.
The first step to deregulate demand deposits was taken. Postal savings
interest rates remained regulated.

In 1984, the repatriation of dividends was fully permitted. In 1991, repatriation
of capital became freely permitted. Market opened to foreign investors. A
notification system made authorization of foreign investment subject to
approval or notification. Foreign participation became easier under the
regulations. In 1992, foreign investors were permitted to invest in the domestic
stock market, subject to the restriction that foreign ownership of listed firms
could not exceed 10% of total equity, and they could not hold more than 3%
of total equity. Investments in stocks by resident foreign financial institutions
were subject to the same limits as those by institutions owned by nationals. In
1995, the ceiling on stock investment by nonresidents was raised twice. The
ceiling on aggregate purchases was raised to 12% in January, and to 15% in
July. In 1996, the ceiling on aggregate purchases was increased to 18% in
April, and to 20% in October. The ceiling on individual purchases was raised
to 5%. In 1997, ceilings on foreign ownership of Korean equities were raised
four times (May, November, and twice in December). In December, these
ceilings were increased to 50% and to 55%. In May 1998, the aggregate
ceiling on foreign direct investment in Korean equities was eliminated, and
equity investment in non-listed companies was permitted.

In 1973, there were no restrictions on repatriation of income. Acquisitions of
securities for portfolio investment could be made freely through designated
securities firms. In other occasions, a prior notification without a waiting
period was required. In 1976, foreign ownership limits applied. In principle,
acquisitions by foreign investors were subject to validation or license.
However, acquisitions of stocks for portfolio investment were automatically
approved by the Bank of Japan. All these acquisitions had to be made against
yen proceeds from the sale of foreign exchange if the investor wished to
obtain remittance rights upon validation. In 1985, controls on outflows were
eased.

In 1974, (deposit and lending) interest rate ceilings were eliminated. In In 1973, foreign investment of any kind was permitted freely. No restrictions
1975, deposit interest rate ceilings were re-established. In 1981, they applied to capital and profit repatriation.
were eliminated.

Domestic Financial Sector

Malaysia

Mexico

Domestic Financial Sector
In October 1978, the liberalization of (deposit and lending) interest rates
started. In October 1985, controls on deposit and lending rates were reimposed by restricting the competitive bidding up of interest rates
among banks. In February 1991, those controls were completely
eliminated.

In 1974, authorities allowed banks to issue certificate of deposits at free
interest rates. In August 1979, a new system to increase flexibility on
deposit interest rates was introduced. By then, the maximum rates were
frequently adjusted by the central bank. In September 1982, the
Mexican president nationalized the banking system. In October 1988,
some interest rate controls were lifted, and liberalization of deposit
interest rates started. In April 1989, interest rate ceilings were abolished.
Banks were authorized to pay interest on checking accounts.

Capital Account
In 1973, no special exchange rate regime for capital account transactions existed. In
May, the new exchange control regulations opened up opportunities for banks and
corporations to expand considerably their foreign exchange operations. Borrowing
by Malaysian residents from nonresidents required the approval of the Controller of
the Foreign Exchange, which was freely given on all loans raised on reasonable
terms and used to productive purposes in Malaysia. In June 1979, borrowing from
nonresidents by banks and corporations was freely permitted, but only up to a
certain limit. In January 1987, resident borrowers could borrow up to US$400,000
from nonresidents without obtaining any permission. Larger amounts required
permission from the Controller of Foreign Exchange, which was freely given to
finance productive activity in Malaysia. From January to August 1994, all
residents were prohibited from selling short-term monetary instruments to
nonresidents. In September 1998, exchange controls were introduced.

In 1973, private corporations and private banks were allowed to borrow abroad, but
subject to the approval of the central bank. There was no special exchange rate
regime for capital account transactions. In August 1982, commercial banks were
required to surrender to the Bank of Mexico their net foreign exchange holdings,
including gold and silver. In September, an exchange control was introduced with a
preferential exchange rate to be used to make interest payments on foreign credit.
In November 1991, the special exchange rate regime for capital account
transactions was abolished, and the central bank abolished the restriction on bank
loans obtained from foreign financial institutions to be channeled through the
controlled exchange market.

Stock Markets
In 1973, repatriation of capital and income was free. Since May, all payments
for capital repatriation up to US$400,000 were freely approved by any
commercial bank. Payments in excess of that amount required the approval of
the Controller of Foreign Exchange, which was freely given under normal
circumstances. In July 1973, the Malaysian stock exchange was established. In
conformity with the liberalization of the Malaysian exchange control
regulations, all nonresidents were permitted to trade freely in all shares listed,
without any need for exchange control permission. In 1975, the general aim
was that foreign investment would be allowed in the proportion of 30% of
foreign equity and 70% of Malaysian equity. New import substitution projects
had to have 100% Malaysian ownership. Industries exporting more than 80%
of their production and using mainly imported materials could be considered
for majority foreign ownership, ranging from 51% to 70%, but in exceptional
cases, 100% foreign ownership could have been considered. In 1984, a
relaxation of these regulations on foreign ownership was announced. Majority
equity shares could be held by foreign firms engaged in capital-intensive and
resource-oriented enterprises. In addition, the possibility of 100% foreign
ownership, previously limited to export industries, was extended to other
sectors. In 1988, foreign stock brokerage firms were allowed to increase their
equity share in local brokerage firms from 30% to 49%. In 1992, the
guidelines on foreign equity capital ownership were liberalized. Companies
exporting at least 80% of their production were no longer subject to any equity
requirements. Companies exporting between 50% and 79% of their production
were permitted to hold 100% equity, provided that they had invested US$50
million or more in fixed assets or completed projects with at least 50% local
value added, and that the company's products did not compete with those
produced by domestic firms. These guidelines did not apply to sectors in
which limits on foreign equity participation had been established. In August
1993, the minimum amount of equity that had to be held by an indigenous
Malay group, company, or institution was lowered from 51% to 35%. In 1998,
investors could not directly convert their short-term investment into foreign
exchange. Proceeds from investments held for less than one year could be
transferred only to Malaysian ringgit-denominated accounts, which could be
used only to acquire other ringgit assets. In February 1999, the minimum
holding period was eliminated and a graduated system of exit taxes was
introduced: for investments made prior to February 1999, capital was taxed at
50% if repatriated less than seven months after entry, 20% if repatriated after
seven months, and 10% if repatriated nine to twelve months after entry; capital
repatriated after a year and the original capital of investments made after
February were not taxed. However, repatriated gains for those investments
were taxable as follows: capital gains repatriated within twelve months after
the gain was realized were taxable at 30%, and those repatriated after more
than twelve months were taxable at 10%.
In 1989, restrictions on foreign capital participation were substantially
liberalized. Foreign investments were permitted in the Mexican Stock Market
through specially designed trust funds and "B" shares of Mexican
corporations. However, participation was not allowed in the administration of
the companies involved. Foreign investors could hold majority of shares in
new firms, as long as the new investment met a list of conditions. In 1991,
restrictions on repatriation of capital and income were abolished, and
restrictions on portfolio investment were lifted. However, there were sectors
that remained reserved to Mexicans or to Mexican corporations with a foreign
exclusion clause. There were also caps to foreign participation in some
sectors, and foreign investment in others required prior authorization.

Norway

Peru

Philippines

Portugal

In 1991, repatriation of capital, income, and dividends were liberalized. In
1992, under the Private Sector Guarantee Regime, foreign investors were
guaranteed non-discriminatory treatment. The stock market was 100% opened
except for banks, which had a foreign portfolio investment limit of 15% of
total shares outstanding. In 1993, shares of banks, insurance companies, and
pension fund management companies became freely available.

In May 1986, a country fund ("The Thornton Philippines Redevelopment Fund
Limited") was introduced. In 1991, a new foreign investment law was
promulgated. It expanded the number of sectors opened to full foreign
ownership, simplified the approval process, and defined more clearly
restrictions on foreign investment. However, the law required that Philippines
nationals owned a minimum of 60% of the shares issued by domestic firms.
To ensure compliance, Philippine companies typically issued two classes of
stock (A-shares, to be held by Philippine nationals, and B-shares, which both
foreign and national investors could buy). Foreign investors were allowed to
invest in all sectors, except for those specified in a negative list. Also, full and
immediate repatriation privileges for all types of investments were allowed to
be serviced directly, without the approval of the central bank. Foreign
investment regulations were removed over the following three years and most
sectors of the economy became open to 100% foreign ownership.
In 1973, the transfer abroad of full proceeds from the liquidation of foreign
investments was authorized without restrictions. Foreign investments were
authorized freely if they were involved in activities that were of recognized
interest for Portugal's development, and provided that no speculative operation
in real state was involved. In 1976, the transfer abroad of proceeds from the
liquidation of foreign investments was authorized after five years and subject
to quantity restrictions. A new decree law restricting foreign investment was
issued. All private capital transactions between Portugal and foreign countries
were subject to prior authorization by the central bank. Foreign direct
investment in Portugal was allowed on the basis of the Foreign Investment
Code. In 1986, a new foreign investment regulation substantially liberalized
capital account movements. The transfer of the proceeds of liquidation of
foreign investment, including capital gains, was free of restrictions.

In 1973, there were no interest rate ceilings for deposit and lending
rates, but some preferential lending rates existed. In 1982, binding
interest rate ceilings were put in place. In 1991, controls on lending
interest rates were abolished. In March 1992, interest rates for foreign
exchange deposits were freed.

In 1981, the central bank deregulated all lending and deposit rates,
except short-term lending rates. In July, ceilings on all deposit rates
were lifted and in October, the ceilings on medium and long-term
lending rates were also lifted. In December 1982, the ceiling on shortterm lending rates was eliminated.

In 1984, the Bank of Portugal freed deposit rates to align them around
the rate on 6-12 month time deposits, which was supposed to serve as a
reference rate. However, ceilings on lending and on some deposit
interest rates prevailed. Some preferential lending rates were still in
place. In 1990, preferential lending rates were practically phased out,
but some ceilings remained.

In 1973, a special exchange rate regime for capital account transactions existed.
Borrowing abroad by corporations was permitted, but under some restrictions. In
1974, the central bank eliminated the regulation restricting the net foreign exchange
position of commercial banks. In 1987, controls were imposed, commercial banks
were nationalized, and borrowing abroad by banks was substantially limited. A
cash deposit requirement was re-imposed. In December 1990, restrictions were
relaxed, capital controls were removed, and the special exchange rate regime for
capital account transactions was abolished. In 1991, borrowing abroad was
substantially deregulated, and in 1992, restrictions on borrowing abroad were
lifted.
In 1976, the central bank exempted Offshore Banking Units (OBUs, introduced in
1972) from reserve requirements, local taxes, and fees and permitted them to
extend foreign currency loans to any enterprise from deposits raised outside the
country. In 1979, regulations were introduced to gain control over short-term
borrowing from OBUs. In 1983, foreign borrowing required prior approval from
the central bank. In 1994, commercial banks were allowed to maintain open
exchange positions, but subject to the limitation that long and short positions could
not exceed 25% and 5%, respectively, of unimpaired capital.

In 1992, all restrictions on borrowing abroad by banks were eliminated, except for
open foreign exchange position limits. In August, the Bank of Portugal liberalized
the purchase of foreign securities by residents. In September, compulsory deposits
affecting all foreign borrowings were abolished. In December, authorities fully
liberalized all external borrowings by residents, regardless of their nature or
maturity.

Stock Markets
In 1973, acquisition by foreign investors was precluded. Repatriation of
capital and income was free of regulations. In 1989, further liberalization
stipulated that non-resident portfolio investment in Norwegian shares and
domestic listed bonds with a maturity of one year or more was unrestricted. In
1984, nonresidents were allowed to purchase quoted and nonquoted shares,
within the limits established in the Concession Acts. Previously, most
transactions in securities involving nonresident's interest were subject to
approval.

Domestic Financial Sector
In 1979, lending rate regulations were briefly removed and explicit
restrictions on deposit interest rates were lifted. In September 1985,
authorities switched to so-called interest rate monitoring (i.e. moral
suasion) and lending interest rates were further liberalized. Also,
lending interest rate declarations were removed. In 1988, liberalization
of lending rates was completed and they became market determined.

Capital Account
In 1980, foreign borrowing by banks was liberalized. Limits on foreign currency
exposure of banks were established. In 1981, there was an elimination of minimum
limits on maturity of foreign debt held by domestic firms. In 1982, an upper limit
on short-term borrowing abroad by domestic enterprises was set. Deregulation of
the conditions on borrowing abroad by corporations started in 1985 and was
completed in 1988. In 1992, borrowing and lending abroad were subject to a
mandatory deposit requirement. No other restrictions on borrowing and lending
abroad existed. Norwegian companies were permitted to make direct investments
abroad.

Stock Markets
Since 1963, foreign capital participation was permitted freely in most Spanish
industries. In some specific industries, foreign participation was permitted
freely up to 50% of the capital of the enterprise and amounts in excess of 50%
required the authorization of the Council of Ministers. Purchases by
nonresidents of shares of Spanish companies were freely permitted up to the
percentages applicable to direct investment. Nonresidents could freely
repatriate the proceeds, including capital gains, from the liquidation of shares
in Spanish companies. Holders of Spanish securities (excluding securities
issued by private companies acquired through direct subscription) could freely
transfer abroad interest and profits. The securities had to be purchased with
pesetas resulting from the sale of foreign exchange. In 1986, a new legislation
that further liberalized foreign (direct and portfolio) investment was approved.
In 1992, most remaining controls on capital transfer were abolished. The
proceeds from liquidation of non-resident investments and capital could be
freely transferable abroad, provided that these investments had been fully
registered at the Registry of Foreign Investment.

In 1973, foreign direct investment and the transfer abroad of proceeds required
authorization, which was always given. Since 1980, foreigners were allowed
to buy Swedish shares. In 1992, the act restricting foreign acquisitions of
Swedish enterprises was abolished.
In May 1983, portfolio investment by foreign investors was permitted through
the purchase of beneficiary certificates issued by a securities investment trust
fund enterprise within the country and sold by agents outside the country. A
preapproval procedure was required for issuing beneficiary certificates. Also
in May 1983, the first country fund was established. In December 1986,
regulations were relaxed, and foreigners were permitted to invest in stock
markets via contracts with mutual funds. In 1987, outward remittances of
capital were allowed freely up to US$5 million per year. In February 1995, the
ceilings on the total amount of foreign investment in the local stock market
were abolished. The new regulation required that each foreign investor held no
more that 6% of the market capitalization of a listed company, and foreign
investors as a group could not hold more than 12% of the market capitalization
of a listed company. In August, the ratios were increased to 7.5% and 15%,

Domestic Financial Sector
In 1974, a gradual liberalization of interest rates began, starting with the
liberalization of lending rates on long-term loans and on deposits with
maturity over two years. In 1977, authorities liberalized interest rates on
deposits with maturity over one year. By the beginning of 1981, lending
and deposit interest rates were freed, except for some short-term deposit
rates. In 1987, final liberalization of interest rates took place and
authorities also allowed banks to pay interest for sight deposits.

In 1978, ceilings on banks’ deposit interest rates were abolished. In
1980, controls on lending rates for insurance companies were removed,
but limits on average lending rates were imposed. In 1985, ceilings on
banks’ lending rates were lifted.
In September 1984, the central bank allowed banks to set their prime
rate based on their cost of funds. In 1986, the central bank approved a
proposal from the Banker's association to enlarge the range between the
maximum and minimum lending rates, allowing banks to enjoy a greater
latitude in setting their own lending rates according to loan maturity and
customer's credit worthiness. In July 1989, interest rate ceilings and
floors were completely abolished. In November 1994, in order to further
liberalize the deposit-taking business, banks were allowed to post
interest rates specified for deposits in excess of 3 millions of New
Taiwan dollars, and these rates could differ from those on deposits of
less than 3 millions of New Taiwan dollars, even though the length of
maturity could be the same.

Capital Account
In 1975, regulations on capital inflows were relaxed. In several cases, borrowing
abroad by the nonbank private sector was encouraged. In 1977, rules on Spanish
direct investment abroad were liberalized, no longer requiring prior authorization.
In addition, authorized banks could extend credit in foreign currency to
nonresidents, provided that it was financed with funds deposited in non-resident
convertible currency accounts. A non-interest bearing deposit requirement
equivalent to 25% of non-commercial loans and credits received from abroad was
introduced in 1979 and abolished in November 1980. Also in November 1980,
foreign borrowing by residents was liberalized: authorization became automatic for
loans with maturity of at least one year. In 1985, for loans with maturity of at least
one year, authorization became automatic if the application was not questioned or
rejected within fifteen working days by the Bank of Spain. In June 1988, the
minimum maturity period of foreign currency borrowing not subject to official
authorization was raised from one to three years. In 1989, a 30% unremunerated
deposit requirement on all new foreign borrowing by industrial firms was imposed.
In 1990, the unremunerated deposit requirement on all foreign borrowing by banks
and residents was abolished. In 1992, all remaining capital controls were lifted. In
March, the non-remunerated deposit requirement that applied to all loans
contracted abroad was abolished. In April, banks were authorized to grant financial
loans to nonresidents without restrictions. Between September and November,
foreign exchange controls were in place. Compulsory 1-year non-interest bearing
deposits at the Bank of Spain were required. Those deposits were equal to 100% of:
(i) the increase in the peseta value of the total long positions in foreign currency;
(ii) the increase in credit balances relating to peseta-denominated loans or deposit
transactions vis-à-vis nonresidents, except those arising from exporting financing.

In 1984, Sweden relaxed the minimum required maturity for borrowing abroad in
foreign currency by enterprises from five to two years. In March 1987, the limit on
foreign borrowing by enterprises was abolished. In 1989, the remaining foreign
exchange controls were removed. Corporations were free to borrow abroad
irrespective of the purpose and maturity.

In July 1987, foreign exchange controls were liberalized and foreign exchange
market was opened. Exchange controls on current account transactions were
completely abolished, and controls on capital account transactions were limited to
transactions over US$5 million per year per person. Ceilings of banks' foreign
liabilities were gradually raised during the late 1980s and 1990s. In October 1996,
domestic corporations were allowed to freely borrow from overseas financial
institutions and convert the foreign currency funds to New Taiwan dollars. In
December, remaining restrictions on forward foreign exchange trade were removed.
In 1997, capital account transactions for investment or trade purposes were
completely free, but controls remained on capital transactions of a short-term
nature. The amount that companies could freely inwardly or outwardly remit each
year was raised from US$20 million to US$50 million. In May, restrictions on
foreign liability limits of authorized foreign exchange banks were abolished.

Sweden

Taiwan

Spain

Taiwan

Thailand

United Kingdom

US

Stock Markets
respectively. Foreign direct investment by all foreign natural persons was
permitted. In March 1996, the domestic securities market was further opened
to nonresidents. Each offshore natural person and offshore juridical person
could invest up to US$5 million and US$20 million in the market,
respectively. The ceiling on total foreign direct investment in any listed
corporation was raised in March and November to 15% of the oustanding
shares. In December 1996, the ceilings on investments in the stock market by
qualified foreign institutional investors was raised from US$400 millions to
US$600 millions. In February 1997, domestic companies were allowed to
issue stocks overseas, and foreign companies were allowed to list their stocks
in the domestic market. In January 1998, ceilings on the proportions of a local
companies' listed shares that could be held by an individual foreign investor
and by foreign investors as a group were raised to 25%, and 30%,
respectively. In April, the ratio was increased to 50%.
In 1988, repatriation of income and capital could be made freely. In January, a
country fund ("The Siam Fund Limited") was introduced. In 1990, equity
capital investments by nonresidents could be made freely. Foreign equity
participation or joint ventures were freely permitted. Foreign investors could
hold up to 100% of the equity of a firm, but provided that the firm exported all
of its output. Certain economic activities were still reserved to Thai nationals.
The Banking Law restricted foreign ownership in banks to 25%. The Alien
Business Law restricted foreign ownership in specified sectors to 49%. In
addition, other laws provided similar restrictions that ranged from 15% to
65%.

In 1973, nonresidents could buy sterling securities on a recognized stock
exchange in the United Kingdom against payment in foreign currency or in
sterling from an external account. The securities purchased could be exported.
The participation of foreign capital as a direct investment was subject to
individual authorization, which was normally granted. Cases involving the
takeover of existing companies, which by their size or nature, constituted a
vital part of the English economy were considered on their merits. All
proceeds from realization, redemption, or maturity of sterling capital assets
(including direct investments) owned by nonresidents could be freely
transferred abroad at the official exchange rate. Payments for invisibles to
nonresidents required exchange control authorization, which was granted
freely.
In 1973, capital, income, and profits were freely transferable abroad. There
were no restrictions on foreign portfolio and direct investment. Foreign
portfolio investment in excess of 10% of the voting securities of a US
corporation was considered direct investment and had to be reported to the
Department of Commerce. Portfolio investment by nonresidents had to be
reported to the Treasury Department.

Domestic Financial Sector

In June 1989, the Bank of Thailand decided to eliminate the ceiling for
time deposits with maturity of more than one year. In March 1990,
interest rate ceilings on all types of deposits were eliminated.
In June 1992, lending interest rates were liberalized.

Since the early 1980s, authorities in the United Kingdom abandoned the
use of credit controls. In August 1981, the Bank of England stopped
publishing its minimum lending rate and eliminated the ceilings on
deposits rates. However, some controls on the mortgage lending rates
were still in place. In 1986, ceilings on lending rates were eliminated,
and the government withdrew its guidance on mortgage lending rates.

In 1973, Regulation Q that set ceilings on interest payments on deposits
was in place. In 1982, Regulation Q was suspended. By October 1983,
all controls on time deposits with an original maturity of at least thirtytwo days were lifted.

Capital Account

In October, Thailand exempted all loans with original maturity of more than one
year from the 10% mandatory deposit requirement. In 1982, authorities set the
maximum rate that foreign lenders could charge to Thai costumers in conformity to
the domestic interest rate ceiling, which enabled borrowers to legally borrow from
abroad at rates higher than the ceiling rate stipulated in the Civil and Commercial
Code. A special exchange rate regime for current account transactions was
introduced in 1983 and abolished in 1984. In 1992, loans from abroad could be
contracted without restrictions, but if the loan was used domestically, resident
borrowers were required to convert foreign currency obtained into bahts. In August
1995, asymmetric open position limits for short and long positions were introduced
in order to discourage foreign borrowing. In December, a variety of measures
aimed at reducing foreign-financed lending was introduced. In 1996, the remaining
restrictions on credit to residents from nonresidents were eliminated. In May and
June 1997, the central bank adopted some measures to limit capital flows. A twotier exchange rate regime was introduced in July 1997 and abandoned in January
1998.

In October 1973, the minimum period for foreign currency borrowing for most
domestic uses was reduced to two years. In 1979, the special exchange rate regime
for capital account transactions was abolished. In October, authorities eliminated
all barriers to outward and inward flows of capital.

In 1973, corporations were allowed to borrow abroad but subject to ceilings, which
were relaxed in July. In June, the minimum reserve to be held by Federal Reserve
member banks against Euro-dollar borrowings in excess of amounts permitted as a
reserve-free base, introduced in 1972, was reduced from 20% to 8%. It was further
reduced in April 1975, from 8% to 4%, and in December 1977, from 4% to 1%. In
August 1978, the reserve requirement on loans by foreign branches of US banks to
US residents (under Regulation M) of 1% was abolished.

Venezuela

Capital Account
In 1973, all capital transfers were permitted freely. Banks and corporations were
allowed to borrow abroad without any restrictions. In February 1983, authorities
announced that authorized private debt could be paid at the preferential rate and a
dual exchange rate regime was introduced. All foreign credit had to be registered.
In March 1989, the system of multiple exchange rate was abolished, and virtually
all forms of exchange controls were eliminated. In 1994, the foreign exchange
market was closed, and a comprehensive system of exchange controls covering all
current and capital account transactions was introduced. In April 1996, exchange
controls were abolished.

Domestic Financial Sector
In August 1981, the government largely freed interest rates. The
discretional control of interest rates by the central bank was replaced by
a system of freely floating interest rates. In February 1984, interest rate
controls were re-established. A mixed regime was introduced: the
central bank imposed a maximum for lending rates, but banks were
allowed to freely determine deposits rates. In June, the central bank
decided to introduce a minimum for deposit rates. In 1989, legal
restrictions on deposit and lending rates were mostly eliminated. In
1991, interest rate ceilings were completely removed. In September
1994, the central bank established a 25% financial margin with respect
to the interest rate of its short term liabilities (plus 15% for the
maximum lending rate, and minus 10% for the minimum deposit rate).
In June 1995, a new measure for fixing money market interest rates was
established as a band, where maximum asset rate was established at
46% and a minimum liability rate at 24%. In April 1996, the maximum
lending rate and minimum deposit rate were removed.

Stock Markets
In 1973, capital transfers were permitted freely. In 1977, ceilings on transfers
of profits and dividends were increased to 20%. National enterprises were
permitted to increase foreign participation from 20% to 49%. Sectoral limits
remained in place. In 1987, no capital repatriation was allowed for a period of
five years, and in the following eight years, repatriation was limited to a
maximum annual rate of 12.5%. In 1989, capital repatriation became freely
permitted. In 1990, profits could be freely repatriated, and controls on foreign
participation in non-financial companies were completely abolished. In 1994,
the government fixed the exchange rate and effectively prohibited the
repatriation of capital and income. In 1995, the government approved the
trading of Venezuelan Brady bonds at the stock market, creating a de facto
currency convertibility for the repatriation of capital and income.

Annex Table 2
References Used to Construct the Chronology of Financial Liberalization
General References
Ariyoshi, A., K. Habermeier, B. Laurens, I. ötker-Robe, J. I. Canales-Kriljenko, and A. Kirilenko. 2000. "Capital Controls:
Countries Experiences with the Use and Liberalization." IMF (Washington, D.C.) Occasional Paper No.190.
Bekaert, G. and C. Harvey. "Chronology of Economic, Political, and Financial Events in Emerging Markets."
www.duke.edu/~charvey/country_risk/chronology.
Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey. 2000. "Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets." Journal of Finance, 55(2), pp. 565613.
Blondal, S. and H. Christiansen. 1999. "The Recent Experience with Capital Flows to Emerging Market Economies." OECD
Economics Department working paper No. 211.
Claessens, S. and M.-W. Rhee. 1993. "The Effect of Equity Barriers on Foreign Investment in Developing Countries."
National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.4579.
Clavijo, S. 1995. "A Survey of Economic Policies and Macroeconomic Performance in Chile and Colombia: 1970-95." IMF
(Washington, DC) Working Paper No.139.
Coricelli, F. 1998. "Macroeconomic Policies and the Development of Markets in Transition Economies." Budapest: Central
European University Press.
Coricelli, F. 1999. "Financial Market Development and Financial Liberalization in Economies in Transition: Tales of Failure
and Success." Paper presented at the Workshop on Financial Liberalization: How Far? How Fast? Development Research
Group, The World Bank, March 18-19.
Dooley, M. and I. Shin. 2000. "Private Inflows When Crises Are Anticipated: A Case Study of Korea." National Bureau of
Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.7992.
Drees, B. and C. Pazarbasioglu. 1995. "The Nordic Banking Crises: Pitfalls in Financial Liberalization?" IMF (Washington,
DC) Working Paper No.61.
Eichengreen, B. and M. Mussa. 1998. "Capital Account Liberalization: Theoretical and Practical Aspects." IMF (Washington,
DC) Occasional Paper No.172.
Galbis, V. 1993. "High Real Interest Rates under Financial Liberalization, Is There a Problem?" IMF (Washington, DC)
Working Paper No.7.
Glick, R. and M. Hutchison. 2000. "Capital Controls and Exchange Rate Instability in Developing Economies." Pacific Basin
working paper series PB00-05, pp. 1-20, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Economic Research Department, Center for
Pacific Basin Monetary and Economic Studies.
Huang, B.-N. and C.-W. Yang. 2000. "The Impact of Financial Liberalization on Stock Price Volatility in Emerging
Markets." Journal of Comparative Economics, 28(2), pp. 321-39.
International Finance Corporation. "Emerging Markets Database." Washington, D.C.: IFC, various issues.
International Monetary Fund. "Exchange Arrangements and Restrictions." Washington, D.C.: IMF, various issues.
International Monetary Fund. "Recent Economic Developments." Washington, D.C.: IMF, various issues.
Johnston, B., S. Darbar, and C. Echeverría. 1997. "Sequencing Capital Account Liberalization: Lessons from the Experiences
in Chile, Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand." IMF (Washington, DC) Working Paper No.157.
Kunt, A. D. and E. Detragiache. 1998. "Financial Liberalization and Financial Fragility." IMF (Washington, DC) Working
Paper No.83.
Mehrez, G. and D. Kaufman. 2000. "Transparency, Liberalization, and Banking Crises." World Bank (Washington, DC)
Policy Research Working Paper No.2286.
OECD. "OECD Economic Surveys." Paris: OECD, various issues.

Reinhart, C. and V. Reinhart. 1997. "Some Lessons for Policy Makers Dealing with the Mixed Blessing of Capital Inflows."
Mimeo.
Reinhart, C. and T. Smith. 1995. "Capital Controls: Concepts and Experiences." Mimeo.
Reinhart, C. and T. Smith. 1997. "Too Much of a Good Thing: the Macroeconomic Effects of Taxing Capital Inflows."
Mimeo.
Savastano, M. 1992. "Dollarization in Latin America: Gresham's Law in Reverse?" IMF (Washington, DC) Staff Papers No.
39, pp. 518-44.
Savastano, M. 1996. "Dollarization in Latin America: Recent Evidence and Some Policy Issues." IMF (Washington, DC)
Working Papers No.4.
Sundarajan, V. and T. Baliño. 1991. "Issues in Recent Banking Crises." in V. Sundarajan and T. Baliño, eds.: Banking
Crises: Cases and Issues , Washington, D.C.: IMF.
Williamson, J. and M. Mahar. 1998. "A Review of Financial Liberalization." South Asia Discussion Paper, Report No. IDP171, The World Bank.
Wyplosz, C. 1999. "Financial Restraints and Liberalization in Postwar Europe." Paper presented at the Workshop on
Financial Liberalization: How Far? How Fast? Development Research Group, The World Bank, March 18-19.

Country-Specific References
Argentina
Baliño, T. 1990. "The Argentine Banking Crisis of 1980." in V. Sundarajan and T. Baliño, eds.: Banking Crises: Cases and
Issues, Washington, D.C.: IMF.
Choueiri, N. and G. Kaminsky. 1999. "Has the Nature of Crises Changed? A Quarter Century of Currency Crises in
Argentina." IMF (Washington, DC) Working Paper No.152.
Gaba, E. 1981. "La Reforma Financiera Argentina: Lecciones de una Experiencia." Ensayos Economicos No.19, Buenos
Aires, Banco Central de la República Argentina.
García Herrero, A. 1997. "Banking Crises in Latin America in the 1990s: Lessons from Argentina, Paraguay, and Venezuela."
IMF (Washington, DC) Working Paper No.140.
Williamson, J. and M. Mahar. 1998. "A Review of Financial Liberalization." South Asia Discussion Paper, Report No. IDP171, The World Bank.

Brazil
Banco Central do Brasil. "Boletim Mensal." Brasilia: Central Bank , various issues.
Cardoso, E. and I. Goldfajn. 1998. "Capital Flows to Brazil: the Endogeneity of Capital Controls." IMF (Washington, DC)
Staff Paper No.45, pp.161-202.
Edwards, A. 1988. "Brazil: A Guide to the Structure, Development, and Regulation of the Financial Services." London:
Economist Intelligence Unit.
Garcia, M. and M. V. Valpassos. 2000. "Capital Flows, Capital Controls, and Currency Crisis: the Case of Brazil in the
Nineties." In Larrain, F., eds. . Capital flows, capital controls & currency crises: Latin America in the 1990s.

Canada
Minister of Supply and Services. "Canada Yearbook." Quebec: Minister of Supply and Services, various issues.
von Furstenburg, G. M (ed.). 1997. The Banking and Financial Structure in the NAFTA Countries and Chile. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.

Chile
Bekaert, G., and C. Harvey. 2000. "Foreign Speculators and Emerging Equity Markets." Journal of Finance, 55(2), pp. 565613.
Central Bank of Chile. "Annual Report." Santiago: Central Bank, various issues.
Edwards, S. and A. Cox-Edwards. 1987. Monetarism and Liberalization: the Chilean Experiment. Cambridge,
Massachusetts: Ballinger Publishing Co.
Edwards, S. 1999. "How Effective are Capital Controls?" National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working
Paper No.7413.
Johnston, B., S. Darbar, and C. Echeverría. 1997. "Sequencing Capital Account Liberalization: Lessons from the Experiences
in Chile, Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand." IMF (Washington, DC) Working Paper No.157.
Nadal-De Simone, F. and P. Sorsa. 1999. "A Review of Capital Account Restrictions in Chile in the 1990s." IMF
(Washington, DC) Working Paper No.52.
Velasco, A. 1999. "Liberalization, Crisis, Intervention: The Chilean Financial System, 1975-85." in V. Sundarajan and T.
Baliño, eds.: Banking Crises: Cases and Issues , Washington, D.C.: IMF.
von Furstenburg, G. M (ed.). 1997. The Banking and Financial Structure in the NAFTA Countries and Chile. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Williamson, J. and M. Mahar. 1998. "A Review of Financial Liberalization." South Asia Discussion Paper, Report No. IDP171, The World Bank.
World Bank. 1979. Chile: An Economy in Transition. Washington, D.C.: World Bank.

Colombia
Barajas, A., R. Steiner, and N. Salazar. 1999. "Interest Sspreads in Banking in Colombia 1974-96." IMF (Washington, DC)
Staff Papers 46(2), pp. 196-224.
Barrera, F. and M. Cardenas. 1997. "On the Effectiveness of Capital Controls: the Experience of Colombia During the
1990s." Special issue: 8th Inter-American Seminar on Economics, Journal of Development Economics, 54(1), pp.1-187.
Central Bank of Colombia. "Annual Report." Bogota: Central Bank, various issues.
Central Bank of Colombia. 1999. "Report to the Congress."
World Bank. 1984. "Colombia: Economic Development and Policy under Changing Conditions." Washington, D.C.: World
Bank.

Denmark
Danmarks Nationalbank. "Report and Accounts." Copenhagen: Central Bank, various issues.

Finland
Bank of Finland. "Bulletin." Helsinki: Central Bank, various issues.
Bank of Finland. "Yearbook." Helsinki: Central Bank, various issues.
Drees, B. and C. Pazarbasioglu. 1995. "The Nordic Banking Crises: Pitfalls in Financial Liberalization?" IMF (Washington,
DC) Working Paper No.61.
Ministry of Finance. "Supplement to the Budget Proposal - Economic Surveys." Helsinki: Ministry of Finance, various issues.

Hong Kong
Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce. 2001. "Economic Comments: More Rate Cuts Expected from Hong Kong."
August 22, 2001.
Census and Statistics Department. "Hong Kong Monthly Digest of Statistics." Hong Kong: Census and Statistics Department,
various issues.
Chan, A. K. K., Y. K. Ho, R. H. Scott, and K. A. Wong (eds.). 1991. The Hong Kong Financial System. Hong Kong; New
York: Oxford University Press.
Ho, Y. K., R. H. Scott, and K. A. Wong (eds.). 1986. Hong Kong’s Financial Institutions and Markets. Hong Kong; New
York: Oxford University Press.
Hong Kong Government Secretariat. "Economic Background." Hong Kong: Hong Kong Government Secretariat, various
issues.
Hong Kong Monetary Authority. "Annual Report." Hong Kong: HKMA, various issues.
Kwan, S. 2000. Impact of Deposit Rate Deregulation in Hong Kong on the Market Value of Commercial Banks. Hong Kong
Institute for Monetary Research and Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco.
The Economist Intelligence Unit. 1998. "Country Report Hong Kong." November 16, 1998.
The Government Publications Centre. "Hong Kong: A New Era." Hong Kong: The Government Publications Centre, various

Indonesia
Bank Indonesia. "Report for the Financial Year." Jakarta: Central Bank, various issues.
Hanson, J. 1999. "Financial Sector Research." Paper presented at the workshop on Financial Liberalization: How Far? How
Fast? Development Research Group, The World Bank, March 18-19.
Hill, H. 1996. The Indonesian Economy since 1966. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Montgomery, J. 1996. "The Indonesian Financial System; Its Contribution to Economic Performance, and Key Policy Issues."
IMF (Washington, DC) Working Paper No.45.

Italy
Banca D’Italia. 1977. "Bolletino XXXII no. 2." Roma: Central Bank.
Banca D’Italia. 1992. "Bolletino Economico del Servicio Studi no. 18." Roma: Central Bank.
Banca D’Italia. 1992. "Bolletino Mensile di Statistica, no. 1 Anno 67." Roma: Central Bank.
Banca D’Italia. "Economic Bulletin." Roma: Central Bank, various issues.

Japan
Bank of Japan. "Monthly Economic Review." Tokyo: Central Bank, various issues.

Korea
Chinn, M. and W. Maloney. 1996. "Financial and Capital Account Liberalization in the Pacific Basin: Korea and Taiwan
During the 1980's." National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.5814.
Cho, Y. J. 1999. "Financial Crisis of Korea - A Consequence of Unbalanced Liberalization?" Paper presented at the
Workshop on Financial Liberalization: How Far? How Fast? Development Research Group, The World Bank, March 18-19.
Cho, D. and Y. Koh. 1996. "Liberalization of Capital Flows in Korea: Big Bang or Gradualism?" National Bureau of
Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.5824.

Chong, L. 1999. "Asia-Pacific: Regulatory Changes to Foreign Direct Investment." Asia-Pacific Tax Bulletin 5, 267-73,
Netherlands: APTB.

Malaysia
Bank Negara Malaysia. "Annual Report." Malaysia: Central Bank, various issues.

Mexico
von Furstenburg, G. M (ed.). 1997. The Banking and Financial Structure in the NAFTA Countries and Chile. Boston: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Bank of Mexico. "Annual Report." Mexico, D.F.: Central Bank, various issues.
Bank of Mexico. "The Mexican Economy." Mexico, D.F.: Central Bank, various issues.
Montes-Negret, F. and L. Landa. 1999. "Financial Sector Reseach." Paper presented at the workshop on Financial
Liberalization: How Far? How Fast? Development Research Group, The World Bank, March 18-19.

Norway
Norges Bank. "Economic Bulletin." Oslo: Central Bank, various issues.

Peru
Banco Central de Reserva de Perú. "Boletín Mensual." Lima: Central Bank, various issues.
Savastano, M. 1996. "Dollarization in Latin America: Recent Evidence and some Policy Issues." IMF (Washington, DC)
Working Paper No.4.

Philippines
Dohner, R. and P. Intal. 1989. "The Philippines Financial System and the Debt Crisis." in J. Sachs and S. Collins, eds.:
Developing Country Debt and Economic Performance 3, Chapter 5, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Gochoco-Bautista, M. S. 1999. "The Past Performance of the Philippine Banking Sector and Challenges in the Postcrisis
Period." in Rising to the Challenge in Asia: a Study of Financial Markets: vol. 10 – Philippines , Asian Development Bank
publications.
Nascimento, J. C. 1990. "Crisis in the Financial Sector and the Authorities’ Reaction: the Philippines." in V. Sundararajan
and T. Baliño, eds.: Banking Crises: Issues and Experiences, Chapter 4, Washington, D.C.: IMF.
Nasution, A. 1999. "Recent Issues in the Management of Macroeconomic Policies in the Philippines." in Rising to the
Challenge in Asia: a Study of Financial Markets: vol. 10 – Philippines , Asian Development Bank publications.
Vos, R. 1997. "Financial Reform, Institutions, and Macroeconomic Adjustment. The Destabilizing Effects of Financial
Liberalization in the Philippines, 1970 to 1992." in Gupta, K. L., ed.: Experiences with Financial Liberalization , Chapter 5,
Boston: Kluwer Academic Publishers.

Portugal
Banco do Portugal. "Economic Bulletin Quarterly." Lisboa: Central Bank, various issues.
Bakker, A. 1996. "The Liberalization of Capital Movements in Europe." Netherlands: Kluwer Academics Publishers.

Spain
Bank of Spain. "Annual Report." Madrid: Central Bank, various issues.

Sweden
Drees, B. and C. Pazarbasioglu. 1995. "The Nordic Banking Crises: Pitfalls in Financial Liberalization?" IMF (Washington,
DC) Working Paper No.61.
Englund, P. 1990. "Financial Deregulation in Sweden." European Economic Review, 34, 385-93.
Sveriges Riksbanks. "Quarterly Review." Stockholm: Central Bank, various issues.

Taiwan
Central Bank of China. "Annual Report." Taiwan: Central Bank, various issues.
Chinn, M. and W. Maloney. 1996. "Financial and Capital Account Liberalization in the Pacific Basin: Korea and Taiwan
during the 1980's." National Bureau of Economic Research (Cambridge, MA) Working Paper No.5814.
Kuo, C.-H. 1991. International Capital Movements and the Developing World: The Case of Taiwan. New York: Praeger
Publishers.

Thailand
Bank of Thailand. "Thailand Economic Conditions." Bangkok: Central Bank, various issues.
Bank of Thailand. 1980. "Outlook." Bangkok: Central Bank.
Bank of Thailand. "Annual Economic Report." Bangkok: Central Bank, various issues.
Johnston, B. 1991. "Distressed Financial Institutions in Thailand: Structural Weakness, Support Operations, and Economic
Consequences." in V. Sundarajan and T. Baliño, eds.: Banking Crises: Cases and Issues , Washington, D. C.: IMF.
Johnston, B., S. Darbar, and C. Echeverría. 1997. "Sequencing Capital Account Liberalization: Lessons from the Experiences
in Chile, Indonesia, Korea, and Thailand." IMF (Washington, DC) Working Paper No.157.

United Kingdom
Bank of England. 1973. "Banking Act Report." London: Central Bank.

United States
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 1973. "Annual Report." Washington, D.C.: U.S. Govt. Print Off.
"The Economic Report of the President to the Congress" Washington D.C., 1983.

Venezuela
Central Bank of Venezuela. "Annual Report." Caracas: Central Bank, various issues.
Central Bank of Venezuela. "Monthly Bulletin." Caracas: Central Bank, various issues.
Central Bank of Venezuela. 1995. "Year-end Economic Review." Caracas: Central Bank.
Central Office of Statistics. 1997. "Statistical Yearbook of Venezuela." Caracas: OCEI.

