                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                          FROM CRADLE TO GRAVE?
        THE LASTING IMPACT OF CHILDHOOD HEALTH AND CIRCUMSTANCE

                                              Anne Case
                                             Angela Fertig
                                            Christina Paxson

                                          Working Paper 9788
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9788


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




We thank Angus Deaton and Jeff Kling for useful discussions, and Janet Currie, Helen Levy and seminar
participants at several universities for useful comments. This research has been funded in part through NIH
grant R01 HD41141-01(National Institute for Child Health and Development). Fertig acknowledges support
from a MacArthur Foundation postdoctoral fellowship while writing this paper. The views expressed herein
are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Anne Case, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.
From Cradle to Grave? The Lasting Impact of Childhood Health and Circumstance
Anne Case, Angela Fertig, and Christina Paxson
NBER Working Paper No. 9788
June 2003
JEL No. I1, D1, J0

                                           ABSTRACT

We quantify the lasting effects of childhood health and economic circumstances on adult health and
earnings, using data from a birth cohort that has been followed from birth into middle age. We find,
controlling for parents' incomes, educations and social status, that children who experience poor

health have significantly lower educational attainment, and significantly poorer health and lower
earnings on average as adults. Childhood factors appear to operate largely through their effects on

educational attainment and initial adult health. Taken together with earlier findings that poorer
children enter adulthood in worse health and with less education than wealthier children, these
results indicate that a key determinant of health in adulthood is economic status in childhood rather
than economic status in adulthood. Overall, our findings suggest more attention be paid to health

as a potential mechanism through which intergenerational transmission of poverty takes place:
cohort members born into poorer families experienced poorer childhood health, lower investments
in human capital and poorer health in early adulthood, all of which are associated with lower

earnings in middle age -- the years in which they themselves become parents.

Anne Case                      Angela Fertig                  Christina Paxson
345 Wallace Hall               288 Wallace Hall               316 Wallace Hall
Princeton University           Princeton University           Princeton University
Princeton NJ 08544             Princeton NJ 08544             Princeton NJ 08544
and NBER                       afertig@princeton.edu          and NBER
accase@princeton.edu                                          cpaxson@princeton.edu
1. Introduction

Recent research has documented that children born into poorer families fall into poorer health as

they age. These children arrive at the doorstep of adulthood not only in poorer health but also

with lower educational attainment, in part attributable to their poorer health. (Case, Lubotsky and

Paxson 2002 provide evidence for the US, and Currie and Stabile 2002 for Canada.) This research

suggests that childhood health may be an important contributor to the “gradient,” the widely

documented positive association between good health and higher economic status observed in

adulthood (Adler et al 1994). Researchers studying children’s health note that it may be an

important ‘third factor’ that affects both health and earnings in adulthood. However, there is little

evidence on the long-run effects of childhood health on adult health and labor market outcomes,

or on the contribution of childhood health and circumstances to gradients in adult health.

       In this paper, we quantify the lasting effects of childhood health and economic

circumstances on adult health and earnings, using data from a birth cohort that has been followed

from birth into middle age. We find, controlling for parents’ incomes, educations and social status,

that children who experience poor health have significantly lower educational attainment, and

significantly poorer health on average as adults. Good health in childhood is positively associated

with the probability of employment in middle age and, among men, better health and economic

circumstances in childhood are positively associated with earnings.

       After a brief introduction of our data, we document the ways in which childhood health

and family circumstance affect adult health and earnings (Section 3). We then present more

speculative results on the pathways leading to correlation between earnings and health in

adulthood (Section 4). We find that health status early in adulthood influences men’s later

earnings, conditional on initial earnings, but that earnings early in adulthood do not affect

subsequent health, conditional on initial health. Childhood factors appear to operate largely

through their effects on educational attainment and initial adult health. Taken together with the

findings that poorer children enter young adulthood in worse health and with less education than
wealthier children, these results indicate that a key determinant of health in adulthood is economic

status in childhood rather than economic status in adulthood.

        Overall, our findings suggest more attention be paid to health as a potential mechanism

through which intergenerational transmission of poverty takes place: cohort members born into

poorer families experienced poorer childhood health, lower investments in human capital and

poorer health in early adulthood, all of which are associated with lower earnings in middle age —

the years in which they themselves become parents.



2. The 1958 National Child Development Study

Our analysis is based on data collected in the 1958 National Child Development Study (NCDS),

which has followed all children born in Great Britain (Scotland, England and Wales) in the week

of March 3, 1958 from birth through to age 42. Parents were interviewed at the time of the birth,

and medical, social, demographic and economic data have been collected on these children during

follow-up interviews conducted at ages 7, 11, 16, 23, 33 and 42.1

        Summary statistics for key variables are presented in the first two columns of Table 1. Our

primary health outcome measures are individuals’ self-reported health status, measured at ages

23, 33 and 42. Each respondent was asked “How would you describe your health generally?

Would you say it is ... excellent, good, fair, or poor?” Self-reported health has been shown to

predict mortality, even when controlling for physician assessed health status and health-related

behaviors. (See Idler and Kasl 1995 for an extensive set of references on studies of self-reported

health and mortality.) In the NCDS, self-reported health status at ages 33 and 42 are highly


        1
         There has been attrition from the original sample of 17,409 children, and some families who miss
a survey round are picked up in later surveys. Attrition does not appear to be systematically associated with
socioeconomic status. (A detailed discussion is provided in the appendix.) The survey has also added
approximately 700 children born during the week of March 3, 1958 who immigrated to Great Britain prior
to the age 16 survey. These children do not appear to be substantially different from the original sample,
and we include these children in our analysis (see appendix for details).

                                                     2
correlated with reports that respondents have chronic conditions, and with reports of their

disabilities and hospitalizations. (See Appendix Table 2.) Consistent with results from a wide

variety of cross-sectional studies, members of the NCDS cohort report worse health at higher

ages. The percentage of men reporting themselves to be in excellent health falls from 48% at age

23, to 36% at age 33, and to 31% at age 42. (Transition matrices of health status for men who

appear at all three ages are shown in Appendix Table 3.) Patterns are similar for women although,

consistent with results from many other countries, women in the NCDS on average report worse

health than men in middle age (Case and Deaton 2002).

        We examine the effects of childhood health and circumstance on two labor market

outcomes in adulthood: employment and earnings. Ninety percent of men are employed part-time

or full-time at the time of the surveys administered at ages 33 and 42, and the vast majority of

men work full-time (30 or more hours per week.) Employment rates are lower for women, with

less than 50% of women working full-time at either of these ages. Our measures of respondents’

earnings are log weekly earnings at ages 23, 33 and 42, all measured in 1987 British Pounds.

Because substantial fractions of women do not work, we restrict our analysis of earnings to men

only.

        The NCDS provides a rich set of variables with which to analyze the impact of family

background and childhood health on adult health and earnings. Our measures of family

circumstance include indicators for the ages at which the cohort member’s mother and father left

school; indicators for mother’s marital status at the time of the cohort member’s birth; the number

of siblings in the cohort member’s household at age 16; log family weekly income at age 16,2 as

well as father’s social class at the time of the birth, and grandfathers’ social class at the time the




        2
         This variable was constructed using information on income categories for both parents together
with information from the British Family Expenditure Survey from 1974. See the appendix for details.

                                                    3
cohort member’s mother and father left school.3 Measures of social class are commonly used in

British surveys, and are based on occupation (professional, managerial, non-manual skilled,

manual skilled, semi-skilled, and unskilled).

        Our measures of childhood and prenatal health consist of the number of physician-assessed

chronic health conditions at ages 7 and 16, height at age 23, and an indicator that the child was of

low weight (less than 2500 grams) at birth. Chronic health conditions at ages 7 and 16 reflect both

health problems the child was born with, as well as health problems acquired in childhood. Table 1

indicates that the average number of chronic childhood conditions is small. Of children who

received medical exams at these ages, 6.2 percent of children have at least one chronic condition

at age 7, and 12.5 percent have a chronic condition at age 16. Height is included as a reflection of

childhood (and possibly prenatal) nutrition. Because height also has a genetic component, we

control for both mother’s and father’s heights in all models.

        Figure 1 presents preliminary information on the relationship between birth weight and

health status in adulthood. The left panel shows locally-weighted regressions of health status at

ages 23, 33 and 42 on birth weight, for men in the NCDS who reported health status at all three

ages. Men born at birth weights below 2500 grams (88 ounces) report the worst health in middle

age. This figure provides a rationale for using the cut-off value of 2500 grams to denote low birth

weight. The right panel shows similar regressions on health status in adulthood for women. In

both panels, birth weight is observed to be related to health status in adulthood, with the

relationship between low birth weight and health becoming more pronounced at older ages.

        One way in which childhood health may affect adult outcomes is through educational

attainment. In this analysis we will focus on O-level passes at age 16 and an overall measure of




        3
        We have experimented with including controls for parents’ age at the time the child was born.
Although these variables are at times jointly significant, their inclusion does not affect other results.

                                                      4
education completed by age 23. Additional information on the British educational system and the

construction of the measure of educational attainment is provided in the appendix.



3. The Effects of Childhood Health and Economic Status on Outcomes in Adulthood

We begin with reduced form estimates of the effects of childhood health and family circumstances

on adult outcomes, including educational attainment, adult health, employment and earnings. Our

interest is primarily in the long run effects of childhood health — here measured using an indicator

of low birth weight, the numbers of chronic conditions in childhood, and height at age 23. In

addition, we include indicators of mothers’ prenatal smoking behavior, which may affect child

health but may also serve as measures of the mothers’ socioeconomic status or parenting ability.

We are also interested in the long run effects of the family circumstance, for which we include the

marital status of the mother at the time of the child’s birth, the number of siblings and family

income when the child was 16, a set of indicators for the age that the child’s mother and father

left school, and indicators for the social class of the child’s father at the time the child was born,

as well as the social classes of the child’s paternal and maternal grandfathers.4 We control for an

identical set of family and child characteristics throughout the analysis; a complete list of variables

is presented in Appendix Table 4.

        Our reduced form results convey information on the associations between childhood and

adulthood, without providing information on the underlying mechanisms that link health and

economic outcomes over the life-cycle. For example, a finding that poor health in childhood is



        4
          Some of these variables are missing for some children. To maintain a large and representative
sample, we use observations that contain one or more missing independent variables but include indicators
for whether each of the independent variables is missing. For example, the set of indicators for mother’s
school-leaving age includes an indicator for whether the mother’s education is missing. For continuous
variables, such as the logarithm of family income at age 16, we include an indicator for whether family
income is non-missing, and interact this indicator with family income at age 16. The appendix provides a
detailed explanation of the handling of missing values.

                                                    5
associated with reduced earnings in adulthood could be because children in poor health receive

less schooling, or because poor health is persistent through time and those in poor health are less

productive, even controlling for education. Likewise, a finding that children in poor health are less

healthy in middle adulthood could also be due to effects of poor health in childhood on education

and earnings early in adulthood, which in turn result in poorer health outcomes. The issue of

disentangling these links will be taken up in Section 4.



A. Educational Attainment

Table 2 presents the relationship between childhood health and subsequent human capital

investment, using several measures of educational attainment: the total number of O-level exams

the child has passed by age 16, whether the English O-level was passed, whether the Math O-level

was passed, and finally an index of completed education by age 23, which ranges from 1 (no O-

levels passed by age 23) to 5 (a University degree was earned by age 23). The relationship

between childhood health and educational attainment is similar for each of our measures, and we

will focus here on the passage of the English O-level exam.

        The results in Table 2 indicate that health in childhood has pronounced effects on

educational attainment. Each childhood condition at age 7 is associated with a 7 percentage point

reduction in the probability of passing the English O-level, and each condition at age 16 with an

extra 6 percentage point reduction. Children born at low birth weight are 8 percentage points less

likely to pass an English O-level.5 Table 2 also shows that mother’s smoking during pregnancy is

associated with a significantly lower probability of passing the English O-level, with heavy

prenatal smoking associated with a 6 percentage point reduction.



        5
        The results on low birth weight presented here are consistent with those presented by Currie and
Hyson (1999), who focus on the impact of low birth weight on education and earnings at age 33 for
members of the 1958 NCDS.

                                                    6
       The results for mother’s smoking during pregnancy may represent the causal effect of

smoking on fetal development and later cognitive development. Smoking during pregnancy has

also been implicated as a source of behavioral and cognitive problems among older children,

including lower IQ and Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder (IOM, 2001), all of which could

have adverse effects on educational attainment. Animal models also support the hypothesis that

prenatal nicotine exposure affects brain development and may have long-lasting effects (see, for

example, Slotkin, 1998). However, it may also be that the association between prenatal smoking

and lower educational attainment we observe is due to family and environmental characteristics

associated with prenatal tobacco use. The dangers of smoking during pregnancy may not have

been widely known in 1958, so that the argument that it was the less caring mothers who were

more likely to smoke may not be as salient for this cohort. However, mother’s smoking may be a

marker for her social status that is not measured by family income, her education, or her father’s

social class, and the association between prenatal smoking and education could work through this

channel.

       Table 2 provides evidence that childhood socioeconomic circumstances are correlated

with educational attainment. Consistent with a large body of literature, we find that children from

higher-income families have higher educational attainment: even controlling for mother’s and

father’s schooling and parents’ and grandparents’ social class, a doubling of family income at age

16 is associated on average with a 10 percentage point increase in the probability that the English

O-level is passed. For all four education measures, a set of indicators for mother’s school leaving

age, and that for father’s, are highly significant. (These tests are provided in the last rows of Table

2.) Figure 2 graphs the coefficients for the indicators of mother’s and father’s school-leaving age

from the regression for the English O-level. Greater levels of education among both mothers and

fathers are associated with a higher probability of passing the English O-level; similar results are

obtained for the other educational outcomes. Father’s social status at the time of the cohort


                                                  7
member’s birth, and grandfathers’ status are all significant predictors of a child’s educational

attainment.



B. Adult Health

Table 3 presents estimates of the effects of childhood characteristics on health status at ages 23,

33 and 42. Chronic conditions in childhood are significantly associated with poorer health in

adulthood, even through age 42. The coefficients on conditions at ages 7 and 16 decline with age

but remain jointly significant at all ages. Results from probit regressions (not shown) indicate that

these effects are large: acquiring an extra chronic condition at age 16 is associated with a 3.6

percentage point increase in the probability of fair or poor health at age 42, an age at which 18.2

percent of individuals are in fair or poor health. The adverse effects of prenatal smoking increase

with age, with heavy maternal smoking associated with a 5.4 percentage point increase in the

probability of being in fair or poor health at age 42. However, the association between height and

health becomes smaller with age, given family background and childhood chronic health

conditions.

       Several measures of socioeconomic status in childhood are also related to adult health.

Family income at age 16 becomes a larger and more significant predictor of health status with age

in adulthood. At age 23, family income at 16 takes a coefficient of –0.07 and is not significantly

different from zero. However, the effect increases in absolute value with age, so that by age 33 it

is –0.137 and by age 42 it is –0.143, and is significant at the 5 percent level. Mothers’ school

leaving age is also significantly associated with adult health. As was the case for family income,

the association between mothers’ education and health becomes more pronounced with age. The

coefficients on the indicators for maternal education, graphed in Figure 3, indicate that at age 23,

there was little correlation between mothers’ school leaving age and the cohort members’ health.

However, by age 33, maternal education has become strongly associated with better health status.


                                                  8
That association remains strong at age 42. Although fathers’ education is not associated with

adult health, fathers’ social class at the time of the child’s birth is strongly related to adult health.

The results indicate that children with unskilled fathers are 6.4 percentage points more likely to be

in fair or poor health at age 42 than are the children of professionals.



C. Employment and earnings in adulthood

Table 4 presents estimates of the associations between childhood health and circumstances and

employment at ages 33 and 42. We show results separately for men and women, because

employment rates differ across these groups. The results indicate that chronic health conditions in

childhood have significant effects on employment in adulthood. An additional chronic condition at

age 16 reduces the probability of employment at age 42 by 2.2 percentage points for women and

by 4.8 percentage points for men. For both women and men, the number of chronic health

conditions at 7 and 16 are jointly significant predictors of employment at ages 33 and 42.

        Family circumstance is a significant predictor of employment for men, but not for women.

For men, the social class of the cohort members’ father and paternal grandfather are significantly

associated with employment at ages 33 and 42. The estimates indicate that men whose fathers

were unskilled at the time of their births are 4.6 percentage points less likely than men with

“professional” fathers to be employed at age 33 and 4.9 percentage points less likely to be

employed at age 42.

        Do childhood health and economic circumstances affect earnings in adulthood? We

examine this question for men only, because relatively few women are employed. Our results,

presented in Table 5, suggest that health in childhood has large and significant effects on earnings

even into middle adulthood. Among 42-year-old men, an additional chronic condition at age 7 is

associated with a 5.6 percent reduction in earnings, and an additional chronic condition at age 16

is associated with a 4.0 percent reduction in earnings. Height is also associated with higher


                                                    9
earnings, and this effect becomes more pronounced over time as men age. A one-standard

deviation increase in male height, of 0.07 meters, is associated with an increase in earnings of 3

percent at age 23, 4.2 percent at age 33, and 6.1 percent at age 42. This evidence is consistent

with Persico et al (2001), who find strong effects of height on education and earnings in young

adulthood using the same data, although they attribute this relationship to social stigma produced

by short stature in adolescence, rather than to poor nutrition. (Both may be contributing factors.)

Other variables have mixed effects: low birth weight and heavy maternal prenatal smoking are

negatively associated with earnings at ages 33 and 42, although these effects are significant only

at age 33.

        Consistent with findings in the intergenerational mobility literature (Reville 1995), family

income at age 16 becomes a larger and more significant predictor of men’s own earnings as they

age. Family income is not significantly associated with own earnings at age 23: the coefficient on

log family income at age 16 is roughly 0.01, with controls for health in childhood. The coefficient

on family income at age 16 jumps to 0.13 for earnings at age 33, and to 0.23 for earnings at age

42. Father’s social class at the time of birth is also a significant predictor of earnings in middle

age, so that men whose fathers were professionals earn more at ages 33 and 42 than those whose

fathers were manual workers.

        Our results in Section 3 show large, positive and significant effects of health in childhood

on educational attainment, and on health, employment and earnings in adulthood. Moreover, the

impact of childhood health on adult outcomes may provide a partial explanation for the

correlation observed between economic status and health in adulthood. We turn next to examine

what the NCDS data can contribute to what is known about the evolution of the gradient over the

life-cycle.




                                                   10
4. The Dynamics of Health and Earnings in Adulthood

Many hypotheses have been put forward to explain the relationship observed between economic

status and health status in adulthood. Low incomes may lead to poor health outcomes, possibly

because poorer individuals consume fewer of the goods and services thought to maintain or

improve health, or because the added stress of being poor results in worse health behaviors (e.g.

smoking). In addition, the psychosocial stress induced by lower socioeconomic status may have

direct effects on biological processes that affect health (Brunner and Marmot 1999). On the other

side, current health status, as a component of human capital, may have direct effects on

employment and earnings. Less healthy people may be less productive at work, or may be forced

to stop working altogether. Expenses related to poor health may also reduce wealth holdings and

asset income (Smith 1999, Wu 2003).

       The dynamic links between income and health may begin with childhood circumstance,

and research to date has varied greatly in the emphasis placed on childhood health and family

resources in determining adult health. A strand of recent work suggests that nutrition in utero can

affect health status in middle age, through its impact on such important chronic conditions as

coronary heart disease and diabetes (Barker 1995, Ravelli et al 1998). In the fetal origins

hypothesis, a contemporaneous correlation between health and socioeconomic status in adulthood

could, in theory, be explained by events prior to birth: poorer children may be more likely to have

been deprived of nutrients in utero and, having been raised in poorer families, such children are

also more likely to earn less when they reach adulthood. At that point, their prenatal nutritional

deprivation may manifest in disease, leading to a correlation between earnings and health in

adulthood that is due to childhood circumstances.

       In a similar vein, some life course models emphasize the extent to which illness and

deprivation in childhood have lasting effects on adult health—directly, through the illness itself,

and indirectly, by restricting educational attainment and life chances (Kuh and Wadsworth 1993).


                                                 11
Life course models may also help to explain the contemporaneous correlation between social

status and health: those who have suffered chronic health conditions in childhood may reach

adulthood in poorer health, and with less educational attainment and poorer labor market skills.

Persistence in the processes generating earnings and health could lead to a contemporaneous

correlation in earnings and health in adulthood that was due to conditions in childhood.

        In contrast to these approaches, research centered on the role of adult socioeconomic

status in determining adult health focuses on childhood health largely to demonstrate that the

observed correlation between income and health in adulthood is not directly attributable to

childhood events. For example, Marmot et al (2001) discuss their finding of a gradient in health

among the subset of British civil servants whose parents survived to age 70: “If parents survive

beyond the age of 70, they could be thought of as neither genetically nor environmentally

predisposed to illness. The fact that the social gradient holds up in this subgroup points to the

effect of current social circumstances” (page 305). They conclude that, in their data, “early life

circumstances are important because they influence adult social circumstances, which in turn

influence disease risk” (page 305). Such pathways models posit a causal link from low

socioeconomic status earlier in adulthood to poor health later in adulthood, with childhood

circumstances important because they affect initial adult socioeconomic position.

        Data limitations prior to the publication of the 1958 NCDS data have made it difficult to

study the dynamic effects of childhood and early adulthood experiences on income and health in

middle age and beyond. Few surveys track individuals from childhood into adulthood, and those

that do generally contain little information on health status.6 Much of what is known for the US

comes from a survey of the elderly, which restricts analysis to changes in income, wealth and



        6
         The Panel Study of Income Dynamics (PSID) contains information on employment, earnings, and
asset holdings, but has asked only one question on health status on a regular basis. This question is asked
only of heads of households and their spouses.

                                                    12
health status in later life, and over a relatively short period of time7. The Whitehall studies, which

collected information on health and mortality of cohorts of British civil servants over time during

working adulthood, contain only minimal retrospective information on family background. Results

presented below suggest that, in particular, the lack of information in the Whitehall studies on

mother’s education and own health status in childhood limits the usefulness of the Whitehall data

for quantifying the extent to which childhood circumstances can explain the relationship between

health and economic status in adulthood8. Two other British birth cohort studies, from 1946 and

1970, have been collected. However, data from the 1946 cohort study are not publically available.

Moreover, researchers using the 1946 and 1958 cohorts have typically structured their analyses to

examine the effects of only a limited number of family and individual background variables,

prohibiting the systematic approach necessary to sort through the dynamics.9

        In the work that follows, we present estimates of the relationship between health and

earnings in early and middle adulthood among men in the NCDS birth cohort. Specifically, we

examine how earnings and health in middle age are related to lagged values of earnings and

health, controlling for childhood characteristics. Interpretation of these results requires care: as

we discuss below, strong assumptions are required to draw inferences about causality from these




        7
       Adams et al (2003) use three waves of data from the Asset and Health Dynamics of the Oldest
Old (AHEAD) data, collected between 1993 and 1998.
        8
         Whitehall I contained “no direct data on the social circumstances of these men as children”
(Marmot et al 1984, page 1004). Whitehall II collected information on father’s occupation (retrospectively
reported by the civil servants), on father’s school leaving age, and on whether the civil servants’ parents
died before reaching age 70.
        9
         Kuh and Wadsworth break data from the 1946 cohort into life-stages, and analyze each stage
separately. Only the significant variables from each stage are then entered into a final model of the
determinants of health in adulthood. If variables from one stage have delayed effects on health status, for
example, they will be missed by this technique. Power, Matthews and Manor (1998) perform a similar
analysis for the 1958 cohort.

                                                     13
models. Provided the assumptions we make are valid, the estimates yield information on the

dynamics of health and earnings in adulthood and the role of childhood characteristics.



A. Empirical Framework and Estimation Issues

To illustrate ideas, we express the logarithm of earnings in middle age (        ) and a measure of

health in middle age (      ) as linear functions of the logarithm of earnings and health in young

adulthood (     and      , respectively) and a vector of childhood and prenatal characteristics C,

which includes the measures of socioeconomic status in childhood, prenatal health, health in

childhood and educational attainment at age 16.10

                                                                                                          (1)

                                                                                                          (2)

Health and earnings in young adulthood are assumed to be functions of childhood and prenatal

characteristics:

                                                                                                          (3)

                                                                                                          (4)

Substitution of (3) and (4) into (1) and (2) yields “reduced form” equations for health and

earnings in middle adulthood, estimates of which were presented in Table 3 (for men and women)

and Table 5 (for men only).

        Two econometric issues are of special concern. First, the parameter estimates of (1) and

(2) will be unbiased only under mean independence between the errors terms and              ,    and C,

i.e.                        and                          . There are situations under which conditional

mean independence may not hold. There may be individual heterogeneity that is not measured by


        10
          We characterize age 23 as “young adulthood,” and ages 33 and 42 as “middle adulthood.” We
estimate (1) and (2) for each of the two middle ages separately, and do not impose stationarity of the
coefficients across these ages. Equations for earnings and health at age 42 condition on health and earnings
at both ages 23 and 33.

                                                    14
C—for example, individuals may have unobserved personality traits or genetic characteristics that

result in both poor health and low earnings throughout the life span. The idea that unobserved

heterogeneity can lead to spurious state dependence in models with lags is well understood

(Heckman 1981). Unfortunately, solutions to this problem either require a set of valid instruments

for earnings and health at younger ages, or the use of fixed effects approaches that require long

panels of data. In our case, no plausible instruments are available. Furthermore, the panel is not

long enough to estimate equations with individual fixed effects, nor is it obvious that fixed effects

models, which rely on the assumption that coefficients are constant over time, make sense when

looking at health and earnings over a period of several decades. In what follows, we include a

large set of variables in C, and assume that the variables we include are rich enough to capture all

individual heterogeneity.

        A second issue we must confront is that our estimates may reflect macro shocks — either

economic or health shocks that affect large numbers of individuals in specific calendar years. To

take an extreme example, an episode of infectious disease that happened to affect predominantly

poor individuals in the year 2000, when the cohort was 42 year old, could result in a negative

association between earnings at age 33 and health at age 42 when such a relationship does not

generally exist. This is a generic problem when using cohort data that are not pooled across years.

Although we know of no obvious macroeconomic or health shocks that could be driving our

results, it will be useful in future work to estimate similar models using data on cohorts born at

different dates.

        Bearing these issues in mind, we can relate equations (1) and (2) to the theories of health

and earnings mentioned above. Pathways models stress the idea that earnings in young adulthood

influence future health (i.e   . non-zero), largely through the effects of low economic status on

psychosocial stress (Marmot et al 1991). This literature argues that childhood circumstance and

health in early adulthood are generally not as qualitatively important as adult socioeconomic


                                                  15
status in determining adult health (i.e. that     and      are relatively less important than   ).

Brunner et al (1999) state that “whatever the salient features of the adult socioeconomic

environment may be, it seems they are equally or more important than circumstances in

childhood” in determining cardiovascular risk among British civil servants (page 762). The

hypothesis that      is non-zero — that health affects future income — is often referred to as the

“health selection” or the “social drift hypothesis” (Adler et al 1994). The literature on pathways

models argues that although some early health problems — in particular severe forms of mental

illness such as schizophrenia or major depression — may affect future socioeconomic status, there

is little evidence that current health affects future economic status (Chandola et al 2003). In

addition, pathways models hypothesize that an important channel through which childhood factors

affect adult health is through their effects on initial social positions (i.e   . is non-zero). Marmot et

al (2001) note that their analyses of intergenerational occupational mobility show that “childhood

circumstances determine adult circumstances and these, in turn, affect disease risk” (page 305).

Much of this research relies on a sample of British civil servants, with economic status measured

by salary-based employment grade within the civil service. It is possible that the effects of health

on movements through (and possibly out of) the civil service differ from the effects in a general

population.

        Economic models of earnings provide several reasons why earnings in adulthood may be

affected by health. Poor health may have a direct effect on labor market productivity, reducing

wage rates at every age. If, in addition, poor health reduces the rate at which workers accumulate

skills, then poor health would also slow the rate of wage growth over time. Health may also affect

labor supply, and earnings—the product of the wage rate and hours worked—will be reduced if

those in poorer health work fewer hours. Those in poorer health may have more spells out of the

labor force or may choose to leave the labor force altogether, and time spent out of the labor

force may also reduce wage growth by reducing the amount of accumulated labor market


                                                    16
experience. The theory that poor health reduces earnings growth implies that          is non-zero.

However, human capital models do not rule out the hypothesis that earnings also affect future

health.

          The fetal origins hypothesis predicts that prenatal development will affect health in middle

age, independent of earlier health outcomes. If true, we would expect in equation (2) that,

controlling for health in childhood and early adulthood, variables associated with prenatal

development would have a significant effect on health in middle age. This is consistent with the

relevant coefficients in      being non-zero: conditional on health and income in early adulthood,

prenatal markers would have a significant effect on health in middle age. The literature on the fetal

origins hypothesis stresses the importance of prenatal nutrition, in particular micronutrients,

something not directly measured in the NCDS. However, an indicator of low birth weight and

information on maternal smoking during pregnancy (included as elements of C) provide crude

measure of nutrition in utero, and in the analyses that follow we examine whether low birth

weight and prenatal smoking affect adult health.

          Life course models are the least precisely specified of all of the theories discussed here.

They emphasize the importance of childhood factors, including childhood health and family

circumstances, on both health status and economic status in adulthood. However, they do not rule

out any of the possible links between health and earnings in adulthood, nor do they specify

whether childhood factors affect adult outcomes only through their effects on health and earnings

in young adulthood (i.e      . and    non-zero), or whether childhood factors may also influence

later adult outcomes given earlier adult outcomes (i.e       . and    non-zero).

          We use estimates of (1) and (2) to examine which implications of these models find

support in our data. Parameter estimates of        and    provide information on whether health

predicts future earnings (as in human capital models), and/or whether earnings predict future

health (as in pathways models). The parameters attached to the childhood characteristics provide


                                                    17
information on whether childhood characteristics affect middle-adult outcomes only through their

effects on early adult outcomes, or whether they have independent effects as is hypothesized in

the fetal origins and life course models.



B. Results

Tables 6 and 7 present estimates of (1) and (2), with controls for educational attainment, for men

in the NCDS at ages 33 and 42. For these tables, we restrict our sample to men with complete

data on health and earnings at ages 23, 33, and 42.11

        Table 6 presents estimates of (1), expressing current earnings as a function of past

earnings and health. All specifications include controls for family background and childhood and

prenatal health variables (i.e. the factors in C), and earnings from earlier waves of the survey. The

first two columns present results for the log of earnings at age 33. We find the log of earnings at

age 23 has a large and significant effect on the log of earnings at age 33: with or without controls

for lagged health and education completed by age 16 (column 2), a doubling of earnings at age 23

is associated with a 40 percent increase in earnings at age 33. Family background variables are

significantly associated with earnings at 33, even controlling for earnings and health at age 23.

Childhood health characteristics are also significant, although less so than in the reduced form

models shown in Table 5 that did not control for educational attainment and early adult health and

earnings. This is consistent with childhood health affecting adult earnings through these variables.

        Central to our focus, health at age 23 is a powerful predictor of earnings at age 33, even

when controlling for educational attainment at age 16, earnings at 23, and family background,

        11
           We do this to ensure that any differences we find in the predictive power of current health status
and current income is not due to changes in the sample between Tables 6 and 7. The last column of Table 1
presents summary statistics for this sub-sample, which show that the family backgrounds of this sub-
sample are similar to those for the sample as a whole. However, Table 1 also reveals that this sub-sample is
a bit healthier and slightly better educated, on average, than is the sample as a whole. (This is perhaps
because those who are less healthy and those less well educated are less likely to be employed at any given
age.)

                                                     18
including family income at age 16. Indicators for good, fair and poor health, relative to excellent

health, are highly jointly significant (F-test = 11.34, p-value = 0.000). Those who report

themselves in “good” health earn on average 7 percent less than those who report “excellent”

health; those in “fair health” earn roughly 14 percent less, and those in “poor” health at age 23

earn 50 percent less at age 33. The same general pattern is revealed at age 42, with health at 23

and 33 significant predictors of earnings at 42, although childhood characteristics are no longer

significantly correlated with earnings at this age.

        Overall, the results in Table 6 present evidence that current health status is a significant

predictor of future earnings (   is non-zero), and some evidence that childhood health continues

to affect earnings in adulthood, conditional on earlier adult earnings and health (      are non-zero

at age 33).

        In Table 7, we test whether earnings predict future health status. The first four columns

show results from ordered probits, using health status measured on a 1 to 5 scale as the dependent

variable. At ages 33 and 42, with or without controls for the respondent’s educational attainment,

we find no evidence that earnings predict future health. The coefficient on lagged earnings is small

and insignificant in all specifications. The role of childhood factors is also insignificant, once

controls for health in early adulthood are included in these models. Neither family income at age

16 nor our set of family background and childhood health measures are jointly significant in any

specification. The only childhood factor that is significantly related to adult health is educational

attainment at age 16.

        We use the ordered probit specification in columns 1 through 4 to be consistent with the

reduced form results shown earlier. This specification treats the underlying dependent variable —

current health — as a continuous latent variable with four observed categories, whereas the

lagged health measures consist of indicators of the possible health states at earlier ages. These

indicators are error-ridden measures of lagged latent health, and the parameter estimates will be


                                                   19
inconsistent. As a cross-check on these results, we show estimates of linear probability models in

which an indicator of fair or poor health is regressed on indicators of earlier fair or poor health,

lagged earnings, and other controls. The results, in columns 5 and 6, are similar to those reported

using ordered probits. In particular, we find no evidence that earnings at earlier ages predict

health at later ages.

        In summary, our analysis of the NCDS suggests that health status in early and middle

adulthood predicts future earnings, but that earnings do not predict future health. In terms of

equations (1) and (2), we cannot reject the hypotheses that       is zero, while the hypothesis that

    is zero is rejected in our data. With respect to earnings, we find that childhood factors are

significantly related to earnings at age 33, even after controlling for health and earnings earlier in

adulthood, or in terms of equation (1), that      is non-zero. However, the importance of

childhood factors for earnings diminishes between ages 33 and 42. We find very different results

for adult health: conditional on past values of health and earnings, childhood factors (with the

exception of educational attainment at age 16) do not influence health in adulthood at any age

(    is zero.) This pattern of coefficients provides strong support for human capital models and no

support for pathways models or the variant of the fetal origins hypothesis we examine.



5. Conclusions

Consistent with human capital models, health in childhood and young adulthood are large and

significant predictors of subsequent earnings. These effects appear to operate primarily through

the effect of poor childhood health on educational attainment, and on initial earnings and health at

age 23. Because earnings and health are both persistent, and because poor health at ages 23 and

33 depresses earnings growth, the effects of poor health in childhood on initial values of earnings

and health in young adulthood are translated forward into lower earnings.




                                                  20
        Our evidence is consistent with life-course models of health and earnings, but offers no

support for the hypothesis that low birth weight adversely effects health in middle age, conditional

on earlier adult outcomes. At age 42, controlling for health at ages 23 and 33, there is little effect

of any of the childhood and prenatal health variables on current health. It is possible that our

measures of prenatal health (birth weight and maternal smoking) are too crude to identify prenatal

effects, or that age 42 is too early for these effects to appear.

        Our results are consistent with one hypothesis of pathways models — that childhood

factors affect initial adult social position. However, contrary to these models, we find no evidence

that initial adult social position as measured by earnings affects later health outcomes. Health at

ages 33 and 42 depends on lags of adult health, but not on earlier earnings. This does not imply

that economic status is irrelevant for adult health: we do find that higher levels of education, a

common marker of socioeconomic status, is positively associated with health outcomes in

adulthood, and that children from wealthier families receive more education. In addition, other

(broader) measures of socioeconomic status may predict future health where earnings do not.

Putting these results together with earlier results that poorer children enter young adulthood in

worse health than wealthier children, our results indicate that a key determinant of health in

adulthood is economic status in childhood, rather than economic status in adulthood.




                                                   21
References

Adams, Peter, Michael D. Hurd, Daniel McFadden, Angela Merrill, and Tiago Ribeiro. 2003.
      “Healthy, Wealthy and Wise? Tests for Direct Causal Paths Between Health and
      Socioeconomic Status,” Journal of Econometrics 112(1): 3-56.

Adler, Nancy E., Thomas Boyce, Margaret A. Chesney, Sheldon Cohen, Susan Folkman, Robert
       L. Kahn, and S.Leonard Syme, 1994. “Socioeconomic Status and Health, The Challenge
       of the Gradient,” American Psychologist, 15-24.

Barker, DJP. 1995. “Fetal Origins of Coronary Heart Disease,” British Medical Journal
        311(6998): 171-74.

Brunner, Eric and Michael Marmot. 1999. “Social organization, stress and health,” Chapter 2 in
      Social Determinants of Health, Michael Marmot and Richard G. Wilkinson (eds.), Oxford
      University Press, 17-43.

Brunner, Eric, Shipley, Blane, Davey Smith and Marmot. 1999. “When does cardiovascular risk
      start? Past and present socioeconomic circumstances and risk factors in adulthood,”
      Journal of Epidemiology and Community Health 53, 757-64.

Case, Anne. 2001. “Does money protect health status? Evidence from South African pensions,”
       NBER Working Paper 8495. October 2001.

Case, Anne and Angus Deaton. 2002. “Consumption, Health, Gender and Poverty,” RPDS
       Discussion Paper 212.

Case, Anne, Darren Lubotsky and Christina Paxson. 2002. “Socioeconomic status and health in
       childhood: the origins of the gradient,” American Economic Review 92(5): 1308-34.

Chandola, Tarani, Mel Bartley, Amanda Sacker, Crispin Jenkinson, and Michael Marmot. 2003.
      “Health Selection in the Whitehall II Study, UK” Social Science and Medicine 56(10):
      2059-72.

Currie, Janet and Rosemary Hyson. 1999. “Is the Impact of Health Shocks Cushioned by Socio-
        Economic Status? The Case of Low Birthweight.” American Economic Review Papers
        and Proceedings 89(2): 245-50.

Currie, Janet and Mark Stabile. 2002. “Socioeconomic status and health: Why is the relationship
        stronger for older children?” NBER Working Paper 9098.

Heckman, James. 1981. "Statistical Models for Discrete Panel Data," Chapter 3 in Charles F.
      Manski and Daniel L. McFadden, eds. Structural Analysis of Discrete Data and
     Econometric Applications. Cambridge: The MIT Press.


                                               22
Idler, Ellen L. and Stanislav V. Kasl. 1995. “Self-ratings of health: Do they also predict change in
        functional ability?” Journal of Gerontology: Social Sciences 508(6): S344-S353.

Institute of Medicine, 2001. Clearing the Smoke: Assessing the Science Base for Tobacco Harm
        Reduction, Washington: National Academy Press.

Kuh, D.J. and Wadsworth, M.E. 1993. “Physical Health Status at 36 Years in a British National
      Birth Cohort. Social Science and Medicine 37(7). 905-916.

Marmot, MG, George Davey Smith, Stephen Stansfeld, Chandra Patel, Fiona North, Jenny Head,
     Ian White, Eric Brunner, and Amanda Feeney. 1991. “Health inequalities among British
     civil servants: the Whitehall II study,” The Lancet 337. 1387-1393.

Marmot, M, Shipley, Brunner and Hemingway. 2001. “Relative contributions of early life and
     adult socioeconomic factors to adult morbidity in the Whitehall II study.” Journal of
     Epidemiology and Community Health 55. 301-307.

Marmot, MG, MJ Shipley, and Geoffrey Rose. 1984. “Inequalities in death—specific
     explanations of a general pattern?” The Lancet (May 5). 1003-1006.

Persico, Nicola, Andrew Postlewaite, and Dan Silverman, “The effect of adolescent experience
       on labor market outcomes: The case of height,” mimeo, University of Pennsylvania.

Power, Chris and Leah Li. 2000. “Cohort study of birthweight, mortality, and disability.” British
       Medical Journal 320 (March 25): 840-41

Power, C., Matthews, S. and Manor O. 1998. “Inequalities in self-rated health: explanations from
       different stages of the life course,” The Lancet 351(Apr 4): 1009-14.

Ravelli, ACJ, JHP van der Meulen, RPJ Michels, C Osmond, DJP Barker, CN Hales, and OP
        Bleker. 1998. “Glucose tolerance in adults after prenatal exposure to famine.” The
        Lancet 351, 173-77.

Reville, Robert T. 1995. "Intertemporal and Life Cycle Variation in Measured Intergenerational
        Earnings Mobility." Mimeo, RAND. Santa Monica, Calif.

Slotkin, Theodore A., 1998. “Fetal Nicotine or Cocaine Exposure: Which One is Worse?” The
        Journal of Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics 285(3), 931-945.

Smith, James P. 1999. “Healthy bodies and thick wallets: The dual relationship between
       health and economic status.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 13(2). 145-66.

Wu, Stephen. 2003. “The Effects of Health Events on the Economic Status of Married Couples.”
      Journal of Human Resources 38(1) (Winter). 219-30.


                                                 23
                                                                 M en                                          W omen

                                                          2.5                                            2.2
                            Self-reported health status




                                                                                                                                                   age 42
                                                                                                          2
                                                                                                                                                   age 33
                                                           2
                                                                                                         1.8                                         age 23


                                                          1.5                                            1.6
                                                                2000   2500 3000   3500 4000 4500              2000   2500 3000   3500 4000 4500
                                                                          Birthweight, grams                           Birthweight, grams




Figure 1: Health Status in Adulthood and Birthweight

                                                                                                    24
                                                                                                                                              child's mother




                   marginal effect on probability of passing English O-level   .2



                                                                                                                                              child's father

                                                                               .1




                                                                               0


                                                                                    <13   13-14   14-15        15-16      16-17    17-18   18-19

                                                                                                  Parent's age at leaving school




Figure 2: Marginal Effects of Mothers' and Fathers' Education on the Probability of Passing the English O-level Exam




                                                                                                          25
                                                                                                                                       age 23
                 marginal effect on self-reported health status
                                                                  .2




                                                                   0


                                                                                                                                       age 33
                                                                                                                                         age 42
                                                                  -.2




                                                                  -.4

                                                                        <13   13-14   14-15        15-16     16-17     17-18   18-19

                                                                                      Mother's age at leaving school




Figure 3: M arginal Effects of Mothers' Education on Self-reported Health Status




                                                                                              26
                     Table 1. Summary Statistics, 1958 British Cohort Survey

 Household and Individual-level                  Full sample, men and women           Sample of men used in
 Variables:                                                                              Tables 6 and 7

                                                 Mean (std.dev.)     # non-        Mean (std.dev.)     # non-
                                                                     missing                           missing
 Self-reported health status at age 23           1.66 (0.67)         12,521        1.55 (0.62)         2,187

 Self-reported health status at age 33           1.81 (0.70)         11,269        1.71 (0.65)         2,187

 Self-reported health status at age 42           1.92 (0.76)         11,371        1.81 (0.68)         2,187
 (1=excellent, 2=good, 3=fair, 4=poor)
 ln(weekly earnings) at age 23, men only         4.71 (0.36)         4,839         4.72 (0.31)         2,187

 ln(weekly earnings) at age 33, men only         5.12 (0.51)         4,220         5.17 (0.45)         2,187
 ln(weekly earnings) at age 42, men only         5.24 (0.69)         3,957         5.28 (0.68)         2,187

 Indicator: employed at time of survey,          0.68 (women)        5,781         0.97                2,187
 age 33                                          0.90 (men)          5,582

 Indicator: employed full-time at time of        0.36 (women)        5,781         0.96                2,187
 survey, age 33                                  0.89 (men)          5,582

 Indicator: employed at time of survey,          0.79 (women)        5,777         1.00                2,187
 age 42                                          0.90 (men)          5,607

 Indicator: employed full-time at time of        0.45 (women)        5,777         0.99                2,187
 survey, age 42                                  0.88 (men)          5,607
 Mother’s age at leaving school (median)         15-16               11,475        15-16               1,679

 Fathers age at leaving school (median)          14-15               11,274        14-15               1,667
 ln(weekly family income) at age 16              5.46 (0.23)         9,415         5.47 (0.208)        1,398

 Height at age 23 (meters)                       1.70 (0.10)         12,452        1.78 (0.07)         2,176

 Indicator: born at low birth weight             0.076               16,776        0.039               2,004
 Number chronic conditions, age 7                0.087 (0.422)       14,321        0.074 (0.34)        1,915

 Number chronic conditions, age 16               0.181 (0.619)       11,670        0.123 (0.43)        1,664

 Number of any O-level passes at age 16          1.96 (2.75)         14,325        2.19 (2.79)         1,906
Notes: All money amounts are in 1987 £. The “full sample” includes all individuals who appeared in the
relevant year of the survey. The sample used in Tables 6 and 7 is of men, excluding observations that had
missing data on health or earnings in adulthood (ages 23, 33 and 42), or who had earnings of zero at ages 23,
33 or 42. Note that, in the age 42 survey, individuals were only asked about earnings if they were employed at
the time of the survey, whereas at age 33 all individuals were asked about earnings regardless of current
employment status.


                                                      27
            Table 2. Education and Childhood Characteristics, Men and Women
                                                                             Dependent Variable:

                                       Total O-levels          Indicator: Passed O-level         Completed
                                          passed                exam by age 16 (probit)       Education Index
                                         by age 16                                            (ordered probit)
                                          (OLS)                  English          Math

 Ln(family income) at age 16                0.636                 0.103           0.084             0.231
                                           (0.129)               (0.025)         (0.020)           (0.063)
 Indicator: moderate prenatal              –0.280                –0.036          –0.044            –0.149
 smoking                                   (0.060)               (0.011)         (0.008)           (0.029)
 Indicator: heavy prenatal                 –0.437                –0.058          –0.064            –0.225
 smoking                                   (0.067)               (0.012)         (0.009)           (0.033)
 Indicator: variable prenatal              –0.452                –0.088          –0.045            –0.237
 smoking                                   (0.093)               (0.016)         (0.013)           (0.046)
 Indicator: low birth weight               –0.464                –0.076          –0.057            –0.225
                                           (0.091)               (0.016)         (0.012)           (0.046)
 # chronic conditions, age 7               –0.310                –0.072          –0.050            –0.291
                                           (0.057)               (0.015)         (0.013)           (0.035)
 # chronic conditions, age 16              –0.184                –0.058          –0.029            –0.202
                                           (0.040)               (0.010)         (0.008)           (0.025)

 Height at age 23 (meters)                  1.840                 0.252           0.228             1.395
                                           (0.329)               (0.063)         (0.051)           (0.168)

 Tests for joint significance: p-value from P2 or F test
 Mother’s education indicators              0.000                 0.000           0.000             0.000
 Father’s education indicators              0.000                 0.000           0.000             0.000

 Father’s class at child’s birth            0.000                 0.000           0.000             0.000
 Paternal grandfather’s class               0.000                 0.000           0.004             0.000

 Maternal grandfather’s class               0.000                 0.000           0.000             0.000

 Prenatal smoking indicators                0.000                 0.000           0.000             0.000
 Chronic conditions                         0.000                 0.000           0.000             0.000

 Observations                              14325                  14299           14299             12533
Note: For the probits, we report the effects of the independent variables on the probability of passing the
indicated O-level exam. Included in all regressions are controls for “family background” and “child health”
described in Appendix Table 4. The completed education index takes the value 1 if no O-levels were passed by
age 23, 2 if less than 5 O-levels were passed, 3 if 5 or more O-levels were passed, 4 if any A-levels were passed
or a teaching, nursing, or technical certificate was earned, and 5 if a degree was earned.


                                                        28
          Table 3. Adult Health and Childhood Characteristics, Men and Women
                                                          Dependent Variable: Health status at:

                                                 age 23                  age 33                   age 42
       Ln(family income) at age 16               –0.069                  –0.137                  –0.143
                                                 (0.065)                 (0.068)                 (0.066)
       Indicator: moderate prenatal              –0.047                   0.031                   0.052
       smoking                                   (0.030)                 (0.031)                 (0.030)

       Indicator: heavy prenatal                  0.031                   0.138                   0.162
       smoking                                   (0.034)                 (0.035)                 (0.034)

       Indicator: variable prenatal               0.106                   0.080                   0.169
       smoking                                   (0.046)                 (0.049)                 (0.047)

       Indicator: low birth weight                0.042                   0.072                   0.085
                                                 (0.046)                 (0.048)                 (0.047)
       # chronic conditions, age 7                0.120                   0.085                   0.054
                                                 (0.027)                 (0.030)                 (0.035)

       # chronic conditions, age 16               0.193                   0.128                   0.124
                                                 (0.020)                 (0.022)                 (0.024)
       Height at age 23 (meters)                 –0.680                  –0.579                  –0.202
                                                 (0.173)                 (0.172)                 (0.170)
       Tests for joint significance: p-value from P2 or F test
       Mother’s education indicators             0.045                   0.012                    0.017
       Father’s education indicators             0.246                   0.301                    0.306

       Father’s class at child’s birth           0.011                   0.000                    0.000

       Paternal grandfather’s class              0.696                   0.320                    0.044
       Maternal grandfather’s class              0.166                   0.012                    0.021

       Prenatal smoking indicators               0.020                   0.001                    0.000

       Chronic conditions                        0.000                   0.000                    0.000
      Observations                               12521                     11269                  11371
Note: Ordered probits. Included in all regressions are controls for “family background” and “child health”
described in Appendix Table 4.




                                                     29
      Table 4. Adult Employment and Childhood Characteristics, Men and Women
                                         Dependent Variable: Part time or full time employment:

                                   women, age 33        women, age 42   men, age 33     men, age 42
 Ln(family income) at age 16            0.042               0.068          0.010            0.042
                                       (0.039)             (0.034)        (0.024)          (0.024)
 Indicator: moderate prenatal          –0.009              –0.014         –0.006           –0.020
 smoking                               (0.018)             (0.016)        (0.011)          (0.012)

 Indicator: heavy prenatal             –0.027               0.005         –0.027           –0.018
 smoking                               (0.021)             (0.017)        (0.013)          (0.013)

 Indicator: variable prenatal           0.017               0.003          0.010           –0.050
 smoking                               (0.029)             (0.025)        (0.016)          (0.020)

 Indicator: low birth weight           –0.008               0.007         –0.040           –0.021
                                       (0.026)             (0.022)        (0.022)          (0.020)
 # chronic conditions, age 7           –0.103              –0.043         –0.021           –0.008
                                       (0.023)             (0.019)        (0.008)          (0.010)

 # chronic conditions, age 16          –0.024              –0.022         –0.032           –0.048
                                       (0.016)             (0.014)        (0.006)          (0.006)
 Height at age 23 (meters)              0.186               0.053          0.072            0.128
                                       (0.114)             (0.101)        (0.064)          (0.067)
 Tests for joint significance: p-value from P2 or F test
 Mother’s education indicators          0.957              0.444           0.949           0.251
 Father’s education indicators          0.755              0.489           0.034           0.304

 Father’s class at child’s birth        0.145              0.653           0.017           0.023

 Paternal grandfather’s class           0.048              0.726           0.544           0.036
 Maternal grandfather’s class           0.550              0.234           0.390           0.230

 Prenatal smoking indicators            0.479              0.799           0.133           0.012

 Chronic conditions                     0.000              0.012           0.000           0.000
 Observations                           5,780               5,771          5,581           5,607
Note: Probits. Marginal effects on the probability of employment are reported. Included in all
regressions are controls for “family background” and “child health” described in Appendix Table 4.




                                                   30
               Table 5. Adult Earnings and Childhood Characteristics , Men

                                                        Dependent Variable: ln(earnings) at:

                                               age 23                 age 33                   age 42
      Ln(family income) at age 16              0.008                   0.128                    0.225
                                              (0.034)                 (0.050)                  (0.071)

      Indicator: moderate prenatal             0.024                   0.017                   –0.039
      smoking                                 (0.015)                 (0.023)                  (0.032)
      Indicator: heavy prenatal                0.027                  –0.060                   –0.029
      smoking                                 (0.017)                 (0.024)                  (0.036)
      Indicator: variable prenatal            –0.002                  –0.008                   –0.012
      smoking                                 (0.023)                 (0.034)                  (0.048)
      Indicator: low birth weight              0.013                  –0.133                   –0.010
                                              (0.025)                 (0.039)                  (0.055)
      # chronic conditions, age 7             –0.053                  –0.075                   –0.056
                                              (0.016)                 (0.023)                  (0.035)

      # chronic conditions, age 16            –0.126                  –0.065                   –0.040
                                              (0.011)                 (0.016)                  (0.028)

      Height at age 23 (meters)                0.431                   0.604                    0.871
                                              (0.086)                 (0.137)                  (0.196)
      Tests for joint significance: p-value from P2 or F test
      Mother’s education indicators            0.405                  0.165                    0.902
      Father’s education indicators            0.534                  0.011                    0.131

      Father’s class at child’s birth          0.000                  0.000                    0.000
      Paternal grandfather’s class             0.210                  0.494                    0.085

      Maternal grandfather’s class             0.138                  0.006                    0.781

      Prenatal smoking indicators              0.218                  0.061                    0.615
      Chronic conditions                       0.000                  0.000                    0.056

       Observations                             4,839                   4,220                3,957
Note: Ordinary least squares. Included in all regressions are controls for “family background” and
“child health” described in Appendix Table 4.




                                                   31
          Table 6. The Impact of Past Health Status on Current Earnings, Men

                                                             Dependent variable:
                                            ln(own earnings), age 33     ln(own earnings), age 42
 ln(family income), age 16                    0.052         0.044          0.090         0.085
                                             (0.058)       (0.058)        (0.087)       (0.087)
 ln(own earnings), age 23                     0.423         0.415          0.202         0.204
                                             (0.028)       (0.028)        (0.044)       (0.044)
 ln(own earnings), age 33                                                  0.547         0.539
                                                                          (0.032)       (0.033)
 # O-levels passed, age 16                    0.038         0.036          0.039         0.038
                                             (0.004)       (0.004)        (0.006)       (0.006)

 Good health indicator, age 23                             –0.070                       –0.002
                                                           (0.018)                      (0.029)
 Fair health indicator, age 23                             –0.138                       –0.100
                                                           (0.039)                      (0.061)
 Poor health indicator, age 23                             –0.500                        0.143
                                                           (0.138)                      (0.209)
 Good health indicator, age 33                                                          –0.025
                                                                                        (0.029)
 Fair health indicator, age 33                                                          –0.038
                                                                                        (0.052)
 Poor health indicator, age 33                                                          –0.441
                                                                                        (0.162)
 Lagged health indicators jointly                           11.34                         2.14
 significant? F (p-val)                                    (0.000)                      (0.047)
 Lagged own earnings jointly significant?    228.68        223.02         195.71        187.98
 F (p-val)                                   (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)
 Family background variables jointly           2.30          2.32           0.61          0.63
 significant? F (p-val)                      (0.000)       (0.000)        (0.980)       (0.972)
 Child health measures jointly                 2.65          2.50           1.61          1.64
 significant? F (p-val)                      (0.032)       (0.041)        (0.170)       (0.161)

Note: Observations=2,187. OLS regressions results are reported. The “family background” variables
and “child health measures,” included in all regressions, are described in Appendix Table 4.




                                                 32
           Table 7. The Impact of Past Earnings on Current Health Status, Men
                                    Ordered probits. Health status                   OLS. Indicators of fair
                                   (1=excellent to 4=poor) at:                         or poor health at:
                                          age 33                  age 42              age 33        age 42
ln(family income), age 16           –0.026      –0.028      –0.140     –0.133          0.037        –0.106
                                    (0.170)     (0.170)     (0.168)    (0.168)        (0.041)       (0.046)
ln(own earnings), age 23                         0.065                 –0.034          0.006       –0.0008
                                                (0.083)                (0.085)        (0.020)      (0.023)
ln(own earnings), age 33                                               –0.096                       –0.027
                                                                       (0.064)                      (0.017)
# O-levels passed, age 16           –0.048      –0.048      –0.032     –0.029         –0.007        –0.005
                                    (0.011)     (0.011)     (0.011)    (0.011)        (0.003)       (0.003)

Good health indicator, age 23        0.832       0.834       0.320      0.313
                                    (0.054)     (0.055)     (0.055)    (0.056)
Fair health indicator, age 23        1.593       1.596       0.565      0.553
                                    (0.113)     (0.113)     (0.116)    (0.116)
Poor health indicator, age 23        1.010       1.011       0.373      0.325
                                    (0.398)     (0.397)     (0.397)    (0.397)
Fair or poor health indicator,                                                         0.304         0.144
age 23                                                                                (0.026)       (0.030)
Good health indicator, age 33                                0.705      0.702
                                                            (0.058)    (0.058)
Fair health indicator, age 33                                1.394      1.388
                                                            (0.101)    (0.102)
Poor health indicator, age 33                                2.184      2.175
                                                            (0.304)    (0.304)
Fair or poor health indicator,                                                                       0.320
age 33                                                                                              (0.025)
Lagged health ind jointly           335.97      336.39      421.36     409.68         137.50        118.91
significant?                        (0.000)     (0.000)     (0.000)    (0.000)        (0.000)       (0.000)
Lagged own earnings jointly                       0.62                   3.06           0.11          1.36
significant?                                    (0.430)                (0.216)        (0.744)       (0.256)
Family background variables          52.85       52.51       38.37      38.12           0.85         0.081
jointly significant?                (0.169)     (0.178)     (0.711)    (0.721)        (0.748)       (0.816)
 Child health measures jointly         0.42        0.39        4.89      4.28            1.45          2.71
 significant?                        (0.981)     (0.983)     (0.299) (0.370)           (0.216)       (0.029)
Note: Observations=2,187. The “family background” variables and “child health measures,” included in
all regressions, are described in Appendix Table 4. The tests of joint significance in the bottom panel
are P2 statistics (p-values in parentheses) for the ordered probit models, and are F statistics (p-values in
parentheses) for the models estimated with OLS.

                                                    33
Appendix

A. Sample attrition
Appendix Table 1 shows descriptive statistics for selected variables collected at the baseline survey (i.e.
at the time of birth) for the samples of children present at later surveys. These statistics indicate that
most of the attrition (from 17,409 children to 11,015 children) occurred between birth and age 16.
Children who left between birth and age 6 were more likely than “stayers” to have been born at low
birth weight. Only a small portion of the total attrition is due to child death: Power and Li (2000) report
that 201 children died between the ages of 1 month and 15 years. However, their finding that deaths in
the first year were concentrated among low birth weight children may explain why those who remain in
the sample are less likely to have been born at low weight. The other baseline characteristics of the
children — measures of mothers’ schooling and fathers’ occupation — do not change over time as the
sample becomes smaller. The survey has also added roughly 700 children born during the week of
March 3, 1958 who immigrated to England, Scotland and Wales prior to the age 16 survey. These
children do not appear to be substantially different from the original sample. “New” children whose
families were present at the age 16 interview had family income that was only 1.5% lower than children
from the original sample. We include these children in our analyses.

            Appendix Table 1: Sample sizes and means of characteristics at birth, over time.
 Age at interview:                             birth          6        16        23         33         42
 Sample size:                                 17,409        14,255   11,015    11,886     10,834     10,794
 Fraction of children with:

                          low birth weight    0.076         0.057    0.057    0.058      0.057      0.056
    mothers who left school at minimum        0.250         0.248    0.250    0.252      0.259      0.260
                      school leaving age
                       professional fathers   0.043         0.039    0.040    0.043      0.045      0.044

                        managerial fathers    0.123         0.125    0.123    0.128      0.131      0.133
                non-manual skilled fathers    0.091         0.094    0.095    0.097      0.097      0.097
                     manual skilled fathers   0.481         0.483    0.482    0.480      0.485      0.480

                        semi-skilled father   0.114         0.116    0.119    0.117      0.115      0.115
                           unskilled father   0.093         0.091    0.093    0.086      0.080      0.083
Note: These statistics include only those who were interviewed at birth, and exclude children added to the
sample later. Low birth weight, whether the mother went beyond minimum school-leaving age, and father’s
social class were all measured at the first interview (i.e. immediately after the child’s birth).

B. Self-reported health status and chronic conditions

The following table shows regressions (ordered probits) of reported health status at ages 33 and 42 on a
set of indicators for whether the respondent reports having each of the health conditions listed in the
table. It also shows the prevalence of each of these conditions. The question wording for several health
conditions varied between the age 33 and age 42 interviews; in those cases, the difference is detailed in a
footnote.

                                                       34
                         Appendix Table 2. Health status and health conditions
                                     Age 33   Dependent Variable:     Age 42     Dependent Variable:
                                     Means    Health Status, age 33   Means      Health Status, age 42

Longstanding illness/disability      0.155        0.371 (0.085)       0.289         0.437 (0.033)

   Illness limits daily activities   0.059       0.704 (0.061)        0.129         0.583 (0.049)
            Registered disabled      0.012       0.361 (0.107)        0.022         0.422 (0.084)

            Illness limits work a    0.135       -0.191 (0.083)       0.113         0.295 (0.050)

                        Epilepsy     0.012       0.509 (0.102)        0.020         0.294 (0.080)
                        Diabetes     0.006       0.370 (0.146)        0.017         0.428 (0.086)

  Severe headaches, migraines        0.193       0.188 (0.029)        0.203         0.049 (0.028)
                      BMI>=30        0.110       0.288 (0.036)        0.151         0.282 (0.032)
                         Asthma      0.089       0.058 (0.044)        0.110         -0.012 (0.041)

                         Ezcema      0.172       0.096 (0.030)        0.225         0.074 (0.027)
                      Hay Fever      0.207       -0.074 (0.029)       0.208         -0.063 (0.029)
                      Bronchitis     0.115       -0.001 (0.038)       0.106         0.030 (0.038)
                          Hernia     0.030       0.076 (0.066)        0.049         0.149 (0.052)
     Kidney/Bladder problems         0.068       0.153 (0.045)        0.080         0.137 (0.041)

           High blood pressure       0.082       0.177 (0.041)        0.111         0.338 (0.036)
Cough 1st thing in the morning       0.116       0.206 (0.040)        0.139         0.228 (0.039)
            Cough with phlegm        0.101       0.176 (0.042)        0.105         0.196 (0.042)
    Short of breath when walk        0.054       0.712 (0.052)        0.086         0.469 (0.043)

   Wheezing/whistling in chest       0.280       0.211 (0.030)        0.283         0.126 (0.030)

         Persistent Back Pain b      0.468       0.159 (0.023)        0.222         0.195 (0.028)
                         Smokes      0.334       0.312 (0.027)        0.300         0.320 (0.028)

            Smoked in the past       0.186       0.102 (0.031)        0.254         0.112 (0.028)

           Stomach problems c        0.179       0.290 (0.030)        0.146         0.284 (0.032)
Emotional Problems d                 0.549       0.199 (0.024)        0.481         0.045 (0.008)

          Chi-Square                                2369.40                            3652.64
           (p-value)                                (0.0000)                           (0.0000)

                   Observations                        10460                            10526

                                                  35
a
  At age 33, an individual is categorized as having an illness that limits work if he answers that his
longstanding illness or disability makes it harder to get and keep a paid job compared to other people of
his age with the same skills and experience. At age 42, he is not asked to compare his ability to work to
those his age or with his skills and experience.
b
  At age 33, the question refers to any back pain that lasted more than one day, where at age 42, the
question asks specifically about persistent back pain, lumbago, or sciatica.
c
  At age 33, the question refers to any stomach trouble or indigestion, whereas at age 42, the question
asks specifically about peptic, duodenal or gastric ulcer, gallstones, irritable bowel syndrome,
ulcerative colitis, or Crohn’s disease.
d
  The questions about emotional problems at both interviews refer to a list of feelings the respondent
may have had since the last interview; however, the last choice – the “other” category – is worded
differently across waves. At age 33, the last category is “other feelings of worry, tension, anxiety,
depression or nerves” where at age 42, the last category is “other problems affecting your mood,
emotions or behaviour.”


                             Appendix Table 3. Transitions in Health States, Men
                 Health at age 33 is:
    Health at
    age 23 is:   Excellent          Good               Fair            Poor          Row total

    Excellent    635 (29.0%)        437 (20.0%)        43 (2.0%)       1 (0.1%)      1,116 (51.03%)

    Good         218 (10.0%)        610 (27.9%)        103 (4.7%)      9 (0.4%)      940 (43.0%)
    Fair         9 (0.4%)           63 (2.9%)          46 (2.1%)       4 (0.2%)      122 (5.6%)

    Poor         3 (0.1%)           5 (0.2%)           0 (0.0%)        1 (0.1%)      9 (0.4%)
    Column       865 (39.6)         1,115 (51.0%)      192 (8.8%)      15 (0.7%)     2,187 (100.0%)
    total



                                         Health at age 42 is:
    Health at
    age 33 is:   Excellent          Good               Fair            Poor          Row total

    Excellent    482 (22.0%)        340 (15.6%)        39 (1.8%)       4 (0.2%)      865 (39.6%)
    Good         235 (10.8%)        728 (33.3%)        145 (6.6%)      7 (0.3%)      1,115 (51.0%)

    Fair         15 (0.7%)          92 (4.2%)          78 (3.6%)       7 (0.3%)      192 (8.8%)

    Poor         1 (0.1%)           3 (0.1%)           6 (0.3%)        5 (0.2%)      15 (0.7%)
 Column        733 (33.5%)        1,163 (53.2%)     268 (12.3%)     23 (1.1%)      2,187 (100.0%)
 total
Notes: The transition matrices are based on the sample of 2,187 males used in Tables 6 and 7.




                                                     36
C. Variables included in the regressions

1. Treatment of missing values

All analyses rely on common sets of “family backgound” and “child health.” Some variables are missing
in some years, either because the child’s parents did not participate in an interview that year, or because
the child was not given the medical checkup that was part of the study. Rather than drop observations
with missing values, we use the following methods that enable us to retain them:

a. We include full sets of indicators for parental and family characteristics, including mother’s and
father’s education; mother’s marital status at the time of the child’s birth; the “social class” of the
child’s father (at the time of the child’s birth) and paternal and maternal grandfathers (measured when
the child’s parents left school); and the mother’s smoking behavior during pregnancy. For each of these
variables, the category “missing” is included as a separate indicator variable.

b. We include indicator variables for whether the “low birth weight” indicator is missing, an indicator
for whether the number of siblings is missing, an indicator for whether height at age 23 is missing,
indicators for whether the child’s mother’s and father’s heights are missing, and an indicator for whether
the child’s family income at age 16 is missing. We also include indicators for whether the parents
completed the age 7 and age 11 interviews, and indicators for whether the child was examined for the
age 7 and age 16 medical interviews.

c. We interact each of the variables mentioned in b, above, with indicators that the variable is non-
missing. For example, the indicator of low birth weight is interacted with with an indicator for whether
birth weight is non-missing, so that those with missing birth weight are assigned a value of zero for this
variable. The same procedure is followed for variables that measure the number of siblings, height at
age 23, mother’s height, father’s height, ln(family income) at age 16, and the number of medical
conditions the child has at ages 7 and 16. The coefficients reported in the Tables for each of these
variables in the coefficient on the interaction of the variable (e.g. birth weight) with the indicator that the
variable is non-missing. These coefficients therefore represent the effect of the variable conditional on
its value being observed.

d. The indicators for missing values are not included in the chi-square and F-test reported in the tables
for the joint significance of different groups of variables. Thus (for example), tests of joint significance
of mother’s education tests whether the indicators of the mother’s school leaving age, excluding the
indicator that school leaving age is missing, are jointly significant. Likewise, tests for the joint
significance of child health variables do not include the measures of whether birth weight, height, and
measures of chronic conditions are missing. The following table indicates which variables are and are
not included in chi-square and/or F-tests.

2. Definition of variables

The following table defines the sets of “family background” and “child health” measures:




                                                      37
                 Appendix Table 4. Family Background and Child Health Measures
Variable:                                                            included in Chi-square
                                                                     and/or F tests for joint
                                                                     significance?
Family background variables
Mother left school before age 13                                     omitted category
Mother left school at age 13-14                                      yes
Mother left school at age 14-15                                      yes
Mother left school at age 15-16                                      yes
Mother left school at age 16-17                                      yes
Mother left school at age 17-18                                      yes
Mother left school at age 18-19                                      yes
Mother left school at age 19-21                                      yes
Mother left school at age 21-23                                      yes
Mother left school at age 23 or more                                 yes
Mother’s school leaving age is unknown                               no
Mother’s school leaving age is missing                               no
Father left school before age 13                                     omitted category
Father left school at age 13-14                                      yes
Father left school at age 14-15                                      yes
Father left school at age 15-16                                      yes
Father left school at age 16-17                                      yes
Father left school at age 17-18                                      yes
Father left school at age 18-19                                      yes
Father left school at age 19-21                                      yes
Father left school at age 21-23                                      yes
Father left school at age 23 or more                                 yes
Father’s school leaving age is unknown                               no
Father’s school leaving age is missing                               no
Mother divorced at child’s birth                                     omitted category
Mother in “stable union” at child’s birth                            yes
Mother twice married at child’s birth                                yes
Mother married at child’s birth                                      yes
Mother unmarried at child’s birth                                    yes
Mother’s marital status at child’s birth unknown/missing             no
Number of siblings x indicator: siblings nonmissing                  yes


                                                38
Variable:                                                          included in Chi-square
                                                                   and/or F tests for joint
                                                                   significance?

Indicator: siblings missing                                        no
Mother’s height (meters) x indicator: mother’s height nonmissing   yes
Indicator: mother’s height non-missing                             no
Father’s height (meters) x indicator: father’s height nonmissing   yes
Indicator: father’s height non-missing                             no
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Professional”           omitted category
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Managerial”             yes
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Non-manual skilled”     yes
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Manual skilled”         yes
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Semi-skilled”           yes
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Unskilled”              yes
Father’s social class at child’s birth is “Unemployed”             yes
Father’s social class at child’s birth is missing or unknown       no
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Professional”              omitted category
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Managerial”                yes
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Non-manual skilled”        yes
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Manual skilled”            yes
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Non-manual semi-skilled”   yes
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Manual semi-skilled”       yes
Paternal grandfather’s social class is “Unskilled”                 yes
Paternal grandfather’s social class is missing                     no
Maternal grandfather’s social class is “Professional”              omitted category
Maternal grandfather’s social class is “Managerial”                yes
Maternal grandfather’s social class is “Non-manual skilled”        yes
Maternal grandfather’s social class is “Manual skilled”            yes
Maternal grandfather’s social class is “Semi-skilled”              yes
Maternal grandfather’s social class is “Unskilled”                 yes
Maternal grandfather’s social class is missing                     no
Mother did not smoke after 4th month of pregnancy                  omitted category
                                     th
Mother was medium smoker after 4 month of pregnancy                yes
Mother was heavy smoker after 4th month of pregnancy               yes
                                     th
Mother was variable smoker after 4 month of pregnancy              yes
Mother’s smoking after 4th month of pregnancy is missing           yes


                                                     39
 Variable:                                                                    included in Chi-square
                                                                              and/or F tests for joint
                                                                              significance?

 Parent interview at age 0 completed                                          no
 Parent interview at age 7 completed                                          no
 Parent interview at age 11 completed                                         no
                                          Child health variables
 indicator of low birth weight x indicator: birth weight nonmissing           yes
 indicator: birth weight missing                                              no
 height in meters at age 23 x indicator: height at age 23 nonmissing          yes
 indicator: height in meters at age 23 missing                                no
 number of chronic conditions at age 7* x indicator: medical interview at     yes
 indicator: medical interview at age 7 completed                              no
 number of chronic conditions at age 16* x indicator: medical interview       yes
 indicator: medical interview at age 16 completed                             no
*Chronic conditions are assessed during the course of a medical exam. Our counts of chronic conditions
include those determined by the medical examiner to be slight, moderate, or severe. The list of possible
conditions at age 7 includes: general motor handicap, disfiguring condition, mental retardation,
emotional maladjustment, head and neck abnormality, upper limb abnormality, lower limb abnormality,
spine abnormality, respiratory system problem, alimentary system problem, urogenital system problem,
heart condition, blood abnormality, skin condition, epilepsy, other CNS condition, diabetes, and any
other condition. The list of conditions at age 16 includes: general motor handicap, general physical
abnormality, mental retardation, emotional/behavioral problem, head and neck abnormality, upper limb
abnormality, lower limb abnormality, spine abnormality, respiratory system problem, alimentary system
problem, urogenital system problem, heart condition, haematological abnormality, skin condition,
epilepsy, other CNS condition, diabetes, eye condition, hearing defect, speech defect, and any other
abnormal condition.

D. Imputation of family income at age 16

The NCDS does not ask the parents of the cohort members their actual earnings in any of the survey
years, but does ask in 1975, when the cohort members are 16 years old, which bracket their usual net
income falls. We use actual income values reported in the 1974, 1975, and 1976 cross-sectional Family
Expenditure Surveys (FES) to impute values which we can assign to our sample of households based on
these brackets. We restrict the FES sample to those households with children between the ages of 15 and
17 and drop all observations from Northern Ireland for comparability to the NCDS. The resulting
sample size is 2,224 households. We separately categorize the FES fathers and mothers into the NCDS
income brackets. We also include two additional categories (self-employed and no mother/father
present) and collapse categories with few observations, resulting in a total of 10 mother categories and
10 father categories. We compute the household’s mean disposable income given that the mother falls in
category i and the father falls in category j and match this value to the corresponding observations in the
NCDS sample.



                                                    40
E. The British Education System

The education system relevant for this cohort is based on the student’s performance on a series of
exams. Upon the completion of primary school (age 11), students take exams which determine whether
they go to grammar school, where they prepare to take O-level exams at age 16, or to secondary school,
which is a non-university track where the students take exams to receive their Certificate of Secondary
Education at age 16 after which they generally enter the labor market. Typically, passing 5 or more O-
level exams, including the Math and English exams, qualifies a student to pursue vocational courses or
to continue his or her academic studies until age 18, when the A-level subject exams are administered.
Students are admitted to universities based on their performance on their A-level exams.

Given this system, the number of O-level exams passed and passing English and Math exams at age 16
are important predictors of completed education. In addition, we have constructed a completed education
index which captures the highest educational qualification achieved by age 23. The index takes the value
1 if no O-levels were passed by age 23, 2 if less than 5 O-levels were passed, 3 if 5 or more O-levels
were passed, 4 if any A-levels were passed or a teaching, nursing, or technical certificate was earned,
and 5 if a degree was earned.




                                                  41
