                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                       PRODUCT CHOICE AND PRODUCT SWITCHING

                                          Andrew B. Bernard
                                           Stephen Redding
                                            Peter K. Schott

                                          Working Paper 9789
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9789


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




We thank Jonathan Haskel, Marc Melitz, Danny Quah, and seminar participants at CEPR, Dartmouth, Penn
State, and LSE for helpful comments. Bernard and Schott gratefully acknowledge research support by the
National Science Foundation. Redding gratefully acknowledges financial support from a Philip Leverhulme
Prize. The research in this paper was conducted at the Center for Economic Studies. Research results and
conclusions expressed are those of the authors and do not necessarily indicate concurrence by the Bureau of
the Census or by the National Bureau of Economic Research. The paper has not undergone the review the
Census Bureau gives its official publications. It has been screened to insure that no confidential data are
revealed. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National
Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Andrew B. Bernard, Stephen Redding, and Peter K. Schott. All rights reserved. Short sections of
text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit
including © notice, is given to the source.
Product Choice and Product Switching
Andrew B. Bernard, Stephen Redding and Peter K. Schott
NBER Working Paper No. 9789
June 2003
JEL No. I1, D1, J0

                                            ABSTRACT

This paper develops a model of endogenous product selection by firms. The theory is motivated by
new evidence we present on the importance of product switching by U.S. manufacturers. Two-thirds
of continuing firms change their product mix every five years, and product switches involve more

than 40% of firm output and almost half of existing products. The theoretical model incorporates
heterogeneous firms, heterogeneous products, and ongoing entry and exit. In equilibrium, firm

productivity is correlated with product fixed costs, with the most productive firms choosing to make
the products with the highest fixed costs. Changes in market structure result in systematic patterns
of firm entry/exit and product switching.


Andrew B. Bernard                                    Peter K. Schott
Tuck School of Business                              Yale School of Management
100 Tuck Hall                                        135 Prospect Street
Hanover, NH 03755                                    New Haven, CT 06520
and NBER                                             and NBER
andrew.b.bernard@dartmouth.edu                       peter.schott@yale.edu

Stephen Redding
London School of Economics
Houghton Street
London, WC2A 2AE
United Kingdom
s.j.redding@lse.ac.uk
               Product Choice and Product Switching                        2


1.   Introduction

    The choice of which product to make is a fundamental decision by a
firm. Despite this, most theoretical models of firm behavior take product
choice by the firm as given or treat entry into a product market to be the
same as the decision to create a firm. Similarly, there is no systematic
evidence on the importance of product switching for the firm or on the
scope of product switching across industries.
    This paper models product choice by heterogeneous firms. The theory
is motivated by a new set of stylized facts where we document the im-
portance of product switching across U.S. manufacturing firms. Product
switching, i.e. the addition or deletion of a product from the firm’s output
mix, is a widespread activity. More than two thirds of continuing U.S.
manufacturing firms alter their product mix over a five year period. For
firms, adding or dropping a product is an important event, aﬀecting more
than one third of current products and current output. Over half of all
product additions also expand the mix of industries produced by the firm.
    Our theoretical model incorporates heterogeneous firms, heterogeneous
products, and ongoing entry and exit in general equilibrium. Firms choose
which product to produce within an industry as well as whether to enter
or exit the market. Products diﬀer both in terms of how they are de-
manded and in their production techniques. Product choice is determined
by an interaction between firm characteristics, product characteristics, and
market conditions. Changes in market characteristics, production technolo-
gies, or consumer tastes are associated with changes in entry and exit rates,
industry and product productivity, and product switching by firms.
    We model firms as being heterogeneous in terms of their productivity
and products as diﬀering in terms of their fixed costs of production. In
equilibrium, firm productivity is correlated with product choice, with the
most productive firms endogenously choosing to make the products with
the highest fixed costs. Both product choice and entry/exit decisions are
endogenously determined by market structure.
    Our framework builds on Melitz’s (2002) dynamic industry model with
heterogenous firms. We extend that model by introducing multiple prod-
ucts defined by their fixed and variable costs of production and their sub-
stitutability in consumption. Our framework incorporates endogenous firm
entry and exit decisions and variation in firm productivity (as in Hopenhayn
                 Product Choice and Product Switching                                  3


1992 and Jovanovic 1982); horizontal product diﬀerentiation and monop-
olistic competition (as in Krugman 1980); and endogenous product choice
based on production technique or quality (as in Shaked and Sutton 1987
and Sutton 1998).
    This paper concentrates on interactions of firm characteristics, prod-
uct characteristics and market conditions as sources of product switching.
However, product choice is not only interesting in its own right, but po-
tentially has implications for the firm’s decisions about investment, factor
and material purchases, and pricing that lie beyond the scope of this pa-
per. Similarly for the industry, we consider the relation of product choice
by firms to market structure and productivity growth and leave unmod-
elled consequences for international trade and investment flows, returns to
factors, and the nature of competition.
    The remainder of the paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides
evidence on product switching by U.S. manufacturing firms from 1972-1997.
Section 3 considers existing empirical and theoretical work on industries
with heterogeneous firms and presents a non-technical overview of the the-
oretical model. In section 4, we develop the model while section 5 solves for
general equilibrium. A technical appendix at the end of the paper contains
important derivations and proofs of the propositions. Section 6 examines
the eﬀects of changes in the model’s parameters on firm-level choices and
industry equilibrium. Section 7 concludes.

2.       Product Switching By U.S. Manufacturing Firms, 1972-1997

   In this section we provide the first complete view of product switching
by U.S. manufacturing firms.1 We look at the importance of adding and
     1
    Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988) use U.S. Census data from 1963-1982 to
examine forms of entry into industries by firms. They find that just under half of all
new entrants in an industry come from continuing firms, i.e. firms adding an industry.
Their paper examines rates of (more aggregate) industry entry and exit and subsequent
performance by diﬀerent types of entrants rather than the extent and importance of
product additions and deletions by firms. Streitweiser (1992) uses U.S. Census data to
describe the number of products (SIC5) produced by U.S. manufacturing plants during
the period 1972-1982. Her focus is on the similarity of products produced at multiple
product plants, not on product switching. Gollop and Monahan (1991) also use U.S.
Census data to construct an index of firm diversification based on 5-digit products. They
report increasing firm diversification and declining plant diversification within most 2-
                 Product Choice and Product Switching                                 4


dropping products for the manufacturing sector a whole as well as for in-
dividual firms. We start by documenting the extent of this activity across
firms in the U.S. manufacturing sector. Next, we consider the importance
of product-switching at the firms themselves. Finally, we ask whether
product switches are associated with significant changes in the firm’s out-
put mix.
    Our data comes from the Censuses of Manufactures (CM) of the Longi-
tudinal Research Database (LRD) of the U.S. Bureau of the Census starting
in 1972 and conducted every fifth year through 1997. The sampling unit
for the Census is a manufacturing establishment, or plant, and the sam-
pling frame in each Census year includes information on inputs, output,
and products on all establishments. We aggregate the plant-level data up
to the enterprise, or firm, for all the results reported in this paper. Ex-
amining the product mix of the firm, rather than the plant, has several
advantages: it is both the level at which decisions are made about prod-
ucts and it avoids a potential problem of a firm shuﬄing its existing mix of
products across plants. From the Census, we construct firm characteristics
including the total value of shipments, the number of products produced,
total value of each product produced, and information on the births and
deaths of firms.
    In constructing our sample, we make several modifications to the basic
data. We use information on all manufacturing establishments in the six
Censuses. While the LRD does contain basic information on small plants
(so-called Administrative records), we do not include them in this study due
to the lack of information on products. We aggregate the establishment
level data in the Censuses up to the level of the firm. All our results
are based on firm-level statistics. On average we are left with 141,561
continuing firms in each year.2
    We refer to a product as a unique five-digit category in the 1987 Stan-
dard Industrial Classification (SIC5).3 In Census years, plant output is
digit industries from 1963-1982 but do not address issues related to product switching.
Bernard et al. (2002) provide evidence of U.S. manufacturing firms switching between
industries in response to competition from low-wage countries.
   2
     On average, over one third of manufacturing firms do not survive from one Census
to the next. In these tables, we focus on product-switching at surviving, or continuing,
firms. The subsequent theoretical model allows for firm failure as an outcome.
   3
     We characterize where firms are located in product space and the extent of product
                   Product Choice and Product Switching                                                5


recorded either at the five-digit or seven-digit SIC level of detail. Roughly
7,000 of the 15,000 seven-digit categories are recorded directly in the LRD,
the rest are recorded at a five-digit level of aggregation. We aggregate
seven-digit categories up to their five-digit ‘product-class’ to obtain a com-
plete set of SIC5 products for all manufacturing firms. Our terminol-
ogy diﬀers slightly from that of the Census Bureau. We [Census] define
four-digit categories as industries [industries] and five-digit categories as
products [product classes].

Table 1: Average Share of US Manufacturing Firm Activity During 5-Year
Census Period Intervals, 1972 to 1997
                                                                   Percent of Firms
                                                                    Single Product       Multiple
      Type of Firm                                   All Firms
                                                                         Firms        Product Firms
      Firm takes no action                               31                47               11
      Firm drops products only                           13                na               31
      Firm adds products only                            12                15                8
      Firm both adds and drops products                  43                38               50
                                                                  Percent of Output
                                                                    Single Product       Multiple
      Type of Firm                                   All Firms
                                                                         Firms        Product Firms
      Firm takes no action                                7                51                3
      Firm drops products only                            8                na                8
      Firm adds products only                             5                21                3
      Firm both adds and drops products                  81                29               86
      Note: Table displays average share of continuing US manufacturing firms engaging in each
      activity across five year intervals from 1972 to 1997. Add and Drop refer to firms adding or
      dropping at least one five-digit SIC manufacturing 'product' during the five years between
      Censuses of Manufactures. The upper panel reports the distribution of firms while the lower
      panel reports the distribution of output. Results are reported for the full sample of firms as
      well as for single- and multiple-product firms separately. On average, there are roughly
      140,000 firm observations in each Census year. "na" indicates not applicable: single
      product surviving firms cannot drop their only product and continue in business.



    Product switching is a pervasive activity among U.S. manufacturing
switching using Standard Industrial Classification codes. This has a number of im-
portant advantages: firms report several SIC5 codes and we can explicitly observe the
addition and deletion of products; also, SIC5 codes are typically chosen on the basis
of distinct product characteristics and are more aggregated than varieties of the same
product. See US Census (1996), http://www.census.gov/prod/2/manmin/mc92-r-1.pdf,
for a complete list of SIC5 categories.
                  Product Choice and Product Switching                                     6


firms. During a typical five year period, two thirds of continuing firms
add or drop a (SIC5) product from their output mix.4 This activity is
summarized in the first panel of Table 1, which reports a breakdown of
product switching for continuing U.S. manufacturing firms. The numbers
in the table refer to the average fraction of firms undertaking the activity
described in the first column across five year Census intervals from 1972 to
1997. The numbers reported in all the tables are averages from 1972-1997,
there is little variation across Censuses. We divide all continuing firms
into one of four types: (a) those that leave their product mix unchanged,
i.e. neither add nor drop a SIC5 product; (b) those that drop at least one
product and do not add any; (c) those that add at least one product but do
not remove an existing product from their output mix; and (d) firms that
both add and drop at least one product. The first four rows of the table
summarize these four mutually exclusive activities.
     Every five years, 43% of continuing firms shuﬄe their product mix by
both dropping and adding products (column 1 of Table 1). Dropping alone
and adding alone are far less frequent events, occurring at 13% and 12% of
firms respectively.
     The second and third columns of Table 1 compare the activity of sin-
gle versus multiple-product firms. Single-product firms are likely to leave
their product mix unchanged (47%) or change it completely by dropping
their existing product and adding one or more new ones (38%). Half
of all multiple-product firms both add and drop products, while 31% of
such firms narrow their product mix by dropping one or more products.
On average 89% of continuing multiple-product firms alter their product
mix during a five year period. These numbers clearly demonstrate that
product-switching is widespread among U.S. manufacturers and that si-
multaneous additions to and deletions from the existing product mix are
   4
     A product addition in the data can represent one of three general activities. The first,
related to product innovation, is the creation of an entirely new good at an existing plant
which is classified in an existing SIC5 category. The second is the start of production of
an existing good, new to the firm but not to the market, also in an existing SIC5 category.
Innovation of a new good can occur but not be captured as a product addition if it occurs
in a SIC5 category where the firm is currently active. Finally, a product addition may
represent the firm’s acquisition of a plant that is producing one or more products new
to the firm. The category of product additions through acquisitions accounts for fewer
than 10% of all switches.
                Product Choice and Product Switching                                      7


frequent events.
    While product-switching occurs at a large proportion of firms it is even
more important in terms of output. The second panel of Table 1 shows
the fraction of total output produced by the four firm types. More than
80% of total output is generated at firms that both add and drop products.
Multi-product firms that are large in size are the most active in changing
their product mix in both directions.

Table 2: Average Number of Products Produced, Added and Dropped
Across 5-Year Intervals, 1972 to 1997
                                              Number of       Number of      Number of
              Type of Firm                      Products           Adds          Drops
              All Firms                               2.3            1.1            1.1
              Single Product Firms                    1.0            0.8            0.4
              Multiple Product Firms                  4.0            1.4            2.0
              Note: Table displays mean number of products produced by continuing
              US manufacturing firms across Census of Manufacturing years 1972-
              1997. Adds and Drops refer to the number of five-digit SIC
              manufacturing products added to or dropped from a firm's product mix
              during the five years between censuses. Results are reported for the full
              sample of firms as well as for single- and multiple-product firms
              separately.


    Product turnover among manufacturing firms is substantial and occurs
at both single-product and multiple-product firms. Table 2 reveals that the
average continuing U.S. manufacturing firm produces 2.3 products at the
beginning of a five year period, and subsequently adds and drops almost half
of its product mix (1.1 products). On average, single-product firms add
products while on average multiple-product firms drop half their existing
products (2 dropped out of 4 produced) and add 1.4 new products.5
    The products that are added and dropped by switching multi-product
firms account for a large fraction of firm output.6 On average, products
that were added in the last five years account for 50% of current firm output
by value. Products that will be dropped over the next five years represent
46% of current shipments, Table 3. For the median firm, recently added
products are 42% of shipments while products to be dropped are more than
   5
     Over time from 1972-1997, there is no systematic change in the number of products
produced by continuing plants, nor in the fraction of products added or dropped.
   6
     Obviously, single-product firms that switch change all their output.
                 Product Choice and Product Switching                                      8



Table 3: Average Share of Firm Output in Products Added and Dropped
in Multi-Product Firms Across 5-Year Intervals, 1972 to 1997
                                    Number of        Mean Share of      Median* Share of
            Activity                   Firms          Firm Output         Firm Output
            Added Products            150,854              50                  42
            Dropped Products          142,178              46                  34
            Notes: Table displays mean and median value of continuing US
            manufacturing firm's added and dropped products as a percent of total firm
            output. Products are five-digit SIC aggregates. Figures are based on all
            adding and dropping behavior across five-year Census of Manufacturing
            years 1972 to 1997. Because of Census disclosure rules, which prohibit the
            reporting of an actual median, the reported median is the average of the 100
            observations around the true median.




a third of output by value.
    The previous facts demonstrate that product-switching is a widespread
phenomenon in the U.S. manufacturing sector, occurring at more than two
thirds of continuing firms that produce more than 90% of total output. In
addition, the results reveal that a sizable fraction of products are turned
over every five years and that these products represent a large share of
existing firm output. However, there remains the possibility that such
activity involves switches among products that are quite similar. For
example, switches between Canned Fruits and Canned Vegetables, both of
which are five-digit products in SIC 2033, are unlikely to indicate important
economic changes at a firm (see Appendix A for further discussion of the
data).
    To identify whether firms are merely adding products that are similar in
nature, we examine the fraction of added-products that extend the range
of production of the firm across industries.7 We focus our attention on
product additions in multi-product firms. The first column of Table 4
shows that 54% of all added products are outside existing four-digit (SIC4)
industries produced by the firm. Furthermore, more than a third of all
new products are in a new three digit (SIC3) industry while 17% of added
products involve a new two digit (SIC2) industry. The second column of
the same table reports similar percentages for firms. Of firms that add
   7
    Almost all empirical work on U.S. manufacturing identifies an “industry” by its 4-
digit (SIC) classification.
                   Product Choice and Product Switching                                                    9



Table 4: Share of Product Additions Outside the Existing Industry Mix of
the Firm, 1972 to 1997
                              Product Additions and Changes in Firm Industry Mix
                                             (I)                                                  (II)
       Share of added products in:                    Share of firms adding a product(s) that:
              existing SIC4 industries       46              do not add a SIC4 industry           42
              new SIC4 industries            54              add a new SIC4 industry              58
              new SIC3 industries            35              add a new SIC3 industry              41
              new SIC2 industries            17              add a new SIC2 industry              22
       Notes: Table reports the extent to which firms add products outside their existing mix of
       industries. The first column of the table reports the share of added five-digit SIC products that
       are outside of the firm's existing stable of four-, three- and two-digit SIC manufacturing
       industries. The second column of the table reports the share of firms adding at least one five-
       digit SIC manufacturing product outside its existing mix of four-, three- and two-digit
       manufacturing industries.




one or more products, 58% also add a new four-digit industry, while 41%
(22%) add a new three (two) digit industry to the mix produced by the
firm. These results confirm that product-switching involves substantial
changes in industry composition and tends to move a firm well beyond its
existing mix of industries.
    This section has documented the extent and quantitative importance
of product switching. The remainder of the paper develops a theoretical
model that explicitly incorporates product switching, while also remain-
ing consistent with existing empirical work emphasizing heterogeneous firm
characteristics and continuing entry and exit. We develop a general equi-
librium dynamic industry model that, for the first time, simultaneously
explains these three phenomena.

3.   Many Firms and Multiple Products

    The facts in the previous section suggest that product choice at surviv-
ing firms should be added to the growing list of stylized facts about industry
performance. From Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988, 1989) we know
that there is substantial covariation in industry entry and exit rates, sug-
gesting an important role for sunk costs of entry. From Dunne, Roberts
and Samuelson (1988, 1989), Davis and Haltiwanger (1991), Bernard and
Jensen (1995) and the survey by Bartelsman and Doms (2000), we know
that there is an enormous amount of firm heterogeneity within narrowly
                Product Choice and Product Switching                                10


classified industries and that firm characteristics, such as productivity, are
correlated with exit/survival and entry into exporting.
     A series of theoretical papers have built upon these stylized facts in mod-
elling industry evolution and performance. Jovanovic (1982) and Hopen-
hayn (1992) incorporate firm heterogeneity in equilibrium industry models
with covariation in entry and exit rates due to underlying variation in sunk
costs. Both models, and Olley and Pakes (1996), have the feature that firms
will exit when their productivity falls below an endogenously determined
cutoﬀ. Bernard et al (2003) and Yeaple (2002) model the interaction of
firm heterogeneity and entry into exporting. Melitz (2002) adds imperfect
competition to a version of Hopenhayn (1992), allowing for industry en-
try and exit rates to covary and for firm characteristics to matter for the
decision to export.
     Our theoretical model extends a version of the heterogeneous firm frame-
work of Melitz (2002) and Hopenhayn (1992) to incorporate product choice
by surviving firms. We explicitly build on existing links between theory and
stylized facts about firm heterogeneity and industry exit and entry rates.
The key contribution of our model is to allow firms to choose endogenously
between distinct products. At the heart of the model lies an interaction
between firm heterogeneity and product heterogeneity that shapes product
choice and product switching.
     The model portrays an industry with a number of distinct products each
containing a continuum of horizontally diﬀerentiated varieties.8 The prod-
ucts are imperfect substitutes and have diﬀerent production technologies,
specifically the fixed and variable costs. Each firm chooses to produce a
variety of one of the two products. In addition to product choice, the model
incorporates firm births and deaths, imperfect competition, and firm het-
erogeneity.
     The model allows us to examine how changes in market conditions aﬀect
product choice through the interaction of firm characteristics and product
attributes. Endogenous product switching by firms aﬀects industry pro-
ductivity and firm profitability. For example, changes in the sunk cost of
starting a firm (entry cost) aﬀect the distribution of firm productivity and,
   8
     The model is for any ‘market’ with a common sunk cost of entry. Given the evidence
on the variation of sunk costs across industries we refer to the market as an industry
with heterogeneous products.
                Product Choice and Product Switching                                 11


at the same, induce some firms to switch products.9
    The demand structure of the model is quite simple. Representative
consumers have a taste for both products and have a love of variety within
each product. Products are less substitutable in consumption than are
varieties. Each variety is produced with a single input, labor, and is subject
to a fixed cost (repeated each period) and a constant variable cost. A key
feature of the model is that the period-by-period fixed costs vary across
products (but not across varieties within products). Variable costs are
also identical for all varieties but may or may not diﬀer across products.10
This provides a particularly tractable way of formalizing the more general
idea that there are diﬀerences in production technologies across products.
    One interpretation of the diﬀerence in fixed costs across products is that
it captures a diﬀerence in physical capital intensity. Although labor is the
sole factor of production in the model, the labor used in paying the product
fixed cost can be thought of as labor set aside to build and, in subsequent
periods, maintain a machine. Another interpretation is that the diﬀerence
in fixed costs captures ongoing expenditures that allow one product to
be a higher quality than another. In this case, since the variable cost of
production can be thought of as an inverse measure of product quality,
the high fixed cost product must be characterized by a lower variable cost
of production (higher product quality). More generally, as noted above,
we make no assumptions about the relative value of the variable cost of
production for the two products.
    For tractability, the theoretical work focuses on the case of a single
industry whose two products enter directly into final consumption. It is
relatively straightforward to introduce many industries. The framework
    9
      While we focus on the interaction of firm and product characteristics in a dynamic
industry setting, we recognize that there are a variety of additional reasons that firms
may add or drop products. Classic treatments of product choice include Hotelling
(1929), Chamberlain (1951) and Lancaster (1966). More formal treatments of horizontal
diﬀerentiation and vertical diﬀerentiation include Dixit and Stiglitz (1977), Shaked and
Sutton (1982, 1987) and Spence (1976), synthesized in Tirole (1988). Issues related
to product choice can also be found in work on corporate diversification, mergers and
divestitures, and evolving firm capabilities and factor accumulation. See, among others,
Amihud and Baruch (1981), Bolton and Farrell (1990), Chandler (1990), Helfat and
Raubitschek (2000), Milgrom and Roberts (1990), and Montgomery (1994).
   10
      Yeaple (2002) allows technologies for producing varieties to vary in terms of both
fixed and variable costs in a static, single-product model.
                 Product Choice and Product Switching                                   12


can also be extended to allow for any number of products within the in-
dustry. These extensions merely complicate the analysis without changing
the model’s key insights.11
    There is a large pool of ex-ante identical potential entrants into the
industry. To enter the industry (and hence either product market within
the industry), firms must pay a sunk cost of entry. Firms then observe
their productivity, drawn from a common distribution. At this point each
firm decides whether to produce or exit the market. Firms with low pro-
ductivity draws immediately exit. If the firm decides to produce it chooses
to manufacture either product 1 or product 2 depending on the relative
profitability of each product for that firm given its observed productivity.
All firms, regardless of the product they produce, face a common exogenous
probability of death in every period which, for simplicity, is assumed not
to depend on their productivity.12
    The solution of the model depends on three key equilibrium conditions:
the zero profit cutoﬀ condition which identifies the lowest productivity
firm that chooses to produce; the product indiﬀerence cutoﬀ condition
which identifies the productivity level at which a firm is exactly indiﬀerent
between producing either of the two products13 ; and the free entry con-
dition which forces expected profits before entry to equal the sunk cost of
entry and is driven by the existence of a competitive fringe.
    In the next three sections, we introduce the theoretical model in further
detail, characterize general equilibrium, and explore how firms’ product
choice and the distribution of productivity across firms responds to changes
in the underlying parameters of the model.
  11
      For simplicity, we assume that all products already exist, although new varieties are
created when the number of producing firms increases.
   12
      This assumption supports a particularly tractable model of product choice, en-
try/exit, and firm heterogeneity. See Hopenhayn (1992) for an analysis of industry
dynamics where productivity aﬀects the probability of firm death, but that abstracts
from product choice.
   13
      A firm with this productivity would be either the highest productivity firm in the
low fixed cost good or the lowest productivity firm in the high fixed cost good.
              Product Choice and Product Switching                        13


4.   Theoretical Model: Endogenous Product Choice and
     Industry Dynamics

    The preferences of a representative consumer are a nested CES function
of consumption of varieties of two products:
     U = [aC1ν + (1 − a)C2ν ]1/ν .                                       (1)
where Ci is a consumption index of a continuum of horizontally diﬀerenti-
ated varieties ω in each product market i:
            ·Z               ¸1/ρ
                         ρ
      Ci =         qi (ω) dω                                         (2)
              ω∈Ωi

and {Ωi } is the mass (number) of available varieties in market i.
    On the demand side, products are distinguished from varieties in terms
of consumers’ elasticity of substitution. The two products are imperfect
                                                    1
substitutes for one another, with elasticity ψ = 1−ν    > 1. Similarly, vari-
                                                                       1
eties of each product are imperfect substitutes, with elasticity σ = 1−ρ > 1.
However, the elasticity of substitution between varieties of the same product
is higher than that between diﬀerent products: σ > ψ > 1. The parameter
0 < a < 1 is a demand-shifter, which captures the relative weight of the
two products in the consumer’s utility function.
    The dual price index for each product is:
            ·Z                 ¸1/1−σ
                         1−σ
       Pi =        pi (ω) dω          .                                   (3)
             ω∈Ωi

and expenditures over varieties of each product are given by:
                  µ        ¶               µ       ¶
                    pi (ω) 1−σ               pi (ω) 1−σ
      ri (ω) = Ri               = αi (P) R                              (4)
                      Pi                       Pi
                          R               R
where R = R1 + R2 = ω∈Ω1 r1 (ω)dω + ω∈Ω2 r2 (ω)dω is aggregate expen-
diture; P = P2 /P1 is the relative price of product 2; and αi (P) = Ri /R
is the share of expenditure devoted to product i. With CES utility, these
expenditure shares are:
                "      µ      ¶        #−1
                         1 − a ψ 1−ψ
      α1 (P) = 1 +               P         ,      α2 (P) = 1 − α1 (P) . (5)
                            a
               Product Choice and Product Switching                         14


4.1.   Production
    Each of a continuum of firms produces a unique variety ω in one of
the two product markets. Production requires one factor, labor, which is
inelastically supplied at its aggregate level L , which also indexes the size
of the economy.
    As well as entering demand as imperfect substitutes, the two products
have diﬀerent production technologies. The fixed costs of production for
the two products are given by {f1 , f2 } where f2 > f1 . For firms of the same
productivity, ϕ, bi is a parameter that indexes variable costs of production
for product i where bi > 0. The key distinction between products is that
the second good is subject to a higher fixed cost of production. We allow
the variable cost for product 2 to be either higher or lower than for product
1. Without loss of generality, we set b1 = 1 and b2 = b, so that b captures
the relative value of the two products’ variable costs.
    Given firm productivity ϕ, labor used is a linear function of output q:
li = fi + biϕqi . Profit maximization under imperfect competition yields
the standard result that equilibrium prices are a constant mark-up over
marginal cost,
                µ      ¶
                   σ      wbi
      pi (ϕ) =                .                                             (6)
                  σ−1      ϕ
We choose the wage as numeraire so that w = 1. Equilibrium profits for
the two products are thus,
                µ          ¶µ         ¶
                  αi (P)R          ϕ σ−1
      π i (ϕ) =               Pi ρ       − fi                      (7)
                      σ            bi
                ri (ϕ)
      π i (ϕ) =        − fi .
                   σ
   From firms’ revenue functions, the ratio of revenues for any two firms
producing the same product depends only on their relative productivities,
                 µ 00 ¶σ−1
     ri (ϕ00 )    ϕ
           0
               =           .                                           (8)
     ri (ϕ )      ϕ0
Comparing revenues for firms producing diﬀerent products is comparably
                Product Choice and Product Switching                          15


straightforward; the ratio of revenues is a function of their relative produc-
tivities and relative prices of the two products,
                   µ            ¶ ·µ 00 ¶     ¸
       r2 (ϕ00 )     1 − α1 (P)     ϕ       1 σ−1
                 =                        P       .                        (9)
       r1 (ϕ0 )        α1 (P)       ϕ0      b
where we have used b1 = 1 and b2 = b. These relationships are useful
because they allow us to express the revenue earned by every firm in terms
of the revenue earned by another firm with a particular level of productivity.

4.2.   Market Entry and Exit
    To produce a variety (of either product), firms must pay a common
fixed entry cost, fe > 0, which is thereafter sunk. After paying the sunk
cost, firms draw their productivity, ϕ, from a common distribution, g (ϕ).
Firm productivity remains fixed after entry, i.e. we assume there is no
feedback from product choice to productivity. Upon entering, there is an
exogenous probability of death each period, δ, which we interpret as due
to force majeure events beyond managers’ control.
    The value of a firm with productivity ϕ is therefore,
                      ( ∞                       ∞
                                                                  )
                          X                     X
      v (ϕ) = max 0,         (1 − δ)t π 1 (ϕ) ,   (1 − δ)t π 2 (ϕ)
                            t=0                 t=0
                   ½                    ¾
                      1         1
              = max 0, π 1 (ϕ) , π 2 (ϕ)                                    (10)
                      δ         δ

4.3.   Endogenous Product Selection
    Firms decide which good to produce based upon their productivity,
taking as given the aggregate price indices {P1 , P2 }. Firms with zero
productivity have negative post-entry profits in both industries, with the
loss greatest for the high fixed cost product 2:
       π 1 (0) = −f1 > π 2 (0) = −f2 .                                      (11)
   A firm with productivity ϕ will produce good i if it brings positive
profit, i.e. covers the fixed production cost fi , and is more profitable than
producing good j. For both goods to be produced in equilibrium, it is
suﬃcient for π 1 (ϕ) > π 2 (ϕ) > 0 for some values of ϕ and π 2 (ϕ) > π 1 (ϕ) > 0
                Product Choice and Product Switching                                  16


for other values of ϕ. Via (11), these conditions require product 1 profits to
increase with productivity ( dπdϕ
                               1 (ϕ)
                                     > 0) and for product 2 profits to increase
faster than product 1 profits ( dπdϕ
                                  2 (ϕ)
                                        > dπdϕ
                                            1 (ϕ)
                                                  ) for at least a range of values
for ϕ. The second of these conditions is met if and only if
                  µ      ¶ µ ¶
       dπ 2 /dϕ     1 − a ψ 1 σ−1 σ−ψ
                =                       P      >1                             (12)
       dπ 1 /dϕ       a        b
where we have used the expression for the CES expenditure share, α1 (P),
from equation 5. This inequality does not depend on ϕ, but rather on
relative prices and parameters of demand and technology.
    Two profit curves meeting the conditions for both products to be pro-
duced are displayed in Figure 1. The curve for π 2 intersects π 1 from below
in the region where positive profits are made. Firms with productivity
below ϕ∗ exit immediately upon entering the market because their produc-
tivity is too low to earn positive profit in either product market. Firms
with productivity between ϕ∗ and ϕ∗∗ enter the low fixed cost product
market while firms with productivity greater than ϕ∗∗ enter the high fixed
cost product market.14
    Figure 1 provides intuition for two key equilibrium conditions that we
use to solve the model. First, the zero profit cutoﬀ condition deter-
mines the lowest level of productivity where product 1 is produced and is
given by,

       (ZP)          π 1 (ϕ∗ ) = 0.                                                 (13)

Second the product indiﬀerence cutoﬀ condition determines the lowest
level of productivity where product 2 is produced and is given by,

       (PI)         π 2 (ϕ∗∗ ) = π 1 (ϕ∗∗ ) .                                       (14)

4.4.   Free Entry
   A third equilibrium condition, the free entry condition, equates ex-
pected firm value and entry costs and is driven by the assumed existence
  14
     Of course, in order for both goods to be produced, we also require that the fixed
costs of production are not large enough to exhaust the economy’s entire supply of labor.
This condition must be satisfied as f1 → 0 and f2 → f1 .
               Product Choice and Product Switching                          17




                   π
                                                      π2
                                                      π
                                                        1




                                      ϕ∗       ϕ ∗∗     ϕ
                  -f
                       1
                  -f
                    2




        Figure 1: Profit Versus Productivity for the Two Products

of a competitive fringe of potential entrants. The expected value of a firm
before entry, ve , consists of two components. The first is the ex ante prob-
ability of producing product 1 times the expected profitability of producing
this good until death. The second is the ex ante probability of produc-
ing product 2 times the expected profitability of producing this good until
death. The cost of entry is equal to the sunk cost, fe .
    Using the definitions of the productivity cutoﬀs (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) above, the free
entry condition is given by:
                        G (ϕ∗∗ ) − G (ϕ∗ )      1 − G (ϕ∗∗ )
      (FE)         ve =                    π1 +              π 2 = fe ,    (15)
                                 δ                     δ
where π 1 and π 2 are the expected or average profits from producing prod-
ucts 1 and 2, respectively. In Appendix B, we show that average profit
in each market is equal to the profit earned by a firm with weighted av-
erage productivity: π 1 = π 1 (e
                               ϕ) and π 2 = π 2 (ϕe
                                                  e ), where ϕ
                                                             e and ϕ  e
                                                                      e are the
weighted average productivities of firms manufacturing products 1 and 2
In addition, weighted average productivity is a function of the two cutoﬀ
productivity levels, ϕ∗ and ϕ∗∗ .
               Product Choice and Product Switching                            18


4.5.    Goods and Labor Markets
    The steady-state equilibrium is characterized by a constant mass of
firms entering each period Me , a constant mass M1 producing product 1,
and a constant mass M2 producing product 2.
    As shown in Appendix B, the product prices (PP) may be written
as:

       (PP)         P1 = M1
                            1/1−σ
                                    p1 (e
                                        ϕ),   P2 = M2
                                                       1/1−σ       e
                                                                   e)
                                                               p2 (ϕ         (16)

where p1 (eϕ) and p2 (ϕe
                       e ) are the prices charged by a firm with weighted
average productivity in each market.
    A condition for steady-state equilibrium is that the mass of firms who
enter and decide to produce a product equals the mass of current produc-
ers who die. Each period, a fraction δ of firms die. Thus, from the
definitions of the productivity cutoﬀs above, these steady-state stability
conditions (SC) are:

       (SC)        [1 − G(ϕ∗∗ )]Me = δM2                                     (17)
                   ∗∗         ∗
              [G(ϕ ) − G(ϕ )]Me = δM1 .                                      (18)

The labor market clearing condition (LM), expressed in value terms,
requires that total labor payments equal the sum of payments to labor used
in production and payments to labor used in the sunk costs of entry:

       (LM)          L = Lp + Le                                             (19)

where, since labor has been chosen for the numeraire, w = 1.

5.     Equilibrium

    An equilibrium is referenced by the sextuple, {ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P1 , P2 , R1 , R2 }:
all other endogenous variables may be written as functions of these vari-
ables. Equilibrium is fully characterized by the zero profit cutoﬀ condi-
tion, the product indiﬀerence cutoﬀ condition, the free entry condition, the
steady-state stability condition (constant aggregate variables), the labor
market clearing condition, and the product prices condition.
                   Product Choice and Product Switching                        19


5.1.   Product Supply and Relative Prices
   Combining the zero-profit ZP and product indiﬀerence PI conditions,
we arrive at a product supply relationship between the productivity cut-
oﬀs (ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ ) and relative prices (P) that must hold when both goods are
produced:
                                    ³          ´          1/(σ−1)
                                         f2
       ϕ∗∗                               f1   −1
             ≡ Λ =  h¡      ¢       ¡ 1 ¢σ−1             i                 (20)
       ϕ∗                 1−a ψ
                                                P σ−ψ   −1
                           a          b

where, in order for both goods to be produced, we require:
     µ        ¶ "µ         ¶ µ ¶                #
        f2            1 − a ψ 1 σ−1 σ−ψ
           −1 >                        P    − 1 > 0.                         (21)
        f1              a        b

     As discussed below, relative prices adjust to ensure that this condition
is satisfied in equilibrium. The middle inequality is just the requirement
that profits for product 2 increase more rapidly in productivity than profits
for product 1 (equation (12)), and ensures the right-hand side of (20) is
positive. The first inequality incorporates information on fixed production
costs, and ensures that profits for product 2, π 2 , intersect profits for product
1, π 1 , from below in the region where positive profits are made (Figure 1),
so that the right-hand side of (20) is strictly greater than 1.
     Equation (20) provides a downward sloping relationship between the
productivity cutoﬀs, ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ , and relative prices, P. As the relative price of
product 2 rises, this raises the profitability of product 2 relative to product
1, inducing firms to switch from product 1 to product 2, and leading to a
fall in ϕ∗∗ relative to ϕ∗ .

5.2.   Product Demand and Relative Prices
   Combining the expression for product prices PP with the steady-state
stability conditions SC, we arrive at a product demand relationship be-
tween the productivity cutoﬀs (ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ ) and relative prices (P):
       " R ϕ∗∗                   #     µ ¶σ−1
           ∗     ϕσ−1 g (ϕ) dϕ          P
         Rϕ∞                         =        .                              (22)
          ϕ∗∗    ϕσ−1 g (ϕ) dϕ          b
                  Product Choice and Product Switching                      20


    Since the left-hand side is monotonically increasing in ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ , equation
(22) implies an upward sloping relationship between ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and P. As the
relative price of product 2 rises, this reduces demand for product 2 relative
to product 1, inducing consumers to switch from product 2 to product 1,
and leading to a rise in ϕ∗∗ relative to ϕ∗ .
    Combining the downward sloping (20) and the upward sloping (22)
defines a unique equilibrium pair (P, ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ ), which satisfies the inequality
in equation (21) so that both products are produced.15
    Starting from equilibrium, if there is a rise in the relative price for
product 2, P, there are two eﬀects. On the supply side, a rise in P reduces
ϕ∗∗ relative to ϕ∗ , while on the demand side, it increases ϕ∗∗ relative to
ϕ∗ . Since relative supply of product 2 has increased and relative demand
has fallen, this cannot be an equilibrium and P must fall in order to bring
relative supply and demand back into balance.

5.3.    Free Entry
    The free entry condition FE equating expected firm value and entry
costs depends on average profitability in each market, which itself depends
on the two productivity cutoﬀs (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) and relative prices P. Using the
relationship between the productivity cutoﬀs in (20), Appendix B shows
that FE may be written as:
          Z ∗ "µ ¶σ−1         #
       f1 Λϕ       ϕ
 ve =                      − 1 g(ϕ)dϕ                                   (23)
        δ ϕ∗      ϕ∗
            Z   "µ       ¶ µ ¶               µ ¶             #
         f1 ∞      1 − a ψ 1 σ−1 σ−ψ ϕ σ−1 f2
       +                              P                 −      g(ϕ)dϕ = fe .
         δ Λϕ∗       a        b               ϕ∗          f1

This provides another equation, which together with (22) and (20), de-
termines unique equilibrium values of three unknowns (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P). The
equilibrium values (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P) are suﬃcient to determine weighted average
productivity and average profitability in each market, as shown in Appen-
dix B.
 15
      See Appendix B for a formal analysis.
               Product Choice and Product Switching                          21


5.4.   Goods and Labor Markets
    Total payments to labor used in production equal the diﬀerence between
total revenue, R, and total firm profits, Π: Lp = R − Π. Combining SC
and LM, total payments to labor used in entry are exactly equal to total
firm profits, Le = Me fe = Π, reflecting the existence of a competitive fringe
of firms entering until the expected value of entry exactly equals the sunk
cost. Together, these results imply that total revenue, R, equals total
payments to labor, L, and the labor market clears.
    Revenue in each product market may be determined from the CES ex-
penditure share (equation (5)) at equilibrium relative prices: R1 = α1 (P)R
and R2 = (1 − α(P))R.
    The absolute levels of the price indices, P1 and P2 , in equation (16)
depend on the mass of firms producing each product, M1 = (R1 /r1 ) and
M2 = (R2 /r2 ), where aggregate revenue in each product market was de-
termined above and average revenue can be written as a function of the
productivity cutoﬀs and relative prices alone (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P).

Proposition 1 There exist unique equilibrium values of {ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ,P1 , P2 ,
R1 , R2 } that solve the zero profit, product indiﬀerence, free entry,
steady-state stability, labor market clearing, and product prices
conditions

Proof. See Appendix B


Proposition 2 (Aggregate Variables)
The equilibrium sextuple {ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P1 , P2 , R1 , R2 } defines unique equilib-
rium values of all other endogenous variables of the model {M1 , M2 , Me ,
LP1 , LP2 , Le , C1 , C2 }


Proof. See Appendix B

    We have fully characterized the equilibrium sextuple {ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P1 , P2 ,
R1 , R2 } and solved for the other endogenous variables of the model. The
theoretical analysis incorporates endogenous product choice, heterogenous
                 Product Choice and Product Switching                                    22


firms, heterogeneous products, and industry dynamics in the form of ongo-
ing entry and exit. In equilibrium, firm productivity is correlated with
product-level fixed costs, with the most productive firms endogenously
choosing to make products with the highest fixed costs.

6.     Market Conditions and Product Choice

     In this section, we examine how changes in market conditions influence
firm product choice and result in product switching. Key product char-
acteristics and features of market structure are: the sunk costs of entry
(fe ), the fixed costs of production (f1 ,f2 ), the variable cost of production
for product 2 relative to that for product 1 (b), and the demand-shifter (a)
capturing the relative weight of the two products in consumers’ utility.
     Until now we have not restricted the distribution of firm productivity,
g(ϕ). In this section we focus on the results assuming that the productivity
distribution g(ϕ) is Pareto with parameters a and                     a −(a+1) ,
                                                    ³ ´k: g(ϕ) = ak ϕ
                                                               a
where k > 0, a > 0, ϕ ≥ k, and G(ϕ) = 1 − ϕk .16 This assumption
simplifies the analysis, as demonstrated in Appendix B, which also contains
formal derivations of the comparative statics in this section.
    In the interests of brevity, we provide a complete analysis of one aspect
of market structure - the sunk costs of entry (fe ). These may be thought
of as capturing barriers to entry in the industry, and may be of particular
interest in so far as they can be directly influenced by policy. The impact of
changes in other market conditions are analogous. We end the section with
a more general discussion of how other parameters of the model influence
product switching.
    As shown in Table 5, an increase in the sunk costs of entry in the
industry (fe ) lowers both cutoﬀ productivity levels thus decreasing average
productivity in each product and for the industry as a whole. The ratio
of the productivity cutoﬀs, the relative price of the products, the mass
of firms producing each product, and average profitability are unchanged.
The expected value of entry rises and welfare unambiguously falls.
  16
    The distribution of within industry (SIC4) cross-firm labor productivity in the US is
well-approximated by a Pareto distribution (formally a Pareto-1 distribution). Compar-
ative statics without assuming a particular distribution for firm productivity are available
upon request from the authors.
               Product Choice and Product Switching                         23



  Table 5: Comparative Statics for a Change in the Sunk Cost of Entry

                               ∂ϕ ∗                 ∂ϕ ∗∗
                               ∂f e
                                       < 0           ∂fe
                                                             < 0
                        ∂(ϕ ∗∗ /ϕ∗ )                  ∂P
                           ∂f e
                                       = 0            ∂f e
                                                             = 0
                                             
                                              
                       ∂ϕ(ϕ ∗,ϕ ∗∗ )         ∂ϕ(ϕ∗ ,ϕ ∗∗ )
                          ∂fe
                                       < 0      ∂f e
                                                             < 0
                               ∂π 1                ∂M 1
                               ∂f e
                                       = 0           ∂f e
                                                             = 0
                               ∂π 2                ∂M 2
                               ∂f e
                                       = 0           ∂f e
                                                             = 0
                               ∂v e                   ∂W
                                       > 0                   < 0
                               ∂f e                   ∂f e



    As the sunk costs of entry rise above the expected value of entry, a
smaller mass of firms, Me , will enter the industry. For given values of ϕ∗
and ϕ∗∗ , a smaller mass of entrants implies a smaller mass of firms with
productivity realizations high enough to produce in each market. This fall
in the mass of firms producing in each market increases ex post profitability.
    The increase in ex post profitability means that firms with lower re-
alizations of productivity than before are able to cover the fixed costs of
producing product 1. Hence, in equilibrium the zero profit cutoﬀ produc-
tivity ϕ∗ falls. As ϕ∗ falls for a given value of ϕ∗∗ , this increases the mass
of firms in product 1 relative to the mass of firms in product 2, thereby
reducing product 1’s relative profitability. Hence, some previously high
productivity manufacturers of product 1 now find it more profitable to
produce the high fixed cost product 2 and ϕ∗∗ also falls.
    The equilibrium ratio of the two productivity cutoﬀs, ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ , is inde-
pendent of the sunk costs of entry, and hence ϕ∗∗ falls by the same propor-
tion as ϕ∗ . With a Pareto productivity distribution, this leaves the relative
price of the two products, P, unchanged.
    The fall in both ϕ∗ and ϕ∗∗ means that some low productivity firms
who previously exited now produce product 1, while some previously high
               Product Choice and Product Switching                            24


productivity manufacturers of product 1 now produce product 2. For both
reasons, weighted average productivity in product 1, ϕ   e , will fall. Similarly,
              ∗∗
the fall in ϕ means that product 2 now includes some lower productivity
firms who previously manufactured product 1. Hence, weighted average
productivity in product 2, ϕ      e
                                  e , will also fall.
                    ∗          ∗∗
    The fall in ϕ and ϕ increases the mass of firms with productivity
realizations high enough to produce in each market for a given mass of
firms, Me , that enter. With a Pareto distribution, this eﬀect exactly
oﬀsets the smaller mass of firms entering the industry, so that the mass
of firms producing in each product market (M1 , M2 ) and average ex post
profitability (π 1 ,π 2 ) are unchanged.
    The expected value of entry, ve , rises to equal the new higher sunk
costs of entry, fe , because the fall in ϕ∗ and ϕ∗∗ increases the expected
probability of a firm having a productivity realization high enough to be
able to profitably manufacture either product 1 or product 2. Welfare per
worker, W , falls because, although the mass of firms and hence product
varieties is unchanged, the fall in average productivity within each product
market leads to a rise in average prices.
    The eﬀects of changes in other market conditions on product choice are
formalized in Appendix B. Increases in the fixed production cost for prod-
uct 2 (f2 ) reduce relative profitability in this product market, increasing
the relative mass of firms that make product 1, and leading to a rise in
ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ . Increases in the fixed production cost for product 1 (f1 ) have
exactly the opposite eﬀect, increasing the relative mass of firms that make
product 2 and reducing ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ .
    Increases in the variable production cost for product 2 (b) reduce relative
profitability for this product, again increasing the relative mass of firms that
make product 1, and leading to a rise in ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ . Increases in the weight
of product 1 in consumers’ utility (a) raise the relative demand for this
product, increasing the relative mass of firms that make product 1, and
again leading to a rise in ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ .
    In each comparative static, market conditions aﬀect both firms’ incen-
tives to enter and exit the market (ϕ∗ ) and to choose between the two
products (ϕ∗∗ ). Changes in product characteristics and market structure
result in systematic product switching, with the interaction between firm
heterogeneity and product characteristics shaping the pattern of product
              Product Choice and Product Switching                         25


switching. When profitability rises in the market for the high fixed cost
product 2, it is the more productive firms within product product 1 who
switch towards this product. Similarly, when profitability rises in the mar-
ket for the low fixed cost product 1, it is the less productive firms within
product 2 who switch.

7.   Conclusions

    This paper develops a model with endogenous product selection in light
of new evidence on the importance of product switching by manufacturing
firms. Two thirds of continuing firms change their product mix in any
five year period. Multiple-product firms that both drop and add products
account for over three quarters of total output. On average, product
switches aﬀect more than 40% of firm output and almost half of existing
products. Product additions also involve important changes in the industry
composition of the firm, extending the range of industries in more than half
of all cases.
    Motivated by these stylized facts, the paper develops a theoretical model
that integrates endogenous product choice into a dynamic analysis of in-
dustry evolution with entry and exit and heterogeneous firms. In equilib-
rium, firm productivity is correlated with product-level fixed costs, with the
most productive firms endogenously choosing to make the products with
the highest fixed costs. Changes in market structure result in systematic
patterns of firm entry/exit and product switching by continuing firms. For
example, increases in an industry’s sunk costs of entry make it profitable
for less productive firms to survive in the market; result in product switch-
ing as the more productive producers of the low fixed cost product 1 switch
to the high fixed cost product 2; and induce a fall in average productivity
within product markets.
    The theoretical model introduces endogenous product choice and the
possibility of product switching by surviving firms. However, the scope of
product switching in the data suggests that future work should allow for
firm characteristics, such as productivity, that evolve over time. The addi-
tion of shocks to the firm productivity process would provide an additional
source of product switching. A multi-industry version of the model would
allow for product-switching that changes a firm’s industry mix.
              Product Choice and Product Switching                       26


    There are a number of theoretical predictions of the current model that
are amenable to empirical testing including the response of product switch-
ing to changes in market structure such as the sunk cost of entry. A
particularly interesting area for further theoretical research is the intro-
duction of international trade. Existing research suggests a number of
ways in which firms in developed countries respond to increased global-
ization: the death of less productive firms; entry into exporting by high
productivity firms; and changes in industry composition as more produc-
tive firms expand. More recent empirical research has provided evidence
of firms switching industry in response to increased competition from low
wage countries. This paper suggests that another important margin along
which firms may adjust to increased globalization and other changes in the
competitive structure of markets is through product choice and/or changes
in the nature of the production process.
              Product Choice and Product Switching                      27


References

Amihud, Y and Baruch, L. (1981) "Risk Reduction as a Managerial Motive
  for Conglomerate Mergers." Bell Journal of Economics, 12, 605-17.
Bartelsman, Eric and Mark Doms, (2000) "Understanding Productivity:
   Lessons from Longitudinal Microdata." Journal of Economic Literature,
   XXXVIII, 569-94.
Bernard, Andrew B. and J. Bradford Jensen, (1995) "Exporters, Jobs, and
   Wages in US Manufacturing: 1976-87." Brookings Papers on Economic
   Activity: Microeconomics, 67-112.
Bernard, Andrew B., J. Bradford Jensen and Peter K. Schott. (2002) "Sur-
   vival of the Best Fit: Competition from Low Wage Countries and the
   (Uneven) Growth of U.S. Manufacturing Plants." NBER Working Pa-
   per # 9170.
Bernard, Andrew B., Jonathan Eaton, J. Bradford Jensen and Samuel Ko-
   rtum. (2003) "Plants and Productivity in International Trade." Amer-
   ican Economic Review forthcoming.
Bolton, P and Farrell, J. (1990) "Decentralization, Duplication and Delay."
   Journal of Political Economy, 98, 803-26.
Chamberlin, Edward H. (1951), "Monopolistic Competition Revisited."
   Economica 18: 343-362.
Chandler, A. (1990) Scale and Scope, Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press.
Davis, Steven J and John Haltiwanger. (1991) "Wage Dispersion between
   and within U.S. Manufacturing Plants, 1963-86." Brookings Papers on
   Economic Activity, Microeconomics, pp. 115-80.
Dixit, Avinash K. and Joseph E. Stiglitz. (1977) "Monopolistic Competition
   and Optimum Product Diversity." American Economic Review, vol. 67,
   no. 3, 297-308.
Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. (1988) "Patterns
  of firm entry and exit in U.S. manufacturing industries." Rand Journal
  of Economics, vol. 19 No.4 Winter, 495-515.
              Product Choice and Product Switching                     28


Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry Samuelson. (1989) "The
  Growth and Failure of U.S. Manufacturing Plants." Quarterly Journal
  of Economics, Vol. 104, No. 4 , pp. 671-698.
Gollop, Frank M. and James L. Monahan. (1991) "A Generalized Index of
   Diversification: Trends in U.S. Manufacturing." Review of Economics
   and Statistics, 73 , 318-30.
Helfat, Constance E. and Ruth S. Raubitschek. (2000) "Product Sequenc-
   ing: Co-evolution of Knowledge, Capabilities and Products." Strategic
   Management Journal, Vol 21: 961-979.
Hopenhayn, Hugo. (1992) "Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run
   Equilibrium." Econometrica, 60(5), 1127-1150.
Hotelling, H. (1929) "Stability in Competition." Economic Journal, 39:
   41-57.

Krugman, Paul. (1980) "Scale Economies, Product Diﬀerentiation, and the
   Pattern of Trade." American Economic Review, 70, 950-59.
Jovanovic, Boyan. (1982) "Selection and the Evolution of Industry." Econo-
   metrica, vol. 50, no. 3, May, 649-70.
Lancaster, Kelvin. (1966), "A New Approach to Consumer Theory." Jour-
   nal of Political Economy, 74: 132-157.
Melitz, Marc J. (2002) "The Impact of Trade on Intra-Industry Realloca-
   tions and Aggregate Industry Productivity." NBER Working Paper #
   8881.
Milgrom, P and Roberts, J. (1990) "The Economics of Modern Manufac-
   turing: Technology, Strategy and Organization." American Economic
   Review, 80, 511-28.
Montgomery, C.A. (1994) "Corporate Diversification." Journal of Eco-
  nomic Perspectives, Vol. 8: 1624-1638.
Olley, Steven G. and Ariel Pakes, (1996) "The Dynamics of Productivity
    in the Telecommunications Equipment Industry." Econometrica, 64(6),
    1263-97.
              Product Choice and Product Switching                      29


Shaked, Avner and Sutton, John. (1982) "Imperfect Information, Perceived
   Quality, and the Formation of Professional Groups." Journal of Eco-
   nomic Theory, vol. 27, no. 1, 170-81

Shaked, Avner and Sutton, John. (1987) "Product Diﬀerentiation and In-
   dustrial Structure." Journal of Industrial Economics, 36, 131-46.

Spence, A. Michael. (1976) "Product Diﬀerentiation and Welfare." Ameri-
   can Economic Review, 66:407-414.

Streitwieser, Mary L. (1992) "The Extent and Nature of Establishment-
   Level Diversification in Sixteen U.S. Manufacturing Industries." Journal
   of Law and Economics, vol. 34, no. 2, Part 2, 503-34 .

Sutton, John. (1998) Technology and Market Structure: Theory and His-
   tory, MIT Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts.

Tirole, Jean. (1988), The Theory of Industrial Organization, MIT Press,
   Cambridge, Massachusetts.

U.S. Census Bureau. (1996) "1992 Census of Manufactures: Numerical List
   of Manufactured and Mineral Products." U.S. Government Printing Of-
   fice, Washington DC. http://www.census.gov/prod/2/manmin/mc92-r-
   1.pdf

U.S. Census Bureau. (2000) "Bridge Between NAICS and SIC." June,
   Washington DC. http://www.census.gov/epcd/ec97brdg/97x-cs3.pdf

Yeaple, Stephen R. (2002) "A Simple Model of Firm Heterogeneity, Inter-
   national Trade and Wages." University of Pennsylvania, mimeo.
              Product Choice and Product Switching                         30


A   Appendix A: Data

    The data comes from the Censuses of Manufactures (CM) of the Longi-
tudinal Research Database (LRD) of the U.S. Bureau of the Census starting
in 1972 and conducted every fifth year through 1997. The sampling unit
for the Census is a manufacturing establishment, or plant. Establishments
that are not mailed a Census form, so-called ‘administrative records (AR)’,
do not report product-level data. Any firm-year observation that includes
an AR establishment is excluded from the sample. Product additions and
deletions are recorded only for firms that are present in the sample in neigh-
boring censuses, i.e. we exclude firm births and deaths as well as changes
from AR status to regular Census status to focus on product switching at
suriving firms. Plant acquisitions and sales by firms will potentially result
in changes in product mix, although they account for fewer than 10% of
such switches in the sample.
    In Census years, plant output is recorded either at the five-digit or
seven-digit SIC level of detail. Roughly 7,000 of the 15,000 seven-digit
categories are recorded directly in the LRD, the rest are recorded at a
five-digit level of aggregation. We aggregate seven-digit categories up
to their five-digit ‘product-class’ to obtain a comparable level of product
detail for all manufacturing firms. A small fraction of firm-product-year
observations report negative values for output. We recode these values to
zero but leave the products in the firm mix (none of the results are sensitive
to this choice).
    For the most part, five-digit 1987 SIC categories correspond to prod-
ucts that are likely to be imperfect substitutes and made by diﬀerent pro-
duction processes. For example, “Nonferrous Wiredrawing and Insulat-
ing” (SIC 3357) includes “Copper Wire”, “Power Wire and Cable”, and
“Fiber Optic Cables”. Similarly, “Motor Vehicles” (SIC 3711) contains
seven five-digit categories including “Passenger Cars”, “Buses”, “Com-
bat Vehicles”, and four categories of “Trucks” distinguished by weight.
Adding or dropping one of these products is likely to entail a substan-
tial change in the production process. The SIC system does not always
categorize products into five-digit codes that represent such distinct pro-
duction processes. "Canned Fruits and Vegetables" (SIC 2033) contains
two five-digit products, “Canned Fruits” and “Canned Vegetables, Except
Mushrooms”. Switches between these products are unlikely to involve
               Product Choice and Product Switching                         31


changes in production technique.

B     Appendix B: Theoretical Derivations

   This theoretical appendix contains detailed derivations of key results
used in the text and proofs of Propositions.

B1.    Product Choice, Ex Ante, and Ex Post Productivity Distributions
    The ex ante distribution of firm productivity prior to entry is g(ϕ).
The analysis of product choice in the main text implies that firms’ ex ante
probability of successful entry is [1 − G (ϕ∗ )], where G (·) is the cumulative
distribution of g (·). The ex ante probability of producing the low quality
good is [G (ϕ∗∗ ) − G (ϕ∗ )], and the ex ante probability of producing the
high quality good is [1− G (ϕ∗∗ )].
    Similarly, the analysis of product choice implies that the ex post distri-
bution of firm productivity for product 1, µ1 (ϕ), is the conditional distrib-
ution of g (ϕ) on [ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ),
                (       g(ϕ)
                      ∗∗       ∗     if ϕ∗ ≤ ϕ < ϕ∗∗
      µ1 (ϕ) = G(ϕ )−G(ϕ )                                                 (24)
                        0              otherwise
while the ex post distribution of firm productivity for product 2, µ2 (ϕ), is
the conditional distribution of g (ϕ) on [ϕ∗∗ , ∞),
               ( g(ϕ)
                       ∗∗       if ϕ∗∗ ≤ ϕ < ∞
      µ2 (ϕ) = 1−G(ϕ )                           .                      (25)
                    0               otherwise

B2.    Aggregate Price Indices
   Equilibrium is characterized by constant masses of firms, M1 and M2 ,
producing the two products (and hence M1 and M2 varieties of the prod-
ucts). Aggregate price indices may be written as:

               ·Z    ∞                          ¸1/1−σ
                              1−σ
       P1 =              p1 (ϕ)     M1 µ1 (ϕ) dϕ                          (26)
                 0
               ·Z    ∞                          ¸1/1−σ
                              1−σ
       P2 =              p2 (ϕ)     M2 µ2 (ϕ) dϕ       .                  (27)
                 0
               Product Choice and Product Switching                          32


Using the equilibrium pricing rule (6), the price index for each product may
be written as proportional to the price charged by a firm with the (weighted)
average productivity of all firms producing that product (equation (16) in
the main text). Weighted average productivity is defined as:

                       "                   Z ϕ∗∗              #1/(σ−1)
          ∗   ∗∗                 1                 σ−1
      e (ϕ , ϕ ) =
      ϕ                                           ϕ g (ϕ) dϕ               (28)
                        G (ϕ∗∗ ) − G (ϕ∗ ) ϕ∗
                      ·             Z ∞                 ¸1/(σ−1)
      e                      1
      e (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) =
      ϕ                                   ϕ σ−1
                                                g (ϕ) dϕ                   (29)
                        1 − G (ϕ∗∗ ) ϕ∗∗

where ϕ           e
        e (·) and ϕ
                  e (·) are weighted harmonic means of the ϕ’s; the weights
reflect relative output shares of firms with diﬀerent levels of productivi-
ties. Note that these weighted averages depend solely on the two cutoﬀ
productivities (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) and the ex ante distribution g(ϕ).

B3.   Average Profitability
    This section of the appendix establishes two results. First, expected or
average profits in each market (π 1 , π 2 ) are equal to the profits earned by a
firm with weighted average productivity (e       f
                                                 e ). Second, the profits earned
                                              ϕ, ϕ
by a firm with weighted average productivity may be written as functions
of the productivity cutoﬀs and relative prices (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P).
    Taking averages in the profit function (7) and using the definitions of
weighted average productivity (e   e
                                   e ), average profit in each market is equal
                                ϕ, ϕ
to the profit of a firm with weighted average productivity:

                       π 1 = π 1 (e
                                  ϕ),                 e
                                                      e ).
                                           π 2 = π 2 (ϕ
    The relationships between the revenues received by firms with diﬀerent
levels of productivity (equations (8) and (9)) imply that the revenue of a
firm with weighted average productivity in each market can be expressed
relative to the revenue of a firm with the zero profit cutoﬀ level of produc-
tivity ϕ∗ . From the zero profit condition (ZP), the revenue of a firm
with the zero profit cutoﬀ level of productivity is proportional to the fixed
cost: r1 (ϕ∗ ) = σf1
               Product Choice and Product Switching                      33


Average profit in the two markets is thus equal to:
                           "µ       ¶σ−1    #
                              e
                              ϕ (·)
         π 1 (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) =               − 1 f1                        (30)
                               ϕ∗
                                                             
                            µ        ¶ψ Ã e !σ−1
                              1−a        1ϕe (·)           f2
     π 2 (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P) =                    ∗
                                                    P σ−ψ −  f1       (31)
                                a         b ϕ              f1

where (e    e
            e ) depend solely on the productivity cutoﬀs (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ), and we
         ϕ, ϕ
have used the expressions for CES expenditure shares, αi (P), in equation
(5) to simplify terms.

B4.   Product Supply and Relative Prices
The conditions ZP and PI imply,

      r1 (ϕ∗ ) = σf1                                                   (32)
          ∗∗           ∗∗
      r2 (ϕ ) = r1 (ϕ ) + σ(f2 − f1 ).                                 (33)

The relationship between the revenues received by firms of diﬀerent pro-
ductivity in product 1 (equation 8) implies,
                   µ ∗∗ ¶σ−1
           ∗∗        ϕ
      r1 (ϕ ) =               r1 (ϕ∗ )                              (34)
                      ϕ∗
                   µ      ¶ µ ¶
           ∗∗        1 − a ψ 1 σ−1 σ−ψ
      r2 (ϕ ) =                        P     r1 (ϕ∗∗ ) .            (35)
                       a        b
Combining these four equations, we obtain equation (20) in the main text.

B5.   Product Demand and Relative Prices
   The relative price of product 2, P, is the ratio of the price indices in
equation (16) and depends on the relative mass of firms producing the two
products, M2 /M1 . From the steady-state stability conditions SC, the
equilibrium relative mass of firms producing the two products is:

                         M2     [1 − G(ϕ∗∗ )]
                            =                    .
                         M1   [G(ϕ∗∗ ) − G(ϕ∗ )]
               Product Choice and Product Switching                          34


Combining this with the definitions of weighted average productivity (e  e
                                                                         e)
                                                                      ϕ, ϕ
in equations (28) and (29), P may be written as the following function of
the productivity cutoﬀs ϕ∗∗ and ϕ∗ :
             " R ϕ∗∗                    # σ−1
                                           1

                ϕ∗     ϕσ−1 g (ϕ) dϕ
      P = b R∞                                    .                         (36)
                ϕ∗∗    ϕσ−1 g (ϕ) dϕ

which is equivalent to equation (22) in the main text.

B6.   Combining Product Supply and Product Demand
   It will prove convenient to rearrange the product supply relationship
(20) so that P appears on the left-hand side:
                   µ         ¶    ψ    "µ         ¶1−σ µ        ¶  # 1
                                                                    σ−ψ
             σ−1        a        σ−ψ        ϕ∗∗            f2
      P =b   σ−ψ                                              −1 +1     .   (37)
                       1−a                  ϕ∗             f1

Since σ > 1, the right-hand side is monotonically decreasing in ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗
and is graphed in (P, ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ ) space in Figure 2.        P takes the value
         1/(σ−ψ)            ψ/(σ−ψ) (σ−1)/(σ−ψ)
(f2 /f1 )        (a/(1 − a))       b            > 0 at ϕ /ϕ∗ = 1 and con-
                                                         ∗∗
                                         ψ/(σ−ψ) (σ−1)/(σ−ψ)
verges to a lower value of (a/(1 − a))          b            > 0 as ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗
tends to infinity.
    The product demand relationship (22) has already been rearranged so
that P appears on the left-hand side in equation (36) above. The right-
hand side of equation (36) is monotonically increasing in ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and is also
graphed in (P, ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ ) space below. As ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ approaches 1, P converges
to 0. As ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ tends to infinity, P converges to ∞.
    It follows that there exists a unique equilibrium value of ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ > 1
where both the product supply and product demand conditions are satis-
fied, as shown graphically in Figure 2. From the product supply condition,
this implies a value for the equilibrium relative price, P, such that the
inequality in equation (21) is satisfied and both products are produced.

B7.   Free Entry
    Substitute the expressions for average profit in equations (30) and (31)
into the free entry condition FE. Substitute for ϕ∗∗ in FE using (20).
                      Product Choice and Product Switching                             35



                          P2
                          P1


              1           ψ
        f2 σ −ψ  a σ −ψ σσ−−ψ1
                  b                                         RD
         f1  1 − a 




                              Pˆ 2
                              P1
                     ψ
                    σ −1
           a σ −ψ σ −ψ                                                   RS
                b
          1− a 
                                0                                               ϕ **
                                                      ϕˆ **                     ϕ*
                                     1
                                                      ϕ*




                                     Figure 2: Equilibrium P and ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗


Use the definitions of weighted average productivity (e    e
                                                           e ) in equations
                                                        ϕ, ϕ
(28) and (29) to simplify terms. As a result, FE may be written in terms
of ϕ∗ , Λ ≡ ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and P as in equation (23) in the main text.

B8.   Proof of Proposition 1
Proof. (a) Equations (20) and (22) define unique equilibrium values
of (ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ , P) as demonstrated in section B6. above. Given values of
                   Product Choice and Product Switching                        36


Λ ≡ ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and P, equation (23) is monotonically decreasing in ϕ∗ :

                                            dve
                                                <0                            (38)
                                            dϕ∗
               Z    Λϕ∗
          f1                                            f1 £       ¤
    ⇔                       ϕσ−1 (1 − σ)(ϕ∗ )−σ g(ϕ)dϕ + Λ Λσ−1 − 1 g(Λϕ∗ )
           δ                                            δ
                                                     } |       {z        }
                   ϕ∗
          |                         {z
                                  Term A                     Term B
               Z   ∞    µ         ¶ψ µ     ¶σ−1
          f1                1−a        1
      +                        P σ−ψ ϕσ−1 (1 − σ)(ϕ∗ )−σ g(ϕ)dϕ
           δ   Λϕ∗           a         b
          |                     {z                            }
                             Term C
              "µ      ¶ µ ¶                     #
           f1    1 − a ψ 1 σ−1 σ−ψ σ−1 f2
          − Λ                  P    Λ     −       g(Λϕ∗ ) < 0
            δ      a     b                   f1
           |                 {z                        }
                                            Term D

where the sum of Terms B and D may be written as,
              "µ       ¶        Ãµ      ¶ µ ¶          !#
   f1       ∗     f2        σ−1    1 − a ψ 1 σ−1 σ−ψ
      Λg(Λϕ )        −1 −Λ                        P  −1   .
    δ             f1                 a       b

From the definition of Λ in equation (20), the term in square parentheses
is exactly equal to zero.
                                                                     dve
    Since σ > 1, Terms A and C in equation (38) are negative and dϕ    ∗ < 0
          ∗                                                ∗
for all ϕ . Furthermore, from equation (23), ve → ∞ as ϕ → 0 and ve → 0
as ϕ∗ → ∞.
    It follows that, given Λ ≡ ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and P, a unique equilibrium value of
  ∗
ϕ exists where the expected value of entry, ve , is equal to the sunk entry
cost, fe , and the free entry condition (23) is satisfied.
    Thus, together, equations (20), (22) and (23) determine unique equilib-
rium values of the three unknowns (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P).
    The equilibrium values of the productivity cutoﬀs, ϕ∗ and ϕ∗∗ , are
suﬃcient to determine weighted average productivity in each product, ϕ      e
and ϕ e                                                                ∗
      e (equations (28) and (29))). Thus, the productivity cutoﬀs, ϕ and
ϕ∗∗ , and relative prices, P, are suﬃcient to determine average profitability
in each product, π 1 and π 2 (equations (30) and (31)).
(b) Combining the steady-state stability and free entry conditions (SC
               Product Choice and Product Switching                            37


and FE) yields the following relationship between aggregate profitability
in the two product markets, Π, and entry:

      Me fe = M1 π 1 + M2 π 2 = Π.                                           (39)

Since Le = Me fe = Π and Lp = R − Π, it follows that L = Lp +Le = R and
the labor market clears. Revenue in each product market may be deter-
mined from the CES expenditure share (equation (5)) at the equilibrium
value of relative prices, P, for which we solved above: R1 = α1 (P)L and
R2 = (1 − α(P))L.
(c) From the product prices condition (PP):
                                      µ                  ¶    1
                      1                    α1 (P)L           1−σ    1
      P1 = (M1 )     1−σ   p1 (e
                               ϕ) =
                                          σ(π 1 + f1 )             ρe
                                                                    ϕ
                                      µ                      ¶    1
                      1
                               e          (1 − α1 (P))L          1−σ    1
      P2 = (M2 )     1−σ       e) =
                           p2 (ϕ
                                           σ(π 2 + f2 )                 e
                                                                        e
                                                                       ρϕ

where we have used Mi = Ri /ri for product i = 1, 2, and (π 1 , π 2 , ϕ  e, ϕ e
                                                                              e)
were determined above.
   We have thus characterized the equilibrium sextuple {ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P1 , P2 , R1 , R2 }.


B9.   Proof of Proposition 2
Proof. To solve for the equilibrium sextuple {ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P1 , P2 , R1 , R2 }, we
used the zero profit, product indiﬀerence, free entry, steady-state stability,
labor market clearing, and product price conditions.
     We now show, using these conditions, that all other endogenous vari-
ables of the model may be expressed as functions of the equilibrium sextuple
{ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P1 , P2 , R1 , R2 }.
(a) (M1 , M2 , Me ) : from equation (16), (M1 , M2 ) can be expressed as func-
tions of the price indices (P1 , P2 ) and the productivity cutoﬀs (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ).
Using equation (39), Me may be expressed as a function of (M1 , M2 ) and
(π 1 , π 2 ), where average profitability may be written as a function of (ϕ∗ ,
ϕ∗∗ , P) alone.
(b) Total payments to labor used in production in each market i equal the
                Product Choice and Product Switching                        38


diﬀerence between revenue, Ri , and total firm profits, Πi , in that market:

       Lp1 = R1 − Π1 = R1 − (M1 π̄ 1 )
       Lp2 = R2 − Π2 = R2 − (M2 π̄ 2 )


where we have used the choice of labor as numeraire; (M1 , M2 ) can be
expressed as functions of the price indices (P1 , P2 ) and the productivity
cutoﬀs (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ); π 1 and π 2 are functions of (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ , P) alone. Payments
to labor used in entry are:
                                    Le = Me fe
where Me was determined above.
(c) The first-order conditions for consumer optimization imply:

                 aψ P1−ψ                                 (1 − a)ψ P2−ψ
C1 = R h                          i,       C2 = R h                          i
        aψ P11−ψ + (1 − a)ψ P21−ψ                  aψ P11−ψ + (1 − a)ψ P21−ψ

where, from the proof of Proposition 1, R = L.

B10.     Market Structure and Product Choice
B10.1.    Pareto Distribution

    We begin by developing some properties of the model when productivity
is Pareto distributed. Suppose that g(ϕ) is Pareto-1 with parameters a
and k: g(ϕ) = ak a ϕ−(a+1) where k > 0, a > 0, and ϕ ≥ k. The
                                                          ³ ´cumulative
                                                                    a
                                                                k
distribution function for productivity becomes G(ϕ) = 1 −       ϕ       .
    Assuming a > σ − 1, the term     ϕσ−1 g(ϕ)
                                          also follows a Pareto distribu-
tion with parameters γ ≡ a − σ + 1 and k,

                                ϕσ−1 g(ϕ) = ξh(ϕ)
           where      h(ϕ) = γkγ ϕ−(γ+1) ,    k > 0, γ > 0, ϕ ≥ k
                             Z ϕ            ·   µ ¶γ ¸
                                                  k
                      H(ϕ) ≡     h(ϕ)dϕ = 1 −
                              0                   ϕ
                                     a−γ
                              ξ ≡ ak     /γ > 0
                  Product Choice and Product Switching                     39


    This property substantially simplifies the expressions for average pro-
ductivity, average profitability, and the aggregate price indices derived
above, all of which contain the term ϕσ−1 g(ϕ).
    Using this result in equation (22), the product demand relationship
between the productivity cutoﬀs (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) and relative prices (P) simplifies
to:

      P = b [(ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ )γ − 1]1/σ−1 .                                     (40)

Combining this with the product supply relationship in equation (20), we
are able to derive an explicit expression for the equilibrium value of ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗
as a function of the parameters of the model:
      ·µ         ¶γ     ¸ 1    "µ     ¶  µ       ¶    # 1 µ     ¶ ψ
           ϕ∗∗           σ−1      ϕ∗∗ 1−σ f2           σ−ψ
                                                             a   σ−ψ   ψ−1
                      −1     =                − 1  + 1               b σ−ψ (41)
           ϕ∗                     ϕ ∗      f1               1−a

where the left-hand side is monotonically increasing and the right-hand side
monotonically decreasing in ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ . Noting this, and taking limits of the
left and right-hand side as ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ → 1 and ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ → ∞, it follows that a
unique equilibrium value of ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ exists.
    It is straightforward to undertake comparative statics using equation
(41). A rise in the product 2 fixed production cost, f2 , increases the right-
hand side, leading to a higher equilibrium ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and a fall in the relative
mass of firms making product 2. A rise in the product 1 fixed production
cost, f1 , reduces the right-hand side, leading to a lower equilibrium ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗
and a rise in the relative mass of firms making product 2.
    An increase in the weight of product 1 in consumers’ utility function, a,
increases the right-hand side, leading to a higher equilibrium ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and
a fall in the relative mass of firms making product 2. An increase in the
relative variable production cost for product 2, b, also increases the right-
hand side, leading to a higher equilibrium ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and a fall in the relative
mass of firms making product 2.

B10.2.   Sunk Cost of Entry (fe ) Comparative Statics

    From FE, an increase in the sunk costs of entry fe requires a correspond-
ing increase in the expected value of entry ve . The expected value of entry
               Product Choice and Product Switching                         40


may be written as equation (23), where, from equation (20), ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ = Λ
is independent of the sunk costs of entry fe .
    The expected value of entry in (23) is monotonically decreasing in the
zero-profit cutoﬀ productivity ϕ∗ . Therefore, as the sunk costs of entry
rise, the zero-profit cutoﬀ productivity ϕ∗ must fall so as to increase the
expected value of entry equal to the new higher sunk cost.
    Since ϕ∗∗ = Λϕ∗ and Λ is unchanged, ϕ∗∗ will also fall by the same
proportion. Hence, we have established: ∂ϕ∗ /∂fe < 0, ∂ϕ∗∗ /∂fe < 0 and
∂(ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ )/∂fe = 0. With a Pareto productivity distribution, the relative
price, P, depends solely on ϕ∗∗ /ϕ∗ and hence ∂P/∂fe = 0.
    From the definition of weighted average productivities, ϕ e and ϕ e
                                                                      e , in
equations (28) and (29) and from the analysis of the Pareto distribution in
section B10.1.:
                          H(ϕ∗∗ ) − H(ϕ∗ )
       ϕ(ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ )]σ−1 =
      [e                                                                  (42)
                           G(ϕ∗∗ ) − G(ϕ∗ )
                                     "      ¡ ¢ #
                                       k γ − k γ
                        = (ϕ∗ )σ−1 ξ        ¡ Λ ¢a
                                       ka − Λk


       e                  1 − H(ϕ∗∗ )
       e (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ )]σ−1 =
      [ϕ                                                                  (43)
                          1 − G(ϕ∗∗ )
                        = (ϕ∗∗ )σ−1 k1−σ .

                              ϕ/dϕ∗ > 0 and hence de
Since σ > 1, it follows that de                      ϕ/dfe = (de ϕ/dϕ∗ )(dϕ∗ /dfe ) <
0. Similarly, dϕ e
                 e /dϕ∗∗ > 0 and hence dϕ e          e
                                                     e /dϕ∗∗ )(dϕ∗∗ /dfe ) < 0.
                                          e /dfe = (dϕ
    The change in average profitability in equations (30) and (31) depends
upon the change in the ratios of weighted average productivity, ϕ     e and ϕ e
                                                                              e,
                                                  ∗
to the zero profit cutoﬀ level of productivity, ϕ :
      µ              ¶                  ·                  ¸
        e (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ ) σ−1
        ϕ                          1      H(ϕ∗∗ ) − H(ϕ∗ )
                           =                                                (44)
            ϕ∗                  (ϕ∗ )σ−1 G(ϕ∗∗ ) − G(ϕ∗ )
                                 "      ¡ ¢γ #
                                   k γ − Λk
                           = ξ          ¡ ¢a
                                   ka − Λk
                  Product Choice and Product Switching                      41




      Ã                   !σ−1                    ·             ¸
          e
          e (ϕ∗ , ϕ∗∗ )
          ϕ                                  1      1 − H(ϕ∗∗ )
                                     =                                    (45)
              ϕ∗                          (ϕ∗ )σ−1 1 − G(ϕ∗∗ )
                                     = Λσ−1 ξk1−σ .

From the above, it is clear that, with Λ unchanged, ∂π 1 /∂ϕ∗ = ∂π 1 /∂ϕ∗∗ =
0 and ∂π 2 /∂ϕ∗ = ∂π 2 /∂ϕ∗∗ = 0. Hence, ∂π 1 /∂fe = 0 and ∂π 2 /∂fe = 0.
The mass of firms producing each product is:
                   R1    α1 (P)L
      M1 =            =                                                   (46)
                   r1   σ(π 1 + f1 )
                   R2   (1 − α1 (P))L
      M2 =            =               .
                   r2    σ(π 2 + f2 )
Since both relative prices, P, and relative profitability, π 1 and π 2 , are
unchanged: ∂M1 /∂fe = 0 and ∂M2 /∂fe = 0. Welfare per worker is:
         h                     i 1
           ψ 1−ψ          ψ 1−ψ ψ−1
      W = a P1   + (1 − a) P2                                             (47)


                  µ        ¶    1
                      R1       1−σ               α1 (P)L 1
      P1 =                           p1 (e
                                         ϕ) =
                      r1                        σ(π 1 + f1 ) ρe
                                                              ϕ
                  µ        ¶    1
                      R2       1−σ
                                         e    (1 − α1 (P))L b
      P2 =                               e) =
                                     p2 (ϕ                     .
                      r2                                     e
                                               σ(π 2 + f2 ) ρϕ
                                                             e

Average profitability in each market, π 1 and π 2 , is unchanged, while average
              e and ϕ
productivity, ϕ      e
                     e , has fallen. Hence, the rise in the sunk cost of entry
leads to an increase in the price indices, P1 and P2 , and a fall in welfare
per worker, W .
