NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

HOW TO TELL IF A MONEY MANAGER KNOWS MORE?
Sergey Iskoz
Jiang Wang
Working Paper 9791
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9791
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
June 2003

Iskoz is from the MIT Sloan School of Management, and Wang is from the MIT Sloan School of
Management, CCFR and NBER. Research support from the National Science Foundation (Grant No. SBR9709976) is gratefully acknowledged. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily
those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.
©2003 by Sergey Iskoz and Jiang Wang. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.

How to Tell if a Money Manager Knows More?
Sergey Iskoz and Jiang Wang
NBER Working Paper No. 9791
June 2003
JEL No. G0
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we develop a methodology to identify money managers who have private information
about future asset returns. The methodology does not rely on a specific risk model, such as the
Sharpe ratio, CAPM, or APT. Instead, it relies on the observation that returns generated by managers
with private information cannot be replicated by those without it. Using managers' trading records,
we develop distribution-free tests that can identify such managers. We show that our approach is
general with regard to the nature of private information the managers may have, and with regard to
the trading strategies they may follow.

Sergey Iskoz
MIT
Sloan School of Management
Cambridge, MA 02142
siskoz@mit.edu

Jiang Wang
MIT, E52-456
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142
and NBER
wangj@mit.edu

Contents
1 Introduction

1

2 An Example

4

3 Methodology
3.1 Positions As Part of Trading Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.2 State Variable(s) As Part of Trading Record . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

10
11
14

4 Analysis When Positions
4.1 IID Returns: Mean . .
4.2 IID Returns: Volatility
4.3 Non-IID Returns . . .
4.4 Multiple Assets . . . .

15
16
19
20
23

Are
. . .
. . .
. . .
. . .

Observable
. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

.
.
.
.

5 Analysis When Positions are Unobservable

25

6 Additional Applications
6.1 Diﬀerential Information . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
6.2 Dynamic Strategies . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26
26
28

7 Robustness
7.1 Sample Size and Power of the Test . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7.2 Choosing Number of Bins to Control for Common Information . . . . . . . .

30
31
31

8 Conclusion

32

1

Introduction

Money managers often claim that they can make better investment decisions than investors
themselves. However, how to evaluate a money manager’s ability to do so remains a challenging question. The traditional approach to evaluate a manager’s ability is to measure the
excess return of his portfolio, adjusted for risk according to a model (Sharpe (1966), Jensen
(1969), Treynor and Black (1973)). This approach crucially relies on the speciﬁc risk model
it uses (such as the CAPM or a linear multi-factor model). If the risk model is mis-speciﬁed,
the ability measure becomes questionable.
In this paper, we pursue a diﬀerent approach to evaluate money managers that does not
rely on a speciﬁc risk model. We start by assuming that a money manager is valuable only
if he brings additional information into the investment process.1 Thus, a basic question in
evaluating a manager is whether or not he has private information about future asset returns.2
If the answer is aﬃrmative, the returns he generates must reﬂect his private information.
In particular, investment strategies without the beneﬁt of this information cannot generate
the same returns. Thus, by examining the managers’ returns, we should be able to identify
those that reﬂect private information from those that do not. We explore methods to do so
based on the managers’ trading records.
Conceptually, we can decompose the evaluation of money managers into two steps. The
ﬁrst step is to identify managers who bring new information into the investment process
and the second step is to determine the “value” of their information. The ﬁrst step need
not rely on any speciﬁc risk model, but the second step does. The traditional approach
combines the two steps by directly analyzing the value-added of a manager. Such a direct
approach is desirable, and is possible if an appropriate risk model is available. However, if
the appropriate risk model is absent or mis-speciﬁed in the analysis, this approach becomes
ineﬀective and potentially misleading.
The contribution of a money manager is to generate returns that investors cannot achieve
1

A money manager can be valuable in other ways such as having the ability to implement simple investment strategies at lower costs. In this paper, we ignore these possibilities.
2
It is conceivable that a money manager might possess valuable information about things other than future
asset returns that are also valuable, such as investors’ future consumption needs and ﬁnancial constraints.
Although we do not consider these possibilities in this paper, our methodology can be extended to include
them.

1

on their own. These returns fall into two categories. The ﬁrst category contains returns that
represent arbitrage proﬁts and the second category contains the rest. Arbitrage proﬁts
are considered by Merton (1981) and Henriksson and Merton (1981), and they only arise
under restrictive conditions.3 For example, in the case considered by Merton, the manager
has perfect information about the direction of future price movements.4 When the market is
complete with respect to the arbitrage proﬁts considered, their evaluation is straightforward,
at least conceptually. When the market is incomplete, the value of arbitrage proﬁts is harder
to determine, but is always positive.5
Short of being arbitrage proﬁts, money manager’s returns are diﬃcult to value. The
main diﬃculty comes from the risky nature of these returns. The traditional approach relies
on a speciﬁc risk model to overcome this diﬃculty. But it has long been recognized that
the possibility of using a wrong model can be devastating.6 Actually, the diﬃculty goes
beyond the search of the “correct” risk model. The very existence of such a risk valuation
model is much in question. It is important to realize that based on his private information,
an informed manager sees a diﬀerent return distribution than that seen by an investor.
Thus, he uses a diﬀerent risk model (see, e.g., Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), Admati and
Ross (1985) and Wang (1993)). Using the investor’s own model to evaluate the manager
is conceptually problematic, since it is based on inferior information. Yet, most traditional
evaluation methods, such as those of Sharpe (1966), Jensen (1969) and Treynor and Black
(1973), take this approach. In fact, the investor can reach wrong conclusions using his own
model to judge the manager (see, e.g., Dybvig and Ross (1985)). Using the manager’s model
is usually infeasible since it is based on his private information. Moreover, even knowing the
3

See Jagannathan and Korajczyk (1986), Cumby and Modest (1987), Glosten and Jagannathan (1994),
Ferson and Schadt (1996) and Goetzmann, Ingersoll and Ivkovic̀ (2000) for applications and extensions
of the Henriksson-Merton methodology. The stochastic discount factor (SDF) framework for performance
evaluation, which is similar in spirit to Merton’s original idea, is reviewed in Ferson (2002). See also Chen
and Knez (1996) and Farnsworth, Ferson, Jackson and Todd (2002) for applications of the SDF methodology.
4
Merton (1981) and Glosten and Jagannathan (1994) also considered extensions of their analysis when
proﬁts have the nature of “risky arbitrages”. Using APT type of arguments (Ross, (1976)), they treat these
as equivalent to arbitrage proﬁts (“approximate arbitrages”). But, “risky arbitrages” belong to the second
category, which we discuss below.
5
The case of arbitrage proﬁts raises the issue of how they can be consistent with an equilibrium. In the
model Merton (1981) considered, the manager knows for sure when the stock will out- or under-perform the
bond. Thus, he disagrees with investors on the support for future stock prices. Further constraints (e.g.,
Dybvig and Willard (1999)) or behavior assumptions (e.g. Kyle (1985)) on the manager are needed to obtain
a sustainable equilibrium in this situation.
6
See, for example, Jensen (1972), Roll (1978), Dybvig and Ross (1985), and Grinblatt and Titman (1989).

2

money manager’s model, an investor may not agree with it since with incomplete markets, his
objective and valuation of returns would generally not coincide with those of the manager.7
This diﬃculty in establishing the appropriate risk valuation model justiﬁes our approach,
which focuses on the ﬁrst question in evaluating a manager: Does he know something that
investors do not? This question is less ambitious, but more direct and basic. Our approach
has the advantage of being independent of the valuation model and the objectives of the
manager and the investors. Its limitations are also obvious compared with the traditional
approach. For example, if our methodology identiﬁes a manager with useful information,
it does not necessarily tell us how valuable that information is to a particular investor, nor
does it allow us to rank the information across diﬀerent managers.
Our approach is related to the method considered by Cornell (1979), Copeland and Mayers (1982) and Grinblatt and Titman (1993) for performance evaluation of money managers.
These authors use the predictive power of a manager’s asset holdings for average future returns as a measure of their ability.8 This measure is intuitive and does not rely on a risk
model and can detect performance if the manager can forecast average future returns. But
it has several drawbacks. First, it can detect the ability in forecasting mean returns, but not
the ability in forecasting other aspects of future returns, such as volatility. Second, it applies
mainly when the returns are IID from investors’ point of view. If the returns are non-IID, the
measure is not directly usable.9 Third, it is sensitive to the managers’ trading strategies. If
there are two managers with the same information on expected future returns, the measure
gives a higher score to the manager who trades more aggressively on the information. Our
approach is in the same spirit in the sense that it also develops an evaluation method that
does not rely on a risk model. But it is more general and does not have these drawbacks.
Moreover, it can be applied even when we do not observe managers’ asset holdings. Our
methodology is very similar to that used by Lo, Mamaysky and Wang (2000) to evaluate the
merit of technical analysis.
7

It should be pointed out that the assumption of complete markets, in addition to being unrealistic,
is inappropriate in dealing with situations when market participants have diﬀerent information. See, for
example, Grossman and Stiglitz (1980), and Milgrom and Stokey (1982).
8
See also Cumby and Modest (1987), Graham and Harvey (1996), and Chance and Hemler (2001) for
applications involving evaluation of direct forecasts.
9
Ferson and Khang (2002) have considered the situation of non-IID returns by making additional assumptions about the return dynamics. We return to this issue in more detail in Section 4.

3

We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we use a simple example to illustrate the basic
idea of our approach. In Section 3, we develop a general method to distinguish informed
managers from uninformed managers based on their trading records. In Section 4, we apply
the general methodology to several settings when the managers’ positions are observable.
Section 5 shows how our procedure can be used when the information about managers’
positions is unavailable. In Section 6, we apply our methodology to the comparison of two
managers, and to the situation where managers can trade in-between observations. Section
7 contains several robustness checks of our methodology. Section 8 concludes.

2

An Example

We start our discussion with the example considered by Dybvig and Ross (1985) to demonstrate the drawback of the traditional approach. We use this example to illustrate how to
identify a manager with superior private information without relying on any risk model. We
further use this example to raise and to clarify several issues related to our approach.
Setup
Suppose that a money manager can invest in cash and a risky asset. Cash earns zero interest
rate, and change in the price of the risky asset in period t + 1 is given by Qt+1 , where
Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1

(1)

µ is a positive constant, Zt and ut+1 are independent normal random variables, IID over time,
with zero mean and variance σZ2 and σu2 , respectively. Throughout this paper, we model and,
later, simulate price changes of the risky asset, which we also refer to as “dollar return”
or simply “return”. For convenience, we refer to the risky asset as a stock and express a
manager’s holdings in it as number of shares. We compute Sharpe ratio of a manager by
dividing the mean of her P&L by its standard deviation. These departures from a more
traditional setup are merely for convenience.
We consider two money managers, an uninformed manager, denoted by 0, and an informed manager, denoted by 1. The uninformed manager has no private information about
future returns. To him, stock return is IID over time with a mean of µ and a variance of
σQ2 ≡ σZ2 + σu2 . The informed manager has private information about future stock returns.
4

In particular, she observes Zt at t (t = 0, 1, · · · ). To her, returns are no longer IID, but
predictable given her information.
Both managers form their investment strategies based on their information about future
returns. Let Nti denote manager i’s stock position (expressed in number of shares) at t,
where i = 0, 1. We assume that the two managers follow simple investment strategies of the
following form:
Nt0 = a0

(2a)

Nt1 = a1 + b1

Zt
σZ

(2b)

where a0 , a1 and b1 are all positive constants, presumably depending on the managers’
objective functions, especially their risk tolerances. It can be shown that these strategies are
optimal given certain form of the managers’ objective functions.10 From (2a), the portfolio
of the uninformed manager is constant over time, reﬂecting the fact that he possesses no
information about future stock returns. The portfolio of the informed manager, however,
does change over time as she receives new information about future returns. We deﬁne
λ ≡ b1 /a1 as a measure of the informed manager’s intensity to trade on her information.
Sharpe Ratio as An Information Identiﬁer
Can we distinguish the informed manager from the uninformed manager, given certain information on their trading records? The traditional approach to performance evaluation is
to look at the (excess) return of each strategy, adjusted for its risk according to a speciﬁc
risk model. A well-known risk model is the mean-variance model, in which the risk-adjusted
measure of excess return is the Sharpe ratio. Given the strategies of the two managers, we
can easily compute their Sharpe ratios, denoted by SR0 and SR1 , respectively:
SR0 =

µ
≡ SR∗
σQ
∗

SR = SR 
1

(3a)
1 + λR/SR∗

1+2λ R SR∗ + λ2 (1+R2 +SR∗ 2 )

10

(3b)

For example, under a similar return process and constant absolute risk aversion preferences, Wang (1994)
shows that the informed manager’s optimal stock holdings are linear in her signal. The linear form assumed
here, however, is for illustrative purposes only. The methodology we develop would work as long as manager’s
holdings are monotone in her signal.

5

where R2 ≡ σZ2 /σQ2 measures the amount of private information the informed manager has
about future returns. It is worth pointing out that the Sharpe ratio of the uninformed
manager is independent of the number of shares he holds. This reﬂects a desirable property
of the Sharpe ratio in measuring performance: By simply taking on more or less risk, a
manager cannot improve his performance measure. This also implies that the Sharpe ratio
of any uninformed manager can not exceed SR∗ .11
For the informed manager, her Sharpe ratio depends on the speciﬁc strategy she follows.
In particular, it may not always exceed that of the uninformed manager (SR∗ ). Figure 1
shows the ratio of SR1 to SR0 as a function of b1 /a1 . Here, we have set the annual mean of
the stock return to be µ = 0.12 and its volatility to be σQ = 0.15. Thus, the Sharpe ratio
of the stock is SR∗ = µ/σQ = 0.8 on an annual basis.12 We assume that the managers are
trading on a weekly basis. The R2 for weekly stock return takes values ranging from 0.5%
to 1%.
The Ratio of Informed to Uninformed Sharpe Ratios
1.4
R2 = 0.5%
R2 = 0.8%
R2 = 1.0%

1.3

SR1 / SR0

1.2

1.1

1

0.9

0.8

0.7
0

2

4

6
λ

8

10

12

Figure 1: Relative Sharpe ratio of the informed and the uninformed manager.
It is obvious that the informed manager can generate Sharpe ratios below SR∗ , especially
when her private information is limited (low R2 ) and she trades aggressively on it. As
In fact, SR∗ gives the upper bound for the Sharpe ratio the uninformed manager can achieve. To see
this, let us suppose that the uninformed manager introduces noise into his investment strategy. In particular,
assume his stock position is Nt0 = a0 + ñt , where ñt is a random variable independent of Zt and ut+1 , with
0
a zero mean. It then follows that his Sharpe ratio becomes SR = SR∗ √ 0 2 a
, which is less than
2
∗2
11

(a ) +(1+SR

)σñ

SR∗ .
12
A Sharpe ratio of 0.8 on annual basis is higher than the historic average for passive strategies. It is
less clear what the reasonable range for active strategies should be. We choose a higher number merely for
illustrative purposes.

6

Dybvig and Ross (1985) have pointed out, the reason for the failure of Sharpe ratio in
detecting the informed manager’s superior ability is that volatility as a measure of risk
becomes inappropriate for her P&L proﬁle, which is no longer normal. In particular, the
P&L proﬁle of the informed manager has a χ2 component in it, due to the positive correlation
between her position in the stock and its return.
This points to a fundamental drawback of the traditional approach, its reliance on a speciﬁc risk model. Besides the possibility of being mis-speciﬁed, a particular risk model is usually based on the perspective of investors who have no private information. It does not necessarily incorporate the potential private information that better informed investors/managers
might have, and thus may not be the right risk model from their perspective.
Information Identiﬁcation without A Risk Model
However, in this example, we do not need a risk model to identify the informed manager.
In fact, simply by looking at the distribution of P&L, we should be able to tell who the
informed manager is. Figure 2 shows the unconditional distribution of the P&L for both the
informed and the uninformed manager. Here, for concreteness, we have chosen a0 to be 1.
Thus, the uninformed manager follows a passive strategy and holds one share of stock. The
informed manager has predictive power of R2 = 1% for future stock return and she actively
trades on her private information. We also set her average stock position to a1 = 1 and the
intensity at which she trades on her information is λ∗ = 0.901.13 However, for comparison,
we consider two values for λ: λ = λ∗ and λ = 5λ∗ .
It is obvious that the P&L of the informed manager is positively skewed while the P&L
of the uninformed manager is always symmetric (around its mean). Table 1.A reports the
moments of the P&L for the two managers. Since the uninformed manager follows a passive
strategy, his P&L has the same moments as the stock dollar return, with a weekly average
gain of 0.231% and volatility of 2.080%. The corresponding Sharpe ratio is 0.111 (weekly).
The informed manager, trading on her private information about average future returns,
13

In the portfolio choice problem with CARA preferences and returns given by (1), the optimal policies of
the uninformed and the informed managers take the form of (2). At the speciﬁed parameter values (µ = 0.12,
σQ = 0.15 and R2 = 1%), a0 = a1 = 1 implies a risk aversion of 5 13 for both managers. Moreover, for the
informed manager, λ∗ = 0.901 for the optimal policy. Although our analysis does require any optimality
on the manager’s part, we use values implied by optimality under CARA preferences in our numerical
illustrations.

7

Empirical PDFs of Various Strategies
35
Uninformed
*
Informed (λ = λ )
Informed (λ = 5λ*)

30

Probability Density

25

20

15

10

5

0
−0.14

−0.07
0
0.07
Weekly Demeaned Rate of Return

0.14

Figure 2: Distribution of the managers’ P&L.
generates large average gains, but with higher volatility. For λ = λ∗ , the average weekly P&L
is 0.418% with a volatility of 2.830%, giving a Sharpe ratio of 0.148, which is signiﬁcantly
higher than that of the uninformed manager. However, when she trades more aggressively
with λ = 5λ∗ , her Sharpe ratio starts to fall to the same range as that of the uninformed
manager.
What is worth noting is the symmetric nature of the uninformed manager’s return proﬁle.
Given that conditional on public information (which is summarized in the prior distribution
of Zt and ut+1 ), the stock dollar return is symmetrically distributed, any strategy that
the uninformed manager adopts based on the same public information can only generate
symmetric P&L. This implies that any strategy that can generate an asymmetric P&L
proﬁle must be relying on additional information about stock returns.
Thus, in this example, information revealed by the unconditional distribution of the
managers’ P&L is suﬃcient to identify the informed manager. However, as we will see
later, relying only on the unconditional P&L distribution is restrictive in general. For example, using option-like strategies, the uninformed investor can closely mimic the important
characteristics of the unconditional distribution of the informed investor’s P&L. Robust
identiﬁcation of informed managers has to rely on additional information about their trading records. In particular, when the trading record also contains the history of manager’s
positions, we can determine if she has private information by looking at the distribution of
asset returns conditioned on her positions. In particular, future returns conditioned on her

8

current stock position being above its average must have a diﬀerent distribution than the
returns conditioned on her current position being lower than its average. In other words, her
current position can predict future returns, which is the point exploited by Cornell (1979)
and Grinblatt and Titman (1993), among others.
(a)

(b)

Conditional and Unconditional PDFs

CDF Differences: Conditional vs. Unconditional
0.05

20

Unconditional
Conditional (N > Avg)
Conditional (N ≤ Avg)

0.04

F(⋅| N > Avg) − F(⋅)
F(⋅| N ≤ Avg) − F(⋅)

0.03
0.02
CDF difference

Probability Density

16

12

8

0.01
0
−0.01
−0.02

4
−0.03
0
−0.08

−0.04
0
0.04
Weekly Demeaned Rate of Return

0.08

−0.04
−0.08

−0.04
0
0.04
Weekly Demeaned Rate of Return

0.08

Figure 3: Comparison of conditional and unconditional distributions of stock dollar return: PDFs
(Panel A) and CDF diﬀerences (Panel B). Distributions conditioned on the manager’s stock position
being above and below average are denoted by the dashed and dotted lines, respectively. The solid
line in Figure 3(a) gives the unconditional distribution.

Table 1.B reports the moments of stock returns conditioned on the informed manager’s
stock position being above and below average. Clearly, conditioned on the informed manager’s stock position being above average, the future stock returns have a positive mean
and skewness, and conditioned on her stock position being below average, the future stock
returns have a negative mean and skewness.
Figure 3(a) plots the stock return distribution conditional on the manager’s position
being above and below average. It is obvious that for the uninformed investor, the two
distributions should be identical and equal to the unconditional distribution. They are
shown in the ﬁgure by the solid line. For the informed manager, the dollar return distribution
conditional on her position being below average is shown by the dotted line, and the dollar
return distribution conditional on her position being above average is shown by the dashed
line. Clearly, the two distributions are diﬀerent and the former lies to the left of the latter.
The diﬀerence between the two conditional distributions unambiguously demonstrates that
9

manager’s position contains information about future returns.
Given that predictive power of the informed manager’s signal about future stock return
has an R2 of only 1%, the diﬀerences between the conditional distributions (when her position
is above and below average, respectively) and the unconditional distribution, as shown in
Figure 3(a), may seem small. But they may well be detectable statistically, depending on
the methods used. In particular, the diﬀerence between the cumulative density function of
the conditional distribution and the unconditional distribution is quite signiﬁcant as Figure
3(b) shows. The test we consider later is related to this observation.
The above example illustrates our basic idea in this paper, which is to identify managers
who have private information about future returns. We explore methods to achieve this by
relying solely on the managers’ trading records, not on any particular notion of risk.
Obviously, this example is special in many ways, such as the return generating process, the
nature of the informed manager’s private information, the information we have on managers’
trading records, etc. This raises many questions about how far we can push our idea in more
general settings. For example, the asymmetry in the informed manager’s P&L proﬁle is
related to the fact that her information is about the mean of future stock return. If her
information is about the volatility of future stock return, can we still identify any special
features of her P&L proﬁle? What if her information is about some aspect of future stock
returns, which we do not even know? Also, we have assumed that we have information
about managers’ portfolio P&L at the same horizon as their trading period. What if we only
observe P&L at a horizon that is longer than their trading period? In this case, dynamic
trading strategies within the horizon over which we record P&L can generate a rich set of
P&L proﬁles even when they are only based on public information. Can we still tell if a
strategy contains new information? We will address these questions in the following sections.

3

Methodology

We now consider a methodology that allows us to separate an informed manager from an
uninformed manager. The eﬀectiveness of any such methodology depends on two factors:
(1) the underlying model, including the return generating process, the nature of private
information, and the trading strategy, and (2) the amount of data, including the length of

10

managers’ trading records. Of course, less reliance on both of these factors is more desirable.
For most of our discussion, we assume that suﬃcient data is available, and focus primarily
on the ﬁrst factor. We return to the data issue in Section 7.
Our methodology is based on the availability of managers’ trading records. Let Nti and
Qt denote manager i stock position and the realized stock return over time. Deﬁne
i
Qt
Git ≡ Nt−1

(4)

as the P&L of manager i in period t where t = 1, . . . T . Let (·)[1, T ] denote the history of
a variable from time 1 to T . We assume that a manager’s trading record always includes
G[1, T ] , his P&L. It also includes public information such as past returns on the stock and
realizations of certain events or state variables (e.g., realized earnings or success/failure of
mergers). In addition, it may contain more detailed information, such as the manager’s
positions. Formally, the trading record (history) of manager i is given by
HTi ≡
≡



Gi , Q, S i




[0, T ]

 



Gi1 , Q1 , S0i , Gi2 , Q2 , S1i , . . . , GiT , QT , STi −1 .

(5)

Here, S represents the information on the manager’s trading history in addition to his P&L
and stock returns. We consider two possible forms of S in this paper. In the ﬁrst instance,
Sti = Nti is the manager’s stock position. In the second instance, Sti is the ex-post realization
of a state variable X that aﬀects the distribution of future stock return and on which the
manager might have private information. For example, if the manager trades on information
about earnings, the actual earnings realizations are observable and constitute an important
part of his trading record. In the ﬁrst case, we assume that the manager’s position is a
monotonic function of X. In the second case, S i is monotonic in X by construction.

3.1

Positions As Part of Trading Record

We ﬁrst consider the situation where Sti = Nti , that is, the manager i’s trading positions
are available for his evaluation. In this case, HTi = (Gi , Q, N i )[1, T ] (notice that since Git =
i
Nt−1
Qt , we can drop Gi from HTi in this setting). If manager i trades on private information

about future returns, his stock position at any point in time must reﬂect this information.
In particular, conditional on his position in the stock, the distribution of future returns must
11

be diﬀerent from the unconditional distribution of returns.
Let



FA (x) ≡ F Qt+1 ≤ xNti ∈ A

(6)

denote the cumulative density function of the stock dollar return next period conditioned on
manager i’s current stock position Nti being in set A, where A is a Lebesgue-measurable set
on . If Nti contains no information about Qt+1 , we have
FA (·) = FA (·) ∀ A, A .

(7)

If, however, Nti contains information about Qt+1 , then we have
FA (·) = FA (·) ∀ A = A .

(8)

Thus, the problem of identifying the informed manager reduces to the task of distinguishing the two conditional return distributions. The null hypothesis to be tested is simply
(7). Instead of making assumptions about the return generating process, we rely on the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, which is distribution-free.
For manager i, FA (x) and FA (x) denote the cumulative return distribution functions
conditioned on his stock position being in A and A , respectively. The null hypothesis is
that FA = FA . The estimated cumulative distribution function FS (S = A, A ) based on the
trading record of manager i with sample size ns is given by
nS
1 

i
FS (x) ≡
1
nS t=1 {Qt ≤x, Nt−1 ∈S}

(9)

where 1{·} is the indicator function. The Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic based on the estimated distributions is
δ(nA , nA ) ≡

nA nA 
nA + nA 

1/2

sup

−∞<x<∞



 FA (x) − FA (x) .

(10)

The distribution of δ(nA , nA ) under the null can be readily computed (see, for example,
Hollander and Wolfe (1999), Table A.10). We can perform an approximate α-level test of
the null hypothesis by computing the statistic and rejecting the null if it exceeds the 100α-th
percentile of its distribution under the null.
When nA and nA are large, the statistic should be small under the null. In particular,

12

when min(nA , nA ) → ∞, it has the following limiting distribution:
lim

min(nA ,nA )→∞

∞



2 2
Prob δ(nA , nA ) < δ =
(−1)k e−2k δ .

(11)

k=−∞

Assuming, without loss of generality, that nA > nA , this approximation is valid for nA ≥ 100,
nA ≥ [0.10nA ].14 An approximate α-level test of the null hypothesis can be performed based
on the limiting distribution of the test statistic under the null, given by (11).
To implement the test proposed above, we need to choose the sets A and A . The choice
depends on several factors. In order to increase the power of the test, we want to choose A
and A such that the diﬀerence between the two conditional distributions, as measured by the
Kolmogorov-Smirnov statistic, is maximized. Also, we want to use the data most eﬃciently.
Any particular choice of A and A involves a trade oﬀ between these two considerations.
Suppose that on average, the managers’ stock position is zero. Then, one choice is to let
A = (−∞, ∞) and A = (−∞, 0] or A = (0, ∞). Another choice is to let A = (−∞, 0]
and A = (0, ∞).15 Both choices use all observations. But the second choice gives a larger
diﬀerence between FA and FA . Therefore, setting A = (−∞, 0] and A = (0, ∞), our test
becomes the test of the hypothesis that F+ = F− , where




F+ (x) ≡ F Qt+1 ≤ x|Nt ≤ 0 and F− (x) ≡ F Qt+1 ≤ x|Nt > 0 .

(12)

Since the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test makes no assumptions about the actual return distribution, it can detect any diﬀerence in the distributions conditioned on a manager’s position.
In particular, the private information that gives rise to this diﬀerence does not have to be
limited to expected returns; it can involve better forecasts about other moments of returns
as well. We consider this case in Section 4.2.
In the above discussion, we assume that the uninformed manager as well as the evaluator
have no information about future returns. In other words, conditioned on their information,
stock returns are IID over time. This is a restrictive assumption. Conditioned on public
information, returns can be non-IID.16 Our method can be easily extended to the case of
14

See Kim and Jennrich (1973). The numerical results presented later in the paper also use the conti√
nuity correction suggested by these authors, which amounts to adding 1/(2 nA ) to the computed value of
δ(nA , nA ).
15
If the manager’s average stock position is not zero, but is N̄ , then we can simply choose A = (∞, N̄ ]
and A = (N̄ , ∞).
16
There are many papers documenting the serial dependence in stock returns. For example, Fama and

13

non-IID returns. Suppose that the distribution of future stock return Qt+1 depends on public
information Yt . Then, for an uninformed manager who nonetheless observes Yt at time t, we
have




∀ A, A and Y
FA · |Y = FA · |Y

(13)





where FS x|Y ≡ F Qt+1 ≤ x|Nt ∈ S, Yt = Y is the cumulative distribution of future
stock return conditioned on the current public information being Yt = Y and the stock
position being in the set S = A, A . In this case, the identiﬁcation of an informed manager
is equivalent to rejecting the null hypothesis (13).

3.2

State Variable(s) As Part of Trading Record

We have developed the methodology to identify informed managers under the assumption
that their positions are available to us for evaluation. Now we consider the case when such
data is not observable. Suppose, instead, that we have ex-post realizations of a state variable
X about which managers may have private information. Our procedure can be modiﬁed to
detect those informed managers. In this case, HT = (Gi , Q, X)[1, T ] .
The intuition behind our methodology in this case is as follows. Controlling for stock
return, the only source of variation in manager’s P&L is his position in the stock. If he
has information about the state variable X, the variation in his position is related to the
variation in X. Therefore, conditioned on the stock return, the distribution of his P&L
when X is “low” should be diﬀerent from the conditional distribution of his P&L when X is
“high”. Thus, identifying an informed manager again reduces to comparing two conditional
distributions, except that in this setting the test is applied to the distribution of manager’s
P&L rather than to the distribution of asset returns.
Let




FSG x|Q ≡ F Gt ≤ x|Xt−1 ∈ S, Qt = Q

(14)

denote the cumulative distribution of a manager’s P&L conditioned on the concurrent stock
French (1988b), Lo and MacKinlay (1988), and Poterba and Summers (1988) have shown serial correlation
in stock index returns at diﬀerent horizons. Campbell and Shiller (1988), Fama and French (1988a), and
Kothari and Shanken (1997) show that dividend yield can predict future returns. Bollerslev, Chou and
Kroner (1992), among others, survey evidence on predictability in stock return volatility.

14

return being Qt = Q and the state variable X being in the set S = A, A . Then, under the
null hypothesis that a manager has no information about X, we must have




FAG · |Q = FAG · |Q ∀ A, A and Q.

(15)

Rejection of this null hypothesis implies that a manager has private information about X.
The test of the null on the distribution of P&L conditioned on the realization of state
variables can be constructed in the same way as the test on the distribution of stock returns
conditioned on the manager’s positions and public information. Here, the return on the
stock plays the same role as the public signal does when returns are non-IID.

4

Analysis When Positions Are Observable

In this section, we apply the methodology proposed in the previous section to simulated
trading records of managers under the assumption that their stock position is observable to
us. We ﬁrst consider the setting that corresponds to the example described in Section 2,
where returns are IID over time and the informed manager has private information about the
mean of future returns. We then extend our analysis to the situation where the manager’s
private signal is about the volatility of future returns. Next, we show how to apply our
methodology when returns are non-IID. Finally, we consider a setting where managers can
invest in multiple risky assets.
Relying on managers’ positions to identify an informed manager was suggested by Cornell
(1979), Copeland and Mayers (1982), Grinblatt and Titman (1993) and Ferson and Khang
(2002). In particular, they use the covariance between a manager’s asset positions and subsequent returns as a performance measure. This measure is intuitive and has simple economic
interpretations. But it is applicable only to the case when the manager’s information is on
the mean of asset returns. It is also sensitive to how aggressively a manager trades on his
information. Finally, it requires asset returns to be IID based on public informaiton. Ferson
and Khang extend the methodology to non-IID returns. But they impose additional structure on the asset return process. The analysis in this section shows that our approach avoids
these limitations. Its application based on managers’ positions is a natural generalization of
the existing methodology.

15

4.1

IID Returns: Mean

Consider the simple case in which stock dollar return is given by (1) and the informed
manager observes Zt at time t. We use the following annual parameter values: µ = 0.12
and σQ = 0.15. R2 , which measures the predictive power of the informed manager’s private
information, is set at 5%. The portfolio strategies of the uninformed and informed managers
are given by (2). In particular, the stock position of the informed manager is linear in Zt .
The intensity of her trading on the private information is measured by λ.
Weekly stock returns are generated by simulating (1) for 400 weeks. The stock price is
initialized to $1, which allows us to interpret stock returns as (simple) returns per dollar
invested at time 0. Each simulation gives us a time series of Qt , Zt−1 and the managers’ stock
i
positions Nt−1
with i = 0, 1. The simulated trading record of manager i is (Q, N i )[0, 400] . The

simulation is repeated 500 times to obtain various statistics and their standard errors.
The uninformed manager (manager 0) follows a passive strategy with Nt0 = a0 . For
concreteness, we set a0 = 1. In other words, he holds one share of stock. We also consider
an uninformed manager, denoted as manager 0 , who adds noise to his stock holdings. This
manager has no private information about future stock returns, but thinks that he does.
He treats noise as signals about future returns, and trades on it. His stock position is


Nt0 = a0 + ñt where a0 = 1 and ñt is normal, independent of Qt , with a mean of zero and a
volatility of 0.5. The informed manager follows an active strategy Nt1 = a1 (1 + λZt /σZ ). Her
average position in the stock is a1 , which is also set to 1. The benchmark value of λ for this
case is λ∗ = 2.016.17 To assess how manager’s trading intensity aﬀects our methodology, we
consider two values of λ: λ = λ∗ and λ = 5λ∗ .
Panel A of Table 2 reports the summary statistics of the P&L of the uninformed managers
with and without noise, and of the informed manager with diﬀerent intensities of her informed
trading. The strategy of the uninformed manager without noise is passive, buy-and-hold.
The moments of his P&L are equal to those of stock dollar return, which has weekly average
gain of 0.231%, volatility of 2.084%, and a Sharpe ratio of 0.111. The skewness is zero and
kurtosis is 3. The strategy of the uninformed manager with noise is active but not rewarding.
His average weekly P&L of 0.234% is comparable to the passive strategy, but the volatility
17

The benchmark value of 2.016 for λ is optimal if the manager has a CARA preferences with a risk
aversion of 5 13 , which gives a1 = 1. See footnote 13.

16

of 2.331% is higher than that for the passive strategy. The skewness of his P&L distribution
is still approximately zero, but the kurtosis becomes 5.038 (with a standard deviation of
1.138). The noise in the uninformed manager’s strategy reduces his Sharpe ratio to 0.101
(with a standard deviation of 0.049). The P&L of the informed manager gives a diﬀerent
pattern. It tends to have higher average gain and volatility than the P&L of the buy-and-hold
uninformed manager. But in general, the informed manager achieves larger Sharpe ratios.
For λ = λ∗ , her Sharpe ratio is 0.242, which is considerably higher than the Sharpe ratio of
the uninformed manager. However, as λ increases, i.e. when the informed manager trades
more aggressively on her information, the Sharpe ratio may decline, as shown in Figure 1.
More importantly, the distribution of the informed manager’s P&L is very diﬀerent from
those of the uninformed managers. In particular, it shows signiﬁcant positive skewness, as
discussed earlier. For λ = λ∗ , the skewness is 1.28 (with a standard deviation of 0.55).
In the particular case we consider here, the unconditional distribution of the P&L of
the informed manager provides strong evidence of her having private information about
stock returns. However, this situation is special. As we show later, the evidence from the
unconditional distribution of P&L is insuﬃcient and can be misleading. For this reason, we
utilize the methodology discussed in Section 3 and construct tests based on the stock return
distribution conditioned on the managers’ positions.
Let N̄ denote the average of a manager’s stock position over the simulated sample. We
partition the sample into two sets, those with Nt ≤ N̄ and those with Nt > N̄ . We have
n− and n+ sample points in the two sets. For each set, we use (9) to estimate conditional
cumulative distribution of stock dollar return, F− and F+ , respectively. We also use the
whole sample to compute the unconditional cumulative stock return distribution F. Table
2.B reports the summary statistics for the unconditional distribution and for the two conditional distributions. The unconditional distribution of stock return is normal with mean of
0.231% and standard deviation of 2.084%. Its skewness is zero and kurtosis is 3, as expected.
The average return conditioned on the informed manager’s position being above average is
0.604%, signiﬁcantly higher than the unconditional mean. Conditioned on the manager’s
stock position being below average, the mean return is negative, -0.141%, which is lower
than the unconditional mean and a lot smaller than the mean conditioned on her position
being above average. The diﬀerence between the means of the conditional distributions re17

ﬂects the private information the manager has about average future returns, as we assumed.
The other moments of the conditional distributions are very similar to those of the unconditional distribution. The standard deviation of the conditional distributions is slightly lower
than that of the unconditional distribution on average, but the diﬀerence is not statistically
signiﬁcant because the R2 of the manager’s signal is only 5%. The third and fourth moments of the conditional distributions are practically the same as those of the unconditional
distribution. It is also worth noting that the moments of the conditional distribution do
not depend on the intensity at which the manager trades on her private information (as
long as it is not zero). The moments are essentially the same for diﬀerent values of λ. This
is not surprising. When the manager’s stock position is linear in her signal about future
stock return (Qt ), as we assume here, conditioning on her position being above average is
equivalent to conditioning on the signal being positive, i.e., Zt−1 > 0. The magnitude of λ
has no impact on the information revealed by the relative size of her position.
We apply the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to each pair of the estimated distributions: F+
versus F, F− versus F, and F+ versus F− , which allows us to accept or reject the null
hypothesis (7) at a given conﬁdence level. For each simulation, we compute the KolmogorovSmirnov test statistic and the corresponding p-value. The rejection rate at the 1% (5%) level
is a fraction of simulations for which the p-value does not exceed .01 (.05). The standard
deviation of the test statistic is shown for information purposes only.
Table 3 reports the results of the test. In the ﬁrst panel, we have the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test statistic δ for the uninformed manager who trades on noise. It is clear that δ is close to
zero. The rejection rate of the null hypothesis that the two conditional P&L distributions
and the unconditional P&L distribution are the same is close to zero at both the 1% level
and the 5% level. For the informed manager, the test statistic becomes larger and more
signiﬁcant. However, the rejection rate of the null that F+ = F or F− = F is still low, about
2% at the 1% level and 13-16% at the 5% level. But for the null that F+ = F− , the rejection
rate becomes very high, 69% at the 1% level and 88% at the 5% level. This is not surprising,
since the diﬀerence between F+ and F− is larger than the diﬀerence between either F and
F+ or F and F− . It should also be pointed out that the results of the test are independent
of the intensity at which the informed manager trades on her private information. This is
clearly a desirable property of our evaluation method.
18

The above analysis of a simple case demonstrates the applicability of our methodology
in identifying managers with private information. In the remainder of this section, we apply
the same methodology to more general cases.

4.2

IID Returns: Volatility

In the preceding analysis, we have assumed that the informed manager has private information about the mean of future returns. We have shown that our methodology can be used
to detect the informed manager in this case. As we discussed earlier, unlike other methods
that can reveal the presence of such information, our procedure does not put any restrictions
on the nature of manager’s private information. In order to demonstrate this, we consider a
situation where the informed manager has private information about the volatility of future
returns rather than the mean. Suppose that stock price increments are generated by the
following process:
Qt+1 = µ + σt ut+1

(16)

where σt follows an IID two-point process and ut+1 is IID standard normal. We assume that
σt takes two values, σh and σl , with equal probability. The informed manager observes σt at
time t and the uninformed manager does not.
For our test, we again let µ = 0.12 and σQ = 0.15. We set σh = 0.20. The unconditional
volatility of stock return then implies that σl = 0.07. In addition to the passive strategy
deﬁned in Section 4.1, we consider three active strategies given by Nt = µ/(γvt2 ), where
γ = 5 13 as before, and vt = σt + ẽt is a manager’s signal about volatility. We use three
diﬀerent distributions of ẽt to simulate an uninformed manager with noise, and partiallyand fully-informed managers.18
Based on simulated trading records of the four strategies over a sample of 400 weeks, we
report the summary statistics of their P&L in Panel A of Table 4. With private information
only on volatility, the informed manager can still generate a Sharpe ratio of 0.171, which is
18

When σt = σh , ẽt takes on two values, 0 and σl −σh , with probability p and 1−p, respectively. Similarly,
when σt = σl , ẽt is either 0 or σh − σl , with respective probabilities of p and 1 − p. Thus, the signal vt has
the same unconditional distribution as σt . Straightforward calculations show that the informativeness of the
signal depends on the value of p. For instance, if p = 0.5, the signal is worthless because F (σt |vt ) = F (σt ).
We set p = 0.5, p = 0.75, and p = 1.0 to simulate an active uninformed manager, and partially- and
fully-informed managers, respectively.

19

noticeably higher than that of a passive strategy (0.107). Panel B of Table 4 reports the
stock return moments conditional on the managers’ position being above (N > N̄ ) and below
(N ≤ N̄ ) its average. Apparently, conditioned on the fully-informed manager’s stock position
being below average, volatility of stock return is signiﬁcantly higher than when her position
is above average. The stock position of the partially-informed manager is also informative.
Panel C gives the results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test applied to the conditional return
distributions. For the fully-informed manager, the test strongly rejects the null that the
two distributions are the same. Rejection rates for the partially-informed manager are high
as well, even though her Sharpe Ratio of 0.109 is almost the same as that of the passive
strategy.
These results show that our methodology does not rely on the speciﬁc nature of the
manager’s private information. As long as suﬃcient data are available, we can identify the
manager with private information.

4.3

Non-IID Returns

In the previous two sections, we have assumed that stock returns are IID based on public
information. This is a restrictive assumption. There is accumulating evidence that asset
return distributions are time-varying. In such a situation, our task becomes to identify
managers whose information about future returns is not in the public information set. For
example, if it is known that the dividend yield predicts future returns, the question is whether
a manager has predictors in addition to the dividend yield.
In the context of the setting considered in Section 4.1, we assume that stock price increments are generated by the following process:
Qt+1 = µ + Yt + Zt + ut+1

(17)

where µ is a positive constant, Yt , Zt and ut+1 are independent normal, IID over time, with
zero mean and volatility σY , σZ , and σu , respectively. Moreover, we assume that Yt is public
information at time t and Zt is private information, known only to the informed manager.
The price process (17) is a straightforward extension of the simple case (1). However, since
Yt is public information at t, stock returns conditioned on this information are no longer IID
over time.
20

As discussed in Section 3, our methodology can be extended naturally to analyze this
case. We only need to condition on the public information ﬁrst and compare the distribution
of returns conditioned on the managers’ stock positions. The implementation of this idea is
straightforward if we have unlimited amount of data on the managers’ trading records. In
practice, data is always limited. Thus, we again face the challenge of ﬁnding a powerful test
with limited amount of data.
We consider the following algorithm. Given a manager’s trading record (Q, N, Y )[0, T ] ,
we divide the sample into m equal-sized bins according to the value of Y . Each bin now
provides a controlled sample in which the values of Y are clustered within a close range. Let
n ≡ T /m be the number of observations in each bin. One can then construct a test based
on the sample {(Ntk1 −1 , Qtk1 ), . . . , (Ntkn −1 , Qtkn )}, where k = 1, . . . , m denotes the k-th bin.
We compute the average position N̄k for the sub-sample k and then divide the sub-sample
into two groups: J+ (k) ≡ {j : Ntkj > N̄k } and J− (k) ≡ {j : Ntkj ≤ N̄k }. Conditional
distributions of stock return, F+ (k) and F− (k), can be estimated based on the two groups
in the sub-sample k as for the IID case. Kolmogorov-Smirnov test can be conducted on the
F+ (k) and F− (k). The disadvantage of this approach is that the size of the sub-sample is
small, giving a test of low power. In addition, it is hard to aggregate the test results over
diﬀerent bins.
We adopt a diﬀerent procedure. Instead of considering tests based on each sub-sample,
we pool together the two groups from diﬀerent sub-samples. Speciﬁcally, we aggregate the
sample points in J+ (k) from all the sub-samples into one sample J+ = ∪m
k=1 J+ (k). Similarly,
we set J− = ∪m
k=1 J− (k). From these two samples, we estimate the distribution functions
F+ and F− . The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is then conducted on these two conditional
distributions. This approach has the advantage of utilizing all available data in a single test.
Table 5 reports the results of our test. Stock returns are generated using the following
parameters: µ = 0.12, σQ = 0.15, as before, and σY2 /σQ2 = σZ2 /σQ2 = 0.04. For the uninformed


manager, we consider two strategies, a passive strategy with Nt0 = a0 = 1, and an active
strategy that utilizes public information and sets Nt0 = a0 (1 + λ∗ Yt /σY ), where a0 = 1 and
λ∗ = 1.803. For the informed manager, we consider her optimal strategy Nt1 = a1 1+λ∗ (Yt +

Zt )/ σY2 + σZ2 with a1 = 1. Since we have seen earlier that the intensity of the informed
manager’s trading on private information does not aﬀect the results of our test (as long as
21

λ = 0), we only consider her optimal strategy. We set m, the number of bins used to control
for public information, to 10. Sensitivity analysis presented in section 7.2 indicates that, in
this setup, using at least ﬁve bins does an adequate job of controlling for the common signal.
The trading records of the two managers are simulated for 800 weeks. We again run 500
simulations to obtain standard deviations of our estimates.
Summary statistics of the managers’ P&L are given in Panel A of Table 5. Clearly,
the active strategy of the uninformed manager that uses public information can generate
a Sharpe ratio much higher than that of the passive strategy. It also generates positive
skewness and higher kurtosis. The informed manager also generates higher Sharpe ratio
than the passive strategy, and positive skewness. For the value of λ that we choose for the
informed manager, she outperforms the uninformed manager’s active strategy as measured
by the Sharpe ratio. But this is not a general result. If she trades less aggressively on private
information (or on public information for that matter), her Sharpe ratio can end up being
lower than that of an active but uninformed manager.
In order to separate the managers according to their private information, we can compare
the estimated distributions F+ and F− . Panel B of Table 5 reports the moments of these
distributions conditioned on the managers’ stock position being above and below average,
controlling for the corresponding level of Y . It becomes obvious that the uninformed manager’s position, after controlling for Y , contains little information about future returns. The
moments of the two conditional distributions are almost identical. The situation is very
diﬀerent for the informed manager. Controlling for Y , the stock return conditioned on her
position being above average has signiﬁcantly higher mean than the stock return conditioned
on her position being below-average.
Panel C of Table 5 reports the results of Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on F+ and F− for
both managers. Conﬁrming the results in panel B for the uninformed manager, we cannot
reject the null that the two conditional return distributions are the same. For the informed
manager, however, we can reject the null at the rate of 92.2% at the 1% level. Such a high
rejection rate supports the validity of our algorithm in implementing our methodology.
Of course, the particular implementation considered here needs further examination,
especially when applied in alternative information settings. We return to some of these
issues in Section 6.1.
22

4.4

Multiple Assets

So far, we have only considered cases where managers can invest in a single risky asset. In
this section, we show that our methodology can be easily applied to the case of multiple
assets.
We assume that managers can invest in 50 stocks. The price process for half of the stocks
is given by
Qs,t+1 = µs + Zs,t + us,t+1 ,

s = 1, . . . , 25

(18)

while the price process for the other half is given by
Qs,t+1 = µs + σs,t us,t+1 ,

s = 26, . . . , 50.

(19)

Thus, returns for individual stocks are generated by the same processes as those considered
in Sections 4.1 and 4.2. Expected annual stock returns (µs ) range from 6% to 20%, while
unconditional volatility of annual returns ranges from 10% to 19%. Here, σs,t takes two
values, σh and σl , with equal probability. We set σl = 0.07 for all stocks. The value of σh
for each stock is then determined by its unconditional volatility. For simplicity, we assume
that individual price processes are mutually independent. Imposing a factor structure - for
example, adding a market factor - does not change the nature of the results.
We simulate trading records of two managers. The ﬁrst manager, manager 0, is active,
0
but uninformed. His position in stock s is given by Ns,t
= a0 + ñs,t , where a0 = 1 and

ñs,t is normal with a mean of zero and a volatility of 0.5. The second manager, manager
1, has information of varying precision about the mean and volatility of future returns of
individual stocks. For the stocks with price process given by (18), her position is given by
1
Ns,t
= a1 (1 + λZs,t /σ(Zs )). We set a1 = 1 and λ = 2. R2 , the ratio of variance of the

manager’s signal Zs to total variance, ranges from 0 to 5%. Thus, the manager does not
have superior information for some of the stocks, and she holds a constant number of shares
1
in that case. For the stocks with price process (19), her position is given by Ns,t
= µs /(γ vs,t ).

As in Section 4.2, vs,t = σs,t + ẽs,t . The distribution of ẽs,t is described in footnote (18). The
probability that the manager’s signal about the volatility state is correct, p, ranges from 50%
to 75%. As pointed out in the footnote, when the probability of correct forecast is 50%, the
manager essentially trades on noise. This represents the non-informational component of
23

the informed manager’s trading. The varying accuracy of informed manager’s signals about
future stock price movements also makes the setting more realistic.
Simulations in this section use (18) and (19) to generate monthly stock returns for 36
months. Thus, the data requirements in the multi-asset setting are similar to those used in
actual studies of mutual fund investment performance (e.g., Grinblatt and Titman (1993)) .
The reason we can signiﬁcantly reduce the required number of time-series observations
is because managers’ trading records for individual securities are aggregated for use in a
single test. Speciﬁcally, for each stock s, we follow the procedure described in Section 4.1 to
−
partition the sample of its monthly returns into the two subsamples, Q+
s and Qs , based on

the manager’s position in s being above and below average. We then pool observations from
50
−
−
Q+
s and Q =
s=1 Qs .
The Kolmogorov-Smirnov test is applied to the distribution functions F+ and F− estimated

the two subsamples across individual stocks to form Q+ =

50
s=1

from these two samples.
The test results, based on 500 simulations, are in Table 6. Panel A reports the moments
of managers’ P&L distributions. In addition to the two active strategies, we also show
the results for the passive strategy that holds one share of each stock. Compared to the
uninformed manager, the P&L distribution of the informed manager has higher mean and
variance, as well as larger skewness and kurtosis. Notably, the three strategies produce
almost identical Sharpe ratios. This result once again demonstrates that this performance
measure is inadequate in detecting an informed manager.
Panel B shows the results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test that compares conditional
distributions estimated from the Q+ and Q− samples. It is clear that our procedure can
identify both an informed and an uninformed managers. The rejection rate for the uninformed manager is very close to the theoretical size of the test. For the informed manager,
the null hypothesis of no information is strongly rejected. Similar results are obtained when
stock price process (18, 19) is modiﬁed to include a market factor. Thus, the analysis in this
section shows that our methodology is applicable when managers invest in multiple risky
assets.

24

5

Analysis When Positions are Unobservable

The analysis in Section 4 demonstrates how to identify managers with information about
asset returns under the assumption that we observe managers’ asset positions. In this section,
we show how our methodology can be used when this data is not available, but instead
observations of the state variable are available ex post. Such a situation arises if we know
the state variable(s) managers claim to have information on, such as earnings or corporate
actions, and its realizations. Recall from the discussion in Section 3 that the trading record
of manager i in this case is given by


HTi ≡ (G, Q, X)[0, T ] ≡ (Gi1 , Q1 , X0 ), . . . , (GiT , QT , XT −1 )

(20)

where Git is the P&L of manager i in period t, and Xt is a state variable correlated with
next-period stock return Qt+1 . Rejection of the null hypothesis (15) about the conditional
distribution of P&L for manager i would imply that this manager has information about X.
The implementation of the test follows the algorithm described in Section 4.3. To control
for the variation in stock return, we partition the sample into m equal-sized bins according
to the value of Q. Within each bin, manager’s P&L is scaled by the average stock return for
that bin. This makes P&L observations from diﬀerent bins comparable to one another. We
then estimate the conditional distributions F+G and F−G and apply the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
test.
We apply this testing procedure in the context of the two settings considered in Sections
4.1 and 4.2, when a manager may have private information on the mean and volatility of
asset returns, respectively. We generate returns for 400 weeks by using equations (1) and
(16), respectively. The simulation is repeated 500 times. We set m, the number of bins used
to control for stock return, to 10.
Panel A of Table 7 shows the results for the IID/Mean case. The four strategies considered
here have been described in Section 4.1. As a reminder, stock returns in this setup are
generated by Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1 , and the informed manager observes Zt before deciding
how much of her portfolio to invest in the stock. Because we do not have access to managers’
positions, it is no longer possible to identify the manager who follows a passive buy-and-hold
strategy without doing the actual test. However, the test clearly reveals that the uninformed

25

manager has no information about Z, whether he follows a passive or an active strategy. The
test also correctly identiﬁes the informed manager; the rejection rate of the null hypothesis
that this manager is uninformed is 100% both at the 1% and the 5% conﬁdence level.
Moreover, test results do not depend on manager’s trading intensity: test statistics when
λ = λ∗ are almost identical to those when λ = 5λ∗ .
Panel B of Table 7 shows the results for the IID/Volatility case. Again, the trading
strategies of the informed and uninformed managers considered here are the same as the
ones analyzed in Section 4.2. In this setting, stock returns are given by Qt+1 = µ + σt ut+1 ,
and the informed manager gets a signal about σt . The test results show that the uninformed
manager has no information about the volatility of the stock return, regardless of the strategy
he follows. For the informed manager, the null hypothesis is strongly rejected even when
her signal about volatility contains noise. The rejection rate for both partially- and fullyinformed strategies is 100%. Not surprisingly, the average value of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov
statistic is higher when the manager’s signal is more precise.

6

Additional Applications

In this section, we show how our approach works in the context of two additional settings.
In Section 6.1, we apply our methodology to a situation where both managers might have
private information about future stock return. After that, we examine the case where a
manager can trade in-between the times at which we observe his positions.

6.1

Diﬀerential Information

Suppose that both managers might have private information about future returns. A natural
question we face is whether one of the managers has information in addition to that of the
other manager. For example, knowing that manager 0 has information about future returns,
can we tell if another manager, manager 1, has information that is diﬀerent from or superior
to that of manager 0? In this subsection, we consider an example that illustrates how our
methodology can be used to answer this question.
As in Section 4.3, we assume that stock returns follow the process:
Qt+1 = µ + Yt + Zt + ut+1

(21)
26

where µ is a positive constant, Yt , Zt and ut+1 are independent normal, IID over time, with
zero mean and volatility σY , σZ , and σu , respectively. Before deciding how much to invest in
the risky asset at time t, both managers receive signals, St1 and St0 , respectively, that contain
information about Zt and/or Yt . The three cases we consider diﬀer in the types of signals
the two managers receive:
Scenario 1: St1 = Zt ,

St0 = Yt

Scenario 2: St1 = Yt ,

St0 = Yt + e0t

Scenario 3: St1 = Yt + e1t ,

St0 = Yt + e0t

2
2
where e1t and e0t are two independent white noise sequences with σe1
= σe0
= 2σY2 . Thus, the

ﬁrst scenario describes a situation when the private information sets of the two managers
are disjoint. The second scenario corresponds to a setting in which both managers receive a
signal about the same “event”, but the signal of one of the managers is more precise than
the signal of the other manager. The last scenario is similar to the second one, except that
now the two managers receive equally precise signals.
The implementation of our approach in this context is similar to that described in Section
4.3. Instead of controlling for public information Y , we need to control for the position of
one of the managers, say manager 0, N 0 . Under the null hypothesis that the second manager
(manager 1 in this case) does not have any additional information, we must have




FA · |N 0 = FA · |N 0 ∀ A, A and N 0

(22)





1
0
∈ S, Nt−1
= N 0 is the cumulative distribution of stock
where FS x|N 0 ≡ F Qt ≤ x|Nt−1
0
dollar return conditioned on the stock position of manager 0 being Nt−1
= N 0 and the stock

position of manager 1 being in the set S = A, A . Given the trading records of the two
managers (Q, N 1 , N 0 )[0, T ] , we partition the sample into m equal-sized bins according to the
value of N 0 . We then proceed to estimate the conditional distributions F+ and F− as in
the non-IID case, and apply the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to these estimated distributions.
By interchanging the positions of the two managers in (22) and repeating this procedure,
we can test whether manager 0 has information beyond that of manager 1. Notice that if a
manager’s position is linear in her signal, controlling for her position gives exactly the same
results as controlling for the value of the signal itself. If her position is non-linear in the
signal, our (unreported) results indicate that this method of controlling for her information
27

is still valid, provided that we use enough bins. The only requirement is that the manager’s
stock position is monotone in her signal.
For the tests discussed in this section, we assume that the managers’ stock position is


linear in their signal: Nti = ai 1 + λSti /σ(Sti ) , i = 0, 1. We set a0 = a1 = 1, λ = 1.803, and
m, the number of bins, to 10. We use (21) to simulate managers’ trading records for 800
weeks, and repeat the simulation 500 times.
Test results for the three scenarios are presented in panels A, B, and C, respectively,
of Table 8. In the ﬁrst case, the results in panel A indicate that observing positions of
both managers is informative. That is, no matter which manager’s position we observe ﬁrst,
knowing the position of the other manager provides additional information about future
stock returns. This is not surprising, given that the two managers receive independent,
equally precise signals about the expected stock return. Since the signals are uncorrelated,
both signals are valuable, and the order of conditioning does not matter.
In the second scenario, manager 1 receives a more precise signal. Therefore, observing
his position is informative even if we already know the position of manager 0. The reverse,
however, is not true. Results in panel B show that the test correctly distinguishes between
the two managers. Controlling for manager 1’s position, we cannot reject the null that
manager 0 has no additional information. In contrast, the test strongly rejects the null that
manager 1’s position is uninformative once we know the position of manager 0. The rejection
rate is 78% at the 1% level and 92.4% at the 5% level.
In the last scenario we consider, the signals of both managers contain noise. Because the
noise components are uncorrelated, observing positions of both managers is more informative
than only knowing the position of one of them. The incremental beneﬁt, however, is smaller
than in the ﬁrst scenario. The results in panel C conﬁrm this intuition. The rejection rates
are similar for the two managers and are much lower than for the ﬁrst scenario.

6.2

Dynamic Strategies

In the discussion of Section 4, we have assumed that we observe the managers’ complete
trading records, including the times of their trades and their positions at those times. Often,
however, we only have a manager’s trading record at a given time interval, which is longer
than the interval at which he can trade. Revealing records only infrequently gives the unin28

formed manager more room to ﬁnd strategies that look proﬁtable. In particular, following
option-like strategies, he can generate very high Sharpe ratios in the absence of any private
information on future returns. Of course, as discussed earlier, the Sharpe ratio is not an
appropriate measure of performance for option-type strategies since they can produce return
distributions that are far from normal.
Thus, we examine how our methodology works when applied to option-type strategies.
Speciﬁcally, we consider the following two strategies. The ﬁrst strategy consists of holding
a portfolio of three put options in the proportion of -1000:1000:-8. This position resembles
long put spread; the ratio is chosen so that higher moments of the strategy’s P&L are
similar to those of other strategies. When the position is initiated, all three puts have three
weeks to maturity and strikes that are $0.30, $0.28, and $0.26 below the current stock price,
respectively. The position is rolled over one week before the options mature. The second
strategy involves rolling over a short position in a deep out-of-the-money call option on the
stock. When the position is initiated, the call has 12 weeks to maturity and a strike price
$1.24 above the current stock price. Again, the position is rolled over one week before the
option expires. We use results in Brennan (1979) to price options under normality. For
both option strategies, the positions are scaled so that mean and standard deviation of P&L
are comparable to those produced by cash-and-stock strategies. The option strategies can
be interpreted as a proxy for an uninformed manager who dynamically adjusts his position
between observation times.
Weekly stock price increments are generated by simulating (1) for 400 weeks, using the
same parameter values as in Section 4.1. Simulation is repeated 500 times to obtain standard
deviations of our estimates. Stock price is initialized to $1 at the beginning of each simulation.
Panel A of Table 9 reports the summary statistics for the two option strategies. For
comparison, we have also included the summary of the P&L of an uninformed manager who
follows a passive strategy, and of an informed manager who trades actively on her private
information. Clearly, the option-type strategies can generate very large Sharpe ratios. The
put strategy gives a Sharpe ratio of 0.844, signiﬁcantly higher than that of the informed
manager. The Sharpe ratio of the call strategy (0.284) also exceeds that of the informed
manager. In addition, the call strategy P&L has large positive skewness, a characteristic
shared by the informed manager’s P&L. In this situation, comparing the unconditional
29

distributions of managers’ P&L fails to distinguish an informed manager from an uninformed
one. As we pointed out before, this is one of the main reasons our methodology relies on
conditional distributions of stock returns.
Suppose that we do not have the complete information on the trading record of the
uninformed manager who follows an option-type strategy. For example, if the manager is
dynamically implementing the strategy of rolling over a short position in calls, we may not
be able to identify his strategy based only on his weekly trading record. However, if he has
to report the delta of his position on a weekly basis, then our approach can be applied to
evaluate him.
Panel B of Table 9 reports the moments of stock dollar return conditioned on the manager’s delta being above (N > N̄ ) and below (N ≤ N̄ ) its average. The results indicate
that there is practically no diﬀerence between the two sets of conditional moments. This is
not surprising given that the manager has no information about future returns. His current
position is only related to past stock price movements, but not to future ones.
Panel C of Table 9 gives the results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. Clearly, we cannot
reject the null that conditioned on diﬀerent delta’s of the uninformed manager, the return
distributions are the same. Thus, the results in Table 9 conﬁrm that while option-type
strategies can generate high Sharpe ratios, our methodology correctly detects that these
strategies contain no information about future stock returns.

7

Robustness

In this section, we discuss several additional issues regarding our methodology. In Section
7.1, we show how the precision of manager’s private signal and the length of her trading
record aﬀect the power of our approach to identify the informed manager when she invests
in a single risky asset. Section 7.2 presents results on choosing the number of bins used to
control for common information.

7.1

Sample Size and Power of the Test

Up to this point, we have focused on developing a methodology to detect an informed
manager assuming that we have enough observations to do so. In particular, for the cases

30

where returns are IID to the uninformed investors, we have used a 400-week sample, which
roughly corresponds to eight years of data. We have used a sample twice as long when
less informed investors have information that makes returns non-IID from their perspective.
Whether or not this is a reasonable assumption depends on the application at hand. For
example, mutual fund holdings data is only available quarterly, meaning that a portfolio
manager would have to have an unusually long career before we can collect a sample of 400
observations. On the other hand, a supervisor at an investment bank trying to assess the
performance of a trading desk has access to traders’ positions at least at a daily frequency,
making our data availability assumptions more realistic. Another factor that aﬀects the
power of our tests is the amount of information reﬂected in a manager’s trading strategy.
Obviously, the better informed a manager is, the easier it is to identify his strategy as being
informative.
In the IID setting of Section 4.1, Table 10 provides sensitivity results for our testing
methodology with respect to the precision of manager’s information and the available sample
size. For three values of R2 , 5%, 2%, and 1%, we report the results of the KolmogorovSmirnov test applied to the conditional distributions F+ and F− estimated when the number
of observations per simulation, T , ranges from 50 to 400. When R2 = 5%, the rejection
rate remains quite high, 35% at the 5% level, even when the sample size is reduced to 100
observations. As R2 decreases, we need more data points to reliably identify the informed
manager. For example, when R2 = 1%, the rejection rate at the 5% level is 31.8% for 400
observations, but drops to 17.4% when we use 200 observations. Overall, the results indicate
that the test remains useful even when the sample size is reduced and when the manager’s
information is less precise.

7.2

Choosing Number of Bins to Control for Common Information

In Section 4.3, we develop a procedure to detect incremental information provided by a manager relative to some common information set. The procedure involves allocating available
observations to bins (sub-samples) formed according to the value of the common signal (call
it Y ). Ideally, we would like Y to be constant within each sub-sample, but this is not possible
when Y is a continuous random variable and we have a limited amount of data. The idea
behind our approach is to limit variation of Y within each sub-sample. Then, in each sub31

sample, most of the variation in manager’s position must be caused by other signal, whether
it is informative or not. This suggests using as many bins as possible, up to a maximum of
T /2.19 However, it might be interesting to see how many bins are suﬃcient to control for
the common signal.
In the non-IID setting of Section 4.3, we show what happens to our test results as the
number of bins used to control for the public signal Yt increases from two to 100. Since
we might not know a priori who the more informed manager is, we do two sets of tests:
controlling for manager 0’s position, and controlling for manager 1’s position, similar to
the diﬀerential information tests discussed in Section 6.1. Table 11 contains the results of
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test applied to F+ and F− . For comparison, we show the results
for T = 800 (panel A), and for T = 400 (panel B). Apparently, using ﬁve or more bins to
condition on manager 1’s position is suﬃcient to conclude that manager 0 has no information
beyond that of manager 1. If we use two bins, the variation of Y in each sub-sample is large
enough to cause signiﬁcant diﬀerences between the two estimated conditional distributions at
least some of the time. Controlling for manager 0’s position (which in this case is equivalent to
controlling for Y directly), the test correctly detects that manager 1’s position is informative.
The rejection rate declines somewhat as we increase the number of bins, especially when we
only have 400 observations. There is a simple explanation for this eﬀect. When we use few
bins, both the variation in X and the residual variation in Y contribute to the diﬀerence
between F+ and F− . As we use more bins, the residual variation in Y diminishes, leaving
X as the only source of diﬀerence between F+ and F− and reducing the observed rejection
rates. Not surprisingly, this eﬀect is more pronounced for smaller samples.

8

Conclusion

It has been recognized for a long time that traditional performance evaluation methods for
money managers have numerous drawbacks. Risk-based framework relies on a speciﬁc risk
model. Because the risk of an asset typically depends on an investor’s information set, any
risk model an evaluator uses based on an information set diﬀerent from that of the manager’s
will be mis-speciﬁed in general. To the extent that the value of a manager comes from the
Since we compute F+ (k) and F− (k) for each sub-sample k, we need to have at least two observations in
each bin.
19

32

additional information she may bring into the investment process, the ﬁrst step in evaluating
a manager is to determine if she possesses private information. In this paper, we develop a
general methodology to identify managers with information on future asset returns based on
their trading records. Our methodology does not rely on a speciﬁc risk model, such as the
Sharpe ratio, CAPM, or APT. It is robust with regard to the nature of private information
the managers may have and the trading strategies they follow.
As mentioned in the introduction, our methodology also has limitations. First, it can
identify informed managers, but does not assess the value of a manager to a particular
investor. Second, the non-parametric nature of the methodology allows it to detect any
information a manager may have about future asset returns. The drawback is that it does
not tell us what this information is about. Further analysis is needed to answer this question.
Third, the implementation of the methodology requires data on the managers’ trading records
in addition to their P&L. In the two cases we considered, one requires information on the
managers’ positions and the other requires information regarding the events on which they
are betting. Moreover, the amount of data needed can be quite substantial in order for the
test to have power. For some applications, such as internal evaluation of a trading desk
or the evaluation of a hedge fund by its investors, the data required is available. But for
other applications, such as the evaluation of mutual funds, the data can be hard to come by.
For these reasons, our methodology should be viewed as a complement to the conventional
methods.

33

References
Admati, Anat R., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, Measuring investment performance
in a rational equilibrium model, Journal of Business 58, 1-26.
Bollerslev Tim, Ray Y. Chou and Kenneth F. Kroner, 1992, ARCH modeling in
ﬁnance: A review of the theory and empirical evidence, Journal of Econometrics 52, 5-59.
Brennan, Michael J., 1979, The pricing of contingent claims in discrete time
models, Journal of Finance 34, 53-68.
Campbell, John Y., and Robert J. Shiller, 1988, Stock prices, earnings, and
expected dividends, Journal of Finance 43, 661-676.
Chance, Don M., and Michael L. Hemler, 2001, The performance of professional
market timers: Daily evidence from executed strategies, Journal of Financial
Economics 62, 377-411.
Chen, Zhiwu, and Peter J. Knez, 1996, Portfolio performance measurement: Theory and applications, Review of Financial Studies 9, 511-555.
Copeland, Thomas E., and David Mayers, 1982, The Value Line enigma (19651978): A case study of performance evaluation issues, Journal of Financial
Economics 10, 289-321.
Cornell, Bradford, 1979, Asymmetric information and portfolio performance measurement, Journal of Financial Economics 7, 381-390.
Cumby, Robert E., and David M. Modest,1987, Testing for market timing ability:
A framework for forecast evaluation, Journal of Financial Economics 19, 169189.
Dybvig, Philip H., and Stephen A. Ross, 1985, Diﬀerential information and performance measurement using a security market line, Journal of Finance 40,
383-399.
Dybvig, Philip H., and Gregory A. Willard, Empty promises and arbitrage, Review of Financial Studies 12, 807-834.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988a, Dividend yields and expected
stock returns, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 3-25.
Fama, Eugene F., and Kenneth R. French, 1988b, Permanent and temporary
components of stock prices, Journal of Political Economy 96, 246-273.
Farnsworth, Heber K., Wayne E. Ferson, David Jackson, and Steven Todd, 2002,
Performance evaluation with stochastic discount factors, Journal of Business
75, 473-503.
Ferson, Wayne E., 2002, Tests of multifactor pricing models, volatility bounds
and portfolio performance, Forthcoming in Handbook of the Economics of
34

Finance, George M. Constantinides, Milton Harris and Rene M. Stulz, editors,
Elsevier Science Publishers, North Holland.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Kenneth Khang, 2002, Conditional performance measurement using portfolio weights: Evidence for pension funds, Journal of Financial
Economics 65, 249-282.
Ferson, Wayne E., and Rudi W. Schadt, 1996, Measuring fund strategy and
performance in changing economic conditions, Journal of Finance 51, 425461.
Glosten, Lawrence R., and Ravi Jagannathan, 1994, A contingent claim approach
to performance evaluation, Journal of Empirical Finance 1, 133-160.
Goetzmann, William N., Jonathan Ingersoll Jr., and Zoran Ivkovic̀, 2000, Monthly
measurement of daily timers, Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis
35, 257-290.
Graham, John R., and Campbell R. Harvey, 1996, Market timing ability and
volatility implied in investment newsletters’ asset allocation recommendations, Journal of Financial Economics 42, 397-421.
Grossman, Sanford J., and Joseph E. Stiglitz, 1980, On the impossibility of
informationally eﬃcient markets, American Economic Review 70, 393-408.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1989, Portfolio performance evaluation:
Old issues and new insights, Review of Financial Studies 2, 393-421.
Grinblatt, Mark, and Sheridan Titman, 1993, Performance measurement without
benchmarks: An examination of mutual fund returns, Journal of Business 66,
47-68.
Henriksson, Roy D., and Robert C. Merton, 1981, On market timing and investment performance. II. Statistical procedures for evaluating forecasting skills,
Journal of Business 54, 513-533.
Hollander, Myles, and Douglas A. Wolfe, 1999, Nonparametric Statistical Methods, New York, NY: John Wiley.
Jagannathan, Ravi, and Robert A. Korajczyk, 1986, Assessing the market timing
performance of managed portfolios, Journal of Business 59, 217-235.
Jensen, Michael, 1969, Risk, the pricing of capital assets, and the evaluation of
investment portfolios, Journal of Business 42, 167-247.
Jensen, Michael, 1972, Optimal utilization of market forecasts and the evaluation of investment portfolio performance, In Giorgio P. Szegö and Karl Shell,
Mathematical Methods in Investment and Finance, Amsterdam: North Holland.
Kim, P.J., and Robert I. Jennrich, 1973, Tables of the exact sampling distribution of the two-sample Kolmogorov-Smirnov criterion, Dmn , m ≤ n. In H.

35

Leon Harter and Donald B. Owen, Selected Tables in Mathematical Statistics, Volume 1, Providence, RI: American Mathematical Society and Institute
of Mathematical Statistics, 79-170.
Kothari, S.P., and Jay Shanken, 1997, Book-to-market, dividend yield, and expected market returns: A time-series analysis, Journal of Financial Economics
44, 169-203.
Kyle, Albert S., 1985, Continuous auctions and insider trading, Econometrica
53, 1315-1335.
Lo, Andrew, Harry Mamaysky, and Jiang Wang, 2001, Foundations of technical
analysis: Computational algorithms, statistical analysis and empirical results,
Journal of Finance 55, 1705-1770.
Lo, Andrew and A. Craig MacKinlay, 1988, Stock prices do not follow random
walks: Evidence from a simple speciﬁcation test, Review of Financial Studies
1, 41-66.
Merton, Robert C., 1981, On market timing and investment performance. I.
An equilibrium theory of value for market forecasts, Journal of Business 54,
363-406.
Milgrom, Paul R., and Nancy L. Stokey, 1982, Information, trade, and common
knowledge, Journal of Economic Theory 26, 17-27.
Poterba, James, and Lawrence Summers, 1988, Mean reversion in stock prices:
Evidence and implications, Journal of Financial Economics 22, 27-59.
Roll, Richard, 1978, Ambiguity when performance is measured by the securities
market line, Journal of Finance 33, 1051-1069.
Ross, Stephen A., 1976, The arbitrage theory of capital asset pricing, Journal of
Economic Theory 8, 343-362.
Sharpe, William F., 1966, Mutual fund performance, Journal of Business 39,
119-138.
Treynor, Jack L., and Fischer Black, 1973, How to use security analysis to improve
portfolio selection, Journal of Business 46, 66-86.
Wang, Jiang, 1993, A model of intertemporal asset prices under asymmetric
information, Review of Economic Studies 60, 249-282.
Wang, Jiang, 1994, A Model of Competitive Stock Trading Volume, Journal of
Political Economy 102, 127-168.

36

Table 1: Moments of managers’ P&L and stock dollar return. Panel A shows weekly P&L moments for
the uninformed an informed managers’ strategies. The uninformed manager’s stock position is Nt = a0 (i.e.
he follows a passive strategy). The informed manager’s stock position is Nt = a1 (1 + λZt /σZ ), where λ,
her trading intensity, takes on one of two values: λ = λ∗ or λ = 5λ∗ . Panel B shows unconditional and
conditional moments of weekly stock dollar return, demeaned by the unconditional mean. We condition on
the informed manager’s stock position being above (N > N̄ ) and below (N ≤ N̄ ) its average. Stock dollar
return is given by Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1 . Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15 (annual),
2
= 0.01, a0 = a1 = 1, λ∗ = 0.901.
σZ2 /σQ

A. Moments of Managers’ P&L
Uninformed Manager

Mean (%)

0.231

Informed Manager
λ = λ∗

λ = 5λ∗

0.418

1.168

S.D. (%)

2.080

2.830

9.727

Skewness

0.000

0.609

0.706

Kurtosis

3.000

7.496

9.421

Sharpe ratio

0.111

0.148

0.120

B. Moments of Stock Dollar Return
Unconditional

Conditional
λ∗

λ=
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄
Mean (%)

0.000

0.166

-0.166

λ = 5λ∗
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄
0.166

-0.166

S.D. (%)

2.080

2.073

2.073

2.073

2.073

Skewness (x100)

0.000

0.022

-0.022

0.022

-0.022

Kurtosis

3.000

3.000

3.000

3.000

3.000

37

38
0.231
(0.105)
2.084
(0.076)
0.003
(0.123)
2.997
(0.247)

Mean (%)
S.D. (%)
Skewness
Kurtosis

0.242
(0.046)

9.262
(3.470)

1.280
(0.550)

4.842
(0.354)

1.176
(0.247)

λ = λ∗

2.987
(0.346)

-0.008
(0.172)

2.082
(0.104)

0.237
(0.148)

2.980
(0.337)

0.015
(0.173)

2.084
(0.107)

0.225
(0.149)

Uninformed
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

2.994
(0.370)

0.005
(0.172)

2.049
(0.105)

0.604
(0.151)

2.979
(0.335)

0.000
(0.168)

2.050
(0.099)

-0.141
(0.150)

0.229
(0.045)

9.236
(3.473)

1.250
(0.570)

21.635
(1.725)

4.964
(1.074)

λ = 5λ∗

2.997
(0.352)

0.005
(0.180)

2.035
(0.110)

0.604
(0.142)

2.976
(0.353)

0.007
(0.168)

2.051
(0.101)

-0.132
(0.152)

λ = 5λ∗
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Informed

λ = λ∗
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Conditional

B. Moments of Stock Dollar Return

0.101
(0.049)

5.038
(1.138)

0.114
(0.313)

2.331
(0.119)

0.234
(0.115)

Active

Uninformed

Unconditional

0.111
(0.051)

Sharpe Ratio

0.003
(0.123)

Skewness
2.997
(0.247)

2.084
(0.076)

S.D. (%)

Kurtosis

0.231
(0.105)

Mean (%)

Passive

A. Moments of Managers’ P&L

managers’ P&L. We consider two strategies for the uninformed manager: passive (Nt = a0 ), and active with noise (Nt = a0 + ñt ). The informed
manager’s stock position is Nt = a1 (1 + λZt /σZ ), where λ, her trading intensity, takes on one of two values: λ = λ∗ , or λ = 5λ∗ . Panel B shows
moments of stock dollar return conditioned on active managers’ stock position being above (N > N̄ ) and below (N ≤ N̄ ) its average. Stock dollar
2
= 0.05, a0 = a1 = 1, λ∗ = 2.016,
return is given by Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1 . Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15 (annual), σZ2 /σQ
σñ = 0.5. Average moments and the corresponding standard deviations (shown in parentheses) are based on 500 simulations.

Table 2: Summary statistics for weekly managers’ P&L and stock return (IID/Mean case). Panel A shows moments of the uninformed and informed

Table 3: Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the conditional distribution of stock dollar return (IID/Mean
case). We estimate cumulative distribution of weekly stock return conditioned on manager’s stock position
being above average (F+ ) and below average (F− ). We also estimate the unconditional cumulative distribution of weekly stock return (F). We then apply the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to three pairs of distributions:
F+ versus F, F− versus F, and F+ versus F− . The average Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic, δ, its standard deviation (shown in parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500
simulations. The uninformed manager’s stock position is Nt = a0 + ñt . The informed manager’s stock
position is Nt = a1 (1 + λZt /σZ ), where λ, her trading intensity, takes on one of two values: λ = λ∗ , or
λ = 5λ∗ . Stock dollar return is given by Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1 . Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual),
2
= 0.05, a0 = a1 = 1, λ∗ = 2.016, σñ = 0.5.
σQ = 0.15 (annual), σZ2 /σQ

F+ vs. F

F− vs. F

F+ vs. F−

Uninformed
Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

0.51
(0.15)

0.51
(0.15)

0.87
(0.25)

Rejection Rate at 1% (%)

0.00

0.00

0.80

Rejection Rate at 5% (%)

0.00

0.00

4.00

Informed
λ = λ∗
Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

1.08
(0.25)

1.08
(0.26)

1.87
(0.44)

Rejection Rate at 1% (%)

2.00

2.20

70.20

Rejection Rate at 5% (%)

15.60

15.80

87.40

λ = 5λ∗
Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

1.08
(0.25)

1.08
(0.25)

1.86
(0.43)

Rejection Rate at 1% (%)

2.60

1.60

68.60

Rejection Rate at 5% (%)

13.40

14.40

88.00

39

Table 4: Summary statistics and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the IID/Volatility case. Panel A
shows summary statistics for weekly P&L of the uninformed and informed managers. The two strategies of
the uninformed manager are passive (Nt = a0 ), and active with noise (Nt = µ/[γ(σt + ẽ0t )2 ]). The informed
manager is either fully informed, with Nt = µ/(γσt2 ), or partially informed, with Nt = µ/[γ(σt + ẽ1t )2 ].
Panel B shows moments of weekly stock dollar return conditioned on active managers’ stock position being
above (N > N̄ ) and below (N ≤ N̄ ) its average. Panel C shows results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on
the distributions of weekly stock dollar return conditioned on active managers’ stock position being above
average (F+ ) and below average (F− ). Stock dollar return is given by Qt+1 = µ + σt ut+1 . Here, σt is either
0.20 or 0.07, with equal probability, and ẽt can be σl − σh , 0, or σh − σl with probabilities 0.5(1 − p), p,
and 0.5(1 − p), respectively, where p0 = 0.5, p1 = 0.75. Other parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual),
σQ = 0.15 (annual), γ = 5 13 , a0 = 1. Average statistics, standard deviations (shown in parentheses), and the
rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500 simulations.
A. Summary Statistics of Managers’ P&L
Passive

Uninformed
with Noise

with Noise

Informed
without Noise

Mean (%)

0.222
(0.103)

0.562
(0.323)

0.570
(0.264)

0.574
(0.172)

S.D. (%)

2.076
(0.098)

6.715
(0.479)

5.261
(0.442)

3.354
(0.159)

Skewness

-0.023
(0.223)

0.129
(0.487)

0.177
(0.767)

0.298
(0.232)

Kurtosis

4.721
(0.526)

8.972
(1.464)

11.538
(2.826)

4.698
(0.565)

Sharpe Ratio

0.107
(0.050)

0.084
(0.048)

0.109
(0.050)

0.171
(0.051)

B. Moments of Conditional Stock Dollar Return
Unconditional

Conditional
Uninformed w/Noise
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Informed w/Noise
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Informed w/o Noise
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Mean (%)

0.222
(0.103)

0.223
(0.141)

0.221
(0.148)

0.226
(0.114)

0.217
(0.168)

0.228
(0.069)

0.214
(0.189)

S.D. (%)

2.076
(0.098)

2.090
(0.143)

2.057
(0.137)

1.619
(0.135)

2.445
(0.137)

0.986
(0.049)

2.764
(0.133)

Skewness

-0.023
(0.223)

-0.044
(0.307)

0.000
(0.320)

-0.042
(0.526)

-0.010
(0.216)

-0.008
(0.170)

-0.012
(0.161)

Kurtosis

4.721
(0.526)

4.653
(0.732)

4.666
(0.779)

6.244
(1.512)

3.624
(0.456)

2.961
(0.342)

2.959
(0.320)

C. Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test On Conditional Stock Dollar Return Distributions
Uninformed
with Noise
F+ vs. F−

with Noise
F+ vs. F−

0.89
(0.25)

1.64
(0.28)

2.73
(0.26)

Rej. rate at 1% (%)

1.60

49.40

100.00

Rej. rate at 5% (%)

5.00

84.00

100.00

K.-S. δ

40

Informed
without Noise
F+ vs. F−

Table 5: Summary statistics and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the non-IID case. Panel A shows
weekly P&L moments for the uninformed and informed managers’ strategies. We consider two strategies for
and active (Nt = a0 (1 + λ∗ Yt /σY )). The informed manager’s
the uninformed manager: passive (Nt = a0 ),
stock position is Nt = a1 1 + λ∗ (Yt + Zt )/ σY2 + σZ2 . Panel B shows moments of weekly stock dollar
return conditioned on active managers’ stock position being above (N > N̄ ) and below (N ≤ N̄ ) its
average. For comparison, we also provide moments of the unconditional weekly stock returns. Panel C
shows results of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the distributions of weekly stock dollar return conditioned
on active managers’ stock position being above average (F+ ) and below average (F− ). Stock dollar return
is given by Qt+1 = µ + Yt + Zt + ut+1 . Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15 (annual),
2
2
= σZ2 /σQ
= 0.04, a0 = a1 = 1, λ∗ = 1.803. Average statistics, standard deviations (shown in
σY2 /σQ
parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500 simulations.

A. Summary Statistics of Managers’ P&L
Passive

Uninformed
Active

Informed
(λ = λ∗ )

Mean (%)

0.230
(0.074)

0.982
(0.155)

1.294
(0.164)

S.D. (%)

2.084
(0.052)

4.421
(0.219)

4.490
(0.243)

Skewness

-0.003
(0.087)

1.187
(0.385)

1.499
(0.375)

Kurtosis

2.994
(0.166)

9.225
(2.481)

9.691
(2.937)

Sharpe Ratio

0.110
(0.036)

0.222
(0.033)

0.288
(0.031)

B. Moments of Conditional Stock Dollar Return
Unconditional

Conditional
Uninformed
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Informed
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Mean (%)

0.230
(0.074)

0.247
(0.100)

0.213
(0.109)

0.564
(0.103)

-0.104
(0.106)

S.D. (%)

2.084
(0.052)

2.081
(0.073)

2.086
(0.073)

2.052
(0.075)

2.062
(0.070)

Skewness

-0.003
(0.087)

0.001
(0.123)

-0.007
(0.115)

0.004
(0.115)

-0.005
(0.125)

Kurtosis

2.994
(0.166)

2.988
(0.240)

2.984
(0.240)

2.982
(0.250)

2.983
(0.231)

C. Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test on Conditional Stock Dollar Return Distributions
Uninformed
F+ vs. F−

Informed
F+ vs. F−

0.88
(0.26)

2.21
(0.41)

Rejection Rate at 1% (%)

0.60

92.20

Rejection Rate at 5% (%)

5.80

98.80

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

41

Table 6: Summary statistics and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the Multiple Assets case. Panel A
shows summary statistics for monthly P&L of the uninformed and informed managers. Managers invest in 50
stocks. Monthly returns for the ﬁrst 25 stocks are generated by Qs,t+1 = µs + Zs,t + us,t+1 . Monthly returns
for the remaining 25 stocks are generated by Qs,t+1 = µs + σs,t us,t+1 . Expected annual stock returns (µs )
range from 6 to 20 percent. Unconditional volatility of annual returns ranges from 10 to 19 percent. Passive
uninformed manager holds one share of each stock. The position of active uninformed manager in stock s is
0
= a0 + ñs,t , where a0 = 1 and ñs,t is normal with a mean of zero and a volatility of 50%. The
given by Ns,t
1
= a1 (1 + λZs,t /σ(Zs )). Here,
position of the informed manager in any of the ﬁrst 25 stocks is given by Ns,t
1
2
a = 1, λ = 2, and R , the ratio of variance of the manager’s signal Zs to total variance, ranges between
1
= µs /(γ vs,t ). Here, γ = 5 13
0 and 5 percent. Her position in the remaining 25 stocks is given by Ns,t
and vs,t = σs,t + ẽs,t . See footnote (18) and Table 4 for the description of vs,t . p, the probability that the
manager’s signal about the volatility state is correct, ranges from 50 to 75 percent. Panel B shows the results
of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. The average Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic for the comparison of F+
vs. F− , δ, its standard deviation (shown in parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level
are based on 500 simulations.

A. Summary Statistics of Managers’ P&L
Uninformed
Passive
Active

Informed

Mean (%)

0.970
(0.102)

0.970
(0.113)

2.355
(0.267)

S.D. (%)

4.284
(0.092)

4.808
(0.140)

11.335
(0.425)

Skewness

0.105
(0.114)

0.382
(0.279)

0.818
(0.388)

Kurtosis

4.415
(0.336)

7.575
(1.488)

11.664
(2.179)

Sharpe Ratio

0.227
(0.024)

0.202
(0.024)

0.208
(0.023)

B. Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test on Conditional Stock Dollar Return Distributions
Uninformed
F+ vs. F−

Informed
F+ vs. F−

0.88
(0.26)

1.75
(0.40)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

1.20

60.80

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

6.40

84.60

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

42

Table 7: Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the conditional distribution of manager’s P&L when managers’ positions are unobservable. After controlling for the observed stock return, we estimate the cumulative
distribution of manager’s weekly P&L conditioned on the realized value of a state variable being above average (F+G ) and below average (F−G ). We use 10 bins to control for the variation in stock return. Panel A
shows the results for the IID/Mean case. Stock returns are generated by Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1 . The state
variable is Zt . See Tables 2 and 3 for the description of managers’ strategies and parameter values. Panel B
shows the results for the IID/Volatility case. Stock returns are generated by Qt+1 = µ + σt ut+1 . The state
variable is σt . See Table 4 for the description of managers’ strategies and parameter values. The average
Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic for the comparison of F+G vs. F−G , δ, its standard deviation (shown in
parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500 simulations.

A. IID/Mean case
Uninformed Manager
Passive
Active
Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

Informed Manager
λ = 5λ∗
λ = λ∗

0.87
(0.27)

0.89
(0.26)

7.82
(0.41)

7.95
(0.44)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

0.80

0.80

100.00

100.00

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

6.00

5.80

100.00

100.00

B. IID/Volatility case
Uninformed Manager

Informed Manager

Passive

with Noise

with Noise

w/o Noise

0.97
(0.25)

0.95
(0.27)

4.72
(0.43)

9.39
(0.24)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

1.80

2.60

100.00

100.00

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

8.00

7.80

100.00

100.00

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

43

Table 8: Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the conditional distribution of stock dollar return when
both managers have private information. After controlling for stock position of one of the two managers,
we estimate the cumulative distribution of weekly stock return conditioned on the second manager’s stock
position being above average (F+ ) and below average (F− ). Panels A, B, and C show the results of applying
the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test to F+ and F− in three diﬀerent information settings. In panel A, stock
1
positions of managers 0 and 1 are given by Nt0 = a0 (1 + λYt /σY ), Nt1 =
 a (1 + λZt /σZ ). In panel B, stock
0
0
0
2 , N 1 = a1 (1 + λY /σ ).
positions of managers 0 and 1 are given by Nt = a 1 + λ(Yt + et )/ σY2 + σe0
t
Y
t 
0
0
1
2
2
In panel C, stock positions of managers 0 and 1 are given by Nt = a 1 + λ(Yt + e0t )/ σY + σe0 , Nt =

2 . Stock dollar return is given by Q
a1 1 + λ(Yt + e1t )/ σY2 + σe1
t+1 = µ + Yt + Zt + ut+1 . Parameter
2
2
= σZ2 /σQ
= 0.04, a0 = a1 = 1, λ = 1.803.
values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15 (annual), σY2 /σQ
1
0
2
2
= 2σY2 . Average test statistics,
Here, et and et are two independent white noise sequences with σe1 = σe0
standard deviations (shown in parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500
simulations.

A. Manager 0 observes Y , Manager 1 observes Z
First Controlling for
Manager 1’s Position

Manager 0’s position

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

2.22
(0.43)

2.22
(0.43)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

91.60

91.60

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

98.20

98.60

B. Manager 0 observes Y with noise, Manager 1 observes Y
First Controlling for
Manager 1’s Position

Manager 0’s position

0.87
(0.26)

1.94
(0.43)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

1.20

78.00

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

4.40

92.40

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

C. Manager 0 observes Y with noise, Manager 1 observes Y with noise
First Controlling for
Manager 1’s Position

Manager 0’s position

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

1.22
(0.37)

1.25
(0.35)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

14.00

15.20

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

32.60

36.40

44

Table 9: Summary statistics and Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results for the Incomplete Trading Records
case. Panel A shows weekly P&L moments for the option and non-option strategies. The two non-option
strategies are the uninformed manager’s passive strategy (Nt = a0 ), and the informed manager’s active
strategy (Nt = a1 (1 + λ∗ Zt /σZ )). The ﬁrst option strategy consists of holding a portfolio of three 3-week
puts in proportion of -1000:1000:-8. The respective strikes are set $0.30, $0.28, and $0.26 below the current
stock price. The position is rolled over one week before the options mature. The second option strategy
involves shorting a 12-week call with a strike $1.24 above the current stock price, and rolling over the short
position one week before the option expires. The implied stock position for both strategies is obtained by
computing the positions’ delta. Panel B shows moments of weekly stock dollar return conditioned on active
managers’ stock position being above (N > N̄ ) and below (N ≤ N̄ ) its average. Panel C shows results
of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test on the distributions of weekly stock dollar return conditioned on active
managers’ stock position being above average (F+ ) and below average (F− ). Stock dollar return is given
2
= 0.05,
by Qt+1 = µ + Zt + ut+1 . Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15 (annual), σZ2 /σQ
0
1
∗
a = a = 1, λ = 2.016. Average statistics, standard deviations (shown in parentheses), and the rejection
rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500 simulations.
A. Summary Statistics of Managers’ P&L
Uninformed

Informed

Put Strategy

Call Strategy

Mean (%)

0.231
(0.105)

1.176
(0.247)

0.531
(0.005)

0.221
(0.000)

S.D. (%)

2.084
(0.076)

4.842
(0.354)

1.734
(11.582)

4.763
(32.021)

Skewness

0.003
(0.123)

1.280
(0.550)

-0.055
(0.838)

2.553
(0.693)

Kurtosis

2.997
(0.247)

9.262
(3.470)

25.199
(45.271)

30.986
(54.031)

Sharpe Ratio

0.111
(0.051)

0.242
(0.046)

0.844
(0.219)

0.284
(0.085)

B. Moments of Conditional Stock Dollar Return
Unconditional

Conditional
Informed
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Put Strategy
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Call Strategy
N > N̄
N ≤ N̄

Mean (%)

0.231
(0.105)

0.604
(0.151)

-0.141
(0.150)

0.228
(0.151)

0.233
(0.156)

0.229
(0.113)

0.251
(0.339)

S.D. (%)

2.084
(0.076)

2.049
(0.105)

2.050
(0.099)

2.082
(0.103)

2.085
(0.112)

2.085
(0.082)

2.072
(0.272)

Skewness

0.003
(0.123)

0.005
(0.172)

0.000
(0.168)

0.003
(0.182)

-0.004
(0.187)

0.001
(0.126)

0.026
(0.396)

Kurtosis

2.997
(0.247)

2.994
(0.370)

2.979
(0.335)

2.980
(0.336)

2.994
(0.375)

2.992
(0.257)

2.876
(0.715)

C. Kolmogorov-Smirnov Test on Conditional Stock Dollar Return Distributions
Informed
F+ vs. F−

Put Strategy
F+ vs. F−

Call Strategy
F+ vs. F−

K.-S. δ

1.87
(0.44)

0.89
(0.27)

0.88
(0.25)

Rej. Rate at 1% (%)

70.20

1.80

0.60

Rej. Rate at 5% (%)

87.40

7.60

5.00

45

Table 10: Sensitivity of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results (IID/Mean case). We estimate the sensitivity
of rejection rates of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with respect to the precision of informed manager’s information (as measured by R2 ) and to the length of her trading record (T ) available. The test is applied to the
distributions of weekly stock dollar return conditioned on the manager’s stock position being above average
(F+ ) and below average (F− ). The average Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic, δ, its standard deviation
(shown in parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500 simulations. The informed manager’s stock position is Nt = a1 (1+λZt /σZ ). Stock dollar return is given by Qt+1 = µ+Zt +ut+1 .
2
is 5% in panel
Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15 (annual), a1 = 1, λ = 2.016. R2 ≡ σZ2 /σQ
A, 2% in panel B, and 1% in panel C.

A. R2 = 5%
T = 400

F+ vs. F−

T = 200

F+ vs. F−

T = 100

F+ vs. F−

T = 50

F+ vs. F−

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

1.87
(0.44)

1.48
(0.39)

1.23
(0.38)

1.08
(0.33)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

70.20

35.20

15.60

6.20

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

87.40

62.40

35.00

19.20

B. R2 = 2%
T = 400
F+ vs. F−

T = 200
F+ vs. F−

T = 100
F+ vs. F−

T = 50
F+ vs. F−

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

1.39
(0.41)

1.17
(0.36)

1.04
(0.35)

0.98
(0.28)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

29.60

10.40

7.00

2.20

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

51.40

28.40

18.20

9.40

C. R2 = 1%
T = 400

F+ vs. F−

T = 200

F+ vs. F−

T = 100

F+ vs. F−

T = 50

F+ vs. F−

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

1.17
(0.38)

1.04
(0.33)

0.96
(0.32)

0.94
(0.27)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

12.60

5.60

5.20

1.80

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

31.80

17.40

12.40

6.60

46

Table 11: Sensitivity of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test results (non-IID case). We estimate the sensitivity
of the Kolmogorov-Smirnov test with respect to the number of bins used to control for the information of one
of the two managers. The test is applied to the distributions of weekly stock dollar return conditioned on
the second manager’s stock position being above average (F+ ) and below average (F− ), after controlling for
the position of the ﬁrst manager. The average Kolmogorov-Smirnov test statistic, δ, its standard deviation
(shown in parentheses), and the rejection rates at the 1% and 5% level are based on 500 simulations. We
assume that the trading record available is either 800 observations (panel A), or 400 observations
(panel B).
Stock positions of managers 0 and 1 are given by Nt0 = a0 (1+λ∗ Yt /σY ), Nt1 = a1 1+λ∗ (Yt +Zt )/ σY2 + σZ2 .
Stock dollar return is given by Qt+1 = µ+Yt +Zt +ut+1 . Parameter values are: µ = 0.12 (annual), σQ = 0.15
2
2
= σZ2 /σQ
= 0.04, a0 = a1 = 1, λ∗ = 1.803.
(annual), σY2 /σQ

A. T = 800
# Bins = 100
First Conditioning on:

# Bins = 50

# Bins = 10

# Bins = 5

# Bins = 2

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

0.87
(0.27)

2.13
(0.43)

0.88
(0.26)

2.17
(0.43)

0.86
(0.26)

2.25
(0.44)

0.90
(0.27)

2.28
(0.44)

1.24
(0.37)

2.48
(0.44)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

1.40

87.60

1.40

90.00

0.80

92.20

2.00

94.00

15.00

98.00

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

6.00

96.80

6.40

97.20

5.20

98.80

6.00

99.60

34.60

99.60

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

B. T = 400
# Bins = 100
First Conditioning on:

# Bins = 50

# Bins = 10

# Bins = 5

# Bins = 2

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

Mgr 1

Mgr 0

0.87
(0.25)

1.55
(0.38)

0.87
(0.25)

1.64
(0.40)

0.89
(0.26)

1.70
(0.41)

0.89
(0.25)

1.74
(0.41)

1.07
(0.35)

1.88
(0.41)

Rejection rate at 1% (%)

1.20

41.60

1.20

51.40

0.80

56.00

1.40

62.00

7.20

71.80

Rejection rate at 5% (%)

4.20

69.40

4.00

77.40

6.20

80.80

5.00

82.80

21.60

90.00

Kolmogorov-Smirnov δ

47

