                                  NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                     DISTRIBUTIONAL DISPUTES AND CIVIL CONFLICT

                                           Herschel I Grossman

                                           Working Paper 9794
                                   http://www.nber.org/papers/w9794


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        June 2003




The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research.

©2003 by Herschel I. Grossman. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs,
may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.
Distributional Disputes and Civil Conflict
Herschel I. Grossman
NBER Working Paper No. 9794
June 2003
JEL No. D74

                                             ABSTRACT

Some polities are able to use constitutionally prescribed political processes to settle distributional
disputes, whereas in other polities distributional disputes result in civil conflict. Theoretical analysis
reveals that the following properties help to make it possible to design a self-enforcing constitution

that can settle recurring distributional disputes between social classes without civil conflict:


•       Neither social class has a big advantage in civil conflict.

•       The expected incremental costs of civil conflict are large relative to aggregate appropriable
        economic rents.

•       Both social classes are greatly concerned about the future consequences of their current
        actions.

Theoretical analysis also reveals that a self-enforcing constitution can require limitations on the
prerogatives of winners of constitutional contests such that on average the distribution of
appropriable economic rents under the constitution is not too favorable to one social class or the
other and such that the outcome of a constitutional contest does not matter too much for the current
distribution of economic rents.




Herschel I. Grossman
Department of Economics
Box B
Brown University
Providence, RI 02912
and NBER
herschel_grossman@brown.edu
       Distributional disputes between social classes are ubiquitous. Some polities are able
to use constitutionally prescribed political processes to settle these disputes, whereas in
other polities distributional disputes between social classes result in civil conflict. Why
do constitutionally prescribed political processes sometimes succeed but other times fail to
prevent civil conflict?
       The political process prescribed by a constitution includes two essential components:
the nature of constitutional contests and the prerogatives of winners of these constitutional
contests.1 Because the constituent groups of a polity cannot make binding commitments
to abide by a constitution, a constitutionally prescribed political process provides a viable
alternative to civil conflict only if the parties to a distributional dispute voluntarily choose
to accept the outcome of this political process – that is, only if the constitution is self
enforcing.
       This paper presents a theoretical analyses of the possibility of designing a self-enforcing
constitution that can settle recurring distributional disputes between social classes. The
analysis is concerned with discovering the configurations of exogenous parameters under
which the set of self-enforcing constitutions is not empty. The relevant exogenous parameters
include the probabilities associated with the distributional consequences of civil conflicts,
the expected incremental costs of civil conflicts, the size of aggregate appropriable economic
rents, and the amount of concern for the future consequences of current actions.2
   1
       These components can be the subject of the constitution, or they can be derived from general principles
expressed in the constitution. In addition, these components, or the general principles from which they
are derived, can be embodied either in explicit provisions of the constitution or in implicit understandings.
Actual constitutionally prescribed political processes also vary widely. In electoral democracies constitutional
contests involve periodic competition for the votes of an electorate. In contrast, in aristocracies constitutional
contests involve competition for the favor of wise men, elders, or hereditary rulers. Many constitutions
combine democratic and aristocratic features.
   2
       The present paper is not concerned with the process of creating a constitution. Specifically, the paper
does not address the question of which constitution would be chosen from the set of self-enforcing constitu-



                                                        1
A Simple Constitution
       Assume that two social classes have to settle a recurring distributional dispute over
aggregate appropriable economic rents.3               Let L, for landlords or capitalists, and W, for
workers, denote the social classes.4            Also, let y denote aggregate appropriable economic
rents, and let s, s ∈ [0, 1], denote the share of y that L receives, where W receives the
share, 1 − s.
       Consider initially a simple constitution that prescribes a periodical constitutional contest
to determine which social class has the prerogative to choose s, but that places no limits
on the prerogatives of the winner in choosing s. Let L have probability p, and let W have
probability 1 − p, of winning each constitutional contest. These probabilities depend on
many factors, including the nature of constitutional contests, the cohesiveness of the social
classes, and the salience of issues other than the distribution of economic rents. Assume that
p is common knowledge.
tions, if that set includes more than one possibility. The answer to this question would depend on, among
other things, whether a concensus of the constituent groups of a polity is necessary to establish a consti-
tution, or whether either one of the constituent groups or an outsider can impose a constitution. Other
authors, such as Daron Acemoglu and James Robinson (2001) and Adam Przeworski (1991, 2001), who have
analyzed the viability of constitutions have looked at civil conflict as a mechanism for switching between
democratic and nondemocratic constitutions. In other related literature Avinash Dixit, Gene Grossman,
and Faruk Gul (2000), who generalize the seminal work of Alberto Alesina (1988), pose as alternatives a
constitution that specifies limits on the prerogatives of the party in power and a constitution without such
limits. These authors implicitly assume that both of these constitutions would be viable. Importantly, none
of these contributions view a constitution and civil conflict to be alternative ongoing methods for resolving
distributional disputes, as in the present paper.
   3
       Although the present paper focuses on distributional disputes between social classes, the analysis can
easily be extended to apply to any instance of recurring disputes between constituent groups of a polity. See
Herschel Grossman (2003).
   4
       The analysis treats the social classes as unitary agents, thereby abstracting from the processes by which
the members of a social class collectively choose their actions and enforce these choices.



                                                        2
       Because this simple constitution places no limits on the prerogatives of the winner, if L
were to win a constitutional contest, then L would set s equal to one, whereas, if W were
to win a constitutional contest, then W would set s equal to zero. Thus, under this simple
constitution the expected value of s, denoted by s̄, equals p.
       To contrast this simple constitution with a civil conflict, normalize the costs of a consti-
tutional contest to zero, and let the positive numbers, cL and cW , which are calibrated
in units of income, denote the expected incremental costs of a civil conflict to the respective
social classes. These incremental costs include the allocation of scarce resources to arming
and to other conflictual activities and, if conflict escalates beyond the threat of the use of
force, the possible destruction of scarce resources and even loss of life. Assume that cL and
cW are exogenous and common knowledge.5
       Finally, let L have probability q, and let W have probability 1 − q, of winning a
civil conflict. Assume that these probabilities are exogenous and also common knowledge.6
Assume also that the social class that wins a civil conflict, like the winner of a constitutional
contest under this simple constitution, would take all of the appropriable economic rents for
itself.
   5
       For simplicity the model assumes that cL and cW do not depend on y. Assuming instead that cL and cW
increase with y would not change the qualitative implications of the model as long as the ratios, cL /y and
cW /y, are not constants. In a complementary analysis Joan Estaban and Debraj Ray (2001) focus on the
resource costs of constitutional contests. An alternative way to make the expected cost of civil conflict larger
than the expected cost of a constitutional contest would be to assume that the social classes are risk averse
and that under a constitution, but not with civil conflict, the social classes can implement supplementary
understandings that decrease the variance of s. Alesina (1988) and Dixit, Grossman, and Gul (2000) explore
the possibility of collusion by political actors to decrease risk.
   6
       An interesting extension of the model would be to endogenize q, as in papers like Dmitriy Gershenson
and Herschel Grossman (2000) and Herschel Grossman (1999) that focus on the decision to allocate resources
to civil conflict. Another interesting extension would be to allow q to be a state variable whose current value
depends on past outcomes of constitutional contests and civil conflicts.




                                                        3
Abide or Abrogate?
       Suppose that a polity establishes a simple constitution and that one of the social classes
wins a constitutional contest. Now the other social class, the loser of the constitutional
contest, has to make a choice. The loser can decide to abide by the constitution, thereby
allowing the winner to exercise its constitutional prerogative to set s. Or, the loser can
abrogate the constitution, attempt to prevent the winner from exercising its constitutional
prerogative, and thereby initiate a civil conflict. (If the constitutional contest was an election,
then we commonly say that the loser can either accept or not accept the results of the
election.) A simple constitution is self enforcing if the loser of a constitutional contest,
whether that is L or W, will choose to abide by the constitution if it can expect future losers
of constitutional contests to abide by the constitution.
       Assume that the losing social class will abide by the constitution if and only if the present
value of its expected income from abiding by the constitution would be at least as large as
the present value of its expected income from abrogating the constitution. To determine
these present values, assume that, as long as both social classes abide by the constitution,
they can settle future distributional disputes between them constitutionally, but that, if
either social class were to abrogate the constitution, then they would be left to settle future
distributional disputes by civil conflict.7
       Given these assumptions, the social class, either L or W , that has lost a constitutional
contest abides by the constitution if and only if s̄ satisfies both of the following conditions:
                                      ρ          1
(1)                                      s̄ y ≥     (q y − cL ).
                                     1−ρ        1−ρ

                               ρ                1
(2)                               (1 − s̄) y ≥     [(1 − q) y − cW ].
                              1−ρ              1−ρ
   7
       If the consequences of abrogation were less drastic – for example, if a refusal to abide by the con-
stitution in resolving the distributional dispute did not preclude with certainty the possibility of resolving
distributional disputes constitutionally in the future – then the configurations of exogenous parameters
under which it is possible to design a self-enforcing constitution would be more restricted.


                                                      4
The parameter ρ, ρ ∈ [0, 1), in conditions (1) and (2) is an exogenous discount factor.
The larger is ρ the more concern that the social classes have for the future consequences
of their current actions.
   The LHS of condition (1) is the present value of the expected income of L, if it has lost a
constitutional contest, from abiding by the constitution, given that L expects that losers of
future constitutional contests will abide by the constitution. Because W sets s equal to zero,
the expected income of L from abiding by the constitution is equal to zero plus the present
value of expecting to get s̄y in future distributional disputes. The RHS of condition (1) is
the present value of the expected income of L from abrogating the constitution and settling
the current distributional dispute and future distributional disputes by civil conflict. With
civil conflict L expects to get y with probability q and to get zero with probability 1 − q,
and to incur the cost cL in each recurrence of the dispute. Condition (2) applies analogously
to W .    Conditions (1) and (2) assume that y, q, cL , cW , ρ, and s̄ are expected to
remain unchanged in the future.
   Taken together conditions (1) and (2) imply the following proposition, which is derived
in the mathematical appendix:

      If and only if the configuration of exogenous parameters satisfies

                              cL        cW      cL   cW
      (3)         max {q −       , 1−q−    , 1−    −    } ≤ ρ,
                              y          y      y     y

         then the set of values of s̄ that satisfy both condition (1) and condi-
      tion (2) is not empty. Hence, if and only if the configuration of exoge-
      nous parameters satisfies condition (3), then it is possible to design a
      simple self-enforcing constitution that, regardless of which social class
      wins a constitutional contest, settles distributional disputes between
      the social classes without civil conflict.

   Condition (3) implies that the following properties of the exogenous parameters would

                                              5
help to make constitutional resolution of recurring distributional disputes a viable alternative
to civil conflict:

       • Neither the probability q nor the probability 1 − q is too large. This property means
         that neither social class has a big advantage in civil conflict.

       • The ratios, cL /y and cW /y, which calibrate the expected incremental costs of civil
         conflict relative to aggregate appropriable economic rents, are large.

       • The discount factor, ρ, is large.8

       The observation that large values of cL /y and cW /y help to make a self-enforcing con-
stitution possible is especially interesting because it conveys both good news and bad news.
The good news is that, given aggregate appropriable economic rents, if civil conflicts would
have suﬃciently large incremental costs, and if these large incremental costs are anticipated
– that is, if cL and cW are suﬃciently large – then civil conflict is avoidable. The bad
news is that, given the expected incremental costs of civil conflict, if aggregate appropriable
economic rents are suﬃciently large, then civil conflict is unavoidable.

Limits on the Prerogatives of the Winner
       Suppose that the configuration of exogenous parameters is such that a simple consti-
tution would not be viable. Is it possible that with the same configuration of exogenous
parameters a more complex constitution that includes limits on the prerogatives of winners
of constitutional contests could be viable?
       Let the limits on the prerogatives of the winner of a constitutional contest under such
a complex constitution be that the winner will not choose s to be either larger than sL or
smaller than sW . If sL is smaller than one, then this limit is a binding constraint on L. If
sW is positive, then this limit is a binding constraint on W . Under this complex constitution
   8
       It is worth noting that condition (3) can be satisfied only if either cL /y or cW /y is positive, but that,
if cL /y and cW /y are suﬃciently large, then condition (3) can be satisfied even if ρ equals zero.


                                                         6
the expected value of s, s̄, equals psL +(1−p)sW . The triple, T, where T = {s̄, sL , sW },
describes this complex constitution.
      Under what configurations of exogenous parameters is it possible to design a complex
constitution that is self enforcing? Suppose that a polity establishes a complex constitution
described by a triple, T, and that a constitutional contest takes place. Given that this
complex constitution imposes a binding constraint on the prerogatives of the winner, both
the loser and the winner have to decide whether to abide by the constitution or to abrogate
the constitution. A complex constitution is self enforcing (1) if the loser of a constitutional
contest will choose to abide by the constitution if it can expect that the winner will abide by
the constitution and that future losers and winners of constitutional contests will abide by
the constitution and (2) if the winner of the constitutional contest will choose to abide by
the constitution if the loser is abiding by the constitution and if the winner can expect that
future losers and winners of constitutional contests will abide by the constitution.
      Suppose that L is the winner of the constitutional contest. Consider the choice that
W faces. Having lost the constitutional contest, if W expects that L will abide by the
constitution and that future losers and winners of constitutional contests will abide by the
constitution, then W abides by the constitution if and only if sL and s̄ are small enough to
satisfy the following condition:

                                    ρ                1
(4)                (1 − sL ) y +       (1 − s̄) y ≥     [(1 − q) y − cW ].
                                   1−ρ              1−ρ

      The LHS of condition (4) is the present value of the expected income of W from abiding
by the constitution, given that W expects that L will abide by the constitution and that both
losers and winners of future constitutional contests will abide by the constitution. Because
in abiding by the constitution L will set s equal to sL , the expected income of W from
abiding by the constitution is equal to (1 − sL ) y plus the present value of expecting to
get (1 − s̄) y in future distributional disputes. A comparison of the LHS of condition (4)
with the LHS of condition (2) shows how a constraint on L, in the form of sL smaller than

                                               7
one, makes it more attractive for W to abide by the constitution. The RHS of condition (4),
which is identical to the RHS of condition (2), is the present value of the expected income
of W from abrogating the constitution. Condition (4) assumes that W expects y, q, cW ,
ρ, and T to remain unchanged in the future.9
       Now consider L, the winner of the constitutional contest. If W is abiding by the consti-
tution, then L can exercise its constitutional prerogative to choose s. In choosing s, either
L can abide by the limitation that it will not set s larger than sL or L can behave oppor-
tunistically, disregard this limit, set s larger than sL , and thereby abrogate the constitution.
       Assume that L will abide by the limit on its constitutional prerogative only if the present
value of its expected income from setting s equal to sL would be at least as large as the present
value of its expected income from setting s equal to one, which is its best opportunistic
choice. Accordingly, if W is abiding by the constitution, and if L expects that future losers
and winners of constitutional contests will abide by the constitution, then L abides by the
constitution if and only if sL and s̄ are large enough to satisfy the following condition:

                                          ρ              ρ
(5)                            sL y +        s̄ y ≥ y +     (q y − cL ).
                                         1−ρ            1−ρ

       The LHS of condition (5) is the present value of the expected income of L from abiding
by the constitution given that W is abiding by the constitution and that L expects that
future losers and winners of constitutional contests will abide by the constitution. Because
in abiding by the constitution L sets s equal to sL , the expected income of L from abiding
by the constitution is equal to sL y plus the present value of expecting to get s̄y in future
distributional disputes. The RHS of condition (5) is the present value of the expected
income of L from being opportunistic by setting s equal to one and, thereby, causing future
distributional disputes to result in civil conflict. Condition (5) assumes that L expects y,
   9
       We might suppose that, because L prefers s to be larger, if condition (4) is satisfied, then it is satisfied
as an equality. The conclusions derived below do not depend on whether condition (4) is satisfied as an
inequality or as an equality.


                                                          8
ρ, q, cL , and T to remain unchanged in the future.
   Condition (4) requires that the sum, sL + ρs̄/(1 − ρ), which is the present value of
current and expected future realizations of s, conditional on L winning a constitutional
contest under a complex constitution, is not too large, whereas condition (5) requires that
this sum is not too small. The analogous conditions that apply if W has won a constitutional
contest require that the sum, sW + ρs̄/(1 − ρ), is neither too large not too small. These
properties imply the following proposition:

     The specification of a complex constitution that provides a viable al-
     ternative to civil conflict must be such that the constitution does not
     produce on average a distribution of appropriable economic rents that
     is too favorable to one social class or the other and that which social
     class wins a constitutional contest does not matter too much for the
     current distribution of appropriable economic rents.

   In addition conditions (4) and (5) and the analogous conditions that apply if W has won
a constitutional contest taken together imply the following proposition, which is derived in
the mathematical appendix:

     If and only if the configuration of exogenous parameters satisfies
                   F
                       q − cL /y     1 − q − cW /y     1 − cL /y − cW /y k
     (6)    max                  ,                 ,                       ≤ ρ,
                       q + cW /y     1 − q + cL /y     1 + cL /y + cW /y
      then the set of triples, T, that satisfy condition (4), condition (5),
     and the analogous conditions that apply if W has won a constitutional
     contest is not empty. Hence, if and only if the configuration of exoge-
     nous parameters satisfies condition (6), then it is possible to design
     a complex self-enforcing constitution that, regardless of which social
     class wins a constitutional contest, can settle distributional disputes
     between the social classes without civil conflict.

                                              9
   Condition (6) has the same implications as condition (3) regarding the properties of
the exogenous parameters that make constitutional resolution of a distributional disputes a
viable alternative to civil conflict – namely, neither q nor 1 − q is too large, cL /y and
cW /y are large, and ρ is large. More interestingly, comparing condition (6) with condition
(3), we obtain the following result, which is derived in the mathematical appendix:

      If the discount factor, ρ, is positive, then the set of configurations
      of exogenous parameters that satisfy condition (3) is a proper subset
      of set of configurations of exogenous parameters that satisfy condition
      (6). Hence, if ρ is positive, then, even if it is not possible to design
      a simple self-enforcing constitution, it can be possible to design a self-
      enforcing constitution that includes binding limits of the prerogatives
      of the social class that wins a constitutional contest.

   If the configuration of exogenous parameters is such that, even though it is not possible
to design a simple self-enforcing constitution, it is possible to design a complex self-enforcing
constitution, then, given this configuration of exogenous parameters, it is possible by lim-
iting the prerogatives of winners of constitutional contests to induce losers abide by the
constitution without causing winners to abrogate the constitution.

Summary
   Constitutional resolution of distributional disputes between constituent groups of a polity
avoids the incremental costs of civil conflict. But, the political process prescribed by a con-
stitution provides a viable alternative to civil conflict only if the constitution is self enforcing.
The analysis in this paper revealed that the following characteristics of the configuration of
exogenous parameters help to make it possible to design a self-enforcing constitution:

   • Neither class has a big advantage in civil conflict.



                                                 10
   • The expected incremental costs of civil conflict are large relative to aggregate appro-
      priable economic rents.

   • Both social classes are greatly concerned about the future consequences of their current
      actions.

Alternatively, either a big advantage in civil conflict for one of the social classes, or expec-
tations that the incremental costs of civil conflict would be small relative to the aggregate
appropriable economic rents, or little concern for the future consequences of current actions
can preclude the designing of a self-enforcing constitution.
   The analysis also has the following important implication:

   • If it is possible to design a self-enforcing constitution that can settle distributional
      disputes between social classes, then such a constitution can require limitations on the
      prerogatives of winners of constitutional contests such that on average the distribution
      of appropriable economic rents under the constitution is not too favorable to one social
      class or the other and such that the outcome of a constitutional contest does not matter
      too much for the current distribution of economic rents.




                                              11
                                      References

Acemoglu, Daron and Robinson, James. “A Theory of Political Transitions.” American
   Economic Review, 97(1), September 2001, 938-963.
Alesina, Alberto. “Credibility and Policy Convergence in a Two-social class System with
   Rational Voters.” American Economic Review, 78(1), September 1988, 796-805.
Dixit, Avinash, Grossman, Gene M., and Gul, Faruk. “The Dynamics of Political Compro-
   mise.” Journal of Political Economy, 108(3), June 2000, 531-568.
Estaban, Joan and Ray, Debraj. “Social Decision Rules Are Not Immune to Conflict.”
   Economics of Governance, 2(1), 2001, 59-67.
Gershenson, Dmitriy and Grossman, Herschel I. “Civil Conflict: Ended or Never Ending?”
   Journal of Conflict Resolution, 44(3), December 2000, 807-821.
Grossman, Herschel I. “Kleptocracy and Revolutions.” Oxford Economic Papers, 51, April
   1999, 267-283.
Grossman, Herschel I. “Constitution or Conflict?” unpublished, May 2003.
Przeworski, Adam. Democracy and the Market. New York: Cambridge University Press,
   1991.
Przeworski, Adam. “Democracy as an Equilibrium.” unpublished, March 2001.




                                           12
                                  Mathematical Appendix

Derivation of Condition (3):
       Condition (1) is satisfied if and only if s̄ is suﬃciently large that

                                                  q − cL /y
(i)                                        s̄ ≥             .
                                                     ρ

Condition (2) is satisfied if and only if s̄ is suﬃciently small that

                                                  1 − q − cW /y
(ii)                                   s̄ ≤ 1 −                 .
                                                        ρ

Conditions (i) and (ii) have the following implications:

 (3.1) If and only if the RHS of condition (i) is not larger than one, then the set of values
         of s̄, s̄ ∈ [0, 1], that satisfy condition (i) is not empty.

 (3.2) If and only if the RHS of condition (ii) is not negative, then the set of values of s̄,
         s̄ ∈ [0, 1], that satisfy condition (ii) is not empty.

 (3.3) If and only if the RHS of condition (ii) is not smaller than the RHS of condition (i),
         then the union of the set of values of s̄ that satisfy condition (i) and the set of values
         of s̄ that satisfy condition (ii) is not empty.

If and only if condition (3) obtains, where

                                    cL        cW      cL cW
(3)                      max {q −      , 1−q−    , 1−    −   } ≤ ρ,
                                     y         y       y   y

then conditions (3.1), (3.2), and (3.3) obtain.


Derivation of Condition (6):
       Both condition (4) and condition (5) are satisfied if and only if the triple, T, satisfies

                    1                      ρ            ρ
(iii)                  (q + cW /y) ≥ sL +     s̄ ≥ 1 +     (q − cL /y).
                   1−ρ                    1−ρ          1−ρ

                                                  13
The analogous condition that applies if W has won a constitutional contest is satisfied if and
only if T satisfies

                     ρ                      ρ        1
(iv)                    (q + cW /y) ≥ sW +     s̄ ≥     (q − cL /y).
                    1−ρ                    1−ρ      1−ρ

Conditions (iii) and (iv) have the following implications:

 (6.1) If and only if the LHS of condition (iii) is not smaller than the RHS of condition
        (iii), then the set of values of sL that satisfy condition (iii) is not empty.

 (6.2) If and only if the LHS of condition (iv) is not smaller than the RHS of condition (iv),
        then the set of values of sW that satisfy condition (iv) is not empty.

 (6.3) If and only if the diﬀerence between the LHS of condition (iii) and the RHS of
        condition (iv) is not smaller than the diﬀerence between the RHS of condition (iii)
        and the LHS of condition (iv), then the set of values of s̄ that satisfy both condition
        (iii) and condition (iv) is not empty.

If and only if condition (6) obtains, where
                        F                                               k
                            q − cL /y 1 − q − cW /y 1 − cL /y − cW /y
(6)               max                ,             ,                        ≤ ρ,
                            q + cW /y 1 − q + cL /y 1 + cL /y + cW /y

then conditions (6.1), (6.2), and (6.3) obtain.


Derivation of the result that the set of configurations of exogenous parameters
that satisfy condition (3) is a proper subset of the set of configurations of exoge-
nous parameters that satisfy condition (6):

      Define Y ≡ q − cL /y, and define Z ≡ 1 − q − cW /y.
Using these definitions, we can rewrite condition (3) as

(3)                                 max{Y, Z, Y + Z} ≤ ρ,

                                                 14
and we can rewrite condition (6) as
                             F                            k
                                  Y   Z     Y +Z
(6)                    max          ,    ,                    ≤ ρ.
                                 1−Z 1−Y   2−Y −Z

Also, note that max{Y, Z, Y + Z} ≤ 1.

To compare condition (3) and condition (6) we have to consider four cases:

  1. If both Y ≤ 0 and Z ≤ 0, then the configuration of exogenous parameters satisfies
      both condition (3) and condition (6).

  2. If both Y > 0 and Z > 0, then max{Y, Z, Y + Z} = Y + Z. In addition, with
      Y > 0 and Z > 0, and with max{Y, Z, Y + Z} ≤ 1, we have
                                          F                            k
                                               Y   Z     Y +Z
                         Y + Z > max             ,    ,        .
                                              1−Z 1−Y   2−Y −Z

  3. If Y ≤ 0 and Z > 0, then max{Y, Z, Y + Z} = Z. In addition, with Y ≤ 0
      and Z > 0, and with max{Y, Z, Y + Z} ≤ 1, we have
                                      F                            k
                                           Y   Z     Y +Z
                           Z > max           ,    ,        .
                                          1−Z 1−Y   2−Y −Z

  4. If Y > 0 and Z ≤ 0, then max{Y, Z, Y + Z} = Y. In addition, with Y > 0
      and Z ≤ 0, and with max{Y, Z, Y + Z} ≤ 1, we have
                                      F                            k
                                           Y   Z   Y +Z
                           Y > max           ,   ,       .
                                          1−Z 1−Y 2−Y −Z

In the latter three cases, max{Y /(1 − Z), Z/(1 − Y ), (Y + Z)/(2 − Y − Z)} is positive
but smaller than max{Y, Z, Y + Z}. Thus, in these cases, if ρ is positive, then the
configuration of exogenous parameters can satisfy condition (6) even if it does not satisfy
condition (3).




                                               15
