                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                           THE PRACTICE AND PROSCRIPTION
                    OF AFFIRMATIVE ACTION IN HIGHER EDUCATION:
                              AN EQUILIBRIUM ANALYSIS

                                             Dennis Epple
                                            Richard Romano
                                              Holger Sieg

                                          Working Paper 9799
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9799


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




The authors thank Allan Meltzer, seminar participants at Carnegie Mellon University, Johns Hopkins
University, Stanford University, and the University of Wisconsin for their comments and the National Science
Foundation and MacArthur Foundation for financial support. The views expressed herein are those of the
authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.
The Practice and Proscription of Affirmative Action in Higher Education:
An Equilibrium Analysis
Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, and Holger Sieg
NBER Working Paper No. 9799
June 2003
JEL No. I20, I28, L3

                                           ABSTRACT

The paper examines the practice of affirmative action and consequences of its proscription on the
admission and tuition policies of institutions of higher education in a general equilibrium. Colleges
are differentiated ex ante by endowments and compete for students that differ by race, household
income, and academic qualification. Colleges maximize a quality index that is increasing in mean
academic score of students, educational resources per student, an income-diversity measure, and a
racial-diversity measure. The pool of potential nonwhite students has distribution of income and
academic score with lower means than that of whites. In benchmark equilibrium, colleges may
condition admission and tuition on race. In a computational model calibrated using estimates from
related research, equilibrium has colleges offer tuition discounts and admission preference to
nonwhites to promote racial diversity. Equilibrium entails a quality hierarchy of colleges, so the
model predicts practices and characteristics of colleges along the hierarchy. Proscription of
affirmative action requires that admission and tuition policies are race blind. Colleges then use the
informational content about race in income and academic score in reformulating their optimal
policies. Admission and tuition policies are substantially modified in equilibrium of the
computational model, and both races are significantly affected. Representation of nonwhites falls
significantly in all colleges. The drop is particularly pronounced in the top third of the quality
hierarchy of colleges.

Dennis Epple                        Richard Romano                   Holger Sieg
Graduate School of                  University of Florida            GSIA
Industrial Administration           richard.romano@cba.ufl.edu       Carnegie Mellon University
Carnegie Mellon University                                           5000 Forbes Avenue
Posner Hall, Room 233C                                               Pittsburgh, PA 15213-3890
Pittsburgh, PA 15213                                                 and NBER
and NBER                                                             holgers@andrew.cmu.edu
epple@cmu.edu
    The Practice and Proscription of Affirmative Action in Higher Education: An Equilibrium Analysis
                                Dennis Epple, Richard Romano, Holger Sieg

I. Introduction

           Consideration of race in admissions and provision of financial aid has become common practice

among selective institutions of higher education, excepting instances where it has been banned.1 While

college and university decision makers have shown a willingness to promote racial diversity with

affirmative action policies, these practices are under legal and legislative attack. The University of

California’s Board of Regents eliminated race- (and sex-) based affirmative action policies in 1995, this

ban expanded to all public institutions in California by referendum in 1996. The state of Washington

followed suit by passing an identical referendum in 1998. The Fifth Circuit Court of Appeals ruled against

race-related admissions in Hopwood vs. Texas (1996), eliminating such practices in universities receiving

public funding in Louisiana, Mississippi, and Texas. The use of race in admissions at the University of

Georgia was proscribed by federal court in Johnson vs. University of Georgia (2001). At Governor Jeb

Bush’s urging, the Florida legislature eliminated affirmative action at Florida public universities in 2000.

As we write this paper, the U.S. Supreme Court is on the verge of ruling on affirmative action in higher

education, having already heard arguments about the University of Michigan’s affirmative action policy.2

            This paper develops an equilibrium model of the practice of affirmative action by colleges and

analyzes the consequences of its proscription.3 In the model, colleges maximize a quality index that

increases with academic qualification of the student body, inputs provided per student, and simple

measures of racial and income diversity. Colleges are differentiated ex ante by access to nontuition

revenues, which we refer to as endowment earnings. Potential students differ by race, income, and

academic qualification, and they maximize a utility function that increases in the quality of their education.

We find a variant of a monopolistically competitive equilibrium, first allowing affirmative action practices.

Equilibrium has a quality hierarchy of colleges, with an associated partition of the type space of potential


1
  Evidence on the practice of affirmative action in higher education is discussed below.
2
  Federal precedent at the time we write this is from the Supreme Court’s Bakke decision in 1978, a
challenge to affirmative action in higher education under Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. The
majority opinion by Justice Lewis Powell condemned quotas but ruled that admission officers could “take
race into account” in admissions. This is discussed further below.
3
  By “colleges” we mean providers of four-year college degrees, including the undergraduate divisions of
universities.


                                                                                                               2
students into colleges and a no-college alternative. For realistic parameterizations, colleges provide merit

and need-based aid in equilibrium, and pursue affirmative action in admissions and provision of financial

aid. We specify and calibrate a counterpart computational model and compute an equilibrium.

         We then examine the consequences of proscription of affirmative action. We presume that

preferences of college administrators and potential students are unchanged, but that college policies must

be race blind. In equilibrium, colleges weigh the informational content of income and academic

qualification about race in formulating race-blind admission and tuition policies. Students with nonracial

characteristics that are more likely to be associated with minorities are given some preference in admissions

and provision of financial aid. In the calibrated model, colleges give some preference to students with high

or moderately high incomes who also have relatively low scores on standardized college entrance exam,

these students relatively more likely to be minorities. In spite of colleges’ strategies to maintain diversity,

we find computationally that minorities are significantly hurt by proscription of affirmative action. For

example, minority presence in the top tier of colleges declines by more than two-thirds. Non-minorities

gain from elimination of affirmative action, but by very little with some exceptions.

         Three strands of literature relate to this paper. The most closely related paper is by Chan and

Eyster (forthcoming). They also analyze theoretically the proscription of affirmative action assuming, like

us, that college administrators have preference for diversity and will employ alternative signals of race

under the ban.4 They emphasize that such a ban may reduce the academic qualification of the admitted

student body, when one motivation for such a ban is to improve academic credentials.5 Our analysis

complements theirs, while differing in several important ways. Their model has one college, no

consideration of tuition, and no variation in incomes of potential students. With one college, their model

abstracts from competition among colleges and there is no college quality hierarchy. Effects on access


4
  See also Chan and Eyster (2002) which models the formation of preferences for affirmative action in
college admissions, individuals taking into account the anticipated effects on their own admission
prospects.
5
  Loury, Fryer, and Yuret (2003) also investigate the consequences of a ban on affirmative action in a
model where colleges maximize aggregate academic qualification of the student body subject to a racial
quota and assuming the races have different costs of increasing their precollege academic qualifications.
They also show that the ban will lower academic qualification of the student body given race-blind
admissions that satisfy the racial quota. They go on to analyze the effects of the ban on costs expended to
increase academic qualification. Our model of diversity preference does not employ a racial quota as
discussed below. Otherwise, our analysis differs in very similar ways as from that of Chan and Eyster as
discussed next in the text.


                                                                                                                  3
along the college quality hierarchy are a key element of our analysis. As well, we examine effects on

tuition policies, and how this affects the races. Our inclusion of variation of income of potential students

adds a realistic dimension to the analysis that is important to the nature of equilibria with and without

affirmative action, and plays a key role in inference about race under the ban.

         Second are our papers on higher education (Epple, Romano, and Sieg, 2002a & 2002b) and earlier

papers with models of education that emphasize peer externalities (Rothschild and White, 1995, Epple and

Romano, 1998 & 2002). Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2002b) develop and test a variant of the model of

higher education employed here, but ignoring race issues. Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2002a) is a

preliminary analysis of introducing race preferences into the model, but with no analysis of proscription of

affirmative action.

         The third set of related papers are concerned with proscription of affirmative action either with no

strategic response of colleges or as compared to some prescribed alternative. Kane (1998) estimates race-

based preferences in college admissions and then shows that class-based affirmative action is a poor

substitute. Kane (2000) provides evidence that high-school graduates ranking in the top 10 percent of their

class and with lower than 80 percentile SAT scores are disproportionately minorities, suggesting an

admissions strategy to enhance diversity at selective colleges. Long (2002a) also estimates preferences

given to minorities in college admissions and then uses these estimates to forecast the effects of a ban on

affirmative action with no substitute policy and also if a policy of admitting top-10 percent graduates from

high schools is substituted.6 In Chapter 2 of their comprehensive analysis of affirmative action in a set of

selective U.S. colleges, Bowen and Bok (1998) forecast effects on African Americans of banning

affirmative action assuming probabilities of admission for a nonracial profile are as for whites. Cancian

(1999) examines the substitutability of class-based for race-based admissions. The present paper is

differentiated from this line of research in our modeling of equilibrium provision of higher education with a

set of competing colleges and our allowing colleges to respond strategically to a ban.

           We close this Introduction with a brief discussion of evidence on affirmative action practices in

higher education. These studies focus on admissions or financial aid. Bowen and Bok (1998) detail the

practice of affirmative action in admissions of African Americans in five highly selective colleges. One

6
 See also Long’s (2002b) forecasts of effects on applications of minorities to colleges from a ban on
affirmative action.


                                                                                                               4
finding they report is that the probability of admission in 1989 for white candidates with SAT score in the

range 1200-1249 was 19 percent, while 60 percent for African American candidates. Kane (1998) uses

data from the High School and Beyond survey and estimates admission probability in 1984 with Black and

Hispanic as (separate) explanatory variables. He finds significant affirmative action in the top two quintiles

of four-year colleges (ranked by mean SAT), most strongly in the top quintile. Using data from the

National Education Logitudinal Study on 1992 high-school graduates, Kane (2000) reconfirms affirmative

action in admissions in top quintile colleges. Long (2002a) estimates admission probabilities to four-year

colleges using data from the National Education Longitudinal Survey. He finds significant affirmative

action in admission for minorities in the early 90’s at both upper and lower tier colleges, but with stronger

preference at upper tier colleges. In the basic regression, for example, he estimates that being African

American increases the “likelihood of acceptance by the equivalent of a 254 point increase in SAT or a

two-thirds of a point increase in GPA (p. 11).”

         Manski and Wise (1983) found evidence of significant tuition discounting to nonwhite students.

This has been reaffirmed in subsequent research by Kane and Spizman (1994) and Epple, Romano, and

Sieg (forthcoming). Using Tobit estimates of financial aid in 1995-96, we estimate an increase in financial

aid on the order of $1,500 for African American and Hispanic students in public schools, with higher

(lower) aid in private colleges for African Americans (Hispanics).7

         Section II of the paper presents the theoretical model. Section III develops results assuming

affirmative action is allowed. Section IV shows how theoretical predictions change under a ban on

affirmative action. Section V describes the computational model. Computational results are presented in

Section VI. Further interpretation and discussion is contained in Section VI. Section VII concludes.


II. Theoretical Model

         Here we present the theoretical model. The economy consists of colleges and potential students.

A. Students. A potential student is characterized by three variables: race (r), household income (y), and

score (s) on standardized college admissions test. We will frequently refer to potential students as just

students, when it is clear by context whether they attend a college or not. We specify “race” to be


7
 The coefficient estimates on the minority dummies are highly significant, but those on the interaction with
private colleges are not significant.


                                                                                                                5
dichotomous, white (w) or nonwhite (nw). Let Γ r , r ∈{w, nw}, denote the proportion of students of race r

in the economy.

         Household income is continuous with range [0,ymax]. While having in mind a household decision

about college, we refer to y as student income or just income henceforth. Score is continuous with range

[smin,smax]. The joint density function of race r’s score and income is given by fr(s,y), assumed positive on S

/ (smin,smax) x (0,ymax). Normalize the economy’s student population to one, and let

f (s, y) = Γ w f w (s, y) + Γ nw f nw (s, y) denote the population density of (s,y). In our computational model

below, we will use SAT to measure score.8 “Score” can, however, be given a more general interpretation

as a one-dimensional measure of academic qualification that combines performance on standardized exam,

pre-college grades, and any other quantifiable measures of academic capability.9

         Student utility is an increasing and twice differentiable function of a numeraire x, college quality

q, and score: U = U(x,q,s). The numeraire is given by x = y – p, where p denotes tuition if a college is

attended. Determination of college quality is discussed below. If no college is attended, q = q0, the

educational quality of high school.10 A special case of the model assumes utility is increasing in

educational achievement a, which is an increasing function of educational quality (q) and score: U =

U(x,a(q,s)). The latter interpretation is used for some of the normative analysis in Section VI. Most of our

analysis is positive, however. Implications regarding variables such as financial aid policies, admission

policies, the college quality hierarchy and the allocation of students across the college quality hierarchy are

the same regardless of the reasons why quality appears in the utility function. For predicting those

variables, quality may be preferred simply because households and their students gain utility from attending

a higher-ranked school, or quality may be valued because it affects achievement. While most predictions

from the analysis that follows do not depend on which of the interpretations is adopted, implications

regarding achievement clearly depend on which of these reasons underlies the preference for quality, and

8
  While not all potential students take a college admissions test in reality, we assume those that would be
admitted and attend a college do so, hence that students can anticipate their score. In our analysis it is then
equivalent to assume every potential student actually takes the test.
9
  Kane (2000) finds that SAT and high-school rank are both significant in predicting admission and college
GPA at top quintile colleges.
10
   Hence, we assume the quality of the “outside option” is the same for everyone. This assumption might
be relaxed, perhaps by making q0 a function of income and/or race.


                                                                                                                  6
some normative implications differ as well. As we proceed, we will identify implications that depend on an

achievement interpretation. Note that we are assuming preferences are independent of race. We

considered some alternatives to this in Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2002a). Here differences across the races

derive solely from differences in their distributions over (s,y).

         We assume a positive income elasticity of demand for educational quality:

                                            ∂U ∂q 
                                          ∂       
                                            ∂U ∂x  > 0.                                         (1)
                                              ∂x

We also assume a non-negative “ability” elasticity of this demand:

                                            ∂U ∂q 
                                          ∂       
                                            ∂U ∂x  ≥ 0.                                         (2)
                                              ∂s

Taking as given college’s tuition and admission policies, students choose among their educational options

to maximize utility.

B. Colleges. By “colleges” we mean institutions of higher education that grant four-year degrees, hence,

including the undergraduate divisions of universities. There are n colleges, differentiated ex ante by their

“endowment earnings,” Wi, i = 1,2,…,n. All nontuition earnings of a college make up Wi (i ranges from 1

to n unless indicated otherwise). We assume Wi ≠ Wj for all colleges i and j, and number the colleges so

that W1 < W2 < … < Wn.

         Each college chooses tuition and admission policies and educational inputs to maximize a quality

index.11 College quality is assumed to be an increasing, twice differentiable, and quasi-concave function of

mean student score ( θ ), educational inputs per student (I), a measure of student income diversity (Dy), and

a measure of racial diversity (DR): qi = q (θi , Ii , Diy , DiR ). There is no doubt that colleges care about at least

three of the four variables in our quality functions. Colleges clearly pursue students with higher scores;

other things constant, they would like higher instructional expenditures per student (e.g., lower

faculty/student ratios), and they would like a racially diverse student body. What is the evidence for the

fourth (income-diversity) component? Empirical analysis (e.g., Epple, Romano, Sieg, forthcoming)


11
  Tuition to a student can itself, of course, induce or prohibit attendance, so our specification of a separate
admission policy is for clarity and analytical convenience.


                                                                                                                     7
confirms the commonplace observation that colleges vary financial aid with income (i.e., provide need-

based aid). One might hypothesize that this is simply price discrimination arising through exercise of

market power by colleges. In our model, price discrimination by income does indeed emerge from the

exercise of market power, but colleges do not have sufficient market power to pursue such price

discrimination to the extent required to yield the income-based pricing that we observe in the data (Epple,

Romano, Sieg, 2002b). Thus, we introduce a concern for income diversity into the quality function as a

means of accounting for the observed degree of pricing by income. Note that colleges’ use of the term

"need-based aid" is consistent with a concern for income diversity, though such a spin might be used as a

convenient rationalization regardless of the motive for income-based pricing.

            The simple measure of income diversity we adopt is Diy = µ y µ i , where µ y is the mean income in

the population, µ i is the mean income of students in college i, and we are assuming µ i > µ y as is


                                                                               ru    ru
empirically relevant.12 Similarly, our racial diversity measure is DiR = Γi i       Γ i , where riu is the under-

                                                                       ru
represented race in college i (meaning Γir < Γ r , for r = riu ), and Γi i denotes the proportion of the under-

represented race in college i. As consistent with the evidence with exception discussed below, assume that

riu = nw will emerge in equilibrium for all colleges, implying we can simplify notation by writing

DiR = Γinw Γ nw .

            The peer student-score measure ( θi ) in the quality index embodies an ability-related peer effect on

educational quality that could operate through several channels. This could be due to students learning

from one another in and outside of the classroom, enhanced competition among students for grades,

student-body effects on hiring and motivation of teachers, and/or a variant of Spencian signaling.13


12
     If µ i < µ y , then ∂q ∂D y ≤ 0, though this will not be relevant to any results.
13
  There is a large, growing, and controversial literature on peer effects by social scientists. Here we
mention just some of the empirical studies by economists that are most closely related to our model. Most
of the literature on peer effects on educational success concern primary and secondary education. Early
studies are Coleman (1966), Henderson, Mieszkowski and Sauvageau (1978), and Summers and Wolfe
(1977). Manski (1993) details the several difficulties in empirically identifying peer effects. Evans, Oates,
and Schwab (1992) find no peer effects in schools on teenage pregnancy or dropping-out once selection is
taken into account. Robertson and Symons (1996), Zimmer and Toma (1997), Hoxby (2000), and Ding
and Lehrer (2001) are more recent studies that find evidence of peer effects on educational success.


                                                                                                                    8
          When maximizing quality, colleges observe student type (r,s,y) and take as given the maximum

alternative utility the student can obtain.14 We now develop college i’s problem assuming affirmative

action is allowed, and develop modifications when it is proscribed in Section IV. Let αi (r,s, y)∈[0,1]

denote the admission policy of college i, αi (⋅) indicating the proportion of type (r,s,y) in the population

that the college admits. Utility taking implies college i believes it can attract any proportion of students to

whom it provides their alternative utility, a belief that must be fulfilled in equilibrium. Letting

pi (r,s, y) denote college i’s optimal price to student (r,s,y), the maximum alternative utility to college i is

given by:

                                                                                                            
                          Uia (r,s, y) = Max  U(y, q 0 ,s),      Max U(y − p j (⋅), q j ,s)                 .   (3)
                                                            j=1,2,...,n; j≠ i;α j (⋅) > 0isan optimalchoice
                                                                                                             
                                                                                                            

Alternative utility is the maximum of the no-college option and utility attainable at a college willing to

admit the student. Let p v (qi (⋅); r,s, y) denote the reservation price for attending college i, defined by:

                                               U(y − p v , qi (⋅),s) ≡ Uia (r,s, y).                              (4)

Given college i’s belief that a student is willing to attend if offered his alternative utility, charging admitted

students their reservation price will always be optimal (as this will loosen college i’s budget constraint).

Note that this also implies Uia (⋅) = U aj (⋅) for all colleges i and j.

          Costs of college i are given by:

                                          C(k i , Ii ) = F + V(k i ) + k i Ii ; V ′, V ′′ > 0,                    (5)

letting ki denote the number of students attending. We assume “custodial costs” F + V that are independent

of quality-enhancing educational inputs, implying an efficient scale k* ≡ Arg min k i C(k i , Ii ) k i that is

independent of Ii.

          We can write college i’s optimization problem:


Turning to research on peer effects in higher education, Sacerdote (2001), Zimmerman (1999), and
Winston and Zimmerman (forthcoming) find peer effects between roommates on grade point averages.
Betts and Morrell (1999) find that high-school peer groups affect college grade point average. Arcidiacono
and Nicholson (2000) find no peer effects among medical students. As noted above, Epple, Romano, and
Sieg (2002b) estimate a variant of the present model and find support for its specification, including peer
student scores in college quality.
14
   Utility taking is as in some of the competitive club-goods literature. See Scotchmer (1994).


                                                                                                                   9
                                                         Max                     q(θi , Ii ,µ y µ i , Γinw Γ nw )                               (6.0)
                                             θi ,Ii ,µi ,k i ,Γ nw ,αi (r,s,y)
                                                               i


           s.t.                                               αi (r,s, y)∈[0,1] ∀ (r,s, y);                                                     (6.1)


            ∫∫ [αi (nw,s, y)p
                                v
                                    (q(⋅); nw,s, y)Γ nw f nw (s, y) +αi (w,s, y)p v (q(⋅); w,s, y)Γ w f w (s, y)]dsdy + Wi
             S                                                                                                                                   (6.2)
                                                    ≥ C(k i , Ii );


                                    ∫∫ [αi (nw,s, y)Γ
                                                                  nw nw
                          ki =                                         f         (s, y) + αi (w,s, y)Γ w f w (s, y)]dsdy;                       (6.3)
                                     S


                                1
                                     ∫∫ s[αi (nw,s, y)Γ
                                                                      nw nw
                        θi =                                               f       (s, y) +αi (w,s, y)Γ w f w (s, y)]dsdy;                      (6.4)
                                ki
                                         S


                                1
                                     ∫∫ y[αi (nw,s, y)Γ
                                                                      nw nw
                        µi =                                               f       (s, y) +αi (w,s, y)Γ w f w (s, y)]dsdy;                      (6.5)
                                ki
                                      S

and

                                                           1
                                                Γinw =          ∫∫ αi (nw,s, y)Γ
                                                                                          nw nw
                                                                                             f    (s, y)dsdy.                                   (6.6)
                                                           ki
                                                                 S

Constraint (6.2) is the college’s budget constraint, which embodies the optimality of charging admitted

students (having αi > 0 ) their reservation price.15 The budget constraint will hold with equality at the

optimum since the objective function is increasing in educational inputs per student. Constraint (6.3)

defines the number of students. Constraints (6.4) – (6.6) define, respectively, the mean score, mean

income, and proportion of nonwhite students. In Section III, we present the solution to Problem (6).

C. Equilibrium. Equilibrium satisfies utility maximization by students, quality maximization by the n

colleges, and a market-clearance condition. Each potential student makes a utility-maximizing choice

among colleges willing to admit the student (i.e., those for whom αi (r,s, y) > 0 is an optimal choice) and the

no-college option, taking as given qualities and the admission and tuition policies of colleges. Each college

solves Problem (6), taking as given its endowment and the alternative utility of potential students (or,

                                                                                                                     n
equivalently, the reservation price function). Market clearance requires that                                       ∑ αi (r,s, y) ≤1 for all (r,s,y)
                                                                                                                    i =1




15
     The specification of tuition to nonadmitted students is irrelevant.


                                                                                                                                                  10
                                                n
for an optimal αi (⋅) for each college.16 If   ∑ αi (r,s, y) >1 , then there would be excess demand by colleges
                                               i =1

                                                             n                                  n
for students, and colleges would fail to optimize. If       ∑      αi (r,s, y) <1 , then 1 −   ∑ αi (r,s, y) of these students
                                                            i =1                               i =1

can do no better than “choose” no college. The problem that colleges solve when affirmative action is

proscribed changes, as then does the definition of equilibrium, as discussed in Section IV.


III. Theoretical Results Allowing Affirmative Action

A. The College Optimum. College i’s optimum satisfies pi (r,s, y) ≡ p v (qi ; r,s, y), budget balance (i.e.,

(6.2) with equality), the definitional conditions (6.3) – (6.6), and the following first-order conditions:

                                          =1                             >
                                                                         
                             αi (r,s, y)  ∈ [0,1]  as p v (qi ; r,s, y)  =  EMCi (r, s, y);                          (7.1)
                                          =0                             <
                                                                         

                                                                   qµ            q nw
                                                      qθ                          Γ
                     EMCi (nw,s, y) ≡ V ′ + Ii +         (θi − s) + i (µ i − y) + i (Γinw − 1);                          (7.2)
                                                      qI           qI             qI


                                                                    qµ            q nw
                                                       qθ                          Γ
                        EMCi (w,s, y) ≡ V ′ + Ii +        (θi − s) + i (µ i − y) + i Γinw ;                              (7.3)
                                                       qI           qI             qI

                                                             qI
                                                 λi =               > 0;                                                 (7.4)
                                                        k i − ∂R ∂I

where (7.1) – (7.3) hold for all student types, λi is the multiplier on the budget constraint (6.1), and R

denotes tuition revenues (i.e., the integral term in (6.2)). 17 Condition (7.1) describes the admission policy,

using what we call a student’s effective marginal cost of admission (EMC). EMC for nonwhites and whites

are defined respectively in (7.2) and (7.3), these differing only by the last term. The first two terms in

EMC equal the marginal resource cost of educating any student. The third term is the peer “ability” effect,

equal to the change in mean score from attendance by a type s student, multiplied by the resource cost of

maintaining quality. Note that this “cost” is negative for students with score exceeding the college’s mean


16
   As shown below, any αi (⋅) ∈ [0,1] is optimal for some (r,s,y) for each college i in equilibrium. These
student types are assumed to have access to college i when solving utility maximization, while market
clearance is fulfilled using the actual number of students that exercise that option.
17
   Local second-order conditions are satisfied in equilibrium provided V” is sufficiently high.


                                                                                                                          11
score. The fourth term quantifies the analogous effect on the income-diversity measure. Note that since

qµi < 0, this cost is positive (negative) for students with income above (below) the college’s mean income.

The last term is the cost of the effect on racial-diversity, which can again be analogously decomposed, but

differs across the races. The cost of admitting a student from the under-represented race (nonwhite) is

negative since Γinw < 1, while positive for the over-represented race.18

           The economic implication of (7.4) is that college i spends more on educational inputs than the

Samuelsonian level, as the latter would equate the collective marginal willingness to pay in the college

(equal here to ∂R ∂I since students pay their reservation prices) to the marginal cost (k i ). Colleges value

educational inputs both for their revenue generating effect and for the direct effect on quality. In

equilibrium, colleges will be differentiated and have some market power, allowing them to depart from

student optimality (i.e., λi < ∞). 19 It is of interest to note that profit-maximizing colleges would adopt the

same admission criteria, but would choose Samuelsonian levels of inputs.20

B. Properties of Equilibrium with Affirmative Action. Perhaps the most basic property of equilibrium is

that a strict educational quality hierarchy characterizes equilibrium.

Proposition 1. q n > q n −1 > ... > q1 > q 0 .

Proof of Proposition 1. All colleges solve the same problem (6) but with different endowments, implying

the strict hierarchy that follows the endowment hierarchy among colleges. Using our assumption that Wn

< F, some students pay positive tuition at every college, implying q0 < q1.                                       ,

While the college quality hierarchy follows the endowment hierarchy, a strict hierarchy would need to

characterize equilibrium if colleges had the same endowments. The hierarchy with the same endowments

is driven by preferences of higher-income types for higher-educational quality and can be proved

following an argument like that developed in Epple and Romano (1998,2002).21

           To establish some of the results that follow, it is convenient to let EMC0(r,s,y) ≡ 0 denote the

hypothetical effective marginal cost of the no-college option. We appeal to the panels of Figure 1 from our


18
   In our model, affirmative action is quite different from a racial quota as discussed in Section VII.
19
   Students would prefer that colleges provide Samuelsonian levels of inputs and lower tuition.
20
   This is shown by solving a college’s profit-maximization problem. Epple and Romano (1998,2002)
develop equilibria in a related environment with profit maximizers.
21
   If colleges have the same endowments, then equilibrium will not exist in the present model.


                                                                                                              12
computational analysis to illustrate some of the results. The solid lines in Figure 1 show the partition by

race of the (s,y) plane into colleges and the no-college alternative in computed equilibrium. The functions

and parameters that underlie this example are discussed in Section V.

         Another fundamental property of equilibrium is non-overlapping attendance sets for given race.

Proposition 2. Given r, the set of (s,y) types that attend college i and college j ≠ i (or no college if j = 0) is

of measure 0.

Proof of Proposition 2. Given r, if type (s,y) attends i or j in equilibrium (i,j = 0,1,…,n; i ≠ j ), then

αi ∈ (0,1) and α j ∈ (0,1). If either αi or α j equals 1, then market clearance would be violated. From (7.1),

tuition at college i and college j then equals EMC there. (If say j = 0, then use the convention that EMC0 =

0.) Using utility maximization, it must then be that

                              U(y − EMCi (r,s, y), qi ,s) = U(y − EMC j (r,s, y), q j ,s)                        (8)

for these types. If, say, utility were higher at option j than at option i, then the reservation price for

attending college j would exceed EMCj (a contradiction to optimal pricing); or if j is the no-college option,

none of these types would attend i. Given qi ≠ qj by Proposition 1, EMCi (r,s, y) ≠ EMC j (r,s, y), implying

ds dy given (8) is satisfied is generically unique in the parameter space of utility functions U(⋅).                 ,

         For given race, we refer to the loci in the (s,y) plane that partition student types into colleges and

no college as boundary loci. These loci are equations (8) where i and j are the best options of these types

and students on one side choose option i and those on the other choose option j. The panels of Figure 1

provide an example with n = 5 (developed in detail below), where the solid lines are boundary loci. In each

panel, the lower left “triangle” of types do not attend college, and the diagonal slices are the attendance sets

at progressively higher quality colleges.

         Proposition 3 concerns tuition policies:

Proposition 3. a. Along a boundary locus of college i, pi (r,s, y) = EMCi (r,s, y).

b. In the interior of college i’s attendance set (i.e., off boundary loci), pi (r,s, y) > EMCi (r,s, y).

c. Equilibrium student choices are the same as would result if pi (r,s, y) = EMCi (r,s, y), i = 1,2,…,n, for all

(r,s,y), all else constant. That is, if student (r,s,y) chooses option i in equilibrium, then:




                                                                                                                 13
                              U(y − EMCi (⋅), qi ,s) ≥ Max U(y − EMC j (⋅), q j ,s),                                (9)
                                                       j= 0,1,...,n; j≠ i


with strict inequality in the interior of attendance sets.

Proof of Proposition 3. a. This follows from the definition of boundary loci and the Proof of Proposition 2.

b. Tuition pi < EMCi to a student attending college i contradicts (7.1). Tuition pi = EMCi in the interior of

college i’s attendance set and pj = EMCj at the best alternative j would contradict Proposition 2. Tuition pi

= EMCi and pj > EMCj at the best alternative j would contradict market clearance (since then α j = 1).

Tuition pi = EMCi and pj < EMCj at the best alternative j is impossible, since pj < EMCj implies j is not an

option for the student.

c. Contradicting (9), suppose that a student attends option i, when U(y − EMC j , q j ,s) > U(y − EMCi , qi ,s)

for some j ≠ i. Since pi ≥ EMCi by (7.1) (and by definition if i = 0), U(y − EMC j , q j ,s) > U(y − pi , qi ,s).

If j = 0, then utility maximization would be contradicted. If j ≠ 0, then

p v (q j ; ⋅) > EMC j ,implying α j = 1 and thus that market clearance is violated (as then αi + α j > 1). Having

established (9), the alternative to it holding with strict inequality in the interior of an attendance set would

have it hold with equality (at least for some values of (r,s,y)). This would contradict Proposition 2.               ,

         The results in Proposition 3 are quite intuitive. On boundary loci, students are indifferent to the

adjacent options with tuitions equal to EMC, implying higher tuition would drive away the students. Since

EMC declines with score and increases with income in any college, merit aid and need-based aid are

implied along boundary loci. Likewise, financial aid is provided to the under-represented race. Moving

into the interior of attendance sets, preferences change so that students would have strict preference for the

college attended if EMC-pricing prevailed. The attended college then increases tuition, taking away the

consumer surplus that would otherwise result. Reference to the panels of Figure 1 provides further

clarification. Consider the students who attend the lowest quality college in equilibrium, those lying

between the bottom two lower-left boundary loci (solid curves) in each panel. Those on the bottom

boundary loci are indifferent to the no-college option, their best alternative to college 1, and face tuition

equal to EMC1(Α) at college 1. Moving above the bottom boundary locus slightly, these students continue

to have the no-college option as their best alternative, and college 1 sets tuition (above their EMC1) to make




                                                                                                                    14
them indifferent to no college. This is so until the dashed line between the bottom two boundary loci is

reached (which is only slightly above the bottom boundary locus in Figure 1), this dashed locus equation

(8) with i = 0 and j = 2. Crossing this locus, students have college 2 as their best alternative with access at

p2 = EMC2, and this option dictates tuition at college 1. Similarly, those who attend college 2 have either

college 1 or college 3 as their best alternative, as delineated by the dashed curve, and so on.22

           The price discrimination in the interior of attendance sets is not very pronounced for realistic

parameterizations (as below), implying merit aid, need-based aid, and discounting to the under-represented

race prevails.23,24 Since it is in the interest of any college to attract any student willing to pay more than

EMC, the price discrimination that is practiced will not disrupt the allocation implied by EMC-pricing (i.e.,

Proposition 3c), a variant of a standard result concerning first-degree price discrimination.

           Proposition 4 summarizes the effects of the preference afforded to members of the under-

represented race who attend college in equilibrium.

Proposition 4. a. Higher Utility. Members of the under-represented race who attend college have higher

utility than those from the other race with the same (s,y), with the exception of those from the under-

represented race with no college as their best alternative (who have the same utility as their counterparts

from the other race).

b. Lower Tuition. Members of the under-represented race with the same (s,y) and in the same college as

members of the other race pay lower tuition, with the exception of those from the under-represented race

who have no-college option as their best alternative (who pay the same tuition as their counterparts from

the other race).

c. Higher College Quality. If the shadow value of racial diversity rises along the college quality hierarchy

(i.e., if (q          / q I )i increases with i), then, for given (s,y), the quality of education is at least as high for the
               Γinw


under-represented race.




22
   Boundary loci might meet (but cannot cross), in which case the partition is somewhat more complicated
but tractable. See Epple and Romano (2002) for related examples.
23
   One can derive further results about properties of pricing for particular specifications of utility, including
the Cobb-Douglas specification adopted in our computational model below.
24
   The top college exercises “more” price discrimination since it faces competition only on the lower side of
the quality hierarchy.


                                                                                                                         15
Proof of Proposition 4. a. We show first that, if a student (r,s,y) attends college i in equilibrium, then

pi (⋅) = p v (qi , ⋅) satisfies:

           U(y − pi (⋅), qi ,s) = Max U(y − EMC j (⋅), q j ,s).                                               (10)
                                     j=1,2,...,n; j≠ i


Since αi (⋅) > 0 in equilibrium, market clearance implies p j (⋅) ≤ EMC j (⋅) for all j ≠ i. If pi (⋅) exceeds the


value satisfying (10), then p v (q j ; ⋅) > EMC j (⋅) for some college j ≠ i, a contradiction (or the no college

option is preferred to i, also a contradiction). If pi(⋅) is below the value satisfying (10), then, since

p j (⋅) ≤ EMC j (⋅) for all j ≠ i, pi (⋅) < p v (qi ; ⋅), a contradiction to quality maximization by college i. This

establishes (10). The result then follows since EMCj(nw,s,y) < EMCj(w,s,y) for all j ≠ 0 and

EMC0(nw,s,y) = EMC0(w,s,y).

b. This follows as well from the proof of part a of this proposition.

c. Suppose the alternative, which by Proposition 3c implies:

           U(y − EMCi (r,s, y), qi ,s) ≥ (≤) U(y − EMC j (r,s, y), q j ,s) for r = w (nw),                    (11)

for some (s,y) and colleges i and j having qi > qj. To simplify notation here, let zi ≡ (q             q I )i denote the
                                                                                                Γinw


shadow value of racial diversity. Given the first inequality in (11),

           U(y − EMCi (w,s, y) + z j , qi ,s) > U(y − EMC j (w,s, y) + z j , q j ,s)
                                                                                                              (12)
                                   = U(y − EMC j (nw,s, y), q j ,s),

the inequality in (12) by normality of demand for quality (see (1)) and the equality by definition (see (7.2)

and (7.3)). By supposition, zi – zj > 0, this with (12) implying:

           U(y − EMCi (w,s, y) + zi , qi ,s) > U(y − EMC j (nw,s, y), q j ,s).                                (13)

Since the left-hand side of (13) equals U(y − EMCi (nw,s, y), qi ,s) (again by (7.2) and (7.3)), we have a

contradiction of the second inequality in (11), implying the result.                                                   ,

           The reason members of the under-represented race who attend college and have no college as their

best alternative are not better off than their counterparts from the other race is that colleges price away

surplus and utilities are the same across the races in the no-college alternative. Proposition 4c provides a

sufficient condition, satisfied in our computational analysis, such that gains to the under-represented race



                                                                                                                       16
entail weakly higher quality education. While the condition is not necessary for this result in general,

absent it a nonwhite might choose to attend a lower-quality college than a counterpart white, utility gains

due to a substantial tuition break. It is important to keep in mind that the relatively more favorable

outcomes for nonwhites we find in equilibrium depend on the “lower” distribution of (s,y) associated with

nonwhites. In our model, if fw(s,y) / fnw(s,y), then outcomes are race neutral. While some nonwhites with

the same (s,y) as whites are better off due to affirmative action for realistic parameter values, nonwhite

presence in colleges will be proportionally lower than for whites, so we do not mean to imply nonwhites

are better off as a group.

         As in the example in Figure 1, equilibrium will frequently exhibit within race income and score

stratification. By income stratification, we mean that, for given race and score, whenever a potential

student changes options as income rises, a higher-educational alternative is chosen. Income stratification

will result as a consequence of normality of demand for educational quality, unless preference for income

diversity causes sufficiently rising aversion to higher-income students by colleges as one moves up the

quality hierarchy.25 We find that the shadow value of income diversity does rise at the top of the college

quality hierarchy in our computational model below, but not by enough to disrupt income stratification.

Score stratification for given race and income is defined analogously. A sufficient condition for score

stratification is a weakly increasing shadow value of scores along the quality hierarchy.26 This

characterizes the equilibrium computed below (and numerous related specifications that we have analyzed).

Note that the combination of income and score stratification for each race produces the “diaganolized”

partition into colleges in the panels of Figure 1.

         We do not have a proof of existence of equilibrium. We can show existence of an allocation that

satisfies utility maximization, market clearance, and has all colleges at a local maximum of Problem (6).

The difficulty in confirming that the allocation is an equilibrium is that the quality maximization problem is

not a quasi-concave programming problem, so conditions for global optimality cannot be shown using

standard methods. While we cannot then be certain that we compute equilibria below, because colleges are



25
   For the specification of utility adopted in our computational model, there is a simple condition for
income stratification. See footnote 30.
26
   The shadow value of score in college i is qθ / q I , the negative of the coefficient on s in EMCi (see (7.2)
and (7.3)).


                                                                                                              17
at local optima (and the remaining equilibrium conditions are satisfied), the allocation is at least an

equilibrium if we presume adjustment costs. Suppose that colleges bear adjustment costs:


       ∫∫ [ δ(w,s, y) f
                          w
K(                            (s, y) + δ(nw,s, y) f nw (s, y)]dsdy), with K(0) = K ′(0) = 0 and K ′′ > 0; where δ(r,s, y) is
       S


any deviation from the equilibrium admission policy α(r,s, y). Then for K” sufficiently high, the allocation

we compute is an “equilibrium with adjustment costs.” For expositional ease, when we discuss the

computed allocation below, we refer to it as just an “equilibrium.”


IV. Theoretical Analysis with Proscription of Affirmative Action

             We model the proscription of affirmative action practices by colleges as requiring that college

policies are race blind. A college’s admission and tuition policies are then restricted to be functions of (s,y)

only. Colleges will factor the informational content of (s,y) about race into their decision calculus in an

effort to promote racial diversity.

             Equilibrium is defined analogously. Colleges continue to maximize the same quality index,

solving the modified problem presented below. The market clearance condition is here race blind:

 n
∑ αi (s, y) ≤1for optimal αi (s, y), with αi (⋅) continuing to denote college i’s admission policy. Generally,
i =1

we will continue to use the same notation, but imposing the race-blind restriction on the functional

arguments.

A. Modified College Problem and Solution. Since the races are treated the same, the reservation price

function is also race blind: pv = pv(qi;s,y). College i now solves:

                               Max q(θi , Ii ,µ y µ i , Γinw Γ nw )                                                 (14.0)
                                              nw
                          θi ,Ii ,k i ,µ i ,Γi ,αi (s,y)


s.t.                      αi (s, y)∈[0,1] ∀ (s, y);                                                                 (14.1)


                          ∫∫ p
                                 v
                                     (q(⋅);s, y)αi (s, y)f (s, y)dsdy + Wi ≥ C(k i , Ii );                          (14.2)
                           S


                          ki =   ∫∫ αi (s, y)f (s, y)dsdy;                                                          (14.3)
                                  S




                                                                                                                          18
                            1
                     θi =
                            ki   ∫∫ sαi (s, y)f (s, y)dsdy;                                                            (14.4)
                                  S


                            1
                     µi =
                            ki   ∫∫ yαi (s, y)f (s, y)dsdy;                                                            (14.5)
                                  S


                                 1
                     Γinw =           ∫∫ αi (s, y)Γ
                                                      nw nw
and                                                     f     (s, y)dsdy.                                              (14.6)
                                 ki
                                       S

                    The solution has the same condition (7.4) describing choice of inputs (Ii), and race-blind

admission policy:

                                =1                        >
                                             v            
                     αi (s, y)  ∈ [0,1]  as p (qi ;s, y)  =  EMCi (s, y);                                          (15.1)
                                =0                       <
                                                          

                                                       qθ           qµ
                     EMCi (s, y) = V′ + Ii +              (θi − s) + i (µ i − y)
                                                       qI           qI
                                 q                                                                                     (15.2)
                                     Γinw    nw Γ nw f nw (s, y) 
                            +                Γi −                .
                                     qI             f (s, y)     
                                                                 

The race-blind EMC is analogous to that above (see (7.2) and (7.3)), except for the last term. With and

without affirmative action, the last term in EMC measures the cost of admitting a student type on racial

diversity, but now using (s,y) as a signal of race. Multiplying the term in parentheses at the end of (15.2)

by 1/ki, one has the expected change in the diversity measure Γinw from increasing αi (s, y)f (s, y), which is

                                                                            q
                                                                                Γinw
then multiplied by the dollar cost of maintaining quality ( k i                        ). Admitting types (s,y) with proportion
                                                                                qI

of nonwhites in the population of potential students exceeding the college’s proportion of nonwhites

( Γ nw f nw / f > Γinw ) improves racial diversity, with then negative diversity cost. The diversity cost is, of

course, positive (or zero) for the remaining set of student types.

B. Equilibrium Properties. The strict-quality-hierarchy property (Proposition 1) continues to characterize

equilibrium with the same proof. Again, attendance sets do not overlap in the (s,y) plane, here for the races

combined.27 As well, the properties of pricing and the allocation collected in Proposition 3 have



27
     The proof is analogous to that of Proposition 2.


                                                                                                                             19
straightforward race-blind counterparts, and are shown by analogous arguments. Obviously, nothing akin

to Proposition 4 regarding racial differences for given (s,y) holds here. Score and income stratification are

more easily violated here due to using (s,y) type as a signal of race, although income stratification

continues to characterize the computations below. The existence issue is the same.

     Predicting the effects of proscription of affirmative action on the provision of higher education,

consumption of it by the races, and on normative measures depends on the functional and parametric

properties of the environment. Hence, we turn to our computational specification.


V.       Computational Model

         To provide evidence regarding the quantitative effects of a ban on affirmative action, we employ a

computational counterpart to our theoretical model. We generalize and refine the computational model in

Epple, Romano, and Sieg (2002a). We use the shorthand ERS to refer to that source in the discussion that

follows. In calibrating the model, we seek to characterize the distributions of income and test scores by race

for the U.S. population. In doing so, we employ data from the U.S. Census, data purchased from Petersons

that is a survey of the universe of colleges and universities, data from the NSF WebCASPAR system, and

data on a sample of college students from the National Postsecondary Student Aid Survey of the National

Center for Education Statistics (NCES). In addition, we use parameter estimates from our econometric

analysis in Epple, Romano, and Sieg (forthcoming). The calibration is in 1995 dollars. The computational

model has five “colleges” in addition to the non-college option.

         The model has two races, whites and nonwhites. Data for nonwhites are obtained by combining

data for African American and Hispanic students and households. We set the proportion of nonwhite

potential students to .20, using 2000 Census data. The income distribution of each race is taken to be

lognormal. In ERS, the parameters of the income distribution for each race are chosen to match mean and

median incomes in the U.S. population. Here we modify the calibration so that average income of college

attendees in the computed equilibrium equals the average income in the NCES data. The ratio of the mean

incomes of nonwhites relative to whites is as in ERS and the standard deviations of the logarithms of

income by race are from ERS. This yields ln(y) ~ N(9.92, .764) and ln(y) ~ N(9.85,.746) for whites and

nonwhites respectively.




                                                                                                           20
         As with the distributions of income, the race-conditioned distributions of score are for the

populations of potential students. The distributions thus characterize the scores of college attendees as well

as predicted scores of those who do not attend college. The parameters of the distributions of score in the

model are chosen so that the means and variances of ln(s) conditional on college attendance in computed

equilibrium equal the means and variances of total SAT (in thousands) for white and nonwhite colleges

attendees in the NCES data. This yields ln(s) ~ N(.924,.190) and ln(s) ~ N(.735,.20) for whites and

nonwhites respectively. The correlation of ln(y) and ln(s) for each race is set equal to the correlation for the

population of students in the NCES data, yielding a correlation of .25. This completes the calibration of the

joint distribution of income and score for the two races.

         Endowments per student were chosen to correspond to those in the NSF WebCASPAR data.

Colleges were ranked by SAT score and combined into five groups with an equal number of students in

each group. Endowment per student was then calculated for each group. We assume that a draw of 2% per

year from endowment is allocated to undergraduate education.28 This yielded endowment income per

student of $155, $243, $386, $755, and $4149 for the five colleges.

         The combined utility and quality function is chosen to be Cobb Douglas:

U = (y − p) ⋅ q ⋅ sφ1 ; q = Iφ 2 θφ3 (D y )φ 4 (D R )φ5 ; ln(s) = SAT. The parameters are thus the exponents on own

score, inputs, mean score, income diversity, and racial diversity. We choose these parameters and the

quality of the outside option so that the equilibrium level with affirmative action of college attendance of

the two races combined corresponds to that observed in four-year colleges in the U.S. (estimated in ERS to

be 28.2%) and equilibrium average cost per student approximately equals average instructional

expenditures reported in the NSF WebCASPAR data. The parameters of the utility-quality function are also

chosen so that equilibrium shadow prices on income, score, and race correspond roughly to magnitudes we

obtained from Tobit regressions of financial aid on those variables using the NCES data (Epple, Romano,

and Sieg forthcoming). Those estimates were an approximate $1,100 increase in financial aid per standard

deviation of SAT, $30 dollar reduction in aid per $1,000 increase in family income, and financial aid to




28
  This is a somewhat arbitrary allocation since we do not have data with respect to the allocation of
endowment funds across undergraduate, graduate, and research activities.


                                                                                                                 21
nonwhites relative to whites of $1,500. The exponents on inputs, mean score, income diversity, and racial

diversity in the quality function are .0705, .0825, .02, and .0029 respectively.29

         The custodial cost function (V(k) + F) was chosen to be cubic. Parameters were chosen to generate

colleges that are roughly equal in size and to yield average custodial costs that are approximately one fourth

as large as instructional expenditures per student. The cost function is: 33.43+200k+2,043k2+925,000(k-

k*)3+ Ik. Cost-minimizing scale in the chosen function is k*=.069.

         Comparison of the equilibrium when affirmative action is permitted to the data is provided in

Table 1, with the data based on the five college groupings described earlier. Income, SAT, and racial

composition data are from the NCES. Inputs are instructional expenditures from NSF WebCASPAR. As

the table reveals, input expenditures and SAT scores match reasonably well between the model and the

data. Average SAT and average percent nonwhite also match reasonably well between the model and the

data. In the data, minorities are not under-represented in the bottom tier of colleges, while our model

predicts under-representation in all colleges. Average income from the model closely matches average

income in the data, reflecting our calibration strategy, but the model predicts more income stratification

than is present in the data. In our calibration, we did not impose a match between the model and data of the

percent of college attendees who are nonwhite. Thus, it is encouraging to see that the equilibrium

percentage of college attendees that are nonwhite from the model (14.6%) is only slightly below the

average in the data (15.3%). However, as is evident from the table, the model predicts a more equal

distribution of nonwhites across colleges than is found in the data. Overall, given the parsimony of our

model, we view the match between the model and data as encouraging.


VI. Computational Results

         The top panel of Table 2 provides further detail regarding the equilibrium when affirmative action

is permitted. Nonwhites are under-represented in each college. Note that the shadow prices on racial

diversity ascend in the equilibrium. From part (c) of Proposition 4 it then follows that the quality of

education for nonwhites is at least as high as for whites for given (s,y). This in turn is illustrated by a


29
  The value of φ1 is irrelevant to the equilibrium allocations, and then need not be calibrated to compute
equilibria with and without affirmative action. However, the value of φ1 is relevant to some of the
normative analysis we pursue, and its calibration is discussed below.


                                                                                                              22
comparison of the boundary loci for whites and nonwhites in Figures 1 and 2. The boundary loci are

overlaid in Figure 2 to facilitate comparison of the admission spaces. The lower boundary loci for

nonwhites relative to whites illustrate the improved access by nonwhites to quality colleges as a result of

affirmative action. A comparison of average SAT scores and average incomes across colleges in the upper

panel of Table 2 provides further illustration.30

         Table 2 also reports shadow prices (sp) for score, income, and race, i.e., the coefficients on these

variables in EMC (recall (7.2) and (7.3)). These shadow prices correspond closely to actual variation in

tuition with student characteristics in colleges 1 through 4 in computed equilibrium.31 Those colleges thus

have little market power, with tuitions closely approximating effective marginal costs. In college 5, the

marginal increase in tuition with income is approximately twice as large as the shadow price. The marginal

decrease in tuition with score is approximately half the shadow price on score and the discount to

nonwhites is approximately half the shadow price on racial diversity. These features of pricing in college 5

reflect the greater market power of the top college as compared to the remaining colleges, as it faces

competition only from lower-quality colleges.

         The bottom panel of Table 2 reports the equilibrium outcomes when affirmative action is

proscribed. This change results in a 35% drop in college attendance by nonwhites. This drop is particularly

pronounced in the higher-ranked colleges and is accompanied by a dramatic increase in the shadow price

on racial diversity along the quality hierarchy. In the top college, the attendance by nonwhites drops by two

thirds. Recall that in our computational model, the top “college” represents the top tier of institutions. In the

computed equilibrium the top college is attended by approximately 13.5% of the student population. Thus,

a drop by two thirds in attendance of nonwhites in that set of institutions would be a very large impact. We

should emphasize that our computational model is a Spartan representation of reality, and this should be

kept in mind in thinking about the numerical estimates of the impact of proscribing affirmative action.

However, the computational analysis supports the conclusion that the effects of proscribing affirmative


30
   Income stratification results in this specification if quality multiplied by one plus the shadow value of
income increases along the college quality hierarchy. This condition is satisfied here.
31
   We investigated properties of tuition functions by generating a random sample of students from the
distribution of types. We determined the school each student would attend in equilibrium and the tuition in
that school. We then estimated linear regressions of tuition on income, score, and race for each college. All
coefficients in these regressions were highly significant, and all the regressions have R2 values greater than
.99. The text summarizes findings from these regressions.


                                                                                                              23
action will be substantial and will be increasingly pronounced as one moves up the college quality

hierarchy.

         Admission spaces with and without affirmative action are shown by race in Figure 3. The solid

lines are the boundary loci when affirmative action is permitted. The dashed lines, common to both races,

delineate admission spaces when affirmative action is proscribed. Where the loci are shifted upward by a

ban on affirmative action, college access is more restricted and conversely where the loci have shifted

downward. A combination of three effects on effective marginal cost of admission of type (s,y) from

proscribing affirmative action explains the changes in the admission spaces in Figure 3. Without

affirmative action, (s,y) types with higher ratio of nonwhites in the population than in the college have

lower EMC and are then relatively preferred by the college (recall the last term in parentheses in (15.2)).

Figure 4 shows the boundary loci under the ban and introduces contours with constant ratios of nonwhites.

Admission of relatively higher-income and higher-score types will worsen diversity, and the reverse for

relatively lower-income and lower-score types. As seen in Figure 3, colleges modify their admission

policies as they accept lower-scoring types with high and moderately high income, students who are

relatively likely to be nonwhite, leading to the hump-shaped boundary loci without affirmative action. The

second effect is that, relative to when affirmative action is permitted, the signal of race is weakened under

the ban, this increasing EMC under affirmative action for nonwhites and decreasing it for whites.

Mathematically, this corresponds to the increase in the term in parentheses in (15.2) relative to the

counterpart term in (7.2) for nonwhites, and the reverse for whites (here comparing to (7.3)). This signal

weakening corresponds to the loss in power to discount tuition to nonwhites and charge a premium to

whites. The third effect is the change in the shadow value of racial diversity, which rises in equilibrium

under the ban in all colleges. The three effects approximately offset at high scores for whites, which

implies higher EMC for the same (s,y) for nonwhites due to the second effect. For high scores, boundary

loci are approximately the same for whites but shift out for nonwhites. For whites, a ban on affirmative

action improves college access particularly for those with relatively lower incomes and scores. For

nonwhites, the shift is generally toward more restricted access except for those with relatively lower

incomes and scores.




                                                                                                              24
         The upward sloping segment of the boundary loci under the ban raises the issue of incentive

compatibility since some students have the opportunity to under perform on the exam and gain access to a

higher quality college. The equilibrium allocation is, however, incentive compatible with respect to

claiming a lower s than the actual value. Here we provide an intuitive explanation with proof in an

appendix (available on request). In the equilibrium, we have verified that tuition declines with s in each

college for given y. Hence, no student who would stay in the same college with a lower score would claim

to have such an s. Neither would a student who would attend a higher quality college with a lower score

underreport s. Utility of a student reporting a lower s while staying within any college declines as we have

discussed, and utility of a student reporting an s that places him on a boundary locus is the same in each

college (as is easily shown). Combining the latter facts implies incentive compatibility.

         A comparison of the two panels in Table 2 reveals a rise in average SAT scores of nonwhites in

lower-ranked colleges and a fall in higher-ranked colleges. This is a consequence of the reduced access of

nonwhite students to higher-ranked colleges. We also see a higher average income for nonwhites relative to

whites in colleges. To understand this phenomenon, first note that along the downward sloping portion of

boundary loci (where most students fall), tuition declines as score rises, hence the minimum income level

for admission also declines with score. This coupled with relatively more whites having higher scores

induces lower average incomes of whites in colleges.

         We calculate two normative measures on potential student types of the effects of proscribing

affirmative action. One is the standard compensating variation of the ban. We also calculate the effect on

educational achievement, using the interpretation of the utility function: U = U(y-p,a(q,s)). Reasons to

examine separately effects on achievement are as follows. Social externalities from educational

achievement may be present that would have no effect on compensating variation. Role models provided

by highly educated individuals are one potential example. The compensating variation measure is also

suspect because the utility function may better be interpreted as a reduced form, suitable for describing

behavior but not for standard normative analysis. We have required normality of demand for educational

quality, consistent with observed behavior, but frequently interpreted as a manifestation of borrowing

constraints. Last, because we are studying education, effects on achievement are also intrinsically of

interest. While our results with respect to achievement rely on the assumption that quality affects utility via




                                                                                                             25
its effect on achievement, we emphasize that this assumption is not required for any of our other

computational results.

         We first investigate the effects of affirmative action on achievement. The achievement function

implicit in our Cobb-Douglas specification of utility-quality is a = qsφ1 . We define normed achievement as

proportional to own score: a N = q1 φ1 s. We have thus far not required a calibration for φ1 , since the

equilibria are invariant to the choice of φ1. For calculating effects on achievement, we set the elasticity of

normed achievement with respect to peer ability equal to 20% of the elasticity of normed achievement with

respect to own ability. Thus, φ1 = 5φ3 = .4125. 32 With this calibration of the achievement function, we

obtain the effects of affirmative action on normed achievement that are reported in Table 3. Table 3 shows

the within cell mean of the proportional change in normed achievement from banning affirmative action,

the cells delineated by deciles of income and score for each race. White students generally gain in

achievement, particularly those with lower incomes and ability among college attendees. Nonwhites

generally experience declines in achievement. As is evident from the table, these effects are quite large for

some groups of students. For nonwhites, the largest effects are on those who attend college in the presence

of affirmative action but do not attend college when affirmative action is banned. For white students, the

largest effects are experienced by those who switch from the no-college alternative to college when

affirmative action is banned.

         The effects on household welfare are exhibited in Table 4.33 These are expressed as the within cell

mean of the compensating variation from eliminating affirmative action relative to household income, the


32
   In defining normed achievement and calibrating the effect of peer relative to own ability, we follow
Epple and Romano (1998). Recent evidence provides further support for our calibration. Using data for
college roommates who are randomly assigned, Winston and Zimmerman (forthcoming) study three
colleges. They run separate regressions for the three colleges using cumulative GPA as the dependent
variable, which can be interpreted as estimating our achievement function if GPA is regarded as the
logarithm of educational achievement. This is analogous to our calibration linking the logarithm of score to
SAT. They find a student's own SAT to be significant in all three colleges. They find the effect of
roommate’s SAT score to be relatively significant as well, with significance levels of .06, .01, and .15 in
the three colleges (Table 3). They estimate the effect of roommate SAT relative to own SAT in the three
colleges to be .1 .17, and .1. Our calibration is intended to capture other mechanisms for peer influence in
addition to those studied by Winston and Zimmerman, and we therefore see our chosen value of .2 as being
quite plausible.
33
   A concern that has been raised with respect to affirmative action is not captured by our normative
measures. Affirmative action may stigmatize higher-scoring nonwhite students if it leads those having
incomplete information about students (perhaps instructors and potential employers) to infer their academic


                                                                                                             26
cells defined as for achievement effects. The effects on welfare also tend to be favorable for whites while

unfavorable for nonwhites. Given the relative magnitudes of the shifts in loci exhibited in Figure 3, it is not

surprisingly that the welfare effects for nonwhites are proportionately larger than for whites. The per capita

compensating variation (not as a percentage of income) is only -$8.90, with per capita amounts by race

equal to $33.32 and -$177.82 for whites and nonwhites respectively. The latter values are misleading

because they include potential students who do not attend college in either equilibrium and are unaffected

by the ban. Conditioning on the number of students in college initially, the means by race rise to $111.81

and -$859.03. 34 Thus we see the distributional effects are quite large.

         Tuitions when affirmative action is permitted are displayed in Table 5. These are the within cell

means conditional on attending college in the associated equilibrium. Comparison of the upper and lower

panels reveals the tuition discounts received by nonwhites when affirmative action is permitted.

Comparisons within each panel reveal the variation of tuition with income and score. Within each panel,

tuitions are lowest in the upper right corner. Those able, low-income students convey positive externalities

via aptitude and via enhancement of income diversity. As a result, they receive very large tuition discounts.

For a given income level, the tuition benefits accorded higher-aptitude students are offset to some degree

by the propensity of higher-aptitude students to attend higher-quality, higher-tuition colleges. Thus, within

a given row of either panel, there is less tuition variation than within a column.

         The changes in tuition associated with proscription of affirmative action are exhibited in Table 6,

calculated for students in college in both equilibria. White students with more moderate incomes and

abilities experience tuition decreases while those with high income or high ability experience smaller

decreases and, in some cases, increases. Declines in tuition to whites are largely explained by their no

longer paying a premium for their adverse effect on diversity, and cases of increased tuition by attendance

at a better college. Most nonwhite students experience some tuition increases since discounts to race have

been eliminated. The magnitude of the increase is highest for students with high income or high score and

somewhat less for students with moderate income and ability relative to the overall student population. In

qualification from the mean score of their minority peers in a college. We find the score differential
between whites and nonwhites drops in the bottom four colleges under the ban, substantially in the bottom
two colleges; but rises drastically from 134 to 289 SAT points in the top college with the ban (see Table 2).
The implications of our findings for stigmatization are then mixed.
34
   The percentage of whites that attend college without affirmative action is 29.8 and the percentage of
nonwhites attending is 20.7.


                                                                                                             27
comparing across the tables, it should be recalled that the ranges defining cell boundaries are scaled to

correspond to deciles of the two racial groups. Overall, the magnitude of the changes experienced by

nonwhite students is generally larger than for white students.

         Summarizing, the normative effects on nonwhites from proscription of affirmative action are

decidedly grim. Educational achievement declines on average in every cell of Table 3 but one, as nonwhite

students attend lower quality colleges or are driven out of college, with large effects on the latter subset.

Every subset of nonwhite students affected by the ban has lower welfare. The one group of nonwhite

students that are drawn into higher quality colleges pay higher tuition (at all alternatives) and are worse off,

and the one group that pays lower tuition in equilibrium has this offset by lower quality education. Whites

that are affected significantly by either normative measure gain. Those whites that gain substantially in

educational achievement are those that attend college only without affirmative action, but their welfare gain

is largely eliminated by their tuition payments.


VII. Discussion

         Critics of affirmative action sometimes characterize college admission policies as “quota

systems,” that establish numerical targets for admissions solely based on race. If colleges pursue racial

quotas, they accept a certain fraction of minority students independently of their qualifications. Opponents

of affirmative action have argued that such a system is seriously flawed since it rewards or penalizes

prospective students using a one-dimensional criterion without regard for other qualifications. The

Fourteenth Amendment's Equal Protection Clause of the U.S. Constitution requires that all people must be

treated equally under the law. Moreover, Title VI of the Civil Right Act of 1964 states that “no person in

the United States shall on the grounds of race, color or national origin, be excluded from participation in, be

denied the benefits of, or be subjected to discrimination under any program or activity receiving Federal

financial assistance.”' Racial quotas are generally considered to be unconstitutional following the Supreme

Court's decision in Regents of the University of California v. Bakke, 438 U.S. (1978).

         This raises the question of whether admission and pricing policies implied by our baseline model

discussed in Sections II and III differ from those implied by a quota system. We interpret a quota system as




                                                                                                                28
                                                    nw       nw                nw
one in which administrators set bounds, denoted by Γmin and Γmax , such that: Γmin ≤ Γinw ≤ Γmax
                                                                                             nw
                                                                                                 . In the

               nw     nw
limiting case Γmin = Γmax , and a college commits to admitting a certain fraction of minority students.

         The specification of our baseline model implies that a college that attempts to maximize quality

would not want to adopt quotas. This follows immediately from the observation that quotas impose

additional constraints on colleges that limit their ability to achieve their objective of quality maximization.

In the baseline model, colleges value diversity. However, racial diversity is only one of four factors

characterizing school quality. Thus colleges are facing trade-offs when admitting minority students. In

equilibrium, a college must balance the desire to admit minority students with the need to generate

revenues, the desire to attract highly qualified students, and the objective to achieve socio-economic

diversity.

         Ceteris paribus minority students have the inherent advantage over non-minority students that they

also provide racial diversity. From the perspective of an administrator this advantage is comparable to the

advantage that more academically qualified students have over their less qualified peers. Gifted students

provide a different type of externality than minorities. A minority student with equal academic

qualification and income will get preferential treatment by administrators over a non-minority student with

the same characteristics (Proposition 4). The degree of preferential treatment ultimately depends on the

relative weight that is assigned to racial diversity in comparison to the other three quality components.

         To illustrate the distinction, consider the following comparative static exercise. Suppose that a

downturn in the economy reduces incomes of minorities relative to non-minorities and this further lowers

minority educational achievement (scores) pre-college. While this could obviously have the effect of

further reducing minority presence in colleges in our model, the same would not result with a binding

quota.

         The results of our computational exercises reported in Table 2 indicate that the fraction of

minorities in equilibrium is almost constant across college types when affirmative action is allowed. This

equilibrium thus resembles a quota system at first sight. However, we would like to stress that this finding

is not an inherent feature of our model.

         Proponents of affirmative action in higher education have argued that the currently used admission

policies are justified under the U.S. Constitution. The main legal argument is based on an interpretation of



                                                                                                             29
Justice Powell's opinion regarding the Bakke ruling. This interpretation states that “the educational benefits

that flow from a diverse student body are sufficiently compelling to permit a school to consider race and/or

ethnicity as one of many factors in making admissions decisions through a “properly defined” admission

program.”35 Proponents of affirmative action also point out that current admission policies often do not

differ much from the “Harvard Plan,” which was directly endorsed by Justice Powell and the U.S. Supreme

Court in the Bakke case. They claim that selective colleges would not be able to attract a sufficient number

of minority students if they were not allowed to use race as a criterion in admission policies.

         To illustrate the limitations of achieving diversity using race-neutral admissions, we consider the

version of our model discussed in Section III. An important feature of pricing and admission policies that

describe equilibrium allocations when affirmative action is banned is given by equation (15.2). To

highlight the main differences between equation (15.2) and equations (7.2) and (7.3), it is insightful to

consider the special case in which there exist values of score and income which are perfect signals of race,

i.e., values such that f nw (s, y) > f w (s, y) = 0. For those minority students equation (15.2) reduces to

equation (7.2). In general, score and income are imperfect signals of race. Colleges that are restricted to

use race-blind criteria adopt policies that can be called “admission and pricing on correlation.” Students

who’s observed characteristics imply that they are more likely to be minority students receive some

preferential treatment in admission and financial aid decisions.

         If admission and financial aid policies are race blind, colleges have additional incentives to gather

background information on prospective students. Much of the background information collected by

colleges would be useless if colleges can use race directly. However, family background and geographical

information may be good signals for the race of a prospective applicant -- perhaps better than income and

academic qualification -- and thus may convey important information to administrators. Thus as long as

colleges are allowed to discriminate based on observed variables which are highly correlated with race and

not easily manipulated by a prospective student, colleges will be able to adopt admission and pricing

policies which closely mimic those adopted in equilibrium when affirmative action is allowed.




35
  The citation is taken from the brief in opposition submitted by the University of Michigan in Grutter vs.
Bollinger, p.1.


                                                                                                              30
         Of course, it is doubtful that admission and pricing policies that condition on variables that are

strongly correlated with race and otherwise irrelevant to educational quality would be constitutional, if

current practices would be found unconstitutional by the U.S. Supreme Court. A ban on affirmative action

is only meaningful if it imposes limits on the ability of colleges to price on correlates. This raises some

important questions. Undoubtedly colleges and universities want to provide need-and merit-based financial

aid. Moreover, the U.S. government subsidizes need- and merit-based policies using a variety of programs.

It is hard to believe that any serious policy maker would argue that these types of programs are, in

principle, undesirable.

         Thus pricing on academic qualification and income may be desirable even if pricing on race or

pricing on other correlates is not. As we have seen above, this allows administrators to pursue racial

diversity indirectly by adopting pricing and admission policies that take the signal value of income and

academic qualification into consideration. Thus, our specification of the model that considers the effects of

banning of affirmative action is a hybrid case. It assumes that administrators are still allowed to pursue

racial diversity, but are limited to race-blind admission policies. Our computational analysis indicates that

if colleges can only use income and score as signals for race, they are severely limited in their ability to

attract minority students and achieve racial diversity. If we interpret a ban on affirmation in a strict a

sense, then such policies may also be unconstitutional. Of course, requiring colleges to use race-blind

admission and financial aid policies is a lot easier to monitor and enforce than requiring them to abandon

diversity as a quality criterion. Nevertheless, we have also considered a version of our model in which

colleges and students do not have any preferences for racial diversity (Epple, Romano, and Sieg, 2002a).

This model captures the scenario that is most likely to occur if a strict ban of affirmative action is adopted

by the Supreme Court. The resulting admission and pricing policies are then not only race-blind, but also

do not exhibit pricing on correlation. Our analysis suggests that the effects of banning affirmative action

would be even more pronounced in this scenario than those reported in Section VI of this paper.36


VIII. Conclusion


36
  There are some important differences in the predictions of the two models. For example, the seemly
counter-intuitive finding that the mean SAT scores of minorities declines by almost 200 points in the top
schools is an artifact of pricing on correlates. Such a steep decline does not occur if pricing is solely merit-
and need-based.


                                                                                                               31
         In this paper, we have considered the role that affirmative action and racial diversity plays in

admission and financial aid policies of colleges. We have presented a model that captures a number of

important features that characterize the market of higher education in the United States. We would like to

emphasize that our model is a Spartan version of reality, and this should be kept in mind in thinking about

some of the quantitative predictions derived in the computational analysis. Nevertheless, the model allows

us to explored how market equilibria might be affected if affirmative action programs are banned in a

number of meaningful ways. We have adopted a general equilibrium perspective throughout this paper

which rests on our conjecture that the effects of banning affirmative action will not be small or negligible.

         Ultimately, our analysis is positive in nature and focuses on simple comparative static exercises.

Independently of what one thinks about the desirability of racial diversity and affirmative action, our

analysis clearly documents that a ban of affirmative action and the resulting adoption of race-blind

admission policies will likely have a substantial impact on the racial composition of colleges, the

achievement of minority students, and the distribution of gains resulting from higher education in the

population. The composition of the most selective colleges in the country and the types of minority

students that are currently attending these colleges and the bottom tier of colleges are likely to be most

affected by such a ban.




                                                                                                             32
References.

Arcidiacono, Peter and Sean Nicholson, “The Mirage of Peer Effects: Evidence for U.S. Medical Schools,”
mimeo, Duke University, 2000.

Betts, Julian R. and Darlene Morell, “The Determinants of Undergraduate GPA: The Relative Importance
of Family Background, High School Resources, and Peer Group Effects,” Journal of Human Resources,
1992, 107, 797-817.

Bowen, William G. and Derek Bok, The Shape of the River: Long Term Consequences of Considering Race
in College and University Admissions, Princeton University Press, 1998.

Cancian, Maria, “Race-Based v. Class-Based Affirmative Action in College Admissions,” Journal of
Policy Analysis and Management,” Winter 1998, 17 (1), 94-105.

Chan, Jimmy and Erik Eyster, “Does Banning Affirmative Action Harm College Quality?” American
Economic Review, forthcoming.

_______________ , “Admission Impossible? Self Interest and Affirmative Action,” mimeo, Johns Hopkins
University, July 2002.

Coleman, James et.al., Equality of Educational Opportunity, Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing
Office, 1966.

Ding, Weili and Steven Lehrer, “Do Peers Affect Student Achievement in China’s Secondary Schools?”
Working Paper University of Pittsburgh, 2001.

Epple, Dennis and Richard Romano, “Competition Between Private and Public Schools, Vouchers, and
Peer-Group Effects,” American Economic Review, March 1998, 88(1), 33-62.

________________ , “Educational Vouchers and Cream Skimming,” working paper, University of Florida,
2002.

Epple, Dennis, Romano, Richard and Holger Sieg, “On the Demographic Composition of Colleges and
Universities in Market Equilibrium,” American Economic Review Papers and Proceedings, May 2002a,
92(2), pp. 310-314.

__________________ , “Admission, Tuition, and Financial Aid Policies in the Market for Higher
Education,” working paper, Carnegie Mellon University, April 2002b.

_________________ , “Peer Effects, Financial Aid, and Selection of Students into Colleges and
Universities,” Journal of Applied Economics, forthcoming.

Evans, William N., Oates, Wallace E. and Robert M. Schwab, “Measuring Peer Group Effects: A Study of
Teenage Behavior,” Journal of Political Economy, 1992, 100, 966-991.

Henderson, V., Mieszkowski, P. and Y. Sauvageau, “Peer Group Effects and Educational Production
Functions,” Journal of Public Economics, 1978, 10 (1), 97-106.

Hoxby, Caroline, “Peer Effects in the Classroom: Learning From Gender and Race Variation,” NBER
Working Paper No. 7867, August 2000.

Kane, John and Lawrence M. Spizman, “Race, Financial Aid Awards and College Attendance: Parent and
Geography Matter, American Journal of Economics and Sociology, January 1994, 53(1), 85-97.




                                                                                                     33
Kane, Thomas J., “Do Test Scores Matter? Racial and Ethnic Preferences in College Admissions,” in The
Black-White Test Score Gap, Christopher Jencks and Meredith Phillips, eds., Washington, D.C., Brookings
Institution Press, 1998.

__________ , “Basing College Admission on High School Class Rank,” mimeo, June 2000, University of
California Los Angeles.

Long, Mark, “Race and College Admissions: An Alternative to Affirmative Action?” mimeo, University of
Michigan, 2002a.

______ , “College Applications and the Effect of Affirmative Action,” mimeo, University of Michigan,
2002b.

Loury, Glenn C., Fryer, Roland G. and Tolga Yuret, “Color-Blind Affirmative Action,” mimeo, April 2003,
Boston University.

Manski, Charles F., “Identification of Endogenous Social Effects: The Reflection Problem,” Review of
Economic Studies, 1993, 40, 531-542.

_______ and David Wise, College Choice in America, Harvard University Press, 1983.

Robertson, D. and J. Symons, “Do Peer Groups Matter? Peer Group Versus Schooling Effects on Academic
Attainment,” London School of Economics Centre for Economic Performance Discussion Paper No. 331,
1996.

Rothschild, Michael and Lawrence J. White, “The Analytics of Pricing of Higher Education and Other
Services in Which the Customers Are Inputs,” Journal of Political Economy, June 1995, 103 (3), pp. 573-
623.

Scotchmer, Suzanne, “Public Goods and the Invisible Hand,” in J. Quigley and E. Smolensky, eds., Modern
Public Finance. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1994, 98-119.

Summers, Anita and Barbara L. Wolfe, “Do Schools Make a Difference?” American Economic Review,
September 1977, 67 (4), 639-652.

Winston, Gordon C. and David J. Zimmerman, “Peer Effects in Higher Education,” forthcoming in
Caroline Hoxby, ed., College Decisions: How Students Actually Make Them and How They Could,
University of Chicago Press for NBER.

Zimmer, Ron and Eugenia Toma, “Peer Effects in Private and Public Schools: Across Country Empirical
Analysis,” University of Kentucky Working Paper, May 1997.

Zimmerman, David J., “Peer Effects in Academic Outcomes: Evidence from a Natural Experiment,”
Williams Project on the Economics of Higher Education Discussion Paper No. 52, 1999.




                                                                                                       34
                                                                FIGURE 1


                  Boundary and Indifference Loci for Whites                 Boundary and Indifference Loci for Nonwhites
         120000                                                        120000
                                                                                                  ____ Boundary Loci
         100000                                                        100000
                                                                                                  ------- Indifference Loci
          80000                                                         80000

          60000                                                         60000




Income
                                                              Income
          40000                                                         40000

          20000    ____ Boundary Loci                                   20000

                  ------- Indifference Loci
              0                                                             0
               400                  800         1200                         400            800                 1200

                                        SAT                                                       SAT




                                                                                                                              35
                               FIGURE 2

                  Boundary Loci for Nonwhites and Whites
                    when Affirmative Action Permitted
         120000

         100000       --Nonwhites
                                           --Whites

          80000

          60000




Income
          40000

          20000

              0
               400             800               1200

                                     SAT
                                                           36
                                                            FIGURE 3

                         Boundary Loci for Whites                                 Boundary Loci for Nonwhites
                     with and without Affirmative Action                        with and without Affirmative Action

         120000                                                     120000


         100000                                                     100000


          80000                                                      80000


          60000                                                      60000




                                                           Income




Income
          40000                                                      40000


          20000                                                      20000


              0                                                          0
               400             800              1200                      400             800              1200

                                     SAT                                                        SAT




                                                                                                                      37
                                 FIGURE 4

             Boundary Loci when Affirmative Action Proscribed
                                    and
         Contours of Constant Density of Nonwhites Relative to Whites
         120000

         100000


          80000


          60000




Income
          40000


          20000              25%
                                20%
                                   15% 10%        5%
               0
                400             800            1200

                                      SAT




                                                                        39
                       TABLE 1

                 Comparison of Calibration
                      To Data

College inputs         incomes        % non-white    Average Sat

                        Model

  1      $    3,825     $   32,756           14.2%           944
  2      $    4,107     $   38,725           14.4%           962
  3      $    4,562     $   47,363           14.5%           986
  4      $    5,644     $   62,178           14.7%          1028
  5      $   11,005     $   90,657           15.5%          1159

                       Data

  1      $    3,997         $40,105          28.8%           876
  2      $    5,042         $44,812          15.1%           967
  3      $    5,620         $51,365          10.1%          1015
  4      $    7,700         $60,215          11.3%          1067
  5      $   12,083         $66,095          11.3%          1193




                                                                   40
                                                                                      TABLE 2

                                                                             Affirmative Action Permitted

                              Average SAT                                    Average Incomes
 College         k       white nonwhite total         sp SAT    inputs       White    Nonwhite sp income % nonwhite      sp race   Quality Average Tuitions
Non-college     71.4%                                                                                        21.7%                  1.317
    1            6.4%       977       810       943   $ 892 $ 3,825      $   33,333 $ 29,223       -0.033    14.2%       $ 1,108    1.565 $        4,833
    2            6.2%       995       829       962   $ 941 $ 4,107      $   39,559 $ 33,666       -0.030    14.4%       $ 1,175    1.570 $        5,028
    3            6.0%      1019       855       986   $ 1,020 $ 4,562    $   48,569 $ 40,117       -0.027    14.5%       $ 1,292    1.579 $        5,366
    4            5.6%      1061       900      1029   $ 1,210 $ 5,644    $   64,046 $ 51,005       -0.026    14.7%       $ 1,583    1.599 $        6,203
    5            3.8%      1186      1052      1159   $ 2,087 $ 11,005   $   94,403 $ 66,740       -0.034    15.5%       $ 2,915    1.681 $       10,090

                                                                             Affirmative Action Prohibited

 College         k       white    nonwhite   total    sp SAT   inputs                 incomes     sp income % nonwhite   sp race Quality Average Tuitions
Non-college     71.4%                                                                                           23.6%    $    -    1.317
    1            6.4%       974       870       953   $ 874 $ 3,771      $   32,171   $ 35,084        -0.033    11.9%    $ 1,305   1.563 $       4,840
    2            6.2%       989       859       963   $ 929 $ 4,075      $   38,041   $ 41,772        -0.030    11.2%    $ 1,498   1.569 $       5,072
    3            6.0%      1010       866       981   $ 1,020 $ 4,572    $   46,671   $ 51,324        -0.028     9.9%    $ 1,901   1.577 $       5,471
    4            5.6%      1044       895      1014   $ 1,233 $ 5,739    $   61,934   $ 68,522        -0.026     7.8%    $ 3,021   1.598 $       6,429
    5            3.8%      1161       888      1107   $ 2,177 $ 11,372   $   92,967   $ 100,028       -0.035     5.0%    $ 9,326   1.677 $      10,772



Definitions

sp SAT        Shadow price per 200 SAT points
sp income     Shadow price on income
sp race       Shadow price on racial composition




                                                                                                                                               41
                                                     TABLE 3

                            Average within Cell of Percent Change in Normed Achievement

                            Rows are Deciles of Income and Columns are Deciles of Score

Whites
         -           680         764        824      876       924       973      1024     1085     1168     1600
$     7,638             0          0          0         0         0         0         0        0        0     0.02
$   10,689              0          0          0         0         0         0         0        0        0     0.08
$   13,621              0          0          0         0         0         0         0        0        0     0.14
$   16,755              0          0          0         0         0         0         0        0        0     0.36
$   20,333              0          0          0         0         0         0         0        0        0     1.36
$   24,675              0          0          0         0         0         0         0        0     2.19     2.43
$   30,353              0          0          0         0         0      0.24      6.66     7.02     3.71     0.12
$   38,677          3.76       11.99      12.03      10.9      9.63      8.63         1    -0.18    -0.13     0.15
$   54,128         17.61        2.49       0.15      0.09         0      -0.1     -0.13    -0.07    -0.08     0.09
     inf              3.7       1.55       0.96      0.69      0.51      0.35      0.24     0.05    -0.08    -0.32

Nonwhites
              0   478.69      566.68    630.12     684.33       735    785.67    839.88    903.3    991.3     1600
$    5,591             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0    -0.17
$    7,763             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0    -0.36
$    9,836             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0    -0.67
$   12,040             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0    -1.51
$   14,545             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0    -3.36
$   17,571             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0    -7.79
$   21,508             0           0         0          0         0         0         0        0        0   -19.96
$   27,251             0           0         0          0         0         0     -0.35    -7.59   -22.32   -27.69
$   37,837         -0.94       -6.03     -10.8     -14.17    -17.48    -20.85    -24.33   -22.38   -15.91    -7.47
    Inf             5.04       -1.25     -0.77      -1.11     -1.64     -2.21     -2.89    -3.62    -5.07      -7.7




                                                                                                                      42
                                                 TABLE 4

                                     Average within Cell of CV/Income

                        Rows are Deciles of Income and Columns are Deciles of Score

Whites
            0   680         764        824       876       924          973    1024    1085    1168    1600
$    7,638         0           0          0         0         0            0       0       0       0    0.01
$   10,689         0           0          0         0         0            0       0       0       0    0.01
$   13,621         0           0          0         0         0            0       0       0       0    0.01
$   16,755         0           0          0         0         0            0       0       0       0    0.02
$   20,333         0           0          0         0         0            0       0       0       0    0.05
$   24,675         0           0          0         0         0            0       0       0    0.01    0.14
$   30,353         0           0          0         0         0            0    0.03    0.13    0.22    0.14
$   38,677      0.01        0.08       0.18      0.26      0.31         0.35    0.34    0.26    0.18    0.09
$   54,128      0.98        0.77       0.59      0.46      0.36         0.29    0.23    0.17     0.1    0.04
    Inf         0.88        0.49       0.35      0.25      0.19         0.14    0.09    0.04       0   -0.04

Nonwhites
            0    479         567        630       684       735       786       840     903      991   1600
$    5,591          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -0.04
$    7,763          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -0.05
$    9,836          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -0.09
$   12,040          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -0.16
$   14,545          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -0.34
$   17,571          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -0.67
$   21,508          0           0         0         0          0        0          0       0       0   -1.55
$   27,251          0           0         0         0          0        0          0   -0.09   -0.74   -3.43
$   37,837          0       -0.08     -0.24     -0.47      -0.77    -1.13      -1.61   -2.28   -2.98   -3.79
    Inf         -0.25       -0.93     -1.27      -1.5       -1.7    -1.87      -2.02   -2.18   -2.39   -2.76




                                                                                                               43
                                                          TABLE 5

                                      Average Tuition when Affirmative Action Permitted

                              Rows are Deciles of Income and Columns are Deciles of Score

Whites
            0         680       764          824          876          924         973      1024        1085        1168         1600
$    7,638      .         .         .              .            .            .         .           .           .           $    916
$   10,689      .         .         .              .            .            .         .           .           .           $   1,283
$   13,621      .         .         .              .            .            .         .           .           .           $   1,707
$   16,755      .         .         .              .            .            .         .           .           .           $   2,141
$   20,333      .         .         .              .            .            .         .           .           .           $   2,628
$   24,675      .         .         .              .            .            .         .           .           $   3,812   $   3,163
$   30,353      .         .         .              .            .            .         $   4,731   $   4,487   $   4,092   $   3,490
$   38,677      .         $   6,085 $     5,898    $   5,662    $   5,427    $   5,194 $   4,963   $   4,719   $   4,407   $   3,920
$   54,128      $   6,868 $   6,457 $     6,209    $   6,024    $   5,858    $   5,692 $   5,492   $   5,260   $   5,054   $   4,872
    inf         $   8,601 $   8,512 $     8,477    $   8,450    $   8,471    $   8,466 $   8,572   $   8,698   $   8,835   $   8,993

Nonwhites
            0         478       567          630          684          735         786       840         903         991         1600
$    5,591      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $      759
$    7,763      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $     1,062
$    9,836      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $     1,376
$   12,040      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $     1,653
$   14,545      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $     1,961
$   17,571      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $     2,343
$   21,508      .         .         .              .            .            .         .         .           .           $     2,835
$   27,251      .         .         .              .            .            .         $   4,288 $     4,089 $     3,740 $     3,241
$   37,837      $   5,869 $   5,624 $     5,378    $   5,174    $   4,986    $   4,789 $   4,570 $     4,366 $     4,111 $     3,839
    inf         $   6,838 $   6,656 $     6,549    $   6,492    $   6,444    $   6,396 $   6,404 $     6,411 $     6,486 $     6,607




                                                                                                                                        44
                                                         TABLE 6

                                            Average within Cell Change in Tuition

                                Rows are Deciles of Income and Columns are Deciles of Score

Whites
          0          680         764       824           876            924         973        1024       1085       1168       1600
$    7,638 .                .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .               105
$   10,689 .                .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                66
$   13,621 .                .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                39
$   16,755 .                .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                17
$   20,333 .                .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                -9
$   24,675 .                .          .          .             .             .            .          .               -81        -30
$   30,353 .                .          .          .             .             .                -137       -121        -88        -25
$   38,677 .                    -346       -305          -254          -210         -165       -139       -111        -76        -15
$   54,128          -388        -310       -234          -189          -160         -145       -123        -85        -58         -9
    inf              447         132         68            39            27            9        -11        -34        -41        -78

Nonwhites
            0        479         567       630           684            735         786        840        903        991        1600
$    5,591      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .          .
$    7,763      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .              1,413
$    9,836      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .              1,359
$   12,040      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                881
$   14,545      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                701
$   17,571      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                450
$   21,508      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                244
$   27,251      .           .          .          .             .             .            .          .          .                498
$   37,837      .           .              591           576            639         703         764        764       777          505
    inf             1,551        732       600           547            515         465         385        296       114         -109




                                                                                                                                        45
46
