                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                      ADDRESSING THE NATURAL RESOURCE CURSE:
                           AN ILLUSTRATION FROM NIGERIA

                                          Xavier Sala-i-Martin
                                          Arvind Subramanian

                                          Working Paper 9804
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9804


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




We are grateful to Francesco Trebbi for valuable research assistance. Thanks are due to Doug Addison, Chris
Lane, and Dani Rodrik for helpful comments and discussions. Errors remain our own.The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Xavier Sala-i-Martin and Arvind Subramanian. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
© notice, is given to the source.
Addressing the Natural Resource Curse: An Illustration from Nigeria
Xavier Sala-i-Martin and Arvind Subramanian
NBER Working Paper No. 9804
June 2003
JEL No. O1, O4, O5, O55, O57, Q0

                                           ABSTRACT

Some natural resources – oil and minerals in particular – exert a negative and nonlinear impact on
growth via their deleterious impact on institutional quality. We show this result to be very robust.
The Nigerian experience provides telling confirmation of this aspect of natural resources. Waste and
corruption from oil rather than Dutch disease has been responsible for its poor long run economic
performance. We propose a solution for addressing this resource curse which involves directly
distributing the oil revenues to the public. Even with all the difficulties of corruption and
inefficiency that will no doubt plague its actual implementation, our proposal will, at the least, be
vastly superior to the status quo. At best, however, it could fundamentally improve the quality of
public institutions and, as a result, transform economics and politics in Nigeria.

Xavier Sala-i-Martin                                  Arvind Subramanian
Department of Economics                               International Monetary Fund
Columbia University                                   700 19th Street, NW
420 West 118th Street, 1005                           Washington, DC 20431
New York, NY 10027
and NBER
xs23@coulmbia.edu
                                             4




                                      I.   INTRODUCTION

       Nigeria has been a disastrous development experience. On just about every
conceivable metric, Nigeria’s performance since independence has been dismal. In PPP
terms, Nigeria’s per capita GDP was US$1,113 in 1970 and is estimated to have remained at
US$1,084 in 2000. The latter figure places Nigeria amongst the 15 poorest nations in the
world for which such data are available.

        Nigeria, unfortunately, fares much worse on measures of poverty and income
distribution. Between 1970 and 2000, the poverty rate, measured as the share of the
population subsisting on less than US$1 per day increased from close to 36 percent to just
under 70 percent (Chart 1A). This translates into an increase in the number of poor from
about US$19 million in 1970 to a staggering US$90 million in 2000 (Chart 1B).1

        Similarly, the income distribution also deteriorated very sharply. Chart 2 plots the
distribution of income for four years, 1970, 1980, 1990, and 2000. It is striking that over time
the two tails of the distribution have become fatter, signifying that more and more people
have been pushed towards poverty (the left hand side of the distribution) and towards
extreme wealth (the right hand side). To illustrate: whereas in 1970 the top 2 percent and the
bottom 17 percent of the population earned the same total amount of income, in 2000 the top
2 percent had the same income as the bottom 55 percent.

        Table 1 reports the growth rate of GDP and its volatility for Nigeria. In terms of
growth since 1960, Nigeria fared worse than the average country but better than oil
producing countries. It is also noteworthy that Nigeria’s economy was substantially more
unstable—reflected in the standard deviation and coefficient of variation of growth rates—
than other countries, including other oil producing countries.2

       These developments, of course, coincided with the discovery of oil in Nigeria.
Chart 3 depicts the revenues that Nigeria has obtained from oil since1965. Over a 35-year
period Nigeria’s cumulative revenues from oil (after deducting the payments to the foreign
oil companies) have amounted to about US$350 billion at 1995 prices. In 1965, when oil
revenues per capita was about US$33, per capita GDP was US$245. In 2000, when oil
revenues were US$325 per capita, per capita GDP remained at the 1965 level. In other
words, all the oil revenues—US$350 billion in total—did not seem to add to the standard of


1
  These calculations are based on Sala-i-Martin (2003). We use the original definition of
poverty line of the World Bank, which is one dollar a day in 1985 prices.
2
 It turns out that the greater instability—relative to other oil producers—is not a
consequence of oil’s greater weight in GDP: in the sample, the share of oil in GDP for oil
producing countries was 9.5 percent compared with 8.1 percent for Nigeria.
living at all. Worse, however, it could actually have contributed to a decline in the standard
of living?

        This paper has three objectives developed in three sections. First, in Section II we use
cross-section empirical analysis to demonstrate that stunted institutional development—a
catch-all for a range of related pathologies, including corruption, weak governance, rent-
seeking, plunder, etc.—is a problem intrinsic to countries that own natural resources such as
oil or minerals. The resulting drag on long-run growth from having resources can be
substantial. Second, in Section II we establish that Nigeria’s poor economic performance
stems largely from having wasted its resource income. Finally, in Section IV we propose a
solution for Nigeria to accelerate institutional change, which would involve distributing the
bulk of the oil revenues directly to the people. In the absence of measures to improve the
quality of institutions and avoid the problems created by oil rents, we remain deeply
pessimistic about Nigeria’s long-run prospects. The final section concludes.


     II. THE NATURAL RESOURCE CURSE: REVISITING THE EMPIRICAL LITERATURE

        Is the detrimental impact of oil on development unique to Nigeria or is it—the oft-
cited “natural resource curse”—a more general phenomenon? From a policy perspective,
while it is important to know if a curse exists, it is perhaps more important to know the
mechanism by which it casts its spell. Identifying the mechanism allows a better stab to be
made at prescription.

         In the theoretical economics literature, three channels of causation from natural
resource abundance to lower growth have been identified.3 First, natural resources generate
rents which leads to rapacious rent-seeking (the voracity effect), whose adverse manifestation
is felt through political economy effects as in Lane and Tornell (1995) and to increased
corruption (Mauro, 1995; and Leite and Weidmann, 1999) which adversely affects long-run
growth. We shall refer to this effect more broadly as the institutional impact of natural
resources.

     Second, natural resource ownership exposes countries to volatility, particularly in
commodity prices, which could have an adverse impact on growth through an increase in

3
  Isham et. al. (2003) provide an excellent summary of the mechanisms of causation
identified in the economics as well as in the political science literature. In the latter, emphasis
is placed on the “rentier” effects, whereby large revenues from natural resources allow
governments to mollify dissent and avoid accountability, insulating governments from
pressures for institutional reform; and “anti-modernization” effects, whereby governments
successfully thwart pressures for modernization and institutional reform because their
“budgetary revenues are derived from a small workforce that deploys sophisticated technical
skills that can only be acquired abroad.”
fertility. Finally, natural resource ownership makes countries susceptible to Dutch Disease—
the tendency for the real exchange rate to become overly appreciated in response to positive
shocks—which leads to a contraction of the tradable sector. This outcome, combined with
the (largely unproven) proposition that tradable (usually manufacturing) sectors are
“superior” because of learning-by-doing and other positive externalities, leads to the
conclusion that natural resource ownership exerts a drag on long-run growth.

        Hausman and Rigobon (2002) state our understanding of the impact of natural
resources as follows: “The concern that natural resource wealth may somehow be
immiserating is a recurring theme in both policy discussions and in empirical analysis. The
empirical regularity seems to be in the data but understanding its causes has been a much
harder task.” This supposed empirical regularity derives originally from the work of Sachs
and Warner (1995), who showed, based on standard cross-section growth regressions, that
the curse of natural resource-ownership is substantial, manifested in such countries growing
slower, on average, by about 1 percent per year during the period 1970–89. Variations of this
basic results can be found in Leite and Weidmann (1999) and Bravo-Ortega and De Gregorio
(2001).

         In their empirical work, Sachs and Warner (1995), and Leite and Weidemann (1999)
attempt to unravel the potential channel of causation, but without great success. Given the
Nigerian experience, we are particularly interested in exploring the channel that operates
through corruption and institutional quality. The recent work (Hall and Jones, 1999, and
Acemoglu et. al., 2001) on institutions provides another reason to revisit the natural resource
literature. Our key results, are in sharp contrast to the commonly-held view about the impact
of natural resources (especially Sachs and Warner, 1995), validating this revisiting of the
empirical literature.

        More recently, Collier and Hoffler (2002) have shown that natural resources
considerably increase the chances of civil conflict in a country. According to their estimates,
the effect of natural resources on conflict is strong and non-linear. A country that has no
natural resources faces a probability of civil conflict of 0.5 percent, whereas a country with
natural resources-to-GDP share of 26 percent faces a probability of 23 percent. Civil conflict,
of course, is an extreme manifestation of institutional collapse and the work of Collier and
Hoffler (2002) is therefore suggestive of a role for natural resources in affecting institutional
quality more generally.

        A recent paper by Isham et. al. (2003) tests the proposition that natural resources
affect economic growth through its adverse effect on economic institutions. Although our
paper focuses on Nigeria, we do test a similar proposition in section II. Our section II differs
from the Isham et al. (2003) paper in some respects. First, we employ a different basis for
measuring natural resources, which also allows us to test for nonlinear effects. Second, in
order to deal with the usual problem of what additional explanatory variables to include, we
use the robust variables identified by Sala-I-Martin, Doppelhoffer and Miller (2003). Third,
and perhaps more importantly, our core results are subject to a greater degree of robustness
checks than in the paper by Isham et. al. (2003).
Econometric specification
        As discussed earlier, three channels of influence from natural resources to growth
have been identified in the literature: the impact through terms of trade volatility,
overvaluation of the real exchange rate, and institutional quality. Our empirical specification
is simple and general enough to capture these three effects:

growth1970–98 = µ+βConditioning Variablesi + φVolatility of Pricesi + δOvervaluation of
Exchange Ratei + γInstitutional Qualityi + λNatural Resourcesi + εi                          (1)

where εi is the random error term. If all the channels of causation from natural resources to
growth are captured in equation (1) and if all the variables are correctly measured, there
should be no need for the natural resources term. In practice, however, neither of these can be
ruled out, hence the inclusion of this term.

        A number of specification issues arise. First, institutional quality will in general be
endogenous and also subject to measurement error. Simple OLS estimation will therefore be
incorrect. Accordingly, and in line with recent developments (Hall and Jones, 1998, and
Acemoglu et. al., 2001), we will adopt an instrumental variable (IV) estimation strategy,
using the instruments recently identified in the literature. Two sets of instruments are
available—mortality rates of colonial settlers (due to Acemoglu et. al., 2001) and fraction of
the population speaking English and European languages (due to Hall and Jones, 1998). In
much of this paper we will rely on the latter set because they are available for a much larger
group of countries, although we will also test whether our results are robust to the former set
of instruments.

        A second issue relates to the choice of conditioning variables and the problem of
endogeneity related to them. In regard to the former, the strategy we deploy is to identify
those variables that have been statistically proven to be the most robust determinants of
growth. Sala-i-Martin, Doppelhofer and Miller (2003) have shown that out of a universe of
about 70 variables that can plausibly affect growth, about 17 variables are statistically robust
to deserve inclusion. In other words, for 17 of the 70 variables analyzed the probability of
inclusion increased after observing the data (so that the posterior was larger than the prior
probability of inclusion). Sala-i-Martin et al. (2003) also show that the sign certainty
probability for all these “robust” variables is well over 95 percent. We narrowed this further
to 5 variables, which appear to be robust in the growth equations even after the inclusion of a
measure for institutions (appropriately instrumented). Thus, we chose initial income
(lnRGDP70), primary school enrolment (p60), the relative price of investment goods
(iprice1), prevalence of malaria (MALFAL66), coastal population (within 100 kms of
coastline) over coastal area (DENS65C) as the set of covariates that feature in all the
regressions. But to ensure that our choice is not selective or biased, we check the robustness
of our results to inclusion of all of the other 12 covariates identified by Sala-i-Martin et. al.
(2003).
        Clearly, many of these covariates—indicators of health and education—are
endogenous in general. This is why we take the initial period values of these variables.
Hence, the only variable we instrument for is institutions. This specification and estimation
strategy yields implicitly a second equation that we estimate which will be very important for
our analysis. This equation is the first-stage for the institution equation. Thus,

Institutional Qualityi = η + νConditioning Variablesi + θVolatility of Pricesi +
ρOvervaluation of Exchange Ratei + τInstruments for Institutional Qualityi + τNatural
Resourcesi + υi                                                                              (2)

         This equation will allow us to test whether natural resources have an indirect effect on
growth (in addition to any possible direct effect captured in equation (1)) via their impact on
institutional quality.4 This equation represents one of the key innovations of this part of the
paper, allowing us to test for one of the channels of causation from natural resources to
growth.

        In this part of the paper, we will therefore be interested in the sign, size, and
significance of the direct impacts of natural resources on growth and hence the coefficients β,
φ, δ, and γ in equation (1), and also of the indirect impacts via institutional quality and hence
the coefficients θ, ρ, and τ.

Data description and sources
        The data and sources are described in detail in the appendix. Here we highlight some
key issues. Growth rates of per capita PPP GDP are from the World Bank’s World
Development Indicators. Following Rodrik, Subramanian, and Trebbi (2002) and Easterly
and Levine (2003), the institutional quality measure we use is due to Kaufmann, Kraay, and
Zoido-Lobaton (2002). This is a composite indicator of a number of elements that capture the
protection afforded to property rights as well as the strength of the rule of law. We also check
for robustness to the other measures of institution quality compiled by Kaufmann et. al.,
(2002).

         We measure natural resource endowments in different ways to ensure that our results
are robust. Sachs and Warner’s preferred measure was the share of exports of natural
resources in GDP in 1970. We enlarge this to include (i) the share of the exports of four types
of natural resources—fuel, ores and metals, agricultural raw materials, and food—in GDP
and total exports; (ii) the share of the exports of all natural resources in total exports; and
(iii) a dummy for oil producing countries. The question arises whether some of these
variables could be endogenous—after all countries could have high share of natural resources
in economic activity because of slow growth. To address this concern, we use initial period

4
  The implied exclusion restriction is that the instrument INSTRi does not appear in equation
(1).
values of the natural resource variables for the estimations, with 1970 and 1980 serving as
alternative initial periods.

Results
        The results for the growth and institution equations are presented in Tables 2–9. All
the tables, except Tables 4 and 8, contain two panels—Panel A presents the estimation results
for the second-stage equation for growth, and Panel B to the corresponding first-stage
regressions for institutional quality.

        Table 2 presents the basic specification with natural resources treated as an aggregate
and expressed in terms of their share in GDP (SHARENATRSGDP) or in total exports
(SHARENATREEXP) for the two periods 1970 and 1980. All the equations include the five
basic conditioning variables, all of which, in the growth equation, are significant and
correctly signed with coefficient estimates that are close to that found in previous studies. In
particular, it is worth noting that the convergence coefficient is between -1.6 percent and—
1.9 percent, which is consistent with the magnitude obtained in growth regressions (Barro
and Sala-i-Martin, 1995). The significance of the institutional quality terms is also consistent
with the recent work of Acemoglu et. al (2002). The coefficient on the instability term
(measured as the standard deviation of the terms of trade between 1970 and 1998 multiplied
by the share of resource exports in GDP) is significant, although not consistently, and the
overvaluation term is never significant and is hence dropped from all the equations.5

        As Panel A of the Table shows, the different measures of natural resources are
insignificant and change signs between 1970 and 1980, suggesting the lack of any direct
impact from natural resources to growth. This is in contrast with the findings of Sachs and
Warner (1995) who found a significant negative impact.

        The institution regressions, in Panel B, however, present a different story. In four of
the four cases, natural resources are significant (at the 5 and 1 percent levels) and negatively
signed, implying that natural resources are detrimental to institutional quality. The overall
picture that appears to emerge is that natural resources have a negative impact on growth via
their effect on institutions and that once institutions are controlled for they have no further
impact on growth.

        To gauge the quantitative significance of this indirect effect, consider the equations
with natural resources expressed as a share of total exports. Note that the standard deviation
for the share of natural resources in total exports is about 29 percentage points (mean of
66 percent) in 1980 and the standard deviation for institutional quality is about 1.03. A unit
standard deviation increase in the share of natural resources in total exports will lead to a
deterioration in institutional quality of 0.259 (28.8*.009, where the latter is the coefficient of

5
 The overvaluation term was insignificant in nearly all specifications when included on its
own and also when were interacted with the various natural resource variables.
natural resources in the institution equation). This represents a 0.259 standard deviation
change in institutional quality which in turn results in a 0.36 percent decline (0.259*1.43,
where the latter is the coefficient on institutional quality in the growth equation) in the annual
average rate of growth. Thus, a one standard deviation increase in the share of natural
resources in exports is associated with a reduction in annual per capita GDP growth of about
0.36 percent.6

         Table 3 analyzes whether it is appropriate to treat all natural resources alike.
Theoretical models would suggest that while they should exert similar effects in terms of
their instability and overvaluation effects, the impact of different natural resources on
institutional quality could be very different. In particular, oil and minerals give rise to
massive rents in a way that food or agricultural resources do not. Isham et. al (2003) refer to
them as “point-source” natural resources. It is the lobbying for and allocation of the rents
associated with such resources which is detrimental to economic and political institutions (as
in Lane and Tornell, 1995). In Table 3, the four natural resources are combined into two—
one for fuel and ores (fuelandmineralshare) and one for food and agricultural raw materials
(foodandagrishare)7 (measured in terms of their share in total GDP and exports)—and
entered instead of the aggregate share.

        The aggregate results in Table 2 appear to be an average of diverging effects at the
level of individual resources. The coefficients on growth of the two natural resource terms
are insignificant. But in the institution regressions, the coefficients of the fuel and mineral
variable is consistently negative and significant, usually at the 1 percent level, while the other
natural resource term switches signs and is generally not insignificant, a pattern that will be
evident in virtually all of the regressions. This strongly confirms our priors that fuel and
minerals have different impacts on institutional quality compared with other natural
resources, a finding confirmed by Isham et. al. (2003).

        The quantitative impact of the individual resources is broadly similar and potentially
large. Taking column 4 as the core specification yields the result that a one-standard
deviation in the endowment of minerals and ores is associated with slower growth of about
0.37 percent per annum. Finally, column (6) in Table 3 introduces an oil dummy, which
yields the interesting result that oil creates a beneficial effect on growth, once institutions are
controlled for. But the impact on institutions of oil is significantly negative.8
6
  Note that the equation with the share of natural resources in GDP in 1980 yields the same
quantitative impact (standard deviation of SHARENATRSGDP80 in the sample is 0.115 and
the coefficient is -2.29, yielding a growth impact of 0.37 percent).
7
    Respectively fuels, ores and metals, agricultural raw materials, and food.
8
  In column (3) of Table (2), we enter the four different natural resource variables
individually. In the institution equation, the fuel and minerals variables behave quite
similarly, although they do appear to have different direct effects on growth.
        Table 4 explores whether the effect of natural resources is linear. This is done by
successively introducing dummies for shares in total exports exceeding 20, 30, 40, 50 60, 70,
and 80 percent, respectively. The interesting results relate to the institution equation (and
hence the growth equations are not reported). The noteworthy regularity is the monotonic
increase in the (absolute value of the) size of the coefficient and the precision of the
estimates. For example, the coefficient on the dummy for fuel and mineral shares exceeding
80 percent is -0.97, nearly three times that of the dummy for fuel share exceeding 20 percent.
Formally, these results suggest that the impact of natural resources is nonlinear; that is, the
marginal (negative) impact of natural resources on institutions depends positively on the
level of natural resources itself. Evidently, oil corrupts and excess oil corrupts more than
excessively.

         Table 5 checks whether the results are sensitive to the list of the conditioning
variables. As discussed earlier, Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003) identified 17 variables that are
potentially worthy of inclusion. Our core specification contains 5 of these. We successively
introduced in this core each of the other 12 variables, and Table 5 reports the results of
introducing 5 of them—proportion of land area within tropics (TROPICAR), life expectancy
at birth in 1960 (LIFE060), the number of years a country is open (YRSOPEN),
ethnolinguistic fractionalization (AVELF), and a variable measuring the fraction of
population that is Confucian (CONFU). The core result relating to the detrimental impact of
fuel and minerals on institutions remains robust—even the magnitude of the coefficients is
stable.9

         In the last column of Table 5, we undertake a slightly different kind of robustness
check relating to the institution equation. The finding that resources have a negative effect on
institutional quality controlling for the level of real income may not be terribly interesting or
surprising. If natural resource income is indeed manna from heaven with no effect at all on
institutions, then we would expect a negative correlation between natural resources and
institutions conditional on total (resource and non-resource) income.10 Hence, a test for
whether natural resources have a negative effect on institutions should be conditioned not on
total income but on non-resource income. To do this, we replaced the 1970 level of GDP in
the institutions equation with that in 1960. Since many of the oil discoveries were made after
1960, one can expect that the 1960 level of income is relatively, albeit incompletely,
uncontaminated by income from natural resources. The results, presented in column (6),
suggest that the core result relating to the negative impact of natural resources remains
robust.


9
  The results when the other covariates are introduced are exactly the same and are not
reported for efficiency. The only variable that changes the results is the Latin American
dummy (see below).
10
     We are grateful to Dani Rodrik for this point.
         Table 6 checks whether the results are robust to alternative measures of institutional
quality. We replaced the rule of law variable successively by four other measures of
institutional quality (from Kaufmann et. al., 2002) that capture respectively voice and
accountability (VOICE), the effectiveness of government (GOVEFF), the control over
corruption (CONCORR) and political stability (POLSTAB). The impact of natural resources
on each of these measures is strong and statistically significant.

        Table 7 undertakes other robustness checks.11 In column 1, we use the Belsey-Kuh-
Welsch (1980) test to check whether individual observations exert unusual leverage on the
coefficient estimates, discarding those which do so. Two observations—Egypt and
Malaysia—are influential. Even with these observations dropped, the coefficient estimates in
the growth and institution regressions remain statistically unaffected. In column 2, regional
dummies are introduced. While the dummies for east Asia and sub-Saharan Africa are
themselves significant in the growth regression, the results on the natural resource variables
remain broadly unaffected.12 Fuel and minerals continue to exert a strong negative impact on
growth (significant again at the 1 percent level) via their adverse effect on institutional
quality. That the results on the fuel and minerals variable survive with the inclusion of the
regional dummies is remarkable.

         In column (3), we narrow the sample to developing countries. The results on fuel and
minerals remain broadly unchanged. The coefficient on the fuel and minerals variable drops
in the institution equation drops to -1.9, but the overall impact remains broadly unchanged
because the coefficient of the institution variable in the growth equation goes up from 1.2 to
1.57. In column (3), we replace the Hall and Jones instrument for institutions with the
Acemoglu et. al. (2001) settler mortality. The negative effect of fuel and minerals on
institutions remains robust and significant at the 1 percent level. Interestingly, the settler
mortality instrument sharply increases the convergence coefficient from less than -2 percent
to -2.9 percent, which is on the high side, suggesting that this specification might be more
fragile.

        In the preceding tables, we held the sample size constant to facilitate comparison
across specifications. In Table 8, we re-estimate the preferred specifications for larger
samples. In view of the fact that the binding constraint on sample size is the growth variable
and that we are particularly interested in the impact of natural resources on institutional

11
   In the rest of the equations, column (4) in Table 3 is treated as the core specification. But
virtually all the results obtain whether the individual natural resource variables are expressed
in terms of export shares in 1970,1980, or for the period 1960–2000, or as a share of GDP in
1970, or whether the fuel variable is replaced by an oil dummy.
12
  The dummy for Latin America is insignificant and its introduction renders the regression
estimate very imprecise, yielding implausible coefficient values, and hence is dropped from
the analysis.
quality, we report only the first-stage equations for institutions. In column 1, the basic
specification using the individual natural resources is estimated with a sample size of 84
rather than 71 (see Table 3). In column 2, the sample is restricted to developing countries. In
both cases, the negative impact of fuels on institutions and the insignificant impact of the
other natural resources holds robustly. In columns (3) and (4) the same exercise is repeated
replacing the natural resource variables with the oil dummy and the results remain
unchanged.

The results can be summarized as follows:

   •   First, in aggregate, there natural resources appear to have a strong, robust, and
       negative effect on growth by impairing institutional quality. Once institutions are
       controlled for, there is either very little effect of natural resources on growth or even a
       positive effect. In other words, owning natural resources on balance may still be a
       blessing rather than a curse in contrast to the findings of Sachs and Warner (1995)
       and Isham et. al. (2003). But there is a channel through which the curse operates,
       addressing which could make natural resources more of a blessing or less of a curse.
   •   Second, this aggregate picture, however, obscures diverging patterns between the
       different natural resources in one important respect. In particular, it is fuel and
       minerals—that typically generate rents that are easily appropriable (“point-source”
       natural resources)—that have a systematic and robust negative impact on growth via
       their detrimental effect on institutional quality. This effect is quantitatively
       significant, amounting to lower growth of about 0.36 percent per year. Other
       resources do not seem to adversely affect institutional quality. This differential impact
       is significant in itself but is also consistent with the different attributes of natural
       resources.
   •   Third, the impact of natural resources is nonlinear. In particular, the negative
       marginal impact of resources on institutional quality depends on and increases with
       their level.


                              III. THE NIGERIAN EXPERIENCE

       Two broad themes pervade any macroeconomic account of Nigeria’s post-
independence development experience: Waste and Dutch disease. We provide evidence that
suggests that Dutch disease is an inadequate explanation for Nigeria’s growth performance.
The waste explanation, on the other hand, appears to be overwhelming, with oil a key factor
causing a whole series of pathologies that have led to the waste.

The evidence on waste
        Chart 4 provides a growth decomposition of Nigeria’s performance since 1965. The
two notable features are the rapid accumulation of physical capital, averaging 6.7 percent per
year; and negative TFP growth, averaging 1.2 percent per year. That oil was responsible for
the physical capital accumulation is suggested by the timing of the surge in investment:
between 1973 and 1980, the years of the two major oil price shocks, the capital stock grew at
an average rate of 14 percent per year, which represented a three-fold increase in the
country’s capital stock in 8 years. A substantial part of the increase was accounted for by
public capital spending financed by the surging oil revenues. Public investment as a share of
GDP rose by over 7 percentage points during the period of the oil shocks. Between the 1960s
and the end of the second oil shock the share of the public sector in capital formation
increased from 20 percent to 55 percent.

        Another telling piece of evidence about the quality of investment comes from
capacity utilization in manufacturing, a substantial portion of which is government-owned.
Capacity utilization, which averaged about 77 percent in 1975, started declining very
quickly, to about 50 percent in 1983 (Chart 5). Since the mid-1980s, capacity utilization has
never exceeded 40 percent, and has languished at around 35 percent. In other words, two-
thirds of the investment in manufacturing by the government is consistently wasted.

       The overall picture that emerges is that Nigeria has over-invested in physical capital
and has suffered from poor productivity. Quality has suffered at the expense of quantity.
Bevan et. al (1998) describe this accurately:

“This conjunction of a powerful political impetus to public investment and a lack of civil
service skill is what makes Nigeria’s economic history in this period so spectacular: almost
the entire windfall was invested, and yet ... there was nothing to show for it.” (p.67).

       But how did oil make its impact felt in a way that affected Nigeria’s economic
fortunes and contributed to such spectacular inefficiency reflected in negative rates of TFP
growth and substantial waste of the capital stock that had been built up based on oil
revenues? Anecdotal evidence for this is abundant.

        In fundamental ways, the politics of Nigeria has been shaped by getting access to the
revenues from oil. The Biafran war of the late 1960s was in part an attempt by the eastern,
predominantly Ibo region, to gain control over oil reserves. Successive military dictatorships
have plundered oil wealth, the most notable being General Abacha, and stories of transfers of
large amounts of undisclosed wealth abroad are legion in Nigeria. The rise in government,
following the surge in oil revenues, reflected an attempt by the North to appropriate oil
revenues, and was manifested in the large share of the civil service being accounted for by
Northerners. Oil revenues financed the building of the famous Ajakouta steel complex in the
1970s, which until today has not produced a commercial ton of steel. Moreover, as Bevan et.
al. (1998) note the oil windfall enabled the government to increase its expenditures and thus
provide increased opportunity for kickbacks.

        Thus, it would seem plausible that not only has oil wealth been squandered but it has
fundamentally altered politics and governance in Nigeria. More formal evidence for this is
provided in Table 9, which examines whether Nigeria is an unusual performer either in terms
of growth or of institutional development. This is done by introducing a Nigeria dummy in
the core specifications. In column (1), the Nigeria dummy is significant: evidently, Nigeria
fared significantly worse in terms of institutions but apparently significantly better in terms
of growth. But when the natural resource variables are included (column (2)), Nigeria
continues to be a positive outlier in the growth equation, although it is no longer an outlier in
the institution equation. In other words, Nigeria, like other oil and mineral producing
countries, has suffered from poor institutional quality stemming from these resources. Based
on the estimates in column (1), poor institutional quality in Nigeria has contributed to lower
long-run growth of 0.5 percent per year. This, in many ways, is the real legacy of oil in
Nigeria.

Relative Prices and the role of Dutch Disease
        In most accounts of Nigerian economic history, the impact of the oil windfall on the
economy via its effect in raising the relative prices of nontradables to tradables occupies a
central role in explaining poor economic performance. In this section, we explore this in
further detail. We consider in turn what happened to relative prices and then to relative
quantities.

        In Charts 6A and 6B, we plot four indicators for the relative price of tradables to non-
tradables: the first two might be called the external relative price and the latter two the
internal relative price.
    • the real effective exchange rate using the official rate;
    • the real effective exchange rate using the parallel rate;13
    • the relative prices of tradable to non-tradables in the GDP deflator;
    • the relative prices of tradables to nontradables in the CPI.

        Since the early 1980s, all four indicators have moved in broadly the same direction: a
substantial favoring of tradables in the 1980s and the first half of the 1990s which has been
reversed since. For the 1970s, however, the indicators diverge. Specifically, the two internal
price indicators suggest that, in fact, relative prices started moving in favor of tradables from
1970 onwards. The real effective exchange rate indicators, on the other hand, point to
unfavorable tradable price movements for all of the 1970s, with the unfavorable trend being
more pronounced for the official exchange rate indicator. A major reason for the diverging
trends in these indicators is the behavior of food prices in the aftermath of the first oil price
shock. As Bevan et. al. (1998) explain, the expansion in the size of government led to a large
influx of labor away from the rural toward the urban areas where job opportunities were
growing. The resulting reduction in the size of the rural labor force led to a sharp decline in
agricultural production and a rise in food prices.
13
   Evidence in favor of Nigerian Dutch disease involves real effective exchange rate
calculations using the official rate (see Pinto, 2002). It is not at all obvious why this is
appropriate. As Reinhart and Rogoff (2002) remind us in their revision of post-World War II
exchange rate history, parallel rates are the mechanism by which fixed exchange rate regimes
become de facto floating ones. The more liberal the parallel market and the more the
transactions carried out in it, the more appropriate it is to measure relative price movements
based on the parallel rate.
        Regardless of how the relative prices are measured, it seems that oil prices cannot
account for their movements. For example, the correlation between oil prices and the two real
exchange rate indices between 1968 and 2000 is -0.05 and -0.11, respectively: correctly
signed but very weakly related (indeed statistically insignificant). The correlation between oil
prices and the two internal price indicators is 0.39 and 0.26, respectively: statistically
significant but incorrectly signed!

Relative quantity movements
        The prime exhibit for the Dutch disease explanation of Nigerian economic decline are
Charts 7A and 7B, which show a decline in the share of agriculture in GDP from 68 percent
in 1965 to 35 percent in 1981. The decline was especially pronounced for the cash crops—
cocoa, oil palm and rubber, which saw a decline in output of about 75 percent between 1970
and 1981. Many commentators have argued that the big difference between the Indonesian
and Nigerian response to oil windfalls was the ability of the Indonesian government to keep
the exchange rate competitive and ensure the health of the agricultural sector through
investments in technology, access to inputs, and provision of extension services (see Gelb et.
al, 1988).

        The counterpart of the decline in agricultural sector was the rapid growth in the size
of services (especially government services) and manufacturing, in which the government
decided to invest heavily. The share of services and manufacturing, over this same period
grew by 16 and 8 percentage points respectively. This suggests that the real problem may
well have been not that the agriculture sector declined but that the size of government in
economic activity increased, with seriously detrimental effects in the long run.

          Furthermore, it should be noted that this re-allocation of resources had probably very
little to do with relative price movements: they were simply the result of the government’s
decision on how to utilize the oil windfalls. In fact, if resources had moved in response to
relative prices, manufacturing should not have seen the expansion that it did because if
anything relative prices were moving against it. In the period of the windfalls, public
absorption increased sharply while private absorption declined: changes in the share of
agriculture (private sector) and services and manufacturing (public sector) thus were the
counterparts in the production side of the national income accounts of the changes in
absorption.

        A final problem with the Dutch disease explanation for Nigeria is that even if its
detrimental effects in the 1970s were real, it is hard to explain why a reversal of the Dutch
disease, indeed a sustained and prolonged depreciation for nearly 15 years failed to offset or
mitigate the previous problem. Looking at Charts 7A and 7B, it is remarkable how constant
the shares of the various sectors in GDP have been since 1980 despite some pronounced
changes in relative prices. Agriculture witnessed a brief boom in the mid-1980s, but
manufacturing has been in secular decline since the 1980s despite favorable relative price
movements.
        To summarize, the Dutch disease explanation for Nigerian economic performance is
not entirely satisfactory because:

     •   it is not clear that relative price movements did in fact consistently disfavor the
         tradable sector even in the immediate aftermath of the oil windfalls;
     •   relative price movements were not correlated with oil prices so that how oil windfalls
         were used rather than oil prices per se were more important in determining relative
         prices; in fact, decisions to keep the official exchange rate appreciated, were to a great
         extent related to the need to create rents (via the black market premium) at a time
         when oil revenues were in decline.14 Thus exchange rate policy—clearly
         endogenous—was driven by rent and fiscal imperatives and the relative price
         consequences were almost a by-product (see Gelb et. al., 1988).
     •   the sustained movement of relative prices in favor of tradables in the 1980s and early
         1990s did not reverse Nigeria’s economic prospects;
     •   although the role of the agricultural sector declined, it was offset by an increase in the
         size of the government sector in economic activity, and the poor performance of the
         latter may well be the most important for Nigeria’s long term economic decline.

        If the investments in services and manufacturing that Nigeria made in the aftermath
of the oil windfalls had been efficient, yielding the returns that say they did in East Asia, we
would now be celebrating successful diversification away from agriculture by the Tiger on
the Niger rather than bemoaning the victimhood of agriculture.


                       IV. NIGERIA: FROM ANALYSIS TO PRESCRIPTION

        If natural resources do indeed lead and are intrinsic to a decline in institutional
quality, what can be done to mitigate or offset this impact? Natural resources are an
endowment, an unalterable geographical feature of the economic landscape. It would seem,
therefore, that countries that have them are stuck, destined to institutional decline and poor
growth.

        But can there be a way out? One, somewhat glib, answer would be to say: increase
transparency and accountability in the management of oil revenues. But who will exercise
these functions? In the past, this proved impossible. With the ongoing consolidation of
democracy in Nigeria, a positive response to this question is conceivable. But even the most
optimistic observer would acknowledge that, given the inheritance of dysfunctional or
decimated public institutions bequeathed by 4 decades of military dictatorships, the transition
from holding periodic democratic elections to having a fully functioning democracy is bound

14
   In fact, the weak correlation between oil prices and the real exchange rate reported earlier
may have been stemmed precisely from the tendency of the government to keep the exchange
rate appreciated during periods of low oil prices.
to be long. After all, institutions are known to exhibit stubborn persistence. In the case of
Nigeria, this skepticism is warranted precisely because of oil revenues. While Nigeria is now
formally a democracy, the balance of power between citizens and public officials, including
those at state and local government levels, is inordinately skewed in favor of the latter by
virtue of their easy access to oil revenues. This perpetuates politics, even democratic politics,
as patronage.

        In the previous sections we showed that the main problem affecting the Nigerian
economy is the fact that the oil revenues that the government gets are regarded as manna
from heaven which tends to corrupt institutions and lower the long-term growth prospects.
Starting from this premise, the logical conclusion is that the best way to deal with the
problem is to transform Nigeria into a “non-oil” economy. One way to do this is to prevent
government officials from appropriating the oil-resources directly. These resources should be
distributed directly to the Nigerian citizens, ultimately their true and legitimate owners. This
would replicate or simulate a situation in which the government has no easy access to natural
resource revenue, just as governments in countries without natural resources. If this “easy
revenue” (and the incentives for corruption that it generates) is eliminated, much of the
problem would disappear. One of the direct benefits of this would be that Nigerians would
have an initial endowment superior to that of other nations.

        Of course one implication of our proposal would be that the government would lose
revenue. In fact, if our proposal were to be implemented, the government would all the
revenue that it now collects directly from the sales of oil. Although this would seem tragic to
some, this is indeed what happens to most governments in the world. And, as most of those
governments, if the Nigerian authorities want to raise resources for necessary public
expenditures, they would have to raise them by taxing the Nigerian citizens and companies.
Our reading of the evidence is that it would be much more difficult to mismanage the
resources that come from taxes than those that fall from the sky like manna. This would
therefore create the right incentives for governance, incentives that are now sorely missing,
and would contribute to reduce corruption and the rest of the problems that affect the
Nigerian institutions today.

        For reasons explained below, it would be desirable to embed our proposal in the
constitution as an inalienable right of each Nigerian to have access to an equal share of oil
proceeds. This would take the rents out of public officials, thereby undermining the
corroding process engendered by the rents, which have detrimental economic consequences.
Of course, this is a radical proposal, and a number of issues arise in relation to them. We
analyze each of them, but we would underscore that converting this idea into a concrete plan
for implementation should be the task of Nigerians. Accordingly, we would suggest that a
national conference, comprising a broad cross-section of Nigerian society, be convened at the
earliest possible date to debate and give effect to this proposal.

       This solution is rendered more urgent by the prospects of the future exploitation of
Nigeria’s vast reserves of natural gas. Nigerians celebrate the discovery of these reserves.
Sadly, we fear that natural gas may only aggravate and prolong the “curse.”
         Our estimates are that the likely magnitude of payments to individual households
under our proposal would be large. We estimate them under two different scenarios: under
current and future production levels each household would get about US$140 which would
amount to US$425 in per capita PPP terms (roughly $760 per adult), representing about
43 percent of current per capita PPP GDP and well above the US$1 per day poverty line.
With full exploitation of gas, these amounts could increase to upwards of US$750 per capita
(US$1330 per adult) in PPP terms.15 Clearly these sums are non-negligible from the point of
view of individual households. If debt relief were to result from our proposal, as we argue
that it will, then the total income to households would be higher still, amounting to an
additional US$100 per capita in PPP terms.

1. Creating a Fund or distributing current revenues
         One possible response to managing revenue volatility is to create a Fund.16 The best-
known examples are Norway and Kuwait, although there are many others (see Davis et. al.
2001). Based on an analysis of a number of countries Davis e. al. (2001) conclude that, funds
“are, however, not an easy—nor necessarily an appropriate—solution to the fiscal policy
problems faced by these countries.” The underlying reasoning is that the conditions that
generally thwart sound fiscal policy are likely to undermine the effectiveness of funds.
Particularly, where institutional capacity—to monitor and exercise accountability—is weak,
there is a very serious risk that Funds will be “raided.” This temptation is likely to be greater
the larger the size of the Fund. If the problem with oil is, as demonstrated above, weak
institutions and corruption, a fund is more likely to exacerbate the problem than address it.
Hence, calling for the creation of a Fund in Nigeria with stringent mechanisms to “ensure
accountability and prevent the misuse of resources” begs the question of how these
mechanisms can be created given the presence of oil. In this context, it is particularly
inappropriate to invoke Norway as a model for Nigeria because Norway’s oil discovery was
made when its institutions were already highly developed.

        For these reasons, the creation of a fund in the spirit of the Alaska Fund, whereby
what is distributed to the public is not the oil revenue directly but the income from the Fund
is not something that we would recommend. Moreover, if savings were an important issue,
that could be addressed at the level of deciding how much oil to extract rather than “over-
extracting” and saving the proceeds, which has the pitfall noted earlier. Leaving oil in the
ground, unextracted, is a form of saving.


15
   Considerable uncertainty surrounds the estimates of the future revenue flows from natural
gas relating to the arrangements for their marketing and the terms offered to companies for
its exploitation. But what is indisputable is the vast amount of reserves and its potential for
exploitation.
16
  Theoretically, a Fund could be created for two reasons: to manage volatility (stabilization
funds) and/or to save for future generations (savings funds).
2. Who should receive the revenues?
        An important question is who should receive the oil revenues. Of course the natural
answer would be: all Nigerian citizens! But when one thinks about this, some issues arise.
For example, if all citizens, young and adult, are entitled to a lump-sum transfer, incentives
to increase fertility (and therefore population growth) are introduced into the system. We do
not think that distorting family incentives and introducing fiscally-induced fertility is
something that Nigeria needs today. If only adults should be entitled to the lump-sum
transfer, the incentive to have more children would be lessened since the revenue associated
with extra children would be postponed for eighteen years.

       It could also be argued that revenues should be distributed among women only. A
number of studies have shown that development outcomes are strongly correlated with the
degree of empowerment of women within a household (Sen, 1999). Whether this would be
acceptable in Nigeria remains to be seen.

3. Fiscal issues
        Another question is whether all the revenues should be distributed or whether a
certain share should be retained because of the government having to provide certain
essential services (public goods). As mentioned earlier, our proposal is based on the
conceptual principle of trying to convert an economy into one that notionally did not have
oil. One way to achieve or simulate this would be to distribute all the revenues to the people
and require the government to rely on normal fiscal principles to determine appropriate levels
of taxation and expenditure.

        This would create the right incentives for governance, incentives which are currently
sorely missing. Currently, oil accounts for a substantial share of total government revenues.
As such, the government has little incentive to provide services efficiently because the
discipline exerted by the need to tax the public is largely absent: oil revenues are manna from
heaven and keep flowing regardless of what the public sector delivers. Thus even though
some would argue that the point of distributing the money and getting it back would
essentially constitute an administrative waste, we believe that this waste would be justified
by the radically altered incentives for governance.

        Of course, given that government cannot be starved of the revenue to provide
essential services, there could be a transition period during which the share of overall
revenues that is paid out progressively increases, culminating in a 100 percent distribution,
say at the end of a finite period.

       The notion that fiscal issues, including those relating to fiscal federalism, should be
addressed “as if” Nigeria were a normal non-oil economy would argue in favor of making
households or individuals rather than states as the beneficiary of the revenues. One natural
question that arises is whether regions or households in regions that are the victims of the
environmental degradation caused by oil should be compensated in the form of greater
revenues to reflect the marginal environmental cost. After all, the derivation principle in
Nigeria, whereby oil producing regions receive a higher share of revenues is in part a
response to these environmental costs. While this might be seen as politically desirable, we
would argue that issues related to environmental compensation and/or other political
considerations should be dealt with through normal tax/expenditure principles. The
distribution of revenues is purely related to the initial allocation of endowments following
which normal fiscal principles would take over. The endowment instrument should not be
burdened with having to address other objectives. Moreover, given that not all the oil causes
environmental degradation (a point that will become even more important as natural gas
exploitation starts acquiring importance), it would seem more practicable and simple to treat
all sources of revenues similarly. Indeed, Ahmed and Singh (2003) argue for oil production
excises to address externalities.

        Our proposal would have a radical impact on fiscal federalism discussions. Above all,
it would create strong pressures for decentralization because the tax base would shift down
toward the states and local governments, allowing social service expenditures, which are and
should be delivered at the regional levels, to come closer to the unit of taxation.17 Thus,
expenditure and tax decision-making would be aligned closer, improving fiscal management.
Currently, there are significant vertical imbalances in Nigeria with revenues of sub-federal
entities financing between 20 and 40 percent of their current revenues, with the rest made up
of transfers of oil revenues from the federal level. Ahmed and Singh (2003) argue that the
current revenue sharing system is a key factor in predisposing the Nigerian
intergovernmental arrangement to instability and inefficiency. In their view, a separation of
revenues bases, with more stable revenue sources for the regions would be desirable for
countries such as Nigeria and Indonesia. They envisage the central government taking on the
stabilization function. Our proposal would be in line with their proposals for a larger and
more stable base for sub-federal levels, while at the same time obviating the need for the
federal government to provide the stabilization function. As we argue below, this
stabilization function is better provided by the private sector than by the government.

        While there would still be a need to determine what goods should be provided at the
federal levels, how they should be financed etc., there would be an improvement over the
status quo which is focused on sharing the “manna” from heaven rather than on conducting
discussions within the context of a normal fiscal framework. Our proposal would also create
pressures to improve tax administration and collection, pressures for which are largely absent
now.

4. Implementation issues
        Implementing a system of transfer would no doubt raise huge administrative
problems. The problems are very real and would have to be addressed. We would suggest
that the transfers be made on a six-monthly or annual basis to minimize the administrative

17
   Of course, it is possible that consumers would rather not have the government provide
some services; our proposal would allow consumers to decide on the scope of government
itself, which might well lead to a reduction in government size.
costs. Preferably, the payments should be made based on actual data made public by the
government and the oil companies as to how much revenues were paid by the companies to
the government.

        Citizenship or residence could be a condition for receiving these payments. Nigeria
could take advantage of the fact that it has just implemented a voter ID system and issued
cards to all eligible voters. It would therefore seem practical to link payments to voter
identification and hence make payments to adults or adult women. Given Nigeria’s short
four-year election cycle, the voter ID would be periodically updated, facilitating the making
of the oil payments. An unintended consequence of our scheme, and one that would facilitate
participation in elections, would be the incentive to obtain voter registration.

        Implementation would be facilitated if all eligible Nigerians had a bank account so
that revenues could simply be transferred from government accounts to individual ones.
Indeed, requiring a bank account as a precondition for receiving revenues could encourage
financial intermediation. Alternatively, and as an interim arrangement, the government could
post checks to individual households as is done in the United States for tax refunds.

        We are under no illusion about the likely corruption and leakage in the distribution
process. Creative arrangements to minimize these should be devised. But we would argue
that there is an important ex post check on the abuse that can result. Corruption and abuse
will inevitably mean that some eligible households will not receive their rightful share of the
oil proceeds. They would then have the constitutional right to seek redress through the
judicial system, which, warts and all, appears to be one of the few institutions that functions
and that provides some scope for citizens to ensure accountability. In essence, the defaults
between the current system and the one we are proposing would change: under the former,
citizens rely on public officials and institutions for receiving the oil money indirectly through
public services; under our proposal they would have an automatic—and justiciable—right to
receive the proceeds directly.

5. Debt relief
        Our proposal also offers a way out of the ongoing and sterile debate between
international donors and Nigeria on the issue of debt relief. Nigerian officials and the public
rightly wish to see the burden of external debt lifted, especially since a sizable part of the
debt was “odious” (contracted by dictators) and in which there was a large degree of creditor
complicity. But donors, even those who accept the economic and moral arguments, are wary
about providing debt relief. They justifiably fear that any savings from relief may well be
misused as other public resources have been, making them reticent about providing it despite
the enormous pressure from within Nigeria and international civil society. Under our
proposal, the “savings” from debt relief would also be distributed directly to the private
sector, alleviating donor’s legitimate concerns and making them more amenable to granting
debt relief.
6. Need for cooperation by foreign oil companies
        Implementing our proposal and minimizing the corruption and waste would require
the cooperation of the foreign oil companies in a number of important respects. To prevent
the government from under-stating the revenues it has available for distribution, oil
companies should independently report the exact amounts they have paid to the government,
which could be verified by independent audit. Information on their levels of production and
the prices received would help in corroborating government figures.

8. Political economy
        Our proposal is open to one fundamental criticism. If vested interests have been
responsible for the squandering of oil revenues in the past, why would they allow our
proposal, which would denude them of all money and power, acquiesce to it.

        Our response is that in some ways radical change of the sort we are proposing might
be easier to accomplish than incremental change. Waste and corruption are issues that
resonate deeply with every Nigerian: one could even hazard that the average Nigerian
considers this to be the fundamental problem in Nigeria. As such, it might be easier to rally
popular opinion in favor of such a proposal in a way that the vested interests might find
difficult to resist. And especially if the push for change can be codified as a constitutional
right for every citizen, the consequences could be enormous. As argued above, this
constitutional right can provide some scope for redress against inevitable abuse.

9. Macroeconomic consequences
        How would the distribution of oil directly to the people affect the ability of the
economy to weather shocks, particularly those relating to oil prices? In term of macro
consequences, the proposal would essentially convert public windfall gains and losses from
price volatility to private gains and losses. And this could have potential macroeconomic
consequences.

        Collier and Gunning (1996) provide an excellent analysis of the management of
public and private windfalls, arguing that “...usually governments have proved themselves to
be rather bad at coping with the revenue volatility that such a policy (custodial fiscal policy)
entailed. By contrast, private agents respond much more appropriately than the argument for
a custodial role presumed.”

         The case for public management of shocks relies on government’s being more able to
distinguish temporary from permanent shocks and being more far-sighted in responding to
them. Ideally, intertemporal consumption smoothing would require that a large portion of
windfall gains be saved and that these savings be efficiently used. On the first, the evidence
is that the private sector does no worse: Collier and Gunning (1996) report that savings from
windfall gains were about the same whether the recipient agent was public or private.

        As importantly, savings are much more efficiently used by the private than the public
sector. This is an implication of our cross-section work, which shows that resources like oil
are typically owned by the public sector corrode institutions because of the lobbying for
rents. And there can be no stronger support for this than Nigeria, where, as our analysis
showed, the returns on investment have been abysmally low. Collier and Bevan (1996) also
provide evidence that the quality of investment deteriorates during windfalls. Tanzania re-
introduced its “basic industries” investment program during the coffee boom having
previously abandoned it. Nigeria embarked on the famous or infamous Ajakouta steel
complex during the oil price boom.

        In fact, Collier and Bevan (1996) discuss whether public windfalls should be
transferred to the private sector through taxation or through the banking system but stop
short, more on grounds of feasibility than of principle. Our proposal would just be a logical
culmination of their analysis, albeit with other important justifications.

        A related argument for custodial fiscal policy is the fear of a real appreciation and
consequent Dutch disease when there is an unexpected positive shock. But if the private
sector responds no worse or better than the public sector in terms of their savings behavior,
there should be no difference in terms of the impact on currency movements.


                                 V. CONCLUDING REMARKS

        Natural resources such as oil and minerals may or may not be a curse on balance. But
our work shows that they certainly have a seriously detrimental impact on the quality of
domestic institutions and through this channel on long-run growth. Evidence from a cross
section of countries shows that this impact is very robust. We also find that the relation is
non-linear.

        The Nigerian experience provides telling confirmation of this aspect of natural
resources. Waste and corruption from oil rather than Dutch disease has been responsible for
its poor long run economic performance.

        Exhortations to the new leadership to provide visionary leadership and implement the
familiar litany of reforms—prudent macroeconomic policy, privatization, trade liberalization,
strengthening the financial sector, etc.—would in our view be neither effective nor credible.
Why should the new leadership be able to deliver where previous ones—dictators and
democrats alike—have failed? Even under the recent democratic government, and allowing
for the sorry inheritance left by 40 years of mismanagement under military rule, the track
record on reforms was disappointing at best.

       Our proposal to the new leadership would be to focus on one key issue: managing the
revenues from oil. Actually, we would propose that the government stop managing these
revenues and turn them directly to the people. In particular, we propose that all Nigerians
should have a constitutional right to an equal share of the proceeds.

      We are under no illusion about the practical difficulties of implementing the proposal.
Even with all the difficulties of corruption and inefficiency that will no doubt plague its
actual implementation, our proposal will, at the least, be vastly superior to the status quo.
After all, the terrible current situation is the result of staggering corruption and waste over the
last 40 years. At best, however, our proposal could fundamentally improve the quality of
public institutions and, as a result, transform economics and politics in Nigeria for decades to
come.

       Further, we would argue that we may have understated the likelihood of our proposal
being superior to the status quo. Our analysis was predominantly focused on average
performance (economic growth), where Nigerian performance has been “merely” bad. If
proper account is taken of Nigerian performance on poverty and income distribution, which
has been nothing short of disastrous and which is intimately related to oil and corruption, it
would be difficult to imagine that the status quo cannot be improved upon.

        Finally, the proposal presented in this paper applies for Nigeria would apply to all
countries that have a deep dependence on natural resources and that have suffered from the
deteriorating institutions as a consequence. In some ways, countries such as Venezuela and
Iraq may be even better candidates because the costs of administering our scheme may be
lower. Ours is a proposal for Nigeria but it is applicable more broadly to all countries that are
afflicted by the natural resource curse.
                                  Table 1: Comparative Indicators


                               Nigeria         Oil producing      Developing countries    All countries
                                                 countries

Per capita GDP, PPP, 1998                955               3579                    2076            3029

Growth rate of per capita             1.336               1.105                   1.520           1.739
GDP, 1960-98

Standard deviation of                0.1465               0.111                   0.078          0.0703
growth of per capita GDP

Coefficient of variation             0.110                0.101                   0.051           0.040
Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators
                                         Table 2: Growth, Institutions and Natural Resources in Aggregate

                                     Panel A. Second stage: dependent variable is real         Panel B. First stage: Dependent variable is
                                             per capita GDP growth, 1970-98                                     rule of law
                                      (1)       (2)        (3)        (4)         (5)        (1)        (2)         (3)      (4)          (5)
Rule of Law                            1.483     1.228      1.156        1.43       1.157
                                     [0.666]   [0.785]    [0.514]    [0.789]      [0.550]
lnRGDP70                              -1.918    -1.678     -1.609      -1.738      -1.626       0.69      0.498      0.646     0.582       0.619
                                     [0.659]   [0.627]    [0.537]    [0.664]      [0.556]    [0.141]    [0.162]    [0.131]   [0.152]     [0.148]
P60                                    2.737     2.635      2.545       2.806       2.576      0.254      0.303       0.41     0.037       0.568
                                     [0.873]   [0.832]    [0.808]    [0.925]      [0.828]    [0.428]    [0.414]    [0.406]   [0.415]     [0.446]
IPRICE1                               -0.009      -0.01    -0.009      -0.009      -0.009     -0.002     -0.002     -0.003    -0.002      -0.003
                                     [0.002]   [0.003]    [0.003]    [0.002]      [0.003]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]   [0.002]     [0.002]
MALFAL66                              -1.048    -1.033     -1.079      -1.059      -1.141     -0.111     -0.108     -0.077    -0.062      -0.071
                                     [0.580]   [0.545]    [0.495]    [0.530]      [0.523]    [0.291]    [0.287]    [0.249]   [0.281]     [0.256]
DENS65C                                0.001     0.001      0.001       0.001       0.001          0          0          0         0           0
                                     [0.000]   [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]      [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]     [0.000]
TOTvolatility7098                     -0.014    -0.049     -0.073      -0.054      -0.065     -0.018     -0.008      0.003     -0.01      -0.006
                                     [0.053]   [0.029]    [0.020]    [0.027]      [0.025]    [0.021]    [0.013]    [0.008]   [0.011]     [0.011]
Overvaluation7098                                                                  -0.002                                                  0.004
                                                                                  [0.005]                                                [0.003]
EURFRAC                                                                                       -0.569     -0.394     -0.661    -0.415      -0.622
                                                                                             [0.241]    [0.220]    [0.232]   [0.217]     [0.228]
ENGFRAC                                                                                        0.476      0.507      0.643     0.496       0.647
                                                                                             [0.340]    [0.351]    [0.319]   [0.342]     [0.321]
naturalresourcesharegdp70             -2.427                                                  -0.151
                                     [3.025]                                                 [0.973]
naturalresourceshareexp70                        0.001                                                   -0.009
                                               [0.010]                                                  [0.004]
naturalresourcesharegdp80                                    2.238                 2.418                             -2.29                -2.415
                                                           [1.546]               [1.681]                           [0.524]               [0.595]
naturalresourceshareexp80                                               0.009                                                 -0.009
                                                                      [0.010]                                                [0.004]

Observations                             71         71         71          71         69         71           71       71         71          69
Adjusted R-squared                     0.57        0.6       0.63        0.59       0.62       0.64         0.68     0.69       0.68        0.69
Robust standard errors in brackets
                                                    Table 3: Growth, Institutions, and Individual Natural Resources

                                 Panel A. Second stage: Dependent variable is real per capita             Panel B. First-stage: Dependent variable is rule of law
                                                     GDP growth, 1970-98
                                 (1)          (2)        (3)      (4)         (5)        (6)            (1)           (2)      (3)        (4)        (5)         (6)
Rule of Law                         1.237       1.295       1.53   1.218         1.05      1.274
                                  [0.745]    [0.568]    [0.682] [0.495]      [0.478]     [0.578]
lnRGDP70                            -1.69      -1.728    -1.989   -1.743      -1.651      -1.754          0.528       0.66       0.746     0.726      0.705          0.7
                                  [0.624]    [0.551]    [0.692] [0.541]      [0.494]     [0.576]        [0.150]    [0.136]     [0.133]   [0.126]    [0.133]     [0.127]
P60                                 2.651       2.911       2.89   2.864       2.324       2.608          0.257      0.026       0.039     0.172      0.271       0.289
                                  [0.864]    [0.925]    [1.002] [0.837]      [0.703]     [0.764]        [0.439]    [0.396]     [0.512]   [0.427]    [0.474]     [0.398]
IPRICE1                             -0.01       -0.01    -0.009    -0.01        -0.01       -0.01        -0.001     -0.001      -0.002    -0.002     -0.002      -0.002
                                  [0.003]    [0.002]    [0.002] [0.002]      [0.002]     [0.002]        [0.001]    [0.002]     [0.001]   [0.002]    [0.002]     [0.002]
MALFAL66                           -0.991      -0.739      -0.92  -0.928      -1.407      -1.101         -0.261     -0.329      -0.282    -0.188     -0.158      -0.069
                                  [0.630]    [0.539]    [0.695] [0.481]      [0.389]     [0.473]        [0.316]    [0.288]     [0.358]   [0.260]    [0.274]     [0.237]
DENS65C                             0.001       0.001          0   0.001       0.001       0.001              0          0           0         0          0            0
                                  [0.000]    [0.000]    [0.000] [0.000]      [0.000]     [0.000]        [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]   [0.000]    [0.000]     [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                      -0.053     -0.079     -0.029   -0.083      -0.011      -0.069          0.006      0.007       0.003     0.011      0.006      -0.007
                                  [0.035]    [0.025]    [0.062] [0.021]      [0.015]     [0.013]        [0.015]    [0.009]     [0.029]   [0.008]    [0.010]     [0.007]
EURFRAC                                                                                                  -0.426     -0.588      -0.562    -0.679     -0.643      -0.579
                                                                                                        [0.234]    [0.226]     [0.240]   [0.232]    [0.233]     [0.213]
ENGFRAC                                                                                                   0.528      0.505       0.432     0.568      0.571       0.557
                                                                                                        [0.331]    [0.297]     [0.316]   [0.295]    [0.303]     [0.298]
fuelandmineralsgareexp70               0.002                                                             -0.012
                                     [0.012]                                                            [0.005]
foodandagrishareexp70                      0                                                             -0.007
                                     [0.009]                                                            [0.004]
fuelandmineralsgareexp80                         0.011                                                              -0.011
                                               [0.009]                                                             [0.003]
foodandagrishareexp80                           -0.001                                                              -0.001
                                               [0.008]                                                             [0.004]
fuelandmineralsgaregdp70                                  -1.474                                                                -1.457
                                                         [3.544]                                                               [1.554]
foodandagrisharegdp70                                     -3.519                                                                 1.365
                                                         [3.865]                                                               [1.311]
fuelandmineralsgaregdp80                                             2.787                                                                -2.587
                                                                   [1.691]                                                               [0.484]
fuelandmineralsgaregdp80                                            -1.434                                                                 0.542
                                                                   [3.170]                                                               [1.195]
fuelsharegdp80                                                                 2.549                                                                 -2.798
                                                                             [1.537]                                                                [0.530]
mineralsharegdp80                                                             -7.148                                                                 -1.497
                                                                             [2.074]                                                                [1.197]
foodsharegdp80                                                                -4.826                                                                 -0.354
                                                                             [3.637]                                                                [1.530]
agrisharegdp80                                                                 7.446                                                                  3.095
                                                                             [6.906]                                                                [1.904]
OIL dummy                                                                                  1.559                                                                  -0.932
                                                                                         [0.613]                                                              [0.175]

Observations                             71        71        71        71         71          71            71            71       71         71         71           71
Adjusted R-squared                     0.59      0.63      0.56      0.64       0.73        0.67          0.68          0.71     0.65       0.71       0.71         0.71
Robust standard errors in brackets
                 Table 4: Institutions and Natural Resources: Monotonic or Non-monotonic Effects?

                                                    First stage: Dependent variable is rule of law
                                     (1)       (2)            (3)        (4)           (5)           (6)       (7)
lnRGDP70                               0.733      0.654         0.596      0.634         0.666         0.748     0.794
                                     [0.120]    [0.147]       [0.152]    [0.141]       [0.126]       [0.114]   [0.120]
P60                                    0.175      0.222         0.101        0.07       -0.001         -0.17    -0.316
                                     [0.410]    [0.427]       [0.408]    [0.403]       [0.408]       [0.422]   [0.473]
IPRICE1                               -0.001     -0.002        -0.001     -0.001        -0.002        -0.002    -0.002
                                     [0.001]    [0.002]       [0.002]    [0.002]       [0.002]       [0.001]   [0.002]
MALFAL66                              -0.352     -0.267        -0.335     -0.327        -0.366        -0.407    -0.294
                                     [0.270]    [0.307]       [0.327]    [0.293]       [0.296]       [0.234]   [0.260]
DENS65C                                    0          0             0           0            0             0          0
                                     [0.000]    [0.000]       [0.000]    [0.000]       [0.000]       [0.000]   [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                          0.002     -0.005        -0.002      0.003         0.007         0.013     0.014
                                     [0.013]    [0.014]       [0.014]    [0.012]       [0.010]       [0.010]   [0.009]
EURFRAC                               -0.721     -0.641        -0.499     -0.466        -0.503        -0.594    -0.564
                                     [0.231]    [0.247]       [0.254]    [0.278]       [0.239]       [0.217]   [0.217]
ENGFRAC                                0.524      0.438         0.393      0.348         0.395         0.447       0.48
                                     [0.274]    [0.314]       [0.322]    [0.310]       [0.303]       [0.291]   [0.294]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>20            -0.387
                                     [0.131]
foodplusagrishareexp>20                0.394
                                     [0.158]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>30                      -0.416
                                               [0.186]
foodplusagrishareexp>30                          0.045
                                               [0.178]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>40                                   -0.605
                                                            [0.263]
foodplusagrishareexp>40                                      -0.235
                                                            [0.238]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>50                                                 -0.655
                                                                          [0.236]
foodplusagrishareexp>50                                                     -0.16
                                                                          [0.234]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>60                                                             -0.671
                                                                                      [0.220]
foodplusagrishareexp>60                                                                 0.038
                                                                                      [0.207]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>70                                                                            -0.878
                                                                                                     [0.181]
foodplusagrishareexp>70                                                                                0.254
                                                                                                     [0.201]
fuelplusmineralshareexp>80                                                                                      -0.965
                                                                                                               [0.195]
foodplusagrishareexp>80                                                                                          0.143
                                                                                                               [0.217]

No. of countries for which
fuel and mineral dummy =1                34         26           22           20           17            12         10
Observations                             71         71           71           71           71            71         71
Adjusted R-squared                     0.71       0.67         0.68         0.69           0.7         0.74       0.72
Robust standard errors in brackets
                              Table 5: Growth, Institutions and Natural Resources: Robustness to Covariates

                              Panel A. Second stage:Dependent variable                 Panel B. First stage: Dependent variable is
                                is real per capita GDP growth, 1970-98                                  rule of law
                              (1)        (2)       (3)     (4)       (5)               (1)       (2)        (3)     (4)       (5)          (6)
Rule of Law                    0.035     1.154      1.072   1.408     0.992
                             [0.971] [0.586] [0.557] [0.497] [0.440]
lnRGDP70 1/                   -1.239 -2.023        -1.716   -1.91      -1.41             0.521     0.385     0.638      0.719      0.73     0.664
                             [0.664] [0.476] [0.532] [0.527] [0.459]                   [0.120]   [0.221]   [0.132]    [0.129]   [0.138]   [0.128]
P60                            2.956     2.437      2.753    2.66       2.42             0.131    -0.334     0.066      0.116     0.159     0.578
                             [0.775] [1.147] [0.843] [0.850] [0.762]                   [0.357]   [0.434]   [0.437]    [0.400]   [0.459]   [0.375]
IPRICE1                       -0.013      -0.01     -0.01   -0.01      -0.01            -0.002    -0.002    -0.001     -0.002    -0.002    -0.002
                             [0.004] [0.003] [0.003] [0.002] [0.003]                   [0.001]   [0.002]   [0.002]    [0.002]   [0.002]   [0.002]
MALFAL66                      -0.112 -0.996        -0.914  -0.557    -0.859               0.29    -0.248    -0.149     -0.084    -0.185    -0.279
                             [0.654] [0.496] [0.490] [0.501] [0.483]                   [0.261]   [0.258]   [0.272]    [0.260]   [0.266]   [0.265]
DENS65C                        0.002     0.001      0.001   0.001     0.001              0.001         0          0         0         0         0
                             [0.001] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000] [0.000]                   [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]    [0.000]   [0.000]   [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                 -0.085 -0.083        -0.079  -0.088    -0.082              0.005     0.011     0.014       0.01     0.011     0.007
                             [0.016] [0.021] [0.020] [0.020] [0.021]                   [0.010]   [0.008]   [0.008]    [0.009]   [0.008]   [0.010]
EURFRAC                                                                                 -0.239    -0.603       -0.6    -0.719    -0.675    -0.764
                                                                                       [0.210]   [0.218]   [0.231]    [0.237]   [0.241]   [0.230]
ENGFRAC                                                                                  0.487     0.434     0.576      0.588     0.565     0.568
                                                                                       [0.221]   [0.288]   [0.297]    [0.307]   [0.302]   [0.304]
fuelmineralsharegdp80          2.556   3.127        2.539      3.674       2.59         -1.347    -2.004    -2.494     -2.461    -2.577     -2.53
                             [1.468] [1.644]      [1.631]    [1.708]    [1.665]        [0.577]   [0.478]   [0.510]    [0.544]   [0.501]   [0.537]
foodagrisharegdp80             3.434 -1.364        -1.476     -1.202     -0.162          2.195     0.667     0.344       0.66     0.573    -0.038
                             [4.274] [3.220]      [2.905]    [3.187]    [2.809]        [0.945]   [1.136]   [1.237]    [1.206]   [1.267]   [1.193]
TROPICAR                      -1.998                                                    -0.901
                             [1.065]                                                   [0.270]
LIFE060                                0.036                                                       0.039
                                     [0.048]                                                     [0.018]
YRSOPEN                                             0.538                                                     0.51
                                                  [0.648]                                                  [0.256]
AVELF                                                         -1.009                                                   -0.313
                                                             [0.509]                                                  [0.325]
CONFUC                                                                    4.547                                                   0.127
                                                                        [0.681]                                                 [0.398]

Observations                        71       71          71         71         71          71        71         71        71        71        71
Adjusted R-squared                0.67     0.64        0.64       0.63       0.68        0.76      0.73       0.72      0.71      0.71      0.74
Robust standard errors in brackets
1/ In column 6, the intitial level of income refers to the year 1960 instead of 1970
                    Table 6: Growth, Institutions, and Natural Resources: Robustness to Alternative Measures of Institutions

                                     Panel A. Dependent variable is rate of                      Panel B. Dependent variable is instituional
                                      growth of per capita GDP, 1970-98                                          quality

Institutional variable      Voice and          Government       Control of    Political      Voice and      Government      Control of    Political
                          accountability       effectiveness    corruption    Stability    accountability   effectiveness   corruption    Stability

Institutions                           1.424            1.546         1.416       3.424
                                     [1.440]          [0.694]       [0.648]     [3.666]
lnRGDP70                              -1.687           -1.946        -2.007      -2.557             0.554           0.706         0.817          0.495
                                     [1.039]          [0.664]       [0.724]     [1.983]           [0.100]         [0.121]       [0.126]        [0.118]
P60                                    2.263            2.841         2.708       1.544             0.426           0.083         0.237          0.411
                                     [1.017]          [0.883]       [0.920]     [1.606]           [0.418]         [0.357]       [0.379]        [0.423]
IPRICE1                               -0.008           -0.012        -0.012      -0.004            -0.003          -0.001             0         -0.002
                                     [0.005]          [0.003]       [0.003]     [0.010]           [0.001]         [0.001]       [0.001]        [0.002]
MALFAL66                              -1.274           -0.808        -0.856      -0.298              0.11          -0.168         -0.18         -0.223
                                     [0.721]          [0.483]       [0.571]     [1.116]           [0.194]         [0.229]       [0.222]        [0.242]
DENS65C                                0.002                0         0.001           0                 0               0             0              0
                                     [0.000]          [0.000]       [0.000]     [0.001]           [0.000]         [0.000]       [0.000]        [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                         -0.079           -0.073        -0.073      -0.109             0.005           0.002         0.002          0.011
                                     [0.031]          [0.023]       [0.022]     [0.059]           [0.011]         [0.009]       [0.008]        [0.010]
fuelmingdp80                           3.766            3.354         2.041       8.248            -2.793          -2.496         -1.77         -2.553
                                     [4.106]          [2.003]       [1.632]     [9.585]           [0.592]         [0.550]       [0.583]        [0.489]
foodaggdp80                           -1.209           -1.793        -2.917      -6.711             0.212           0.669         1.647          1.728
                                     [4.350]          [2.931]       [4.070]     [9.114]           [1.160]         [1.185]       [1.197]        [1.014]
                                                                                                   -0.261          -0.493        -0.598         -0.208
                                                                                                  [0.188]         [0.200]       [0.231]        [0.249]
                                                                                                     0.47           0.491         0.487          0.227
                                                                                                  [0.191]         [0.286]       [0.268]        [0.202]

Observations                             71                70            69          70                71              70           69             70
Adjusted R-squared                       0.3             0.63          0.51           ..             0.67            0.73         0.74           0.66
Robust standard errors in brackets
                                Table 7. Growth, Natural Resources, and Institutions: Robustness to
                        Influential Observations, Regional Dummies, Sample, and Instrument for Institutions

                                Panel A. Second stage: Dependent variable is real            Panel B. First stage: Dependent
                                        per capita GDP growth, 1970-98                          variable is rule of of law
                                    (1)              (2)         (3)           (4)          (1)        (2)        (3)      (4)
Rule of Law                                 1.027     1.128          1.564       3.408
                                          [0.479] [0.420]         [0.974]      [1.135]
lnRGDP70                                   -1.533    -1.419        -1.645       -2.913       0.759     0.709      0.346     0.482
                                          [0.557] [0.420]         [0.483]      [0.848]     [0.129]   [0.140]    [0.169]   [0.185]
P60                                         2.596     1.286          2.524       3.258       0.128     0.266      0.465    -0.151
                                          [0.847] [0.728]         [0.928]      [1.332]     [0.424]   [0.561]    [0.428]   [0.483]
IPRICE1                                    -0.012    -0.008          -0.01      -0.008      -0.003    -0.002     -0.002    -0.001
                                          [0.002] [0.002]         [0.003]      [0.004]     [0.001]   [0.002]    [0.002]   [0.002]
MALFAL66                                   -0.771    -0.044        -0.685                   -0.044    -0.211      -0.38
                                          [0.452] [0.399]         [0.647]                  [0.275]   [0.321]    [0.250]
DENS65C                                     0.001     0.001          0.001                       0         0          0
                                          [0.000] [0.000]         [0.001]                  [0.000]   [0.000]    [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                              -0.079      -0.07       -0.087                    0.009      0.01      0.011
                                          [0.023] [0.021]         [0.026]                  [0.007]   [0.008]    [0.008]
EURFRAC                                                                                     -0.652    -0.699     -0.665
                                                                                           [0.234]   [0.266]    [0.288]
ENGFRAC                                                                                      0.572     0.573      0.387
                                                                                           [0.290]   [0.307]    [0.540]
fuelmineralsharegdp80                       1.591     2.367          3.164      5.561       -2.639    -2.571      -1.92    -1.599
                                          [1.582]   [1.555]        [2.186]    [2.685]      [0.507]   [0.480]    [0.487]   [0.529]
foodagrisharegdp80                         -3.836    -0.762         -1.504     -3.586        0.337     0.534      0.671     0.796
                                          [2.821]   [2.165]        [4.056]    [3.498]      [1.338]   [1.245]    [1.390]   [1.427]
East Asia dummy                                       1.005                                           -0.103
                                                    [0.663]                                          [0.228]
Sub-saharan Africa dummy                             -1.498                                            0.042
                                                    [0.368]                                          [0.392]
Log settler mortality                                                                                                      -0.217
                                                                                                                          [0.109]

Observations               69 (influential               71 51 (sample =           53          69         71        51           53
                           observations: Egypt              developing
                           and Malaysia)                    counries)
Adjusted R-squared                           0.68      0.71           0.56      -0.04         0.72        0.7     0.42       0.52
Robust standard errors in brackets
      Table 8. Growth, Institutions, and Natural Resources: Maximizing Sample Size

                                       First stage: Dependent variable is rule of law
                                     (1)             (2)           (3)              (4)
lnRGDP70                                0.683            0.242          0.77            0.365
                                      [0.131]          [0.156]      [0.111]           [0.123]
P60                                     0.396            0.601        0.089             0.282
                                      [0.397]          [0.356]      [0.349]           [0.327]
IPRICE1                                -0.001           -0.002       -0.001            -0.001
                                      [0.002]          [0.002]      [0.002]           [0.002]
MALFAL66                                 -0.15          -0.359       -0.042            -0.259
                                      [0.238]          [0.232]      [0.229]           [0.227]
DENS65C                                      0               0             0                0
                                      [0.000]          [0.000]      [0.000]           [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                           0.007            0.009       -0.004             0.001
                                      [0.011]          [0.009]      [0.008]           [0.008]
EURFRAC                                -0.645           -0.546       -0.566             -0.53
                                      [0.212]          [0.257]      [0.196]           [0.241]
ENGFRAC                                 0.652            0.393        0.591             0.378
                                      [0.287]          [0.506]      [0.276]           [0.496]
fuelmineralsharegdp80                  -2.388           -1.644
                                      [0.478]          [0.494]
foodagrisharegdp80                     -0.335           -0.547
                                      [1.060]          [1.247]
OIL                                                                  -0.965            -0.659
                                                                    [0.175]           [0.136]

Observations                               82 62 (sample =                87 67 (sample =
                                              developing                     developing
                                              countries)                     countries)
Adjusted R-squared                       0.68            0.42           0.67            0.39
Robust standard errors in brackets
        Table 9: Growth, Institutions, and Natural Resources: Is Nigeria Unusual?

                                     Panel A. Second stage: Dependent         First stage: Dependent
                                        variable is real per capita            variable is rule of law
                                          GDP growth, 1970-98
                                          (1)                   (2)              (1)            (2)
Rule of Law                                      1.431                 1.23
                                               [0.661]              [0.502]
lnRGDP70                                        -1.857               -1.758           0.698        0.726
                                               [0.652]              [0.548]         [0.139]      [0.127]
P60                                              2.722                2.877           0.236        0.172
                                               [0.874]              [0.842]         [0.428]      [0.431]
IPRICE1                                         -0.009                -0.01          -0.002       -0.002
                                               [0.002]              [0.002]         [0.002]      [0.002]
MALFAL66                                        -1.109               -1.006          -0.092       -0.189
                                               [0.563]              [0.486]         [0.292]      [0.266]
DENS65C                                          0.001                0.001               0            0
                                               [0.000]              [0.000]         [0.000]      [0.000]
totshkwtd7098                                   -0.051               -0.085          -0.018        0.011
                                               [0.030]              [0.019]         [0.016]      [0.008]
EURFRAC                                                                              -0.567       -0.679
                                                                                    [0.238]      [0.234]
ENGFRAC                                                                               0.472        0.568
                                                                                    [0.337]      [0.297]
naturalresourcesharegdp80

fuelmineralsharegdp80                                                2.643                         -2.59
                                                                   [1.722]                       [0.494]
foodagrisharegdp80                                                  -1.101                         0.546
                                                                   [3.208]                       [1.224]
Nigeria dummy                                    1.784               1.308           -0.349        0.017
                                               [0.355]             [0.317]          [0.174]      [0.143]

Observations                                        71                  71               71             71
Adjusted R-squared                                0.59                0.64             0.64           0.71
Robust standard errors in brackets
                                                                              Chart 1A: Poverty Rates, 1970-2000

                                                         80%


                                                         70%
   % Population with less than One Dollar a Day




                                                         60%


                                                         50%


                                                         40%


                                                         30%


                                                         20%


                                                         10%


                                                          0%
                                                            1970      1975         1980         1985        1990    1995   2000




                                                                              Chart 1B: Poverty Count, 1970-2000

                                                         90,000
   Thousands of People with Less than One Dollar a Day




                                                         80,000


                                                         70,000

                                                         60,000


                                                         50,000


                                                         40,000


                                                         30,000


                                                         20,000


                                                         10,000


                                                               0
                                                               1970    1975         1980        1985         1990   1995   2000


Source: Authors’ calculations based on Sala-i-Martin (2003)
                                Chart 2: Income Distribution, 1970-2000

  7,000


  6,000


  5,000


  4,000


  3,000


  2,000

  1,000


      0
       $10                             $100                          $1,000          $10,000

                                        1970        1980      1990            2000

Source: Authors’ calculations based on Sala-i-Martin (2003)
                      C hart 3: C umulative Reve nue s from O il, 1965-2000
                                        (at 1995 Price s)
350                                                                                                                                  3500


300                                                                                                                                  3000

                                  cumulative
250                               revenues per                                                                                       2500
                                  capita, right
                                  scale
200                                                                             cumulative revenues                                  2000
                                                                                in US$ billions, left
                                                                                scale
150                                                                                                                                  1500


100                                                                      GDP per capita in                                           1000
                                                                         constant US$, right scale

 50                                                                                                                                  500


  0                                                                                                                                  0
      1965
             1967
                    1969
                           1971
                                   1973
                                          1975
                                                 1977
                                                        1979
                                                               1981
                                                                      1983
                                                                             1985
                                                                                    1987
                                                                                           1989
                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                         1993
                                                                                                                1995
                                                                                                                       1997
                                                                                                                              1999
                                              C hart 4: GDP, Capital, and TFP, 1965-2000
                                                          (index, 1965=100)
                1000

                 900
                                                                                                           physical capital
                 800

                 700

                 600

                 500
                                                                                                                         human capit al
                 400

                 300
                                                                                GDP

                 200
                                                                                                                                 T FP
                 100

                   0
                       1965
                              1967
                                     1969
                                            1971
                                                   1973
                                                          1975
                                                                 1977
                                                                        1979
                                                                               1981

                                                                                      1983
                                                                                             1985
                                                                                                    1987
                                                                                                           1989
                                                                                                                  1991
                                                                                                                          1993
                                                                                                                                 1995
                                                                                                                                        1997
                                                                                                                                               1999
Source: Authors’ calculations
           Chart 5. Average Capacity Utilization in Manufacturing in Percent, 1975-
                                            2000
   90
   80
   70
   60
   50
   40
   30
   20
   10
    0



Source: Authors’ calculations
                           Chart 6A. Nige ria: REER-O fficial and Paralle l, 1965-
                                                   2000
                   1200

                   1000
                                                                            based on parallel
                    800                                                     rate

                    600

                    400

                    200
                                                                                                  based on official
                      0                                                                           rate




                                 Chart 6B. Nigeria: Ratio of Tradable to Nontradable
                                                  Price s, 1970-2000
                   300
                                                                                     based on GDP deflator
                   250

                   200

                   150

                   100                                                                    based on consumer
                                                                                          price index
                     50
                          1970
                                  1972
                                         1974
                                                1976
                                                       1978
                                                              1980
                                                                     1982
                                                                            1984
                                                                                   1986

                                                                                          1988
                                                                                                 1990
                                                                                                        1992

                                                                                                               1994
                                                                                                                      1996
                                                                                                                             1998

                                                                                                                                    2000




Source: Authors’ calculations
                                  Chart 7A. Nigeria: Share s of Sectors in Real GDP
                        80%

                        70%
                                         agriculture
                        60%

                        50%

                        40%
                                                                            govt. and other
                        30%

                        20%
                                                                               oil
                                           manuf.
                        10%
                                                                     const. and util.
                         0%




                                Chart 7B. Nigeria: Share of se ctors in non-oil GDP
                       80%

                       70%
                                         agriculture
                       60%

                       50%

                       40%

                       30%                                           govt. and other

                       20%
                                                                             manufacturing
                       10%
                                                                       const. and util.
                       0%



Source: Authors’ calculations


               Chart 5. Nigeria: Average Capacity Utilization in Manufacturing in Percent,
   90                                          1975-2000

   80
   70
   60
   50
   40
   30
   20
   10
    0
        1975    1977     1979     1981    1983         1985   1987   1989      1991       1993   1995   1997   1999
                               Appendix: Data and Sources

ABSLAT = Distance from Equator of capital city measured as abs(Latitude)/90. Source:
Rodrik et. al. (2002).

AGRIshareEXP = Share of exports of agricultural raw materials in total merchandise
exports. Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

AGRIshareGDP = Share of exports of agricultural raw materials in GDP. Source:World
Bank’s World Development Indicators.

AVELF = Average of five different indices of ethnolinguistic fractionalization which is the
probability of two random people in a country not speaking the same language. Source:
Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

CONCORR = Index of control over corruption. Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-
Lobaton (2002).

CONFUC = Fraction of population Confucian. Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

DENS65C = Coastal (within 100km of coastline) population per coastal area in 1965.
Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

East = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Asia, 0 otherwise.

ENGFRAC = Fraction of the population speaking English. Source: Hall and Jones (1999).

EURFRAC = Fraction of the population speaking one of the major languages of Western
Europe: English, French, German, Portuguese, or Spanish. Source: Hall and Jones (1999).

FoodandagrishareEXP = Share of exports of food and agricultural raw materials in total
merchandise exports. Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

FoodandagrishareGDP = Share of exports of food and agricultural raw materials in total
GDP Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

FoodshareEXP = Share of food exports in total merchandise exports. Source: World Bank’s
World Development Indicators.

FoodshareGDP = Share of food exports in GDP. Source: World Bank’s World Development
Indicators.

FuelandmineralshareEXP = Share of exports fuel and natural gas and ores and minerals in
total merchandise exports. Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.
Fueland mineralshareGDP = Share of exports fuel and natural gas and ores and minerals in
total GDP. Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

FuelshareEXP = Share of fuel and natural gas exports in total merchandise exports. Source:
World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

FuelshareGDP = Share of fuel and natural gas exports in GDP. Source: World Bank’s
World Development Indicators.

GOVEFF = Index of effectiveness of government. Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-
Lobaton (2002).

IPRICE1 = Average investment price level between 1960 and 1964 on purchasing power
parity basis. Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

LAAM = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Latin America or the
Caribbean, 0 otherwise.

LCOPEN = Natural logarithm of openness. Openness is given by the ratio of (nominal)
imports plus exports to GDP (in nominal US dollars). Source: Rodrik et. al. (2002).

LIFE060 = Life expectancy in 1960. Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

LNRDGP70 = Natural logarithm of per capita PPP GDP in 1970. Source: Sala-i-Martin et.
al. (2003).

LOGEM4 = Natural logarithm of estimated European settlers’ mortality rate. Source:
Acemoglu, Johnson, and Robinson (2001)

LOGFRANKROM = Natural logarithm of predicted trade shares computed following
Frankel and Romer (1999) from a bilateral trade equation with “pure geography” variables.
Source:Rodrik et. al. (2002).

LSO = Dummy variable taking a value of 1 if a country has a socialist legal system.

MALFAL66 = Index of malaria prevalence in 1996. Source: Gallup and Sachs (1998).

MEANTEMP = Average temperature (Celsius). Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

MineralshareEXP = Share of exports of ores and minerals in total merchandise exports.
Source: World Bank’s World Development Indicators.

MineralshareGDP = Share of exports of ores and minerals in GDP. Source: World Bank’s
World Development Indicators.
NaturalresourceshareEXP = Share of natural resources in total exports (calculated as the
sum of the shares of individual resources). Source: World Bank’s World Development
Indicators.

NaturalresourceshareGDP = Share of natural resources in GDP. Source: Sachs and
Warner (1995).

NGA = Dummy variable taking value 1 for Nigeria, 0 otherwise.

OIL = Dummy variable taking value 1 for a country being major oil exporter, 0 otherwise.

OVERvaluation7098 = measure of exchange rate overvaluation. Source: Easterly and
Levine (2002).

P60 = Enrollment rate in primary education in 1960. Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

POLSTAB = Index of political stability. Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton
(2002).

RULE = Rule of Law index. Refers to 2001 and approximates for 1990’s institutions.
Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton (2002).

SAFRICA = Dummy variable taking value 1 if a country belongs to Sub-Saharan Africa, 0
otherwise.

TOTshkwtd7098 = Volatility in the terms of trade between 1970 and 1998 weighted by
share of natural resource exports in GDP in 1970. Source: World Bank, World Development
Indicators.

TROPICAR = Percentage of tropical land area. Source: Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).

VOICE = Index of voice and accountability. Source: Kaufmann, Kraay, and Zoido-Lobaton
(2002).

YRSOPEN = Number of years economy has been open between 1950 and 1994. Source:
Sala-i-Martin et. al. (2003).
                                        REFERENCES

Acemoglu, Daron, Simon Johnson, and James A. Robinson, 2001, "The Colonial Origins of
     Comparative Development: An Empirical Investigation," American Economic
     Review, 91, 5, pp. 1369–1401.

_______, S. Johnson, J.Robinson, and Y. Thaicaroen, 2002, Institutional Causes,
      Macroeconomic Symptoms: Volatility, Crises and Growth, forthcoming Journal of
      Monetary Economics, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series.

Ahmad, E., and R. Singh, “Political Economy of Oil-Revenue Sharing in a Developing
     Country: Illustrations from Nigeria,” International Monetary Fund Working Paper,
     WP/03/16, Washington D.C.

Barro, R. and X. Sala-i-Martin, 1995, Economic Growth, MIT Press.

Belsey, D.A., E. Kuh, and R.E. Welsch, 1980, Regression Diagnostics. New York: John
       Wiley and Sons.

Bevan, D., P. Collier, J.W. Gunning, 1999, The Political Economy of Poverty, Equity, and
       Growth: Nigeria and Indonesia, Oxford University Press.

Bravo-Ortega, C., and J.De Gregorio, 2001, “The Relative Richness of the Poor? Natural
      Resources, Human Capital, and Economic Growth,” mimeo, University of California,
      Berkeley.

Collier, P. and J. Gunning, 1996, “Policy Towards Commodity Shocks in Developing
        Countries,” IMF Working paper WP/96/84, Washington D.C.

Collier, P. and A. Hoffler, 2002, “Greed and Grievance in African Civil Wars,” Quarterly
        Journal of Economics (forthcoming).

Davis, J., R. Ossowski, J. Daniel, and S. Barnett, 2001, “Stabilization and Savings Funds for
       Nonrenewable Resources,” International Monetary Fund Occasional Paper No. 205,
       Washington D.C.

Easterly, W., and R. Levine, 2002, “Tropics, Germs, and Crops: How Endowments
       Influence Economic Development,” mimeo, Center for Global Development and
       Institute for International Economics.

Engerman, Stanley L., and Kenneth L. Sokoloff, 1994, “Factor Endowments, Institutions,
      and Differential Paths of Growth Among New World Economies: A View from
      Economic Historians of the United States,” National Bureau of Economic Research
      Working Paper No. H0066.
Gelb, A. and Associates, 1988, Oil Windfalls: Blessing or Curse?, World Bank: Oxford
       University Press.

Hall, Robert, and Chad I. Jones, 1998, “Why Do Some Countries Produce So Much More
       Output per Worker than Others?” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 114, 1, pp. 83–
       116.

Hausman, R., and R. Rigobon, 2002, “An Alternative Interpretation of the Resource Curse:
     Theory and Implications for Stabilization, Saving, and Beyond,” Paper prepared for
     the Conference on Fiscal Policy Formulation and Implementation in Oil Producing
     Countries, International Monetary Fund Washington D.C.

Isham, J., L. Pritchett, M. Woolcock, and G. Busby, 2003, “The Varieties of the Resource
       Experience: How Natural Resource Export Structures Affect the Political Economy
       of Economic Growth,” mimeo, World Bank, Washington D.C.

Kaufmann, D., A.Kraay, and P. Zoido-Lobatón, 2002, “Governance Matters II—Updated
      Indicators for 2000/01,” World Bank Policy Research Department Working Paper
      No. 2772, Washington D.C.

Leite, C. and M. Weidmann, 1999, “Does Mother Nature Corrupt? Natural Resources,
        Corruption and Economic Growth,” IMF Working paper WP/99/85, Washington D.C.

Mauro, P., 1995, “Corruption and Growth,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 90,
      pp. 681–712.

Pinto. B., 1987, “Nigeria During and After the Oil Boom: A Policy Comparison with
        Indonesia,” The World Bank Economic Review, Vol. 1, No. 3, pp. 419–445

Reinhart, C.M., and K. Rogoff, 2002, “The Modern History of Exchange Rate Arrangements:
       A Reinterpretation,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No.
       8963.

Rodrik, D. A. Subramanian, and F.Trebbi, 2002, “Institutions Rule: The Primacy of
       Institutions Over Integration and Geography in Development,” National Bureau of
       Economic Research Working Paper No. 9305.

Sachs, J., and A.Warner, 1995, “Natural Resource Abundance and Economic Growth,” in G.
       Meier and J. Rauch (eds.), Leading Issues in Economic Development, New York:
       Oxford University Press.

Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 2003, “Estimating Poverty from the World Distribution of
       Consumption”, mimeo Columbia University.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, Gernot Doppelhofer and Ronald Miller (2003), “Determinants of
       Long-Term Growth: a Bayesian Averaging of Classical Estimates (BACE)
       Approach”, forthcoming American Economic Review.

Sen, A., 1999, Development as Freedom, New York: Norton.

Tornell, A., and P. Lane, 1999, “Voracity and Growth,” American Economic Review, Vol.
       89, pp. 22–46.
