                                 NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                        BANKRUPTCY POLICY REFORM AND TOTAL
                       FACTOR PRODUCTIVITY DYNAMICS IN KOREA:
                             EVIDENCE FROM MACRO DATA

                                             Youngjae Lim
                                             Chin Hee Hahn

                                          Working Paper 9810
                                  http://www.nber.org/papers/w9810


                       NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                  Cambridge, MA 02138
                                       June 2003




This paper was prepared for the volume on Productivity that is being edited by Takatoshi Ito and Andrew Rose
for the NBER and will be published by the University of Chicago Press.The views expressed herein are those
of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research.

©2003 by Youngjae Lim and Chin Hee Hahn. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.
Bankruptcy Policy Reform and Total Factor Productivity Dynamics in Korea:
Evidence from Micro Data
Youngjae Lim and Chin Hee Hahn
NBER Working Paper No. 9810
June 2003
JEL No. K0, L1, N8, O0, O4

                                           ABSTRACT

Using the firm level panel data, obtained from the period between during , this study shows that the
failing firms, accepted in the court-administered rehabilitation procedures after the post-crisis
bankruptcy reform in Korea, had experienced less persistent problems in the pre-bankruptcy Total-
Factor-Productivity (TFP) performances than those before the reform. The most crucial element of
the post-crisis reform in the post-crisis court-administered bankruptcy system is the implementation
of an economic efficiency criterion, whereas the pre-reform system benefited failing firms deemed
as having high social value and prospects for rehabilitation. The new system removes the
possibilities for interested parties to oppose the exit of the firms without economic values. Then,
to get an idea of how the bankruptcy policy reform would affect the performance of aggregate TFP,
we assess the role of the creative destruction process of entry and exit in total factor productivity
growth utilizing plant level panel data in the Korean manufacturing sector during the 1990-98
period. For this purpose, we document the plant entry and exit rates, examine the dynamic
relationship between plant turnovers and plant productivity, and quantify the contribution from
entry and exit to productivity growth. We conclude that, for sustained total factor productivity
growth, it is important to establish policy or institutional environment where efficient businesses
succeed and inefficient businesses fail.



Youngjae Lim
Korea Development Institute
P.O. Box 113, Cheongnyang
Seoul 130-012, KOREA
yjlim@kdi.re.kr
Chin Hee Hahn
Korea Development Institute
P.O. Box 113, Cheongnyang
Seoul 130-012, KOREA
chhahn@kdi.re.kr
I. Introduction

         During the onset of the Korean financial crisis in 1997, an inefficient corporate


bankruptcy system had a detrimental affect on Korea ’s economy. Prior to the crisis, in 1996


and the first three-quarters of 1997, a number of large firms fac ing bankruptcy actively


sought shelter under the court-administered rehabilitation procedures. However, the


inadequacies of the bankruptcy system failed to maintain discipline in targeting appropriate


firms to undergo the rehabilitation procedure among the increasingly large number of


financially distressed firms. Meanwhile, before the outbreak of the economic crisis, the


uncertainty and delay encountered in dealing with failing firms clearly added to the distortion


of the resource allocation process in Korea’s economy.


         In other words, the exit barriers for large firms seemed to have deteriorated the


efficiency of resource allocation before the onset of the crisis. Prior to the crisis, Korea ’s


corporate bankruptcy system had a tendency to work as a de facto exit barrier. For example,


before the reform, producers with persistently declining productivity were more likely to be


accepted in some rehabilitation procedure if they were deemed as having “high social value”


such as a large output or employment share in the economy.


         Hence, the natural course of action for post-crisis Korea was to undertake a

                                                 2
sweeping reform of its corporate bankruptcy system. As the case with other structural reforms


in the corporate sector, reforming Korea’s bankruptcy policy was pushed forward based on


the belief that new reforms were essential in preventing recurrent economic crises from


plaguing the economy. Yet, the past experiences of crisis-hit countries suggest that there is a


strong possibility that incomplete or weak reforms will often lead to recurrent economic


crises. Despite the suggestion, to the best of our knowledge, there are few empirical studies to


examine how bankruptcy reforms in the post-crisis Korea affect the efficiency of resource re-


allocation and, ultimately, the total factor productivity (TFP) growth in Korea’s economy. 1


          Against this backdrop, our study aims to address the issue of evaluating the effects


of bankruptcy policy reform by analyzing micro data on the firm or plant level.                       First, by


employing the firm-level panel data, the study will examine how the post-crisis reforms in the


bankruptcy policy affect the productivity dynamics of failing firms. In the analysis, we will


focus on bankruptcy procedures administered by the courts. For example, failing firms faced


with bankruptcy that are unsuccessful in securing an out-of-court settlement after exhausting



1
  There are some recent studies that begin by examining the determinants of the divergent growth path of crisis-
hit countries and (simply) suggest that such policies as bankruptcy policy reform, are possibly the candidates.
However, they do not analyze the effect of bankruptcy policy reform on the resource re-allocation process of the
economy based on the details of institutions at the micro level. For instance, Hayashi and Prescott (2000) show
the 1990's of the Japanese economy is the failure to improve productivity not the failure to accumulate inputs.
Based on this finding and other evidence, they further suggest that the industrial policy of protecting failing or
declining industries or firms by the Japanese government is the main culprit behind the "lost decade".
Meanwhile, in a comparative study of Chile and Mexico, Bergoeing, Kehoe, Kehoe, and Soto (2001) show that
the decade-long divergent growth paths of the two countries since the financial crisis in the early 1980's are
predominantly driven by the differences in total factor productivity growth rates. They suggest that policies such
as the bankruptcy policy reform, are candidates for explaining the different paths of the two countries.
                                                             3
all options would have to settle for an in-court settlement. Maintaining discipline in in-court


bankruptcy procedures would have far-reaching consequences on out-of-court bankruptcy


procedures, because the discipline would act as an effective and credible deterrent to failing


firms in other stages.


          We examine whether the firms accepted under the reformed court-administered


rehabilitation procedures would experience less persistent problems in their pre-bankruptcy


TFP compared with firms undergoing the process before the reforms. We expect that, if the


reform in the in-court bankruptcy procedures is successful, then only the firms with


temporary difficulties would be accepted by the rehabilitation programs, whereas failing


firms with persistently declining productivity would be rejected. Successful reform of the


corporate bankruptcy system would imply an improvement in the efficiency of resource re-


allocation.


          Secondly, to formulate an idea of how bankruptcy policy reform would contribute to


preventing prolonged economic stagnation, we will examine how the reforms would improve


the efficiency of resource re-allocation and, in turn, aggregate TFP growth.


          Over the past years, there have been studies documenting that the resource re-


allocation process from exiting producers to entering producers explains a substantial portion


of TFP changes at the aggregate level. Most of the studies find that exiting producers exhibit

                                                   4
persistently declining productivity while entering producers that survive the market selection


process exhibit rapidly increasing productivity (Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan 1998, Hahn


2000, etc). This pattern suggests that policies that prevent the efficient reallocation of


resources via entry and exit could be potentially very costly with the cost possibly grow ing


over time. On the contrary, the reforms of bankruptcy policy, which induce inefficient firms


to exit with a lower cost and allocate released resources to efficient entrants or incumbents,


would enhance the rate of aggregate productivity growth.


         In this study, we will ask whether this productivity dynamics of entering and exiting


producers holds in Korea, by using the plant-level panel data on the Korean manufacturing


sector. Specifically, we will examine the following questions. What kinds of time profiles do


the TFPs of exiting and entering producers show? Given the pattern of productivity dynamics,


how does the competitive process of entry and exit improve aggregate productivity? Can we


expect the policies that improve the efficiency of resource re-allocation, such as bankruptcy


policy reform, to improve aggregate TFP instantaneously or over a period of time?


         The broad outline of this study is as follows. In section 2, we examine the effects of


the post-crisis bankruptcy policy reform in Korea on the resource re-allocation process using


the firm-level data. For this objective, we discuss the key eleme nts in the post-crisis


bankruptcy reforms and then proceed to analyze the TFP performance of failing firms


                                                 5
entering the court-administered rehabilitation procedures before and after the reform. In


section 3, we examine the mechanism by which the reform would improve the efficiency of


resource re-allocation or the performance of aggregate TFP, by using the plant-level panel


data on the Korean manufacturing sector,. In section 4, we summarize and conclude this study.




II. Bankruptcy Policy Reform and the Productivity

     Dynamics of Failing Firms


2.1 Corporate Bankruptcy System prior to the Economic Crisis



< Exit Barriers for Large Firms >



        In Korea, economic growth in the past was possible through the growth or


restructuring of existing firms rather than through the dynamic pr ocess of entry and exit. In


the period of development when profitable new markets were rapidly emerging, the


inadequate corporate bankruptcy system did not significantly distort the resource allocation


of the economy due to the ability of the economy to easily re-allocate resources from


declining sectors to emerging profitable sectors. Under these circumstances, through


rationalization programs, the government played an active role in re-allocating resources


from failing firms to other existing firms. During the developmental period, many of the
                                              6
failing firms were not filing for bankruptcy procedures overseen by the courts.2


            In particular, most small and medium-sized bankrupt firms were effectively


liquidated on a non-judicial basis. A bankrupt firm’s debt was usually collected on an


individual basis under the Civil Procedure Act. Most of the bankrupt firm’s assets were


already subject to mortgage or security, consequently, leaving little for unsecured creditors.


Additional procedures for the collection of debt were not necessary.


            For large firms, however, the ‘too big to fail’ argument played a part in building exit


barriers in the sense that inefficient firms were often allowed to operate through some explicit


or hidden subsidies from the government. Several large sized bankrupt firms were


periodically bailed out through the government’s various “rationalization” measures,


undercutting Korea’s formal bankruptcy procedures.


            Since the early 1990s, however, Korea ’s inadequate corporate bankruptcy system


began to distort the economy’s resource allocation, which increasingly grew until the


outbreak of the financial crisis in 1997. Since the early 1990s, some failing firms began to


enter court-administered bankruptcy procedures, but the bankruptcy system was often abused


by controlling shareholders of the failing firms.



2
  One technical hurdle to enforcing judicial bankruptcy procedures was the Act on Special Measures for Unpaid
Loans of Financial Institutions. The act gave the Korea Asset Management Corporation (KAMCO) the authority
to hold auctions of the bankrupt firm’s assets before the initiation of court procedures. The act basically nullified
the Corporate Reorganization Act since the auction of assets by KAMCO effectively preempted the corporate
reorganization process. In 1990, the Constitutional Court declared this provision unconstitutional, paving the
way for the expanded use of judicial bankruptcy procedures.
                                                                7
         By enacting the Rule on Corporate Reorganization Procedure in 1992, the Supreme


Court began to shift towards improving judicial bankruptcy procedures. In particular, the new


rule established conditions for initiating corporate reorganization proceedings. The conditions


established by the new rule included firms which exhibited high social value, financial


distress, and potential for rehabilitation; interestingly however, economic efficiency was not a


condition for corporate reorganization. The new rule tended to give preference to larger


failing firms for in-court corporate bankruptcy settlements creating a de facto exit barrier for


large firms. For example, producers with persistently declining productivity were more likely


to be accepted in one of the rehabilitation procedures if they were deemed as having “high


social value” such as a large output or employment share in the economy.



< Exit Barriers from the Controlling Shareholders of Failing Firms >



         Prior to the economic crisis, the controlling shareholders of failing large firms often


sought to take shelter under court-administered rehabilitation procedures. However, Korea ’s


inefficient bankruptcy system failed to maintain discipline in targeting appropriate firms for


the rehabilitation procedures among an increasingly large number of financially distressed


firms.


         The frequent abuse of the corporate reorganization procedure highlighted by several


notorious cases involving controlling shareholders of failing firms forced the court to amend
                                                 8
the system in 1996. In particular, the court argued for wiping out shares held by controlling


shareholders responsible for a firm’s failure. The introduction of the amendment in 1996


produced an unintended consequence: controlling shareholders of failing firms pursued other


means that would allow them to retain their ownership and control. Controlling shareholders


found a loophole in the bankruptcy proceedings through the composition procedure , which


was originally designed for small- and medium-sized firms with less complex capital


structures. However, before the law’s revis ion later, the composition procedure did not


contain an explicit limit on a firm’s size ,which enabled existing management of larger firms


to retain control.




// Table 1 here //



           As shown in Table 1, there was a dramatic rise in bankruptcy filings for the


composition procedure where the number of cases increased from nine cases in 1996 to 322


in 1997, and 728 in 1998. In the first three quarters of 1997, before the onset of the crisis,


many large firms on the verge of financial collapse sought to file for bankruptcy under the


composition procedure. Kia Motors was among the many that filed for composition


procedure. It deserve s special attention. In the case of Kia Motors, the debtor and creditors


initially seeked to file for different procedures : K ia , the debtor, initially filed for composition

                                                  9
procedure, but shortly thereafter creditors decided to file for corporate reorganization. In


cases when involved parties file for different pr oceedings as in the case of Kia Motors,


corporate reorganization overrides a composition filing. In the end, the court accepted Kia


Motors’ bankruptcy filing for corporate reorganization, but the uncertainty and delay


resulting from the inefficient bankruptcy system in dealing with large failing firms such as


Kia Motors clearly worsened the situation of the economy.



2.2 Post-Crisis Bankruptcy Policy Reforms


          The economic crisis of 1997 placed tremendous strain on the existing corporate


bankruptcy system for both in-court and out-of-court proceedings as a result of the soaring


number and scale of bankruptcies. Table 1 shows that the filings for judicial bankruptcy


procedures rose dramatically in 1997. The fallout from the economic crisis on the system was


the main driving force in implementing revisions in the bankruptcy laws and procedures. In


addition, the IMF and IBRD required that improvements be made in the corporate bankruptcy


system as a condition for the bailout package.


      After the economic crisis, the Korean government implemented reform efforts to remove


exit barriers along two separate lines: one involved the court-administered bankruptcy


procedure, and the other, the pre-bankruptcy informal arrangements for corporate restructuring.


Whereas the workout procedure had a significant impact on the corporate restructuring of larger

                                                 10
failing firms , the court-administered procedures focus ed on the restructuring of medium-sized


failing firms.


      In this study, we focus on policy reform in the court-administered bankruptcy system.


Except for small-sized firms with less complex capital structures, the court-administered


bankruptcy procedures would be the last resort for insolvent firms if the interested parties could


not agree on the pre-bankruptcy informal arrangements for corporate restructuring. For pre-


bankruptcy informal arrangements, one of the most effective disciplines should come from the


discipline of the court-administered bankruptcy procedures. In other words , during out-of-court


informal settlements the incentives of interested parties’ would be directly affected by how they


expect the outcome of the court-administered bankruptcy proceedings to be.



< Bankruptcy Policy Reform in 1998: Economic Efficiency Criterion and the removal of the


Exit Barriers for Large Firms>



          The most crucial element in the post-crisis court-administered bankruptcy system


was the court ’s establishment and tight enforcement of an economic efficiency criterion in


selecting qualified firms for judicial bankruptcy procedures. Instead of basing the system on


economic efficiency, the pre-reform system was based on high social value and prospects for


rehabilitation. Presently, a comparison of a distressed firm’s value as a going-concern with its



                                                11
liquidation value is required to initiate judicial bankruptcy proceedings.


          The new criterion greatly contributed to removing the de facto exit barrier placed on


large firms that had existed in the in-court bankruptcy system prior to the crisis. Prior to the


crisis, producers with persistently declining productivity were more likely to be accepted into


a rehabilitation procedure as long as they exhibited “high social value” such as a large output


or employment share in the economy.


          The reforms initiated in 1998 represented the most dramatic change in the system


since the enactment of the corporate bankruptcy laws in 1962. However, in the wake of the


crisis, in an effort to quickly implement the reforms, the government was not successful in


initiating a fully comprehensive revision. The shortcomings of the first reforms resulted in


another round of revisions in 1999. The two revisions to the bankruptcy laws significantly


expanded the role of the courts in the corporate bankruptcy process. If not for the workout


procedure introduced as an out-of-court settlement in 1998, the role of the courts would have


been much greater.


          Besides the economic efficiency criterion, the 1998 reforms attempted to speed up


the proceedings. The revisions introduced time limits for critical steps in the proceedings


such as for the decision on stay, the report of debts and equities, the approval of the


reorganization plan, and other related steps. Additional changes in the 1998 revision included


                                                     12
the following: First, the reforms established mechanisms in order to induce a more active role


for the creditors such as introducing a creditor’s conference. Second, to enhance the court’s


capacity to deal with a large volume of bankruptcy cases, the court receivership committee


was introduced as a special advisor to oversee the critical steps in the proceedings. Third, the


process of wiping out the shares of controlling shareholders was strengthened and made more


transparent. Fourth, to prevent the abuse of the composition procedure, some critical


enhancements were made to the Composition Act. For example, large firms with complex


capital structures were not allowed to file bankruptcy under the composition procedure. Table


1 shows the impact resulting from changes to the Composition Act, as the number of


composition filings decreased sharply from 728 in 1998 to 140 in 1999.



< Bankruptcy Policy Reform in 1999: Mandatory Liquidation System>



          Despite these significant revisions in 1998, there was room for further reform. To


some extent, in fact, the 1999 reforms filled the gap between the initial reform proposals and


what was finally passed in the 1998 revisions. While developing the revisions in 1999, there


was an initial debate on the inclusion of an automatic stay provision for the new law. Under


an automatic stay, the debtors’ assets would be automatically protected from creditors seeking


to secure their claims. After strong arguments were presented for both sides on the issue of


automatic stay, the final compromise was to speed up the initiation of the proceedings to

                                                 13
within a month of the filing.


          Although the automatic stay provision can enhance the rehabilitation of failing firms


after bankruptcy, the debtor may choose to utilize the court in order to avoid a formal default


and thereby evade criminal punishment under the Illegal Check Control Act. According to the


Illegal Check Control Act, the managers or controlling owners of failing firms who issued


bad checks are criminally liable. The objective of the act was to overcome the informational


asymmetry between debtor s and creditors. Creditors faced with highly unreliable accounting


information would be less willing to facilitate loans to debtors without a credible means of


recourse. As a result, debtors are forced to make a credible commitment to repayment by


risking incarceration in the case of default.


          The new revision also facilitated an efficient transition between corporate


reorganization and liquidation. After the initiation decision, the court must compare the


going-concern value of the firm with its liquidation value. If the liquidation value is larger


than the going-concern value, the court must declare the liquidation of the firm. Donga


Construction was liquidated in early 2001; it was the first large firm to travel down this path.


The mandatory liquidation provision could be considered as a reform that contributes to


enhance the efficiency of bankruptcy system.


          However, the mandatory liquidation provision created an unintended consequence.


The possibility of liquidation instilled fear among failing firms to a point where many
                                                14
attempted to avoid the judicial rehabilitation procedures. Resolving this problem in the


current judicial bankruptcy system remains as one of the major future policy objectives in


Korea.




2.3 Bankruptcy Policy Reform and the Productivity Dynamics of

     Bankruptcy Cohorts


          Firms go bankrupt due to their inability to pay their debts. rom the perspective of


designing a corporate bankruptcy system, a critical element is the ability to distinguish (or to


elicit information on) whether an insolvent firm’s financial distress is temporary or persistent.


One method to resolve this issue empirically is analyzing the productivity of insolvent firms.


In the study, we construct total factor productivity measures for the firms in our data set to


evaluate the performance of the corporate bankruptcy system instituted after the economic


crisis. In the analysis we examine a failing firm’s cross-sectional distribution of corporate


bankruptcy and time series productivity pre and post bankruptcy filing.



< Use of Bankruptcy Procedures by Chaebol Category after the Crisis >



         <Table 2> shows the composition of bankruptcy procedures applied to insolvent


firms by the chaebol category from 1997 to 1999. The table demonstrates the relative share of


bankruptcy procedures among insolvent firms, weighted by the size of assets. The insolvent

                                                  15
firms in a given year include only those that went bankrupt for the first time in that year and


excludes those from other years; hence, the table gives us the incidence of new bankruptcies


in the specific year. By focusing on the year cohorts, we can control for various year-specific


effects and single out the relationship between the various rehabilitation settlements and the


size factor over time.


          Once firms are insolvent, they can either enter into court or out-of-court


administered settlements, including corporate reorganization, composition, or workout


procedures. But not all firms enter into one of these rehabilitation programs; instead, some


are simply left bankrupt for a prolonged period of time. Firms under these circumstances are


cut off from credit, limiting the firms to only cash transactions.




// Table 2 here //



          <Table 2> shows the relative share of different types of settlements for new chaebol


bankruptcies from 1997 to 1999. The firms that went bankrupt in 1997 show a clear pattern.


For the top 30 chaebols, the majority (94 percent in terms of asset size) was accepted into


corporate reorganization whereas only a fraction (6 percent in terms of asset size) was


accepted into composition. On the other hand, quite a significant proportion of small-sized


chaebols entered into the composition program. A substantial portion of the independent

                                                    16
firms (and a less substantial portion of small-sized chaebols) did not qualify for any


rehabilitation program after bankruptcy.


         In 1998, the government introduced an out-of-court workout procedure. < Table 2 >


shows that, for large-sized chaebols, the workout program was the main method of settlement.


Similarly , the workout program played an important role among independent firms. By 1999,


the role of the workout program had increased significantly, and most of the new


bankruptcies (in terms of asset size) were handled through the out-of-court workout


procedure.



< Examining the Pre-Exit Productivity of Bankruptcy Cohorts >



         Note that one of the most significant changes in the 1998 revision was the


introduction of the economic efficiency criterion. The new revision required that the courts


compare the going-concern value of the firm with its liquidation value for the initiation of


judicial bankruptcy proceedings. A preliminary analysis shows the firms that filed for


bankruptcy between 1998-2000 experienced less persistent difficulties compared w ith the


firms in 1997. For the firms filing bankruptcy in 1997, their productivity was lower than


solvent firms several years before they enter into one of the rehabilitation programs.


Rehabilitation mechanisms applied to firms under these conditions are most likely doomed to


failure from the start. Rehabil itation procedures must target firms that under go bankruptcy

                                             17
due to temporary setbacks with the high potential for recovery. This is the case for the 1998-


2000 cohorts. The introduction of the economic efficiency criterion in 1998 appears to have


affected the types of firms targeted. Note that the 1998 reform was initiated at the beginning


of the year.


          These hypotheses can be tested statistically in the following manner. <Tables 3–4>


show regressions of productivity on a set of dummy variables referring to the specific year


bankruptcy cohort interacted with the year dummy. Only the particular cohort and the group


of solvent firms are included in each regression. Then, the reported coefficients mean the


productivity differential between the specific bankruptcy cohort and the group of solvent


firms.




//Table 3 and 4 here//




          <Table 3> shows that for the 1997 (corporate reorganization or composition)


bankruptcy cohort, the coefficients reported are negative from 1993 to 2000, and significant


from 1995 to 2000. The 1996 bankruptcy cohort shows a similar pattern, but standard errors


are large due to the small sample size of the 1996 cohort. On the other hand, for the pre-exit


years of the 1998-2000 bankruptcy cohorts starting, the coefficients are small and


                                             18
significantly negative only around the time of bankruptcy.


          <Table 4> shows a similar pattern of regression for the variable of profitability. The


variable of profitability does not show a clear pattern regarding the pre-exit year productivity


of failing firms. A possible interpretation is that some explicit or hidden subsidies given to


failing firms at the pre-exit years may have worked to blur the pattern of persistently


declining productivity for the bankruptcy cohorts before the reform.


          As discussed in Section 2.2, the most crucial element in the post-crisis court-


administered bankruptcy system was the implementation of an economic efficiency criterion.


The court established and tightly enforced an economic efficiency criterion in selecting


qualified failing firms for the judicial rehabilitation procedures. One of the key criteria for all


judicial bankruptcy proceedings was to conduct a comparison of the value of a distressed firm


as a going-concern with its liquidation value.


          Instead of economic efficiency, the pre-reform system was based on high social


value and prospects for rehabilitation. Note that the prospects for rehabilitation could vary


depending on the amount of subsidies from creditors and the government. In comparison with


the pre-reform system, the new system removed the possibilities for interested parties (for


example, controlling shareholders, labor union, or local /central governments) to be in the


way of a failing firm’s exit. In other words, the new system contributed towards removing the


de facto exit barrier that benefited large firms under the in-court bankruptcy system prior to
                                                   19
the crisis. Under the new system, producers with persistently declining productivity were less


likely to be accepted into a rehabilitation procedure regardless of whether they exhibited high


social value such as a large output or employment share in the economy.




III. Entry, Exit and Aggregate Productivity Growth in

        Korea Before and After the Crisis

      In the previous section, it was found that firms accepted in the court-administered


rehabilita tion program after the reform had less persistent problems in pre-bankruptcy TFP


performance than those before the reform. We interpret this finding as a lending support to


the argument that bankruptcy policy reform enhanced the efficiency of resource re-allocation


after the crisis.


      Then, how is the bankruptcy policy reform likely to affect the aggregate factor of


productivity growth? To answer this question, we discuss how the resource re-allocation by


the competitive process of entry and exit contributes to the aggregate productivity growth


based on evidence from the plant-level data on the Korean manufacturing sector.


           Before proceeding any further, it may be helpful to give a brief background.


Recently, there are a growing number of studies that explore the relationship between the


resource re-allocation process of entry and exit and aggregate TFPG, based on plant or firm



                                                 20
level data.3 Most studies support the point that the process of entry and exit enhances the


aggregate productivity by reporting at least one of the following three effects: market


selection, learning, and “shadow of death” effects. Here, the market selection effect is the part


of the aggregate productivity gain that comes from the fact that the efficient survive while the


inefficient fail. The learning effect purposes that surviving entrants become relatively more


efficient over time. Finally, the “shadow of death” denotes the phenomenon that exiting


plants exhibited relatively low productivity performance several years earlier.4


            Then, can we expect that the same forces are at work in Korea’s case? To answer


this question, we discuss below what the actual patterns of plant entry and exit have been and


whether the plant turnovers reflect productivity differential among plants, based on Hahn


(2000).5



<Patterns of Plant Entry and Exit in the Korean Manufacturing Industry>



            In Hahn (2000), there are two types of entry—birth and switch-in. Birth is defined


as a plant that first appears in the data set. Switch-in is a plant that existed in a market in the


previous period which is different from its current one. Here, a market is defined as a five-


3
  For a recent survey of the empirical literature in this vein, see Tybout (1996a), Caves (1998), and Foster,
Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001).
4
  With regard to the question of how much of the aggregate productivity growth is accounted for by entry and
exit, however, the available evidence seems mixed. For example, Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001) on the
U.S., and Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001) on Taiwan report large role of entry and exit in aggregate productivity
growth while Baily, Hulten, and Campbell (1992) on the U.S., and Griliches and Regev (1995) on Israel find a
minor role.
5
  For more detailed discussion, see Hahn (2000).
                                                                 21
digit level industry. A continuing plant is the one that is neither identified as birth nor switch-


in. Similarly, there are two types of exit—death and swit ch-out. Death is defined as a plant


that disappears from the data set in the next period, while switch-out is a plant which moves


out to another market in the next period. Under these working definitions, the actual patterns


of entry and exit can be documented.


          <Table 5> and <Table 6> show the percentage contribution of plant births and


deaths, respectively, in terms of output and number of plants. Specifically, table 5 illustrates


what fraction of output or number of plants for each year is attributable to the plants which


are grouped by plant age. Table 6 shows similar statistics for each year by group of plants that


will die within a certain time period. Overall, the figures below suggest that the plant


turnover rate was quite high in the Korean manufacturing industry during the 1990-98 period.


          According to Table 5, plants less than five years of age account for more than 25


percent of manufacturing production except for the crisis year of 1998. In 1998, the


contribution from plants aged less than five years declines sharply to 21.5 percent. This


decline is attributable not only to a fall in the birth rate but also to a rise in the closing of


young plants, reflecting the severe recession. In terms of plant number, the importance of


births becomes more pronounced; one to five-year-old plants account for about 65 percent of


the total for each year, except for 1998. The larger contribution of young aged plants in terms


of plant number indicates the relatively small size of those plants.
                                                    22
// Table 5 and 6 here //



           The new plant entry rate in Korea seems to be higher than most other countries for


which similar studies are available. While plants aged less than five years account for about


25 percent of a given year’s output in Korea, they explain 13.6 to 18.5 percent in the U.S.,


18.3 to 20.8 percent in Colombia, and 15.0 to 15.7 percent in Chile, depending on the year. 6


Comparison of entry rate between Korea and Taiwan might be useful since, even though both


countries were equally dynamic countries, these countries differed vastly in their industrial


structure. That is, it is well known that Korea relied heavily on Chaebols, while Taiwan on


small and medium sized enterprises, in their past economic success. If Chaebols in Korea


employed a more capital intensive production structure requiring larger sunk setup costs than


SMEs in Taiwan, then it could well be conjectured that this condition, combined with policy-


related exit barriers, worked as an entry barrier, lowering entry rate in Korea. Consistent with


this hypothesis, the entry rate in Korea reported by Hahn (2000) seems to be less pronounced


compared with Taiwan. In a similar study for Taiwan, Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001) report


that one to five -year-old firms account for approximately one-third to one -half of the




6
  See Dunne, Roberts, and Samuelson (1988) for the U.S., Roberts (1996) and Tybout (1996b) for Colombia
and Chile, respect ively. The figure for the U.S. is based on firm level data.
                                                                 23
production in nine Taiwanese manufacturing industries in 19917. However, further study is


required to shed more light on this issue.


            The plant death rate is also high in the Korean manufacturing industry, which is not


surprising given the high cross sectional correlation between the entry and exit rates reported


in the literature. Although there are some variations over the years, about 20 percent of the


plants in terms of output and more than half of the plants in terms of plant number cease to


exist within a span of five years. In 1993, the contribution of the plants that will die within


five years became significantly larger reflecting the severe economic recession in 1998. The


contribution of plant deaths in terms of plant number is much larger than in terms of output,


indicating that the deaths are concentrated among the smaller plants.


            The plant death conditional on birth (not reported) is even higher than the


unconditional death rates reported above. In terms of both plant number and output, the death


rate conditional on births is much higher than the unconditional death rate especially during


the first three years of operation. Thus, new plants seem to fail easily especially during the


first three years. This might be due, among other factors, to the low productivity of births on


average during the early stages of operation, which seems consistent with the theories of firm


dynamics such as Jovanovic (1982) and Hopenhyn (1992). Switch-ins and switch-outs (not


7
  Unfortunately, a direct comparison of the two studies could be somewhat misleading because Hahn (2000)
used plant-level data while Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001) used firm level data. Nevertheless, relatively high
entry rate in Taiwan seems to be a robust conclusion since entry rate measured at plant level would be higher
than at firm level in so far as there are multi-plant firms.
                                                             24
reported) are also frequently observed in the Korean manufacturing sector. In terms of output,


they are almost as important as births or deaths, respectively. Compared with births or deaths,


switch-ins or switch-outs are generally bigger in size.



<Productivity Differential Among Plant Groups At a Point in Time>



           Having described the plant entry and exit rates in the Korean manufacturing sector,


we proceed to the issue of whether plant turnovers reflect certain patterns of productivity


differential. For this purpose, we first examine the relationship between plant turnover


patterns and plant productivity, both at a point in time and over a period of time. 8 Below, we


discuss the former aspect of the study.


           <Table 7> compares the unweighted mean productivity levels of plants that exist in a


given year, by five plant groups defined as earlier. Main findings could be summarized as


follows. First, deaths in a given year are, on average, less productive than continuing plants in


that year. Depending on the year, they are about 3 to 6 percent less productive than


continuing plants. This result is consistent with the prediction by models of plant or firm


heterogeneity that market selection forces sort out low -productivity plants from high-


productivity plants.




8
 Plant productivity level is measured according to chained-multilateral index number approach as developed in
Good (1985) and Good, Nadiri, and Sickles (1997) and employed in Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001). For details,
                                                            25
           // Table 7 here //




           Second, births are on average less productive than continuing plants in the first year


they are observed. They are even less productive than deaths. In fact, the productivity of a


typical birth plant is the lowest among all groups of plants in every year. Initial low


productivity of birth plants relative to continuing plants or deaths is not consistent with the


presence of the simple vintage effect that new plants are more productive than older plants.


However, it is not necessarily contradictory to the prediction of several recent models of plant


dynamics, such as Jovanovic (1982) and Hopenhayn (1992). Potential entrants who are


uncertain about their productivity but hold a positive outlook on their post-entry productivity


performance—i.e., who expect they could catch up with the incumbents in terms of


productivity sooner or later—may enter despite their initially low productivity. Of course,


birth plants themselves are also heterogeneous in terms of productivity, as will be discussed


later.


           The initial low productivity level of births relative to incumbents is also documented


by other studies, although these studies differ from ours in data and methodologies. For


example, Aw, Chen, and Roberts (2001) reports that entrants in 1986 are between 0.6 percent


and 6.9 percent less productive than incumbent firms depending on industry, using firm level


see Hahn (2000).
                                                26
data on Taiwanese manufacturing industries. Meanwhile, Table 10 in Foster, Haltiwanger, and


Krizan (2001) reports that there is no statistical difference between continuing plants and


enterin g plants in terms of multifactor productivity in 1987, based on ten-year interval


analysis of plant level data on U.S. manufacturing sector. However, the same table illustrates


that the cohort of plants that entered during the past five-year period, rather than ten-year


period, show lower productivity than continuing plants in 1987.9


           Third, switch-in or switch-out plants have higher productivity than birth or death,


respectively. The productivity of those plants is roughly comparable to the continuing plants


on average. Higher productivity of switch-ins relative to births is consistent with the idea that


having experience in a related market is beneficial. Also, the finding that switch-outs have


productivity levels comparable to continuing plants seems to suggest that high productivity


plants possesses mobility. Finally, each new cohort of births are more productive than their


previous cohorts. This finding conforms well with the presumption of recent R&D-based


endogenous growth models, such as Grossman and Helpman (1991), in that potential entrants


receives externality from previous innovation.


           The above findings suggest that plant turnovers, especially entry by birth and exit by


death, are not random events. In other words, the productivity of birth and death plants are


more likely to be located at the lower end of the productivity distribution. In particular, lower


9
    They report, however, that in terms of labor productivity entering plants have lower productivity than
                                                    27
productivity of deaths relative to continuing plants indicates that market selection forces are


at work as predicted by theoretical models of plant or firm dynamics. Market selection of low


productivity plants from surviving high productivity plants is a process that enhances the


aggregate level productive efficiency.


            Lower productivity of births relative to continuing plants or even death is not


inconsistent with the prediction of theoretical models and often found for other countries.


However, it could cast doubt on the positive role of exit and entry on the aggregate efficiency


gain. That is, it suggests that the instantaneous effect of resource reallocation by plant deaths


and births on aggregate productivity growth might be very small or even negative, which


might be true especially if the resources released by deaths are entirely reallocated to births.


Is this the end of the story? The answer is no. To further understand this point, we now


discuss the dynamic aspects of the relationship between plant turnovers and productivity.


Specifically, we discuss post-entry and pre-exit performance of plants by focusing on market


selection, learning, and shadow of death effects.



<Post-Entry Performance: Market Selection and Learning>



            To proceed, we utilize the longitudinal aspect of the data set to examine whether


market selection forces sort out low productivity plants among birth plants. In our sample,



continuing plants even at ten year intervals.
                                                    28
there are eight cohorts of births according to birth year from 1991 to 1998. Focusing on a


particular birth-year cohort has the advantage of controlling the possible age effect on


survival. For example, we examine whether plants that belong to the 1991 birth cohort but die


in 1993 have lower productivity at the time of death compared with the other surviving


members of the birth cohort. To do so, plant productivity is regressed on a set of year


dummies (not reported) and a dummy variable denoting whether the plant died after birth


within the sample period interacted with year dummies. Thus, the estimated coefficients


denote the productivity differential between deaths and survivors at the time of death. The


regression results for three birth cohorts are reported in <Table 8>.


          The table shows that, for each birth-year cohort reported, exiting plants demonstrate


significantly lower productivity than surviving plants at the time of death. Depending on the


cohort year or death year, deaths are less productive than surviving plants by about 3 to 6


percent. Thus, the evidence from the Korean manufacturing sector clearly supports the


presence of a market selection effect: market forces sort out plants on the basis of


productivity.




// Table 8 here //




          As noted by Foster, Haltiwanger, and Krizan (2001), the entry and exit process
                                                   29
contributes to aggregate productivity growth also through rapid learning of surviving entrants.


In the Korean manufacturing sector, the learning effect is also observed. To illustrate the


point, let us examine the productivity performance of the surviving members of the births


relative to continuing plants. <Figure 1> shows the average productivity of birth cohorts that


survived until 1998 by birth year, in comparison with continuing plants in 1991 that also


survived until 1998. Continuing plants have increased their productivity steadily and


improved their average productivity by about 23 percent during the 1991-98 period. Each


birth-year cohort starts with a productivity disadvantage relative to continuing plants at the


year of entry. However, every birth cohort exhibits a very rapid improvement in productivity


following entry, and catches up with continuing plants in terms of productivity level after


several years. The initial productivity differential between births and continuing plants ranges


from 6 to 10 percent depending on the birth year. In the following year after entry, the


productivity differential narrows to only about 0 to 3 percent. In the third year after entry, the


productivity level of births is roughly the same as, or even slightly higher than, continuing


plants. The 1991 birth cohort in particular, which has the longest time series, maintains a


higher average productivity than continuing plants three years after entry. Thus, the results


are clearly supportive of the presence of a rapid learning effect by surviving members of


births, especially during the first several years after entry.



                                                     30
    // Figure 1 here //




<Pre-Exit Productivity Performance of Deaths: “Shadow of Death ” Effect>



          In order to understand the connection between the micro process of entry and exit


and the aggregate productivity growth, it would be ideal if we could examine the


counterfactual phenomenon of what would have happened to the productivity performance of


deaths if they had not died. Unfortunately, this seems to be an impossible task. However, it


could prove to be beneficial to examine pre-death productivity performance of deaths in order


to formulate an idea on the counterfactual. The issue is whether plant deaths reflect a random


or transitory event or a persistently bad productivity performance record.


          <Figure 2> shows the time series of the average productivity of plants that existed in


1990 grouped by the year of death in comparison with plants that survived throughout the


sample period. There are two points to be noted here. First, there is a significant productivity


gap not only at the time of death but also in the years preceding death between each death


cohort and the group that survived until 1998, even though each death cohort experienced


absolute productivity gain over time. This phenomenon suggests that plant deaths reflect


underlying productivity differences that have existed for a long period of time. In other words,


                                                  31
those differences are not just a result of a random or transitory event. To take an example of


the 1997 death cohort, the productivity disadvantage relative to the surviving group is about


6.5 percent in 1997. However, the productivity differential dates back as early as 1990 when


it is as large as 3.7 percent already. Similar results hold for other death cohorts. Thus, plant


deaths seem to reflect not only a disadvantage in productivity at a point in time but also


persistently poor history of productivity. 10




      // Figure 2 here //




             Second, the productivity differential between deaths and surviving plants tends to


widen, especially during the periods nearing the death year. For example, in the 1997 death


cohort, the productivity differential fluctuates between 3.5 and 4.7 percent during 1990-96


period, but in 1997 it rises to 6.5 percent. Similar patterns are found for other death-year


cohorts.


             So far we examined the pre-death productivity performance of death cohorts relative


to surviving groups of plants and observed large and persiste nt productivity differences. The


disparities often widen over time during the period near the death year. However, such large


and persistent productivity differences observed in Figure 2 might reflect other uncontrolled


10
     Hahn (2000) shows that these results are largely intact from the industry composition effect.
                                                               32
factors that differ between survivors and deaths, such as plant age. That is, younger plants


may be less productive and suffer death more frequently than older plants. In order to control


for this possible age effect on productivity and survival, we also looked at the pre-death


performance of plants that are born in the same year.


          <Figure 3> shows pre-death productivity of a 1991 birth cohort that is further


divided by the death year, in comparison with the 1991 births that survived until 1998. For


comparison, the productivity performance of 1991 continuing plants that survived until 1998


is also shown. As expected, the persistence of productivity differential among 1991 births is


somewhat less pronounced than suggested by Figure 2. The 1991 births that dies before 1998


do not demonstrate a noticeable productivity disadvantage in the early years of operation


compared with the surviving group. Especially in the first year of operation, which is 1991,


there is virtually no productivity differential among them, except 1996 deaths. Moreover, for


several years following entry, the productivity differential between the 1991 births and


the1991 continuing (and surviving until 1998) plants narrows over time.




    // Figure 3 here //




          However, as surviving members of 1991 births improve their productivity at a faster


rate, productivity gap begins to develop and persists over time. In addition, for each death-
                                                  33
year cohort among the 1991 births, the productivity disadvantage relative to the continuing


group becomes the largest in the last year they are observed. Thus, even if the possible age


effect on productivity and survival is controlled for, plant deaths still reflect somewhat


persistent productivity disadvantage that often widens during the period near death.


          These findings seem to suggest that plant deaths reflect persistently poor


productivity performance which often worsens near the death year. In other words, low


productivity of deaths is not just an outcome of random or transitory events.



<Entry, Exit and Aggregate TFPG >



          The empirical evidence presented above is summarized as follows. Overall, plant deaths


reflect persistently low productivity in the past. Entering plants may initially begin with a relatively


low productivity level, but over time, they go through the process of market selection: the inefficient


fail and the efficient survive. The surviving entrants experience a rapid learning and become highly


efficient over time.


          This pattern of productivity dynamics suggests that the major effect from the resource


reallocation of entry and exit on aggregate productivity will emerge over time even though the


instantaneous gain may be small or even negative. The evidence also suggests that policies that inhibit


the resource reallocation process of entry and exit of businesses are likely to be inefficient. In


particular, although the cost of such policies may not appear immediately, it will materialize and grow

                                                  34
over time in the form of foregone aggregate productivity gain. Alternatively, policies that improve the


efficiency of resource reallocation, such as bankruptcy policy reform, may not improve aggregate


total factor productivity instantaneously. However, the benefits from such policies will most likely to


be realized over time.




IV. Concluding Remarks

          This study has found that failing firms, accepted in court -administered rehabilitation


procedures after the bankruptcy reforms, had less persistent problems in pre-bankruptcy TFP


performance compared with those before the reforms. We interpreted this finding as lending


support to the argument that bankruptcy policy reform improved the efficiency of resource re-


allocation after the crisis.


          Then, to get an idea of how the bankruptcy policy reform would affect the


performance of aggregate TFP, we examined how the resource reallocation by the


competitive process of entry and exit had contributed to aggregate productivity growth based


on evidence from plant level data on the Korean manufacturing sector. The empirical analysis


supports that, in Korea, exiting producers exhibit persistently declining productivity while


entering producers that survive the market selection process show rapidly increasing


productivity. These specific patterns of productivity dynamics suggests that policies that



                                                  35
prevent resources from being reallocated efficiently via entry and exit could potentially be


very costly with the cost growing over time. Conversely, bankruptcy policy reform, which


induces inefficient firms to exit and allocates the released resources to efficient entrants or


incumbents, would contribute to increasing the rate of aggregate productivity growth.




                                                 36
  ¦ Appendix: Data

1. Productivity Dynamics of Distressed Firms in Korea in Section


  (1) firm-level productivity measure


       We use detailed financial information on the firms that have external audit reports.


According to the Act on External Audit of Joint-Stock Corporations, a firm with assets of 7


billion won or more must issue audited financial statements. The data thus includes all the


firms with assets of 7 billion won or more. For this data, firm productivity is estimated using


the chained-multilateral index number approach.


  (2) data on bankruptcy filings by distressed firms


         The information on corporate bankruptcy was gathered from various sources such as


the Courts, Financial Supervisory Service and the Bank of Korea.



2. Plant Productivity in Korean Manufacturing Sector in Section


         The data used for this section comes from the unpublis hed plant-level database


underlying the Annual Report on Mining and Manufacturing Survey. The data covers all


plants with five or more employees in 580 manufacturing industries at five digit level. It is an


unbalanced panel data with about 60,000 to 90,000 plants for each year during the 1990-98


period, so that the total number of observations is about 700,000. For details in measurement
                                                  37
of plant total productivity, see Hahn (2000).




                                                38
                                       References

Aw, BeeYan, Xiaomin Chen, and Mark J. Roberts, 2001. “Firm-level Evidence on


       Productivity Differentials, Turnover, and Exports in Taiwanese Manufacturing,”


       Journal of Development Economics, Vol 66, No. 1, pp. 51-86.


Baily, Martin Neil, Charles Hulten, and David Campbell, 1992, “Productivity Dynamics in


       Manufacturing Plants,” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity: Microeconomics,


       pp. 187-267.


Bergoeing Raphael, Patrick J. Kehoe, Timothy J. Kehoe, and Raimundo Soto, 2001. “A


       Decade Lost and Found: Mexico and Chile in the 1980s,” Federal Reserve Bank of


       Minneapolis Staff Report 292.


Caves, Richard E., 1998. “Industrial Organization and New Findings on the Turnover and


       Mobility of Firms,” Journal of Economic Literature, Vol 37, No. 4, pp. 1947-1982.


Dunne, Timothy, Mark J. Roberts, and Larry, Samuelson, 1988, “Patterns of firm entry and


       exit in U.S. manufacturing industries”, RAND Journal of Economics, Vol.19, No.4,


       pp.495-515.


Foster, Lucia, John Haltiwanger, and C. J. Krizan, 2001. “Aggregate Productivity Growth:


       Lessons from Microeconomic Evidence,” in New Development in Productivity



                                               39
       Analysis, Charles Hulten, Edwin Dean, and Michael Harper eds, Studies in Income


       and Wealth, Vol. 63, University of Chicago Press.


Good, David H., 1985, The Effect of Deregulation on the Productive Efficiency and Cost


       Structure of the Airline Industry, Ph.D. dissertation, University of Pennsylvania.


Good, David H., M. Ishaq Nadiri, and Robin Sickles, 1997, “Index Number and Factor


       Demand Approaches to the Estimation of Productivity,” in Handbook of Applied


       Econometrics: Microeconometrics, Vol II, H. Pesaran and Pl Schmidt eds, Blackwell


       Publishers.


Griliches, Zvi, and Haim Regev, 1995, “Firm Productivity in Israeli Industry”, Journal of


       Econometrics, Vol.65, pp.175-203.


Grossman, Gene M., and Elhanan Helpman, 1991, Innovation and Growth in the Global


       Economy, The MIT Press.


Hahn, Chin Hee. 2000. “Entry, Exit, and Aggregate Productivity Growth: Micro Evidence on


       Korean Manufacturing,” OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 272,


       ECO/WKP(2000)45. Presented at the OECD Workshop “The Causes of Ec onomic


       Growth”, 6-7 July 2000. Also published as Korea Development Institute Policy


       Study 2000-04.


Hayashi, Fumio. And Edward C. Prescott, 2002. “The 1990s in Japan: A Lost Decade,”


       Review of Economic Dynamics 5, 205-235.
                                                40
Hopenhayn, Hugo A., 1992, “Entry, Exit, and Firm Dynamics in Long Run Equilibrium”,


        Econometrica, Vol.60, No.5, pp.1127-1150.


Jovanovic, Boyan, 1982, “Selection and the Evolution of Industry”, Econometrica, Vol.50,


        No.3, pp.649-670.


Kim, Beom Sik. 1999. The Revision of Corporate Bankruptcy Laws and the Implications (in


       Korean), Samsung Economic Research Institute, Korea.


Kim, Jae Hyung. 2001. Policy Proposals for Corporate Rehabilitation (in Korean), Korean


       Chamber of Commerce and Industry, Korea.


Koo, Bon Cheon. 1998. The Economic Analysis of corporate Exit and the Reform Proposals


       (in Korean), Korea Development Institute, Korea.


Korea Economic Daily, Various Issues.


Lim, Youngjae, 2003, The Corporate Bankruptcy System and the Economic Crisis, in


       Economic Crisis and Corporate Restructuring in Korea: Reforming the Chaebol,


       edited by S. Haggard, W. Lim and E. Kim, Cambridge Asia -Pacific Studies,


       Cambridge University Press


Maeil Economic Daily, Various Issues.


Nam, Il Chong, Soogeun Oh, and Joon-Kyung Kim. 1999. “Insolvency Mechanisms in


       Korea,” Korea Development Institute Working Paper 9918.


Roberts, Mark J., 1996. “Colombia, 1977-85: Producer Turnover, Margins, and Trade
                                              41
        Exposure,” Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro Patterns of


        Turnover, Productivity, and Market Structure, Edited by Roberts, Mark J. and James


        R. Tybout, Oxford University Press, pp.227-259.


Tybout, James R., 1996a, “Heterogeneity and Productivity Growth: Assessing the Evidence”,


        Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries : Micro Patterns of Turnover,


        Productivity, and Market Structure, Edited by Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout,


        pp.43-72.


Tybout, James R., 1996b, “Chile, 1970-86: Trade Liberalization and Its Aftermath,” Industrial


        Evolution in Developing Countries : Micro Patterns of Turnover, Productivity, and


        Market Structure, Edited by Mark J. Roberts, and James R. Tybout, pp.200-226.


Yoo, S.M., Y.J. Lim, B.C. Koo, S.W. Lee, and J.H. Lee. 1997. Corporate Exit: Proposals


       for Reform (in Korean), Korea Development Institute, Korea.


Yun, Mikyung. 1998. “Bankruptcy Procedure in Korea: A Perspective,” Korea Institute for


       International Economic Policy Working Paper 98-02.




                                               42
                         Table 1. Bankruptcy Filings before and after the Crisis
                                                                                                 (unit: number of cases, %)

                                    Year
                                            1995      1996          1997     1998      1999      2000      2001     2002 1)
Bankruptcy Procedure


                                             79        52        132         148        37        32        31        19
            Reorganization
                                           (76.0)    (65.8)     (26.8)      (14.9)     (9.1)    (13.2)    (12.3)    (15.3)


                                             13        9         322         728       140        78        51        23
            Composition
                                           (12.5)    (11.4)     (65.5)      (73.3)    (34.4)    (32.2)    (20.2)    (18.6)


                                             12        18            38      117       230       132       170        82
             Liquidation
                                           (11.5)    (22.8)         (7.7)   (11.8)    (56.5)    (54.6)    (67.5)    (66.1)


                                             104       79         492         993       407       242       252       124
                 Total
                                           (100.0)   (100.0)    (100.0)     (100.0)   (100.0)   (100.0)   (100.0)   (100.0)

Note: 1) from January to October.

      2) Numbers in parentheses denote the percentage.

Source: Supreme Court of Korea




                                                               43
                      Table 2. Insolvent Firms’ Procedure by the Chaebol Category
                                                                                                                      (unit: trillion won, %)
                             1997                                          1998                                      1999

                No                        No                                                         No
                          Com- Corporate                         Com- Corporate                               Com- Corporate
               Proce-                    Proce-                                 Workout             Proce-                   Workout
                         position Reorg                         position Reorg                               position Reorg
                dure                      dure                                                       dure


  1-30          0.35        0.61         9.48      0.09983             0          0       5.669       0        0            0       3.455
 Largest
 Chaebols
               (3.38)      (5.80)      (90.82)       (1.73)     (0.00)          (0.00)    (98.27)   (0.00)   (0.00)      (0.00)     (100)


                  0          0           0.19           0              0          0       5.713       0        0            0      0.5862
  31-60
 Largest
 Chaebols      (0.00)      (0.00)       (100)        (0.00)     (0.00)          (0.00)    (100)     (0.00)   (0.00)      (0.00)     (100)


 61-300    3.18             7.69        12.67       0.7850       1.560          6.795     13.05       0      1.081       0.2857     14.71
 Largest
 Chaebols (13.51)         (32.66)      (53.84)       (3.54)     (7.03)          (30.62)   (58.81)   (0.00)   (6.73)      (1.78)    (91.50)

   Small
 Chaebols 3.95              1.32         8.27        2.090       1.638          1.469     3.354     0.4627   0.9036      0.4040     25.68
    and
 Independ (29.16)          (9.73)      (61.11)      (24.44)     (19.16)         (17.18)   (39.22)   (1.69)   (3.29)      (1.47)    (93.55)
 ent Firms

Notes: 1) The frequencies are weighted by the asset size.

         2) Author’s calculation for all the firms in the NICE data.

         3) Numbers in parentheses denote the percentage.

Source: Youngjae Lim (2003)




                                                                           44
                       Table 3. Productivity Dynamics of Bankruptcy Cohorts before and after Bankruptcy Policy Reform
                                                   (Firms undergoing Corporate Reorganization or Composition)

          Independent variables:                                                                    Dependent Variable: Productivity
Dummy Variable Denoting a Specific
Cohort Interacted with Year and Industry
Dummy                                             (1)For the 1996 Cohort   (2)For the 1997 Cohort       (3)For the 1998 Cohort     (4)For the 1999 Cohort   (5)For the 2000 Cohort

                    1993                                 -0.0687115              -0.0820866                   -0.0069199                 0.0251072                0.0092007
                                                        (0.1739958)             (0.0596231)                   (0.035766)                (0.0527104)              (0.0795996)

                    1994                                 -0.0629782              -0.0815479                    -0.0366698                -0.0219148               -0.0277665
                                                        (0.1739847)             (0.0602887)                   (0.0347451)               (0.0500552)              (0.0750421)
                                                         -0.0588727            -0.1367584**                    -0.0390412                0.0127083                -0.0821738
                    1995                                (0.1739736)             (0.0588782)                   (0.0339194)               (0.0474052)              (0.0711893)
                                                         -0.3647536            -0.1347013**                    0.0070321                 0.0317036                -0.0124563
                    1996
                                                        (0.2245488)             (0.0595412)                   (0.0334223)               (0.0470457)              (0.0700231)

                    1997                                 -0.2869542            -0.2780865**                    -0.0574577                -0.0368554               0.0304901
                                                        (0.2245442)              (0.063298)                   (0.0356012)               (0.0460487)              (0.0689116)

                    1998                                 -0.1409918            -0.2565868**                  -0.3211885**              -0.1993039**               -0.0003248
                                                        (0.1739603)             (0.0650112)                   (0.0447192)               (0.0648769)              (0.0711459)
                                                         -0.1321559            -0.1544865**                  -0.1599611**              -0.1475066**             -0.2036022**
                    1999
                                                        (0.2245506)             (0.0700572)                   (0.0466198)               (0.0722738)               (0.091783)
                                                         -0.1572699            -0.1793303**                  -0.1627449**              -0.2222749**             -0.3875751**
                    2000                                (0.2245766)             (0.0765336)                   (0.0488477)               (0.0778949)              (0.1376069)
          Year Dummies Included                              Yes                    Yes                           Yes                       Yes                      Yes
        Industry Dummies Included                            Yes                    Yes                           Yes                       Yes                      Yes

          Number of Observations                            40,205                40,476                        41,025                     40,588                  40,373

Notes: 1) Numbers in the parenthesis are standard errors.
      2) * significant at the 10% significance level

        ** significant at the 5% significance level
                                                                                           45
                    Table 4. Profitability Performance of the Bankruptcy Cohorts before and after Bankruptcy Policy Reform

                                                    (Firms undergoing Corporate Reorganization or Composition)

           Independent variables:                                                                    Dependent Variable: Profitability
 Dummy Variable Denoting a Specific
 Cohort Interacted with Year and Industry
 Dummy                                             (1)For the 1996 Cohort   (2)For the 1997 Cohort       (3)For the 1998 Cohort          (4)For the 1999 Cohort   (5)For the 2000 Cohort

                                                              -5.53285            -1.053267                      1.02541                        -2.983965               -4.046776
                     1993                                   (102.5908)            (35.0131)                    (20.11472)                      (28.94122)                (42.627)
                                                             -5.593412            -2.923504                    -0.1474853                       -2.976718               -1.751188
                     1994                                   (102.5857)            (34.5993)                    (19.65527)                      (27.26436)               (39.96213)
                                                             -3.757859            -4.626083                     -0.618984                       -2.501499               -7.389917
                     1995
                                                            (102.5831)           (34.20874)                    (19.36783)                      (26.70296)               (38.80357)
                                                             -55.05091             -5.89941                    -0.7878422                       -2.480486               -2.169504
                     1996
                                                            (132.4078)           (34.98389)                    (19.43056)                      (26.52319)               (39.95305)
                                                             -109.6434            -19.09772                     -3.990996                       -5.698947               -1.671837
                     1997                                   (102.5782)           (34.97537)                    (20.27411)                      (26.16555)               (38.25027)
                                                             -3.665419            -29.41768                     -32.68748                       -31.58403               -13.42344
                     1998
                                                            (102.5801)           (37.19917)                    (24.80246)                      (36.19649)               (41.20706)
                                                            -0.8003833            -12.61717                     -5.174351                       -15.59426               -19.05743
                     1999
                                                            (132.4098)           (36.73676)                    (22.27227)                      (31.50063)               (50.03865)
                                                             -10.02233            -1.937577                    -0.7337271                        1.431097               -4.809503
                     2000                                   (132.4134)           (41.18623)                    (24.02397)                      (35.79111)               (59.18531)
                                                             36.11783              9.827578                     0.1038245                        9.514607               -99.89773
                     2001
                                                            (132.4123)           (41.85452)                    (25.12973)                      (37.65765)               (61.25584)
           Year Dummies Included                               Yes                   Yes                           Yes                            Yes                      Yes
         Industry Dummies Included                             Yes                   Yes                           Yes                            Yes                      Yes
           Number of Observations                            52,026                52,345                        53,031                          52,520                  52,236

Notes: 1) Numbers in the parenthesis are standard errors.

     2) * significant at the 10% significance level
        ** significant at the 5% significance level
                                                                                            46
                                     Table 5. Contribution of Plant Births
                                                                                                                          (Unit: %)

                                                      Under 5 years                                              Over 5 years

      Year                    1-3                              4-5                        Total

                  Number            Current        Number            Current     Number           Current    Number      Current
                  of plants         Output         of plants         Output      of plants        Output     of plants   Output

     1995             53.32          17.13          14.22              9.09       67.54            26.22      32.46       73.78

     1996             47.60          15.36          18.68             11.11       66.29            26.46      33.71       73.54

     1997             45.40          14.77          18.67             10.63       64.08            25.40      35.92       74.60

     1998             39.45          12.77          18.63              8.68       58.08            21.45      41.92       78.55

Source: Hahn (2000)



                                    Table 6. Contribution of Plant Deaths
                                                                                                                          (Unit: %)

                                                        Within 5 years
                                                                                                              Survive more than 5
                                                                                                                     years
       Year                        1-3                           4-5                         Total

                       Number            Current     Number            Current    Number           Current   Number       Current
                       of plants         Output      of plants         Output     of plants        Output    of plants    Output

       1990             36.85             13.36       15.71               6.48      52.57            19.85     47.43       80.15

       1991             37.41             14.52       17.11               7.62      54.52            22.14     45.48       77.86

       1992             39.28             15.08       16.72               7.77      56.00            22.85     44.00       77.15

       1993             43.71             14.92       20.23               9.13      63.93            24.05     36.07       75.95

Source: Hahn (2000)




                                                                     47
                 Table 7. Average Productivity of Plant Groups, 1990-1998

                                                 Entry                         Exit                          Total
                   Continuing
                                       Birth             Switch in    Death           Switch out

     1990             -0.005                                         -0.044             -0.026            -0.016

     1991             0.046           -0.031              0.041      -0.003             0.050                0.026

     1992             0.061           -0.005              0.061       0.018             0.068                0.046

     1993             0.087            0.030              0.096       0.051             0.101                0.072

     1994             0.132            0.056              0.141       0.101             0.144                0.118

     1995             0.190            0.132              0.199       0.150             0.202                0.174

     1996             0.197            0.143              0.208       0.160             0.214                0.185

     1997             0.239            0.177              0.252       0.182             0.245                0.218

     1998             0.256            0.200              0.267                                              0.249

Note: Unweighted averages.
Source: Hahn (2000)




                          Table 8. Market Selection among Birth Cohorts

                                            Births 1991              Births 1993                   Births 1995

                                               -0.065
            Deaths 1992
                                               (0.005)
                                               -0.044
            Deaths 1993                        (0.004)
                                               -0.036                -0.042
            Deaths 1994                        (0.004)               (0.003)
                                               -0.032                -0.032
            Deaths 1995
                                               (0.004)               (0.003)
                                               -0.048                -0.030                        -0.053
            Deaths 1996                        (0.004)               (0.003)                       (0.003)
                                               -0.038                -0.044                        -0.039
            Deaths 1997                        (0.003)               (0.002)                       (0.002)

Note: Numbers in parentheses are standard errors.
Source: Hahn (2000)




                                                            48
           <Figure 1> Post-entry Productivity Performance of Surviving Births: Learning
              0.3



            0.25



              0.2



            0.15                                                                                                continuing
                                                                                                                birth91
  logTFP




                                                                                                                birth93
                                                                                                                birth95
              0.1                                                                                               birth97



            0.05



                   0



           -0.05
                        1991     1992      1993          1994          1995          1996      1997     1998
                                                                Year




  Source: Hahn (2000)




             <Figure 2> Pre-Exit Productivity Performance of Deaths: Shadow of Death

             0.3




            0.25




             0.2




            0.15
                                                                                                                death90
                                                                                                                death91
 logTFP




                                                                                                                death93
             0.1
                                                                                                                death95
                                                                                                                death97
                                                                                                                survivors98
            0.05




               0




           -0.05




            -0.1
                       1990    1991     1992      1993          1994          1995      1996     1997    1998
                                                                Year




Source: Hahn (2000)




                                                                   49
         <Figure 3> Pre-Exit Productivity Performance of Deaths Among 1991 Births


          0.3



         0.25



          0.2


                                                                               continuing
         0.15                                                                  plants
                                                                               bd9195
logTFP




                                                                               bd9196
          0.1

                                                                               bd9197

         0.05                                                                  survivors



            0



     -0.05



         -0.1
                1991   1992   1993   1994          1995   1996   1997   1998
                                            Year




                                               50
