NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION AS AN AGENCY PROBLEM
Lucian Arye Bebchuk
Jesse M. Fried
Working Paper 9813
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9813
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

We are grateful to Bradford Delong, Andrei Shleifer, Timothy Taylor, and Michael Waldman for many
valuable suggestions. For financial support, we would like to thank the John M. Olin Center for Law,
Economics, and Business (Bebchuk) and the Boalt Hall Fund and U.C. Berkeley Committee on Research
(Fried). The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau
of Economic Research
©2003 by Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Executive Compensation as an Agency Problem
Lucian Arye Bebchuk and Jesse M. Fried
NBER Working Paper No. 9813
July 2003
JEL No. D23, G32, G34, G38, J33, J44, K22, M14
ABSTRACT
This paper provides an overview of the main theoretical elements and empirical
underpinnings of a “managerial power” approach to executive compensation. Under this approach,
the design of executive compensation is viewed not only as an instrument for addressing the agency
problem between managers and shareholders but also as part of the agency problem itself. Boards
of publicly traded companies with dispersed ownership, we argue, cannot be expected to bargain at
arm’s length with managers. As a result, managers wield substantial influence over their own pay
arrangements, and they have an interest in reducing the saliency of the amount of their pay and the
extent to which that pay is de-coupled from managers’ performance. We show that the managerial
power approach can explain many features of the executive compensation landscape, including ones
that many researchers have long viewed as puzzling. Among other things, we discuss option plan
design, stealth compensation, executive loans, payments to departing executives, retirement benefits,
the use of compensation consultants, and the observed relationship between CEO power and pay.
We also explain how managerial influence might lead to substantially inefficient arrangements that
produce weak or even perverse incentives.

Lucian Arye Bebchuk
John M. Olin Center
for Law, Economics, and Business
Harvard Law School
1557 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
and NBER
bebchuk@law.harvard.edu

Jesse M. Fried
Boalt Hall School of Law
University of California at Berkeley
Berkeley, CA 94720
friedj@law.berkeley.edu

Executive compensation has long attracted a great deal of attention from
financial economists. Indeed, the increase in academic papers on the subject of
CEO compensation during the 1990’s seems to have outpaced even the
remarkable increase in CEO pay itself during this period (Murphy (1999)). Much
research has focused on how executive compensation schemes can help alleviate
the agency problem in publicly traded companies. To adequately understand the
landscape of executive compensation, however, it is necessary to recognize that
the design of compensation schemes is also partly a product of this same agency
problem.
I. ALTERNATIVE APPROACHES TO EXECUTIVE COMPENSATION
Our focus in this paper is on publicly traded companies without a
controlling shareholder. When ownership and management are separated in this
way, managers might have substantial power. This recognition goes back, of
course, to Berle and Means (1933) who observed that “[D]irectors, while in office,
have almost complete discretion in management” (p. 139). Since Jensen and
Meckling (1976), the problem of managerial power and discretion has been
analyzed in modern finance as an “agency problem.”
Managers may use their discretion to benefit their private interests in a
variety of ways (Shleifer and Vishny (1997)). For example, managers may engage
in empire building (Jensen, (1974), Williamson (1964)). They may, as Jensen
(1986) suggests, fail to distribute excess cash when the firm does not have
profitable investment opportunities. Managers also may entrench themselves in
their positions, making it difficult to oust them when they perform poorly
(Shleifer and Vishny (1989)). Any discussion of executive compensation must
proceed against the background of the fundamental agency problem afflicting
management decision-making. There are two different views, however, on how
the agency problem and executive compensation might be linked.
Among financial economists, the dominant approach to the study of
executive compensation views these pay arrangements as a (partial) remedy to the
agency problem. Under this approach, which we label “the optimal contracting
approach,” boards are assumed to design compensation schemes to provide
managers with efficient incentives to maximize shareholder value. Financial
economists have done substantial work within this optimal contracting model in
an effort to understand executive compensation practices. Recent surveys of this
work include Murphy (1999) and Core, Guay, and Larcker (2001). To researchers
working within the optimal contracting model, the main flaw with existing
practices seems to be that, due to political limitations on how generously
1

executives can be treated, compensation schemes are not sufficiently highpowered (Jensen and Murphy (1990)).
Another approach to studying executive compensation focuses on a
different link between the agency problem and executive compensation. Under
this approach, which we label the “managerial power approach,” executive
compensation is viewed not only as a potential instrument for addressing agency
problems – but also as part of the agency problem itself. As a number of
researchers have recognized, some features of pay arrangements seem to reflect
managerial rent seeking rather than the provision of efficient incentives (e.g.,
Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer, (1994), Yermack (1997), and Bertrand
and Mullainathan (2001)). We seek to develop a full account of how managerial
influence shapes the executive compensation landscape in a forthcoming book
(Bebchuk and Fried (2004)) that builds substantially on a long article written
jointly with David Walker (Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2002)).
Drawing on this work, we argue below that managerial power and rent
extraction are likely to have an important influence on the design of
compensation arrangements. Indeed, the managerial power approach can shed
light on many significant features of the executive compensation landscape that
have long been seen as puzzling by researchers working within the optimal
contracting model. We also explain that managerial influence on pay might
impose substantial costs on shareholders – beyond the amount of excess pay
executives receive – by diluting and distorting managers’ incentives and thereby
hurting corporate performance.
Although the managerial power approach is conceptually quite different
from the optimal contracting approach, the former is not proposed as a complete
replacement for the latter. Compensation arrangements might be shaped both by
market forces, which push toward value-maximizing arrangements, and by
managerial influence, which pushes toward departures from optimal
arrangements in directions favorable to managers. The managerial power
approach simply claims that these departures from value-maximizing
arrangements are substantial and that compensation practices thus cannot be
adequately explained by optimal contracting alone.
II. THE LIMITATIONS OF OPTIMAL CONTRACTING
The optimal contracting view recognizes that managers suffer from an
agency problem and do not automatically seek to maximize shareholder value.
Thus, providing managers with adequate incentives is important. Under the
optimal contracting view, the board, working in shareholders’ interest, attempts
2

to cost-effectively provide such incentives to managers through their
compensation packages.
Optimal compensation contracts could result either from effective arm’s
length bargaining between the board and the executives, or from market
constraints that induce these parties to adopt such contracts even in the absence
of arm’s length bargaining. However, neither of these forces can be expected to
constrain effectively departures from arm’s length outcomes.1
Just as there is no reason to presume that managers automatically seek to
maximize shareholder value, there is no reason to expect a priori that directors
will either. Indeed, an analysis of directors’ incentives and circumstances suggests
that directors’ behavior is also subject to an agency problem. The director agency
problem undermines the board’s ability to effectively address the agency
problems in the relationship between managers and shareholders.
Directors will generally wish to be re-appointed to the board. Average
director compensation in the 200 largest US corporations in 2001 was $152,626
(Pearl Meyers and Partners (2002)). In the notorious Enron case, the directors
were each paid $380,000 in 2001 (Abelson (2001)). Besides an attractive salary, a
directorship is also likely to provide prestige and valuable business and social
connections. Thus, because of the important role CEO’s play in re-nominating
directors to the board, directors typically have an incentive to favor the CEO.
To be sure, in a world in which shareholders selected individual directors,
directors might have an incentive to develop reputations as shareholder-serving.
However, board elections are by slate, dissidents putting forward a competing
slate confront substantial impediments, and such challenges are therefore
exceedingly rare (Bebchuk and Kahan (1990)). Typically, the director slate
proposed by management is the only one offered.
The key to a board position is thus being on the company’s slate. Because
the CEO’s influence over the board gives her significant influence over the
nomination process, directors have an incentive to “go along” with the CEO’s pay
arrangement, a matter dear to the CEO’s heart, at least as long as the
compensation package remains within the range of what can be defended and
justified. In addition, because being on the company’s slate is the key to being
appointed, developing a reputation for haggling with the CEO over her
compensation would hurt rather than help a director’s chances of being invited to
join other companies’ boards. Yet another reason to favor the CEO is that the CEO
can affect directors’ compensation and perks.
1

Shareholders could try to challenge undesirable pay arrangements in court. However,
corporate law rules effectively prevent courts from reviewing compensation decisions.
(Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2002), at 779-781).

3

Directors typically have only nominal equity interests in the firm (Baker,
Jensen, and Murphy (1988), Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999)). Even if a
director did not place much value on a board seat, he would still have little
personal motivation to fight the CEO, or other directors who wish to please the
CEO, on compensation matters. And, in any event, directors usually lack easy
access to the independent information and advice on compensation practices
necessary to effectively challenge the CEO’s pay.
Finally, market forces are not sufficiently strong and fine-tuned to assure
optimal contracting outcomes. Markets -- including the market for control, the
market for capital, and the labor market for executives -- impose some constraints
on what directors will agree to and what managers will ask them to approve. An
analysis of these markets, however, indicates that the constraints they impose are
far from tight and permit substantial deviations from optimal contracting
(Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker (2002)).
Consider, for example, the market for corporate control – the threat of a
takeover. Firms frequently have substantial defenses against takeovers. For
example, a majority of companies have a staggered board, which prevents a
hostile acquirer from gaining control for at least a year and often enables
incumbent managers to block hostile bids that are attractive to shareholders
(Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002)). To overcome incumbent opposition,
a hostile bidder must be prepared to pay a substantial premium; during the
second half of the 1990’s, the average premium in hostile acquisitions was 40%
(Bebchuk, Coates, and Subramanian (2002)). The market for corporate control
thus leaves managers with considerable slack and ability to extract private
benefits. The disciplinary force of the market for corporate control is further
weakened by the prevalence of golden parachute provisions, as well as by the
acquisition-related benefits that target managers often are given to facilitate an
acquisition (Bebchuk and Fried (2004)). To be sure, the market for control might
impose some costs on managers who are especially aggressive in extracting rents;
we later note evidence that CEO’s of firms with stronger takeover protection get
pay packages that are both larger and less performance sensitive. The important
point is that the market for corporate control fails to impose tight constraints on
executive compensation.
Some responses to our earlier work assumed that our analysis of the
absence of arm’s length bargaining assumed that it does not apply to cases in
which boards negotiate pay with a CEO candidate from outside the firm (see, e.g.,
Murphy (2002)). However, while such negotiations might be closer to the arm’s
length model than negotiations with an incumbent CEO, they still fall quite short
of this benchmark. Among other things, directors negotiating with an outside
CEO candidate know that after the candidate becomes CEO she will have
4

influence over their re-nomination to the board and over their compensation and
perks. The directors will also wish to have a good personal and working
relationship with the person who is expected to become the firm’s leader and a
fellow board member. And while agreeing to a pay package that favors the new
CEO imposes little financial cost on the directors, any breakdown in the hiring
negotiations, which might embarrass the directors and in any event force them to
re-open the CEO selection process, would be personally costly to them. Finally,
directors’ limited time forces them to rely on information shaped and presented
by the company’s human resources staff and compensation consultants, all of
whom have incentives to please the incoming CEO.
III. THE MANAGERIAL POWER APPROACH
The very reasons for questioning the ability of optimal contracting to
adequately explain compensation practices suggest that executives have
substantial influence over their own pay. These reasons also suggest that the
greater managers’ power, the greater their ability to extract rents. There are limits
to what directors will accept and what markets will permit, but these constraints
do not prevent managers from obtaining arrangements more favorable than those
obtainable under arm’s length bargaining.
One important building block of the managerial power approach is that of
“outrage” costs and constraints. The tightness of the constraints managers and
directors confront depends, in part, on how much “outrage” a proposed
arrangement is expected to generate among relevant outsiders. Outrage might
cause embarrassment or reputational harm to directors and managers, and it
might reduce shareholders’ willingness to support incumbents in proxy contests
or takeover bids. The more outrage a compensation arrangement is expected to
generate, the more reluctant directors will be to approve the arrangement, and the
more hesitant managers will be to propose it in the first instance. Thus, whether a
compensation arrangement that is favorable to executives but suboptimal for
shareholders is adopted will depend on how it is perceived by outsiders.
There is evidence that the design of compensation arrangements is indeed
influenced by how outsiders perceive them. Johnson, Porter, and Shackell (1997)
find that CEO’s of firms receiving negative media coverage of their compensation
arrangements during 1992-94 received relatively small pay increases during
subsequent years and had their compensation’s pay-performance sensitivity
increased. Thomas and Martin (1999) find that, during the 1990’s, CEO’s of firms
that were the target of shareholder resolutions criticizing executive pay had their
annual compensation reduced over the following two years by $2.7 million.
5

The potential significance of outsiders’ perception of a CEO’s
compensation and of outrage costs explains the importance of yet another
building block of the managerial power approach – “camouflage.” To avoid or
minimize outrage resulting from outsiders’ recognizing the presence of rent
extraction, managers have a substantial incentive to obscure and to try to
legitimize—or, more generally, to camouflage—their extraction of rents. The
strong desire to camouflage might lead to the adoption of inefficient
compensation structures that hurt managerial incentives and firm performance.
This concept of camouflage turns out to be quite useful in explaining many
otherwise puzzling features of the executive compensation landscape.
The importance of how compensation arrangements are perceived means
that, in the executive compensation area, the transparency of disclosure matters.
Financial economists often focus on the role of disclosure in getting information
incorporated into market pricing. It is widely believed that information can
become reflected in stock prices as long as it is known and fully understood by a
limited number of market professionals. In the executive compensation context,
however, the ability of plan designers to choose arrangements that favor
managers depends on how these arrangements are perceived by a much wider
group of outsiders. As a result, the transparency and salience of disclosure can
have a significant effect on CEO compensation.
Murphy (2002) and Hall and Murphy (2003) argue that our approach
cannot explain increases in managerial pay during the 1990’s. In their view, CEO
power declined during this period. Given the strengthening of takeover defenses
during the 90’s, however, it is unclear whether CEO power diminished during
this period. In any event, in our view, executive pay increases during the 1990’s
resulted not from changes in managerial power but rather from other factors,
none of which is inconsistent with our approach.
First, seeking to make pay more sensitive to performance, regulators and
shareholders encouraged the use of equity-based compensation. Taking
advantage of this enthusiasm, executives used their influence to obtain
substantial option pay without giving up corresponding amounts of their cash
compensation; furthermore, the options they received did not link pay tightly to
the managers’ own performance but rather enabled managers to reap windfalls
from that part of the stock price increase due solely to market and sector trends
beyond their control; as a result, managers were able to capture much larger gains
than more cost-effective and efficient plans would have provided. Second,
because executive compensation has historically been correlated with market
capitalization, the rising stock markets of the 1990s, which carried along with
them even many poorly performing companies, provided a convenient
justification at most firms for substantial pay increases. Third, market booms
6

weaken outrage constraints; exuberant shareholders are less likely to scrutinize
and resent generous pay arrangements, in the same way that the recent market
declines has made shareholders more prone to do so.
IV. POWER AND CAMOUFLAGE AT WORK
We illustrate below the potential value of the managerial power approach
by discussing four patterns and practices that can at least partly be explained by
power and camouflage: the relationship between power and pay; the use of
compensation consultants; executive loans; and golden good-bye payments to
departing executives.
A. Power-Pay Relationships
The managerial power approach predicts that pay will be higher and/or
less sensitive to performance in firms in which managers have relatively more
power. Other things being equal, managers would tend to have more power
when: (i) the board is relatively weak or ineffectual; (ii) there is no large outside
shareholder; (iii) there are fewer institutional shareholders; or (iv) the managers
are protected by antitakeover arrangements. There is evidence indicating that
each of these factors affects pay arrangements in the way predicted by the
managerial power approach.
Executive compensation is higher when the board is relatively weak or
ineffectual vis-à-vis the CEO. Core, Holthausen, and Larcker (1999), examining 205
large public firms, find that CEO compensation is higher under the following
conditions: when the board is large, making it more difficult for directors to
organize in opposition to the CEO; when more of the outside directors have been
appointed by the CEO, which could cause them to feel gratitude or obligation to
the CEO; and when outside directors serve on three or more boards, and thus
more likely to be distracted. Also, CEO pay is 20-40% higher if the CEO is the
chairman of the board ((Cyert, Kang, and Kumar (2002), Core, Holthausen, and
Larcker (1999)). Finally, CEO pay is negatively related to the share ownership of
the board’s compensation committee; doubling the compensation committee
ownership reduces non-salary compensation by 4-5% (Cyert, Kang, and Kumar
(2002)).
The presence of a large outside shareholder is likely to result in closer
monitoring (Shleifer and Vishny (1986)) and thus can be expected to reduce
managers’ influence over their compensation. Consistent with this observation,
Cyert, Kang, and Kumar (2002) find a negative relationship between the equity
ownership of the largest shareholder and the amount of CEO compensation;
7

doubling the percentage ownership of the outside shareholder reduces non-salary
compensation by 12-14%. Bertrand and Mullainathan (2000) find that CEO’s in
firms that lack a 5 percent (or larger) external shareholder tend to receive more
“luck-based” pay – pay associated with profit increases that are entirely
generated by external factors (e.g., changes in oil prices and exchange rates)
rather than by managers’ efforts. They also find that, in firms that lack large
external shareholders, the cash compensation of CEO’s is reduced less when their
options-based compensation is increased. Relatedly, in an examination of S&P 500
firms during the period 1992-97, Benz, Kucher, and Stutzer (2001) find that a
higher concentration of shareholders significantly reduces the number of granted
options.
A larger concentration of institutional shareholders might result in greater
monitoring and scrutiny of the CEO and the board. Examining CEO pay in almost
2000 firms during the period 1991-1997, Hartzell and Starks (2002) find that more
concentrated institutional ownership leads to lower executive compensation.
They also find that a larger institutional presence results in more performancesensitive compensation. Examining CEO compensation in the 200 largest
companies during 1990-1994, David, Kochar and Levitas (1998) find that the effect
of institutional shareholders on CEO pay depends on the types of relationships
they have with the firm. They divide institutional shareholders into: (1) ones
having no other business relationship with the firm and thus concerned only with
the firm’s share value (“pressure-resistant” institutions); and (2) ones having
other business relationships with the firm (e.g., managing a pension fund) and
thus vulnerable to management pressure (“pressure-sensitive” institutions). As
the managerial power approach predicts, CEO pay is negatively correlated with
the presence of pressure-resistant institutional investors and positively correlated
with the presence of pressure-sensitive ones.
The adoption of antitakeover provisions makes CEO’s less vulnerable to a
hostile takeover. Borokhovich, Brunarski and Parrino (1997), examining 129 firms
that adopted anti-takeover provisions (such as a supermajority rule) during the
period 1979-1987, find that CEO’s of firms adopting such provisions enjoy abovemarket compensation before adoption of the anti-takeover provisions and that
adoption of these provisions increases their excess compensation significantly.
This pattern is not readily explainable by optimal contracting; indeed, if
managers’ jobs are more secure, shareholders should be able to pay managers a
lower risk premium (Agrawal and Knoeber (1998)). In another study, Cheng,
Nagar, and Rajan (2001) find that CEO’s of Forbes 500 firms that became
protected by new state anti-takeover legislation enacted during the period 19841991 reduced their holdings of shares by an average of 15%, apparently because
the shares were not as necessary for maintaining control. Optimal contracting
8

might predict that a CEO protected by anti-takeover legislation would be
required to buy more shares to restore her incentive to increase shareholder
value.
B. Compensation Consultants
U.S. public companies typically employ outside consultants to provide
advice about executive compensation (Bizjack, Lemmon, and Naveen (2000)). The
use of consultants can be explained within the optimal-contracting framework on
grounds that they supply useful information and contribute expertise on the
design of compensation packages. But although compensation consultants can
sometimes play a useful role, they also can play a role in camouflaging rents. The
incentives of compensation consultants – and the evidence regarding their use—
suggest that these consultants are often used to justify executive pay rather than
to optimize it.
Compensation consultants have strong incentives to use their discretion to
help the CEO. The consultant is usually hired by the firm’s human resources
department, which is subordinate to the CEO. Providing advice that hurts the
CEO’s pocketbook is hardly a way to enhance the consultant’s chances of being
hired in the future by this firm or, indeed, by any other firm. Moreover,
consulting firms often have other, larger assignments with the hiring company,
which further increases their incentive to please the CEO (Crystal (1991)).
Pay consultants favor the CEO by providing the types of compensation
data that are most useful for justifying a high level of pay. For example, when
firms do well, consultants recommend increasing compensation, arguing that pay
should reflect performance and should be higher than the average in the industry
-- and certainly higher than that of CEO’s who are doing poorly. In contrast,
when firms do poorly, the consultants focus not on performance data but rather
on peer group pay to argue that CEO compensation should be higher to reflect
prevailing industry levels (Gillan (2001)).
After the compensation consultant has collected and presented the
“relevant” comparative data, the board generally sets pay equal to or higher than
the median CEO pay in the comparison group. Reviewing the reports of
compensation committees in 100 large companies, Bizjack, Lemmon, and Naveen
(2000) find that a large majority of them used peer groups in determining pay and
set compensation at or above the fiftieth percentile of the peer group. The
combination of helpful compensation consultants and sympathetic boards is in
part responsible for the widely recognized “ratcheting up” of executive salaries
(Murphy (1999), p. 2525).
9

After the board compensation approves the compensation package, firms
use compensation consultants and their reports to justify executive compensation
to shareholders. Examining S&P 500 companies during the period 1987-1992,
Wade, Porac and Pollack (1997) find that companies that pay their CEO’s larger
base salaries, and firms with more concentrated and active outside ownership, are
more likely to cite the use of surveys and consultants in justifying executive pay
in their proxy reports to shareholders. This study also finds that, when
accounting returns are high, firms emphasize the accounting returns and
downplay market returns.
C. Stealth Compensation
As we document in Bebchuk and Fried (2003), firms use pay practices that
make less transparent the total amount of executive compensation and the extent
to which managers’ compensation is de-coupled from their own performance.
Among the arrangements used by firms that camouflage the amount and the
performance-insensitivity of the compensation paid executives are pension plans,
deferred compensation, and post-retirement perks and consulting contracts.
Most of the pension and deferred compensation benefits given to
executives do not enjoy the large tax subsidy enjoyed by the standard retirement
arrangements provided to other employees. In the case of executives, however,
such arrangements largely shift tax liability from the executive to the firm in ways
that can increase the joint tax liability of the two parties. The efficiency grounds
for providing compensation through in-kind retirement perks and guaranteed
post-retirement consulting fees are also far from clear. All of these arrangements,
however, make pay less salient.
Among other things, under existing disclosure rules, firms do not have to
place a dollar value on – and include in the firm’s publicly filed compensation
tables -- compensation provided to executives after they retire from the firm.
Although the existence of executives’ retirement arrangements must be noted in
certain places in the firm’s public filings, this disclosure is less salient because
outsiders focus on the dollar amounts reported in the compensation tables.
Indeed, the compensation table amounts are used by the ExecuComp database,
which is the basis for much of the empirical work on executive compensation.
Another practice with camouflage benefits is the use of executive loans.
While the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 now prohibits such loans, prior to the Act’s
adoption more than 75 percent of the 1,500 largest U.S. firms lent money to
executives (King (2002)). It is not readily apparent that having firms (rather than
banks) lend to executives – or that providing compensation in the form of
10

favorable interest rates – is efficient. But loans are useful for reducing the saliency
of managers’ compensation.
To begin with, the implicit compensation provided by below-market rate
loans often does not appear in the compensation tables. Firms are required by
SEC rules to disclose in the tables, under the category of “other annual
compensation,” the difference between the interest actually paid on executive
loans and “the market rate.” However, the SEC has not defined “market rate,”
and firms have interpreted the term in a manner that enabled them to exclude the
value of large interest subsidies from the compensation tables. For example,
WorldCom did not report in its compensation tables any income to CEO Bernard
Ebbers from the over $400 million of loans he received at an interest rate of 2.15
percent. Worldcom later explained that 2.15 percent was the “market rate” at
which WorldCom was borrowing under one of its credit facilities. However, 2.15
percent was far below the more than 5 percent rate that Ebbers would have paid
at that time in the market to borrow funds. With the existence and terms of the
loans (but without any estimate of the value of the conferred benefits) buried in
the disclosures of related-party transactions in the firm’s public filings and not
reflected in WorldCom’s compensation tables, Ebbers’ large benefits from the
loan received no media attention and no outside scrutiny until WorldCom
became involved in an accounting scandal.
Another manner in which loans can provide camouflage is through the
practice of loan forgiveness. Firms that provided executives with a loan to buy a
large amount of stock often do not demand repayment if the stock value falls
below the amount due on the loan. As a result, the arrangement is similar to (but
usually more tax-inefficient than) granting the executive an option to buy shares
at a price equal to the amount owed on the loan. However, firms must include the
value of option grants in the compensation tables for the year the grant is made.
In contrast, when granting a loan that will likely be forgiven if the stock price
drops, firms do not need to include the option value of the arrangement in the
compensation tables. If the stock price falls, the loan will often be forgiven at the
time the executive leaves the company, when any resulting outrage is likely to
have little impact on the executive personally. For example, George Shaheen, the
Webvan CEO who resigned shortly before Webvan went bankrupt, had a $6.7
million loan forgiven in exchange for $150,000 of Webvan stock (Lublin (2002)).
D. Golden Goodbyes
A “golden goodbye” refers to the practice of the board giving a departing
CEO payments and benefits that are gratuitous -- not required under the terms of

11

the CEO’s compensation contract. Such golden goodbyes are common even when
CEO’s perform so poorly that their boards feel compelled to replace them.
Compensation contracts usually provide executives with generous
severance arrangements even when they depart following very dismal
performance. Such “soft landing” provisions provide executives with insurance
against being fired due to poor performance. It is far from clear that these
arrangements reflect optimal contracting; after all, such provisions reduce the
difference in managerial payoffs between good and poor performance that firms
spend so much to create. Our focus, however, is on payments that go beyond the
severance arrangements that are contractually specified.
For example, when Mattel CEO Jill Barad resigned under fire, the board
forgave a $4.2 million loan, gave her an additional $3.3 million in cash to cover
the taxes for forgiveness of another loan, and allowed her unvested options to
automatically vest and remain exercisable until the end of their original terms.
These gratuitous benefits were in addition to the considerable benefits that she
received under her employment agreement, which included a termination
payment of $26.4 million and a stream of retirement benefits exceeding $700,000
per year.
It is hard to reconcile such gratuitous payments with the arm’s length,
optimal contracting model. The board has the authority to fire the CEO and pay
the CEO her contractual severance benefits. Thus, there is no need to “bribe” a
poorly performing CEO to step down. In addition, the signal sent by the golden
goodbye will, if anything, only weaken the incentive of the next CEO to perform.
The making of such gratuitous payments, however, is quite consistent with
the existence of managerial influence over the board. Because of their relationship
with the CEO, some directors might be unwilling to replace the existing CEO
unless she is very generously treated. Other directors might be willing to replace
the CEO in any event but prefer to accompany the move with a golden goodbye
in order to confer a favor on the CEO, to alleviate the discomfort they otherwise
would feel in forcing out the CEO, or to make the difficult separation process
more pleasant and less contentious. In all of these cases, directors’ willingness to
make gratuitous payments to the (poorly performing) CEO results from the
CEO’s relationship with, and influence over, the directors.
It is important to note that, taking managerial power as given, providing
golden goodbyes to fired CEO’s might be beneficial to shareholders in some
instances. If many directors are loyal to the CEO, such a golden goodbye might be
necessary to assemble a board majority in favor of replacing him. In such a case,
the golden goodbye would help shareholders when the CEO’s departure is more
beneficial to shareholders than the cost to them of the golden goodbye payment.
For our purposes, however, what is important is that these gratuitous payments,
12

whether they are beneficial to shareholders or not, reflect the existence and
significance of managerial influence.
V. SUBOPTIMAL PAY STRUCTURES
A. Pay Without Performance
Optimal contracting arrangements might involve very large amounts of
compensation for executives, provided that such compensation is designed to
provide managers with powerful incentives to increase shareholder value (Jensen
and Murphy (1990)). The problem with current arrangements, however, is that
the generous compensation provided executives is linked only weakly to
managerial performance. This pay-performance disconnect is puzzling from an
optimal contracting view.
The substantial part of compensation that is not equity-based has long been
criticized as weakly linked to managerial performance. During the 1990s, there
was no significant correlation between a CEO’s salary and bonus and her firm’s
industry-adjusted performance (Murphy (1999)). Similarly, cash compensation
increases when firm profits rise for reasons that clearly have nothing to do with
managers’ efforts (Blanchard, Lopez-de-Silanes, and Shleifer (1994), Bertrand and
Mullainathan (2001)). Furthermore, managers receive substantial non-equity
compensation through arrangements that have received little attention from
financial economists – such as pensions, deferred benefits, and favorable loans –
and this compensation is also relatively insensitive to managers’ own
performance.
In light of the historically weak link between non-equity compensation and
managerial performance, shareholders and regulators wishing to strengthen the
connection between pay and performance have increasingly looked to, and
encouraged, equity-based compensation. Unfortunately, however, managers have
been able to use their influence to obtain option plans that appear to deviate
substantially from optimal contracting in ways that favor managers.
We wish to emphasize our strong support for equity-based compensation,
which in principle can provide managers with very desirable incentives. The
devil, however, is in the details. Below we discuss several important features of
existing option plans that make option pay less tightly linked to performance
than would be beneficial for shareholders: the failure of option plans to filter out
windfalls, the almost-uniform use of at-the-money options, and managers’
freedom to unload options and shares.
It might be asked why risk-averse managers would not use their influence
to get higher cash salaries rather than options. Holding the value of compensation
13

constant, one would indeed expect this to happen. But managers seeking to
increase their pay during the 1990’s did not have a choice between additional
compensation in the form of cash and additional compensation in the form of
options with the same expected value. Rather, outsiders’ enthusiasm about
equity-based compensation enabled managers to obtain additional compensation
in the form of options without offsetting reduction in cash compensation.
Furthermore, the possible benefits from improved incentives provided defensible
reasons for very large amount of additional compensation. While Steve Jobs was
recently able to obtain an option package worth over half a billion dollars, albeit
with some outcry, cash compensation of this order of magnitude is (still) quite
inconceivable. The fact that better-designed options could have provided much
more cheaply the incentives provided by conventional option plans has not been
sufficiently salient to make these plans patently unjustifiable.
B. Option Plans that Fail to Filter Out “Windfalls”
One widespread and persistent feature of stock option plans is that they
fail to filter out stock price rises that are due to industry and general market
trends and thus are completely unrelated to managers’ own performance. With
conventional options, when the market or sector rises substantially, even
executives whose companies perform poorly relative to those of their peers can
make large profits. Paying managers substantial compensation for stock price
increases that have nothing to do with their own performance is difficult to
explain under optimal contracting. The substantial amount currently spent on
rewarding managers for market or sector rises could either be used to enhance
incentives (for example, by giving managers a larger number of options linked
more tightly to the managers’ relative performance) or be saved with little
weakening of incentives.
There are many different ways of designing what we call “reducedwindfall” option plans – plans that filter out all or some of that part of the stock
price increase that is unrelated to managers’ performance. One approach
discussed frequently by academics is linking the exercise price of the options to a
market-wide index or a sector index (e.g., Rappaport (1999)). Another strategy is
to condition the “vesting” of options on the firm meeting specified performance
targets. These targets can be linked to the stock price, earnings per share, or any
other measure of firm performance.
When the exercise price of an indexed option is linked to market or sector
averages, there is a substantial possibility that the manager will receive no payoff
from the option plan. If this possibility were regarded as undesirable, reducedwindfall options could easily be designed to produce a high likelihood of payout.
14

For example, the exercise price could be indexed not to changes in the industry or
market average but rather to a somewhat lower benchmark – say, the change in
the stock price of the firm at the bottom 20th percentile of the industry or market.
Under such an option plan, executives would have, on average, an 80 percent
probability of outperforming the benchmark and receiving a payout. But
executives would not profit, as they could under conventional plans, when their
performance places them in the bottom 20th percentile.
Given the wide variety and potential benefits of reduced-windfall options,
it is likely that for many firms it would be optimal to filter out at least some of the
increase in the stock price that has nothing to do with the managers’ own
performance. Yet almost all U.S. firms use conventional stock options under
which managers capture all of the increase in the stock price. In 2001, only about 5
percent of the 250 largest U.S. public firms used some form of reduced-windfall
options (Levinsohn (2001)).
Financial economists have made substantial efforts to develop optimalcontracting explanations for why firms do not use reduced-windfall options. We
survey the various explanations in our earlier work (Bebchuk, Fried, and Walker
(2002), pp. 803-809) and conclude that none of them can adequately explain the
widespread failure to screen out option windfalls. From the perspective of
managerial power, however, the failure to filter out general market or industry
effects is not at all puzzling. Under this approach, compensation schemes are
designed with an eye to benefiting executives while ensuring that the schemes are
not perceived as clearly unreasonable. Given that using conventional options is
clearly legitimate and acceptable (after all, most firms use them), and that moving
to indexing or any other form of reduced-windfall options is likely to be costly or
inconvenient for managers, the lack of any real movement toward such options is
consistent with the managerial power approach.
C. At-the-Money Options
Almost all stock options used to compensate executives are “at-the-money”
-- that is, their exercise price is set to the grant-date market price (Murphy (1999),
p. 2509). An optimally designed scheme would seek to provide risk-averse
managers with cost-effective incentives to exert effort and make valuemaximizing decisions. The optimal exercise price under such a scheme should
depend on a multitude of factors that are likely to vary from executive to
executive, from company to company, from industry to industry, and from time
to time. Such factors might include the degree of managerial risk aversion, which
in turn might be affected by the manager’s age and wealth, the project choices
available to the company, the volatility of the company’s stock, the expected rate
15

of inflation, and the length of the executive’s contract, among other things. There
is no reason to expect that “one size fits all” – that the same exercise price level is
optimal for all executives at all firms, in all industries, and at all times.
It is therefore highly unlikely that out-of-the-money options – options
whose exercise price is above the current market price – are never optimal. Outof-the-money options have a lower expected value than at-the-money options
because they are less likely to pay off than at-the-money options, and if they do
pay off the holder receives less value. Thus, for every dollar of expected value a
firm can give more out-of-the money options than at-the-money options. By
giving more out-of-the money options, the firm can increase the reward to the
manager for doing particularly well. Out-of-the-money options can thus offer
much higher pay-for-performance sensitivity per dollar of expected value than
conventional options (Hall (1999)). There is even evidence suggesting that giving
managers out-of-the-money options rather than at-the-money-options would, on
average, boost firm value (Habib and Ljungqvist (2000)). The almost uniform use
of at-the-money options is thus difficult to explain from an optimal contracting
perspective. Indeed, economists working within optimal contracting have called
this practice a “puzzle” (Hall (1999), p. 43).
The near-uniform use of at-the-money options is not puzzling, however,
when examined under the managerial power approach. All else equal, executives
prefer a lower exercise price. Because at-the-money options might sometimes be
optimal and are employed by almost every other firm, their use in any given case
will not generate outrage. Therefore, there is little reason for plan designers to
increase the exercise price above the grant-date market price.
Executives would be even better off, of course, if stock options were issued
with an exercise price below the grant-date market price. However, such in-themoney options would create a salient windfall and might generate some outrage
costs. Furthermore, in-the-money options would trigger a charge to accounting
earnings, which might undermine a main excuse for not using indexed options or
other reduced-windfall options — that the use of such options would hurt
reported earnings. Because in-the-money options might be difficult or costly for
plan designers to use, and at-the-money options are the most favorable to
managers within the remaining range of possibilities, a uniform use of at-themoney options is consistent with the managerial power approach.
D. Managers’ Freedom to Unwind Equity Incentives
Another problem for the optimal contracting approach is managers’ broad
freedom to unload their options and shares. When managers unwind their equity
incentives, restoring pay-performance sensitivity requires giving them new
16

options or shares. Thus, such unwinding either (1) weakens managers’ incentives
or (2) forces the firm to give managers new equity incentives to restore incentives
to the pre-unwinding level.
Although an executive becomes entitled to options once they have vested,
the compensation contract could preclude the executive from “cashing out” the
vested options – that is, from exercising the options and then selling the acquired
shares – for a specified period after the vesting date. Such a limitation would
maintain incentives for an additional period (beyond the vesting date) without
requiring the firm to grant new options to replace the ones cashed out.
To be sure, restricting executives’ freedom to cash out vested equity
instruments imposes on them liquidity and diversification costs that must be
balanced against the incentive benefits of restricting unwinding. The efficient
arrangement is thus likely to vary from case to case, depending on the executive’s
and firm’s characteristics. But there is no reason to expect that optimal contracts
would generally make the vesting date and the cash-out date identical.
Yet, in practice the date on which options vest and the date on which they
are exercisable are almost always the same. A minority of firms have created
“target ownership plans” that require managers to hold a certain amount of
shares, but the targets tend to be rather low, and there often appears to be no
penalty imposed for missing the target (Core and Larcker (2002)). As a result of
these weak restrictions, managers exercise many of their options well before the
options expire, and sell almost all of the shares thereby acquired (Carpenter
(1998), Ofek and Yermack (2000)). Shares that are not sold after option exercise
are often hedged or partially hedged in transactions that are not reported to the
SEC (Bettis, Bizjack, and Lemmon (2001)).
Managers also typically have freedom to determine the precise time of
unwinding. Although trading on “material” inside information is illegal, the
definition of materiality and the difficulties of enforcement are such that
managers making selling decisions can use their superior knowledge about the
firm with little fear of liability (Fried (1998)). As a result, managers are able to
obtain abnormal returns trading in their firm’s shares (Seyhun (1998)). It is far
from clear, however, that enabling managers to make such profits is an efficient
form of compensation.
Even assuming it is desirable to permit managers to unload shares at a
certain stage in their contracts, it does not follow that executives should have
absolute control over the exact timing of their sales. After all, liquidity or
diversification needs are unlikely to arise unexpectedly one morning. Firms could
require that sales be carried out gradually over a specified period, perhaps
pursuant to a prearranged plan. Alternatively, firms could require executives to
publicly disclose in advance their intended trades, which would reduce their
17

ability to profit from informational advantages (Fried (1998)). Yet firms generally
do not impose any such restrictions.
Because a firm can be held liable if it fails to take reasonable steps to
prevent insider trading by its employees, a number of firms have adopted
“trading windows” and “blackout periods” to restrict the times during the year
that a manager can sell or buy shares (Bettis, Coles, and Lemmon (2000)).
However, many firms have not put such restrictions in place. And even in firms
that have imposed such restrictions, managers who know undisclosed bad news
at a time they are permitted to trade may use that trading opportunity to unwind
a substantial amount of their holdings. Thus, executives retain considerable
ability to dump shares before bad news becomes public. In one notorious case,
Enron insiders sold hundreds of millions of shares before information about
Enron’s actual financial condition was released and the stock price collapsed.
Although managers’ ability to unwind equity incentives early and to
control the time of such unwinding cannot easily be explained under optimal
contracting, it is quite consistent with the managerial power approach. Broad
freedom to unload equity instruments provides managers with substantial
benefits that are not particularly conspicuous. The corresponding costs to
shareholders from diluted incentives are also not salient. Furthermore, and
perhaps most importantly, managers’ unwinding of options and shares provides
a convenient justification for frequently granting managers new equity-based
incentives, thereby boosting their total compensation. Although a system of
constant unwinding and replenishing incentives is more costly to shareholders
than one that requires managers to hold options and shares for longer periods, it
is obviously much better for managers.
E. The “Perceived Cost” Explanation
Murphy (2002) and Hall and Murphy (2003) put forward a “perceived
cost” explanation for the use of conventional, at-the-money options. According to
their explanation, executives and directors erroneously perceive conventional
options to be “cheap” or even “nearly free to grant” because such options can be
granted without any cash outlay and without reducing reported earnings.
We doubt that executives and their advisers do not grasp the costs of
conventional options to shareholders. Assuming that Hall and Murphy are
correct in suggesting that managers believe that the stock market is influenced by
accounting numbers rather than underlying economic reality, this would at most
mean that executives believe that investors under-estimate or ignore the costs of
options that are not expensed for accounting purposes – not that executives
18

themselves fail to see the significant economic costs that conventional options
impose on shareholders (whose ownership interest the options dilute).
One might even be skeptical that directors, many of whom are business
executives themselves, overlook the costs of options to shareholders. Indeed, if
directors had so little financial sophistication, then the corporate governance
model based on board monitoring is in even worse shape than our analysis
suggests. Let us suppose, however, that directors have been oblivious to the true
cost of conventional options. If so, such a misperception on the part of directors is
best seen not as an alternative to the managerial power explanation but rather as
one of the factors contributing to managers’ ability to exert considerable influence
over the terms of their pay.
As we discussed earlier, there are several reasons why boards cannot be
expected to engage in arms’ length negotiations with the CEO over executive
compensation, and one of them is directors’ lack of adequate time and easy access
to accurate, unbiased information. To the extent directors in fact did misperceive
the cost of options, such misperceptions would simply be part of the
informational problem that contributes to directors’ willingness to approve suboptimal arrangements. If directors were ignorant about such important and
widely discussed issues as the actual cost of options, they would likely be
inadequately informed, and thus ineffectively monitor, other features of
compensation arrangements.
In our view, inadequate information is just one of the factors, alongside
inadequate incentives and others, that might lead directors to agree to pay
arrangements that favor managers. For one thing, directors’ confusion over the
cost of options cannot explain the systematic relationship between power and
pay, and managers’ efforts to make compensation less salient using executive
loans and retirement benefits. For many purposes, however, it does not matter
whether directors’ willingness to accept arrangements that favor executives is the
result of conscious favoritism, honest misperceptions, inadequate incentives to
exert effort, or some combination of these factors. The important thing is that
directors do not adequately represent shareholders’ interests in bargaining with
managers over their pay, and that pay arrangements consequently depart from
the arm’s length model in directions favorable to executives.
VI. COSTS TO SHAREHOLDERS
What are the costs imposed on shareholders by managers’ influence over
their own pay? To begin with, there is the excess pay managers receive as a result
of their power – the difference between what managers’ influence enables them to
obtain and what they would obtain under an arm’s length arrangement. Some
19

might think that this problem is only symbolic, and that these rents have little
actual effect on shareholders’ bottom line. But a close look at the amounts
involved indicates that they add up to much more than small change (Bebchuk
and Cohen (2003)). In 2000, CEO compensation in the firms making up the 1500company ExecuComp dataset was on average 7.89% of corporate profits (Balsam
(2002), p. 262).
Furthermore, and perhaps more importantly, managers’ ability to influence
their pay leads to compensation arrangements that generate worse incentives
than those that arm’s length contracts would provide. Managers have an interest
in compensation schemes that camouflage the extent of their rent extraction or
that put less pressure on them to reduce slack. As a result, managerial influence
might lead to the adoption of compensation arrangements that provide weak or
even perverse incentives. In our view, the reduction in shareholder value caused
by these inefficiencies, rather than the excess rent captured by managers, could be
the largest cost arising from managers’ ability to influence their compensation.
First of all, compensation arrangements currently provide weaker
incentives to reduce managerial slack and increase shareholder value than likely
would be provided by arm’s length arrangements. As explained, both the nonequity and equity components of managers’ compensation are substantially more
decoupled from the managers’ contribution to firm performance than
appearances might suggest. Shareholders thus might benefit substantially from
the improved performance that a move toward optimal contracting arrangements
could generate.
Prevailing practices not only fail to provide cost-effective incentives to
reduce slack but also create perverse incentives. For one thing, they provide
managers’ incentives to change firm parameters in a way that would justify
increases in pay. Consider, for example, the familiar problem of empire-building.
It is commonly believed that the practice of granting options provides managers
with incentives not to undertake acquisitions that are value-decreasing for
shareholders. This is clearly the case, however, only in a static model in which all
option grants are made before managers make acquisition decisions. In a dynamic
model, managers considering an expansion decision that is somewhat valuedecreasing for shareholders would have different incentives: While such an
expansion would reduce the value of their current options, it may well raise their
aggregate future compensation by an even greater amount because a larger firm
size can be used to justify higher pay.
Furthermore, managers’ broad freedom to unload equity incentives can
produce substantial inefficiencies. Executives who expect to unload their shares
or options have a weaker incentive to exert ex ante efforts whose payoffs are not
going to be recognized by the market at the time they unwind their equity
20

positions (Bar-Gill and Bebchuk, 2003a). Such executives also have incentives to
misreport corporate performance and suppress bad news (Bar-Gill and Bebchuk,
2002). Indeed, such executives also have incentives to choose projects that are less
transparent or to reduce the transparency of existing projects (Bar-Gill and
Bebchuk, 2003b). The efficiency costs of such distortions might exceed, possibly
by a large amount, whatever liquidity or risk-bearing benefits executives obtain
from being able to unload at will their options and shares.
VII. CONCLUSION
There are good theoretical and empirical reasons for concluding that
managerial power substantially affects the design of executive compensation in
companies marked by a separation of ownership and control. Executive
compensation can thus be fruitfully analyzed not only as an instrument for
addressing the agency problem arising from the separation of ownership and
control -- but also as part of the agency problem itself.
The conclusion that managerial power and rent extraction play an
important role in executive compensation has significant implications for
corporate governance, which we explore in our forthcoming book (Bebchuk and
Fried, 2004). It is important to note, however, that this is an area in which
widespread recognition of the problem might contribute to alleviating it. The
extent to which managerial influence can move compensation arrangements
away from optimal contracting outcomes depends on the extent to which market
participants, especially institutional investors, recognize and are on guard
against, the problems we have discussed. Financial economists can thus make an
important contribution to improving compensation arrangements by analyzing
how compensation practices deviate from those suggested by optimal
contracting. We hope that future studies of executive compensation will devote to
the role of managerial power as much attention as the optimal contracting model
has received.

21

References
Abelson, Reid. 2001. “Enron Board Comes Under a Storm of Criticism.” N.Y.
Times, December 16, C4.
Agrawal, Anup and Charles R. Knoeber. 1998. “Managerial Compensation and
the Threat of Takeover.” Journal of Financial Economics 47:2, pp. 219-239.
Baker, George P., Michael C. Jensen, and Kevin J. Murphy. 1988. “Compensation
and Incentives: Practice vs. Theory.” Journal of Finance 63:3, pp. 593-616.
Balsam, Steven. 2002. An Introduction to Executive Compensation (Academic Press).
Bar-Gill, Oren and Lucian Bebchuk. 2002. “Misreporting Corporate Performance.”
Working Paper No. 400, Harvard Olin Center for Law, Economics, and
Business, available at <http://www.ssrn.papers/abstact= 354141>.
Bar-Gill, Oren and Lucian Bebchuk. 2003a. “The Costs of Permitting Managers to
Sell Shares.” Mimeo, Harvard Law School.
Bar-Gill, Oren and Lucian Bebchuk. 2003b. “Corporate Transparency and
Managerial Incentives.” Mimeo, Harvard Law School.
Bebchuk, Lucian, John Coates IV and Guhan Subramanian. 2002. “The Powerful
Antitakeover Force of Staggered Boards: Theory, Evidence, and Policy.”
Stanford Law Review 54, pp. 887-951.
Bebchuk, Lucian, and Alma Cohen. 2003. “The Costs of Executive
Compensation,” mimeo, Harvard Law School and NBER.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Jesse M. Fried. 2004. Pay without Performance: The
Unfulfilled Promise of Executive Compensation (forthcoming, MIT Press).
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye and Jesse M. Fried. 2003. “Stealth Compensation.” mimeo,
Harvard Law School and Boalt Hall School of Law.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, Jesse M. Fried, and David I. Walker. 2002. “Managerial
Power and Rent Extraction in the Design of Executive Compensation.”
University of Chicago Law Review 69:3, pp. 751-846.
Bebchuk, Lucian Arye, and Marcel Kahan. 1990. “A Framework for Analyzing
Legal Policy Toward Proxy Contests.” California Law Review 78, 1071-1136.
Benz, Matthias, Marcel Kucher, and Alois Stutzer. 2001. “Stock Options: The
Managers’
Blessing:
Institutional
Restrictions
and
Executive
Compensation.” Working Paper No. 61, University of Zurich Institute for
Empirical Research in Economics.
Berle, Adolf A., Jr. and Gardiner C. Means. 1932. “The Modern Corporation and
Private Property.” (The Macmillan Company, New York).
Bertrand, Marianne and Sendhil Mullainathan. 2001. “Are CEO’s Rewarded for
Luck? The Ones Without Principals Are.” Quarterly Journal of Economics, pp.
901-932.
22

Bettis, J. Carr, John M. Bizjak, and Michael L. Lemmon. 2001. “Managerial
Ownership, Incentive Contracting, and the Use of Zero-Cost Collars and
Equity Swaps by Corporate Insiders.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative
Analysis 36, pp. 345-70.
Bettis, J. Carr, Jeffrey L. Coles, and Michael L. Lemmon. 2000. “Corporate Policies
Restricting Trading by Insiders.” Journal of Financial Economics 57, pp. 191xxx.
Bizjack, John M., Michael L. Lemmon, and Lalitha Naveen. 2000. “Has the Use of
Peer Groups Contributed to Higher Levels of Executive Compensation?”
Working Paper, Portland State University.
Blanchard, Olivier Jean, Florencio Lopez-de-Silanes, and Andrei Shleifer. 1994.
“What do Firms do with Cash Windfalls?” Journal of Financial Economics. 36,
pp. 337-360.
Borokhovich, Kenneth A., Kelly R. Brunarski, and Robert Parrino. 1997. “CEO
Contracting and Anti-Takeover Amendments.” Journal of Finance 52:4, pp.
1495-1517.
Carpenter, Jennifer N. 1998. “The Exercise and Valuation of Executive Stock
Options.” Journal of Financial Economics 48, pp. 127-158.
Cheng, Shjun, Venky Nagar, and Madhar V. Rajan. 2001. “Control Versus Risk in
Stock-Based Incentives: Evidence from Antitakeover Regulation.” Working
Paper, University of Michigan Business School.
Core, John E., Robert W. Holthausen, and David E. Larcker. 1999. “Corporate
Governance, Chief Executive Compensation, and Firm Performance.”
Journal of Financial Economics 51, pp. 371-406.
Core, John E., Wayne Guay, and David F. Larcker. 2001. “Executive Equity
Compensation and Incentives: A Survey,” Working Paper, Wharton
School.
Core, John E.
and David Larcker 2002, “Performance Consequences of
Mandatory Increases in Executive Stock Ownership.” Working paper,
Wharton School.
Crystal, Graef S. 1991. In Search of Excess. Norton.
Cyert, Richard, Sok-Hyon Kang, and Praveen Kumar. 2002. “Corporate
Governance, Takeovers, and Top-Management Compensation: Theory and
Evidence.” Management Science 48:4, pp. 453-469.
David, Parthiban, Rahul Kochar, and Edward Levitas. 1998. “The Effect of
Institutional Investors on the Level and Mix of CEO Compensation.”
Academy of Management Journal 41:2, pp. 200-208.
Fox, Justin. 2001. “The Amazing Stock Option Sleight of Hand.” Fortune June 25,
pp. 86-92.
23

Fried, Jesse M. 1998. “Reducing the Profitability of Corporate Insider Trading
through Pre-trading Disclosure.” Southern California Law Review 71:2, pp.
303-392.
Gillan, Stuart. 2001. “Has Pay for Performance Gone Awry: Views from a
Corporate Governance Forum.” Research Dialogue. TIAA CREF Institute. 68,
pp. 1-16.
Habib, Michel A. and Alexander P. Ljungqvist. 2000. “Firm Value and Managerial
Incentives.” Working Paper, London Business School.
Hall, Brian J. 1999. “A Better Way to Pay CEO’s?” in Executive Compensation and
Shareholder Value: Theory and Evidence. Jennifer Carpenter and David
Yermack, eds. Kluwer Academic, pp. 35-46.
Hall, Brian J. and Kevin J. Murphy. 2000. “Optimal Exercise Prices for Executive
Stock Options.” American Economic Association Proceedings 90, pp. 209-214.
Hall, Brian J. and Kevin J. Murphy. 2003. “The Trouble with Stock Options.”
Journal of Economic Perspectives (this issue).
Hallock, Kevin. 1997. “Reciprocally Interlocking Boards of Directors and
Executive Compensation.” Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 32:3,
pp. 331-334.
Hartzell, Jay C. and Laura T. Starks. 2002. “Institutional Investors and Executive
Compensation.” Working Paper, New York University Stern School of
Business.
Jensen, Michael 1986. “Agency Costs of Free Cash Flow, Corporate Finance, and
Takeovers.” American Economic Review 76, pp. 323-329.
Jensen, Michael, and William Meckling. 1976. “Theory of the Firm: Managerial
Behavior, Agency Costs, and Ownership Structure.” Journal of Financial
Economics 3, pp. 305-360.
Jensen, Michael, and Kevin Murphy. 1990. “Performance Pay and Top
Management Incentives.” Journal of Political Economy 98, pp. 225-263.
Johnson, Marilyn F., Susan Porter, and Margaret B. Shackell. 1997. “Stakeholder
Pressure and the Structure of Executive Compensation.” Working Paper,
Michigan State University, University of Massachusetts at Amherst, Notre
Dame.
King, Ralph. 2002. “Insider Loans: Everyone Was Doing It.” Business 2.0.
November.
Leonhardt, David. 2002. “It’s Called a Loan, But It’s Far Sweeter.” New York
Times, February 3, Section 3, Page 1.
Levinsohn, Alan. 2001. “A Garden of Stock Options Helps Harvest Talent.”
Strategic Finance 82, pp. 81-82.

24

Lublin, Joan. 2002. “As their Companies Crumbled, some CEO’s Got Big-money
Payouts.” Wall Street Journal, Feb 26, p. B1.
Murphy, Kevin J. 1999. “Executive Compensation.” in Handbook of Labor
Economics. Orley Ashenfelter and David Card, eds. North Holland, pp.
2485-2563.
Murphy, Kevin J. 2002. “Explaining Executive Compensation: Managerial Power
vs. the Perceived Cost of Stock Options.” University of Chicago Law Review
69, pp. 847-869.
Pearl Meyers & Partners. 2002. Executive Pay Trends: Looking Forward and Looking
Back.
Ofek, Eli and David Yermack. 2000. “Taking Stock: Equity-Based Compensation
and the Evolution of Managerial Ownership.” Journal of Finance 55:3, pp.
1367-1384.
Rappaport, Alfred. 1999. “New Thinking on How to Link Executive Pay with
Performance.” Harvard Business Review March-April, pp. 91-101.
Seyhun, H. Nejat. 1998. Investment Intelligence from Insider Trading, MIT Press.
Shleifer, Andrei and Robert W. Vishny. 1986 . "Large Shareholders and Corporate
Control." Journal of Political Economy 94:3, pp. 461-88.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1989. “Management Entrenchment: The Case
of Manager-specific Investments.” Journal of Financial Economics 25, pp. 123140.
Shleifer, Andrei, and Robert Vishny. 1997. “A Survey of Corporate Governance.”
Journal of Finance 52, pp. 737-783.
Thomas, Randall S. and Kenneth J. Martin. 1999. “The Effect of Shareholder
Proposals on Executive Compensation.” University of Cincinnati Law Review
67, pp. 1021-1081.
Wade, James B., Joseph Porac, and Timothy Pollock. 1997. “Worth, Words, and
the Justification of Executive Pay.” Journal of Organizational Behavior 18, pp.
641-664.
Williamson, Oliver, 1964. The Economics of Discretionary Behavior: Managerial
Objectives in a Theory of the Firm (Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, N.J.).
Yermack, David. 1997. “Good Timing: CEO Stock Option Awards and Company
News Announcements.” Journal of Finance 52, pp. 449-476.

25

