NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

ENTREPRENEURIAL SPAWNING: PUBLIC CORPORATIONS
AND THE GENESIS OF NEW VENTURES, 1986-1999
Paul Gompers
Josh Lerner
David Scharfstein
Working Paper 9816
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9816
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

Seminar participants at the Bank of Italy, Berkeley, Harvard, Stanford, and the University of Wisconsin
provided useful comments, as did Rebecca Henderson, Antoinette Schoar, and Noam Wasserman. We thank
Harvard Business School’s Division of Research and the National Science Foundation for financial support.
We are grateful for the research assistance of Jason Breen, Jon Daniels, Sonia Koshy, Robin Lee, Jonathan
Man, Oguzhan Ozbas, and Bernard Yoo. We also thank David Witherow of VentureOne and Tracey
Boylston of Thomson Delphion for providing us with the data. All errors are own.The views expressed
herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Paul Gompers, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including ©
notice, is given to the source.

Entrepreneurial Spawning: Public Corporations and the Genesis of New Ventures, 1986-1999
Paul Gompers, Josh Lerner, and David Scharfstein
NBER Working Paper No. 9816
July 2003
JEL No. G2, L2
ABSTRACT
This paper examines the factors that lead to the creation of venture capital backed start-ups, a
process we term "entrepreneurial spawning." We contrast two alternative views of the spawning
process. In one view, employees of established firms are trained and conditioned to be entrepreneurs
by being exposed to the entrepreneurial process and by working in a network of entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists. Alternatively, individuals become entrepreneurs because the large bureaucratic
companies for which they work are reluctant to fund their entrepreneurial ideas. Controlling for a
firm's size, patent portfolio and industry, we find that the most prolific spawning firms were public
companies located in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts that were themselves once venture capital
backed. Less diversified firms are also more likely to spawn new firms. Spawning levels for these
firms rise as their sales growth declines. Firms based in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts and
originally backed by venture capitalists are more likely to spawn firms only peripherally related to
their core businesses. Overall, these findings appear to be more consistent with the view that
entrepreneurial learning and networks are important factors in the creation of venture capital backed
firms.
Paul Gompers
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University, Morgan 483
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
pgompers@hbs.edu
David Scharfstein
Sloan School of Management
MIT, Room E52-433
50 Memorial Drive
Cambridge, MA 02142-1347
and NBER
dscharf@mit.edu

Josh Lerner
Graduate School of Business Administration
Harvard University, Morgan 395
Soldiers Field Road
Boston, MA 02163
and NBER
jlerner@hbs.edu

Introduction
There is now a large and growing literature analyzing the factors that determine
whether entrepreneurs raise venture capital funding (Hellmann and Puri [2000]; Burton,
Sørensen, and Beckman [2002]) and the factors that affect the terms of this financing
(Gompers [1997], Kaplan and Stromberg [2002]). There is much less understanding of
how these venture capital backed entrepreneurs come to be entrepreneurs in the first
place. In this paper, we try to fill this gap by examining the factors that lead to the
creation of venture capital backed entrepreneurs, a process we term “entrepreneurial
spawning.”
We contrast two alternative views of the spawning process.

In one view,

employees of established firms are trained and conditioned to be entrepreneurs by being
exposed to the entrepreneurial process and by working in a network of entrepreneurs and
venture capitalists.

The prolific spawning of entrepreneurial firms by Fairchild

Semiconductors and its descendents is a prominent example of “how entrepreneurial
learning and networks may function,” as Saxenian [1994] writes. Fairchild was founded
by eight engineers who left Shockley Semiconductor with $1.5 million in venture capital
funding from Arthur Rock, one of the earliest (and later most successful) venture
capitalists. While the “Treacherous Eight” succeeded as inventors of the first integrated
circuit in 1959, the founders and other engineers soon began to leave Fairchild to begin
firms of their own. Between 1957 and 1976, at least 23 out of 67 entrants to the
semiconductor industry had at least one founder who worked for Fairchild (Braun and
Macdonald [1982]), including Advanced Micro Devices, Intel, and National
Semiconductor, almost all of which were based in Silicon Valley.

2

In this view, individuals already working for entrepreneurial firms, particularly
those already backed by venture capitalists and located in hotbeds of venture capital
activity—notably Silicon Valley and Massachusetts—may find launching their own
venture less daunting than others might. This may be the case for a number of reasons.
First, working in such firms exposes would-be entrepreneurs to a network of suppliers of
labor, goods, and capital, as well as a network of customers (Saxenian [1994]). Because
starting a new venture requires suppliers and customers to make relationship-specific
investments before it is guaranteed that the venture will get off the ground, networks can
be particularly useful in alleviating this chicken-and-egg problem (Hellmann [2002]).
Second, would-be entrepreneurs learn how to found companies by participating in the
entrepreneurial process alongside other, more experienced entrepreneurs.

Finally,

individuals with a higher taste for risky activities may have already found their way to
entrepreneurial firms, consistent with the sorting processes hypothesized by Jovanovic
[1979], Holmes and Schmidt [1990] and Gromb and Scharfstein [2002]. We refer to this
depiction of entrepreneurial spawning as the “Fairchild view.”
An alternative view of the entrepreneurial spawning process is that individuals
become entrepreneurs because the large bureaucratic companies for which they work are
reluctant to fund their entrepreneurial ideas. The most prominent example of this is
Xerox, which developed many of the key technologies underlying the personal computer,
but which failed to commercialize these technologies (summarized in Hunt and Lerner
[1995]). In 1969, Xerox chief executive Peter McColough commissioned the firm’s head
of research to build a new laboratory to provide the company with the technology to
move the firm from being the leading office copier company to being the dominant

3

supplier of information-intensive products (Chesbrough [2002]). The Palo Alto Research
Center (PARC) was formed to house this group in 1970. The firm hired outstanding
researchers for this new technical initiative, including physicists, mathematicians,
materials scientists, computer system architects, and software engineers. PARC proved
to be enormously fertile, inventing such technologies as laser printing, the Ethernet, the
graphical user interface, and personal distributed computing. Despite appeals by PARC
leaders to invest in commercializing these innovations, the firm’s Rochester, New Yorkbased executives resisted such expenditures. Instead, the vast bulk of the value from
these inventions was captured by employees who left Xerox to found companies such as
Adobe Systems and 3Com as well as licensees such as Apple Computer.
There are at least three reasons that large, established firms might be more prone
to spawn entrepreneurial ventures.

We will refer to this as the “Xerox view” of

entrepreneurial spawning. First, it may be that firms are incapable of responding to
radical technological changes that upset the established ways of organizing their
businesses. Christensen [1997], perhaps the most visible proponent of this view, has
written about the failure of companies to capitalize on “disruptive technologies”:
Why was it that firms that could be esteemed as aggressive, innovative,
customer-sensitive organizations could ignore or attend belatedly to
technological innovations with enormous strategic importance? …
Finding new applications and markets for new products seems to be a
capability that each of these firms exhibited once, upon entry, and then
apparently lost. It was as if the leading firms were held captive by their
customers, enabling attacking entrant firms to topple the incumbent
industry leaders each time a disruptive technology emerged (Christensen
[1997], p. 24).
Henderson [1993] presents evidence of the organizational incapacity of firms to respond
to technological change. Using data from the semiconductor photolithography industry,

4

she shows that incumbents were consistently slower than entrants in developing and
introducing new technologies.
A second, related reason why large, established companies may spawn more is
that high-level managers at these firms are incapable of evaluating these entrepreneurial
opportunities because they fall outside the company’s core line of business. Assessing
these opportunities may also require the analysis of “soft information,” which
hierarchical organizations may have a hard time doing (Stein [2002]; Berger, et al.
[2002]). Moreover, the internal capital market tends to favor established lines of business
over less established, but perhaps more promising, businesses (Scharfstein [1998];
Scharfstein and Stein [2000]). These arguments suggest that a considerable amount of
entrepreneurial spawning should come from large established firms, where these
problems are presumably most severe.
Finally, it is also possible that the level of entrepreneurial spawning would be
high among these firms not because of any sort of inefficiency at these firms, but rather
because these firms wisely choose to focus on their core business or “core competence.”
The wisdom of focusing on one’s “core competence,” has been a mainstay of
management consulting since the 1980s. It is also supported by the findings that:
•

diversified firms tend to trade at a discount to a portfolio of comparable focused
firms (Berger and Ofek [1995]);

•

firms that diversified excessively during the 1960s and 1970s were more likely to
be acquired and broken up in the subsequent two decades (Mitchell and Lehn
[1990]); and

5

•

when firms diversified into unrelated businesses, the productivity of their existing
businesses declined (Schoar [2002]).

Thus, in this view, even though good entrepreneurial ideas might be germinated at these
firms, management wisely chooses not to develop them because it would do more harm
than good to their core businesses.
This paper is an empirical exploration of the Fairchild and Xerox views of the
entrepreneurial spawning process. To analyze these perspectives on spawning, we
assemble a database of employees who leave public companies to start venture capital
backed firms during the period 1986-1999. From these data, we are able to calculate the
spawning levels of public companies. We then relate these spawning levels to firm
characteristics in a cross-sectional analysis and examine how these spawning levels
change over time for particular firms.
Controlling for firm size, patent portfolio, and industry, we find that the most
prolific spawning firms from 1986 to 1999 were public companies located in Silicon
Valley and Massachusetts that were once venture capital backed themselves. These
effects are substantial: being located in Silicon Valley increases the spawning level by
almost 38%; companies in Massachusetts have a 23% higher spawning level; and
companies that were once venture capital backed have a 23% higher spawning level.
Diversified firms appear to spawn less, not more. Firms focused in one segment
have spawning levels 19% higher than those operating in multiple segments. Moreover,
after controlling for the quantity, quality, and originality of patents that firms have in the
areas of principal interest to venture capitalists (computers and communication as well as
drugs and medical), the existence of other types of patents in the portfolio (e.g.,

6

mechanical patents) tends to reduce a company’s spawning level.

This result is

inconsistent with the notion that more diversified firms will spawn more. Our findings
appear to be more consistent with the notion that diversified firms are less entrepreneurial
and thus less prone to have the sorts of people who would have the inclination, ability, or
skills to start new venture capital backed firms.
The penultimate empirical section of the paper examines how spawning levels
change over time for firms. Thus, we construct a panel of annual spawning levels for
firms with patents in areas of interest to venture capitalists. When we use firm fixed
effects in our regression analysis, we find that firm spawning levels are lower when a
firm’s past sales growth is high relative to the firm’s mean level of growth. We interpret
this finding as indicating that when firms are growing rapidly, employees choose to stay
at their firms (and perhaps develop their entrepreneurial ideas internally) because they
perceive the rents from doing so to be high. When growth slows, however, employees
are more prone to seek entrepreneurial opportunities outside the firm.
One competing interpretation of our findings is that venture capital backed firms
in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts with a history of venture capital backing have high
spawning levels not because of entrepreneurial learning, networks, or attributes, but
simply because they have technologies and operate in businesses that are of more interest
to venture capitalists in the first place (as, for instance, the tabulations in Kortum and
Lerner [2000] suggest). While this remains a possible explanation, it is worth noting that
we have controlled extensively for patent characteristics (quantity, class, quality, and
originality) and industry. Thus, if high spawners simply function in fields of greater

7

relevance to venture capitalists, they must do so in a way that is neither observable to us
nor captured by our patent and industry controls.
As a further check to see that our results are not driven by technology differences,
we examine the extent to which venture capital backed start-ups pursue businesses related
to those of the firms from which they are spawned. If technology differences underlie our
results, we would expect to see more related spawning from the high spawners.
However, this is not what we observe in our empirical analysis. We find, instead, that
firms located in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts with prior venture capital backing
spawn less related businesses.
This finding also sheds some light on the causes of entrepreneurial spawning.
The results do not appear to be consistent with Xerox-type spawning because we would
expect less related spawning from large, established firms for the reasons discussed
above, i.e., the inability of the firms to evaluate technologies outside their core business
or the commitment on the part of these firms to focus on their core business. Instead, the
findings appear to be more consistent with the view that these firms are unable or
unwilling to take advantage of entrepreneurial opportunities in their core business
(perhaps because of fear of cannibalization). By contrast, the high spawners in Silicon
Valley and Massachusetts are more prone to spawn outside their core and would appear
to be capitalizing on opportunities in their core lines of business.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section I describes the construction
of the data set and summarizes the data. The analysis is presented in Section II. Section
III concludes the paper, discusses some implications of our findings, and highlights other
research opportunities in this area.

8

I.

Constructing the Data Set
The core data for the analysis come from VentureOne. VentureOne, established in

1987, collects data on firms that have obtained venture capital financing. Firms that have
received early-stage financing exclusively from individual investors, federally chartered
Small Business Investment Companies, and corporate development groups are not included
in the database.
The companies are initially identified from a wide variety of sources, including trade
publications, company Web pages, and telephone contacts with venture investors.
VentureOne then collects information about the businesses through interviews with venture
capitalists and entrepreneurs. The data collected include the identity of the key founders (the
crucial information used here) as well as the industry, strategy, employment, financial
history and revenues of the firm. Data on the firms are updated and validated through
monthly contacts with investors and firms.
For the purposes of this analysis, we examine the founders and initial executive
officers (henceforth referred to as “entrepreneurs”) that joined firms listed in the
VentureOne database during the period from 1986 and 1999.1 Typically, the database
reported the previous affiliation and title (at the previous employer) of these entrepreneurs,
We did not include events in earlier periods because of concerns about selection biases.
VentureOne has “back-filled” data on entrepreneurial firms through the early 1980s, but
firms that did not survive until 1987 were not added to the database. At the time this
study was initiated, the 2000 and 2001 data were substantially less complete than the
other years due to lags in identifying and surveying firms.
1

9

as well as the date they joined the firm.2 In some cases, however, VentureOne did not
collect this information. In these cases, we attempt to find this information by examining
contemporaneous news stories in LEXIS-NEXIS, securities filings, and web sites of
surviving firms.3 We believe this data-collection procedure may introduce a bias in favor of
having more information on successful firms, but it is not apparent to us that it affects our
analysis.
Table I summarizes the population of entrepreneurs and their venture capital backed
start-up firms. First, the table presents the number of entrepreneurs that joined new venture
capital backed companies in the VentureOne database by the year that they joined those
venture-backed firms, as well the number of new venture capital backed firms that these
entrepreneurs joined in each year. We also list the number of venture capital backed
technology companies.

We then present the number of entrepreneurs who held at least one

of three key titles in the new company—CEO, president, and chief technical officer
(CTO)—as well as the count of entrepreneurs who left firms that were publicly traded.
Finally, we report the share of entrepreneurs that were from entities that were publicly
traded at the time of their departure.
Two observations should be highlighted from the summary statistics. First, the level
of activity has risen over the period, reflecting the more general growth of the venture
2

We code the entrepreneur as being spawned from the most recent company for which he
worked, even though he may have a wealth of experience working at other types of
companies.
3

When we were unable to ascertain the year in which the individual joined the firm, we
used the year in which the firm was formed, which was the modal answer in cases where
we had complete data. This approach does introduce some empirical difficulties, as we
discuss below.

10

capital industry over these years.4 The number of entrepreneurs joining venture capital
backed start-ups increases from 483 in 1986 to 1717 in 1999. Similarly, the number of
distinct venture capital backed firms represented in the sample increases from 218 in 1986 to
799 in 1999. Second, the share of entrepreneurs that emerge from publicly traded firms is
significant.

The first measure we report calculates the share as a percentage of all

entrepreneurs. This measure suggests that there has been an increase of about 40% over this
period in the share of entrepreneurs coming from public companies (from 30% to 42% of
the entire sample of entrepreneurs). There are many entrepreneurs, however, for which the
database reports no prior work history. If one excludes these entrepreneurs from the
calculation, the share of entrepreneurs coming from public companies appears more stable,
averaging approximately 45% per year.

The difference in these findings is probably

attributable to the more complete reporting of prior work histories in later years.
The data on entrepreneurs are linked to information on the companies that spawned
them. In particular, we determine whether the entrepreneur had previously been employed
at a publicly traded firm in the United States, and, if so, we link it to the appropriate firm in
the Compustat and Center for Research into Securities Prices (CRSP) databases. We also
identify the spawning firm’s patents (and their characteristics) using the National Bureau of
Economic Research’s (NBER) Patent Citations Data File (summarized in Hall, Jaffe, and
Trajtenberg [2001]).

This database links patent data from the U.S. Patent Office to

4

The reader may be puzzled that the volume of spawned venture capital backed start-ups
falls in 1999, a record year for venture capital activity. This decline occurs because the
years reported are those where the entrepreneurs joined the new firms, not the year of
first venture capital financing. Thus, even though many more entrepreneurs may have
joined start-ups in 1999, it is likely that a smaller percentage of them were later funded
by venture capital because of the plunge in the NASDAQ in April 2000 and the
subsequent drop in overall venture capital funding.

11

Compustat (as it was comprised in 1989). We add links for companies listed in Compustat
after 1989.5
Table II lists the firms and industries that were most active in spawning new firms.
Panel A lists the 48 publicly traded corporations that spawned ten or more entrepreneurial
teams during the sample period. (Multiple individuals departing to establish a firm are
regarded as a single team).

Panel B describes the top three-digit Standard Industrial

Classification (SIC) codes in which the most spawners operated. (Each firm is assigned to
one three-digit SIC code, based on the primary industry assigned in Compustat.)

The

dominant importance of firms in the software, computer and office equipment, and drug
industries is apparent. The concentration of entrepreneurs spawned from public firms in
these industries closely mirrors the overall investment pattern of the venture capital industry.
It is not surprising that the venture capitalists would finance entrepreneurs with relevant
technology experience.
Table III compares spawning firms to non-spawning firms. We take averages for
each company that ever spawned a venture capital backed start-up in the VentureOne
database during these years: i.e., those that spawned at least one entrepreneur over the time
period. We contrast these firms to those that spawned no venture capital backed firms. For
the purposes of interpreting our later results, we report summary data only on those firms
that end up in our basic regression analysis.

5

Because there are a very large number of companies listed in the patent database, it was
not feasible to scan the entire database for possible links to Compustat. Thus, we listed
all companies in the patent database with at least two patents in the computers and
communication and medical and drugs patent categories and narrowed our search of
public companies to this subset of patent holders.

12

The tabulation reveals that spawning firms tend to be significantly larger than nonspawners. For instance, the median spawning firm has 60% higher sales, 90% greater
assets, and 170% more employees. Tobin’s Q is calculated as the ratio of the market value
of the firm to the book value of its assets, following the procedure delineated in Kaplan and
Zingales [1997]. Because the distribution of Tobin’s Q has a dramatic rightward skew, we
report winsorized versions of this measure, cutting off the distribution at a Q of 10, roughly
corresponding to the 99th percentile.

The mean Q of spawning companies (2.75) is

somewhat higher than the mean Q of non-spawning firms (2.54). The difference in the
medians is much larger: 2.18 versus 1.71. The average EBITDA to assets ratio is not
appreciably different across the two sub-samples but sales growth is considerably higher
among the spawning firms.6
In addition to looking at differences in the financial performance of spawning and
non-spawning firms, we also tabulate whether the headquarters of these firms are in Silicon
Valley or Massachusetts.

Prior venture capital backing is determined by linking the

companies to the Venture Economics database of venture capital financings (discussed in
Gompers and Lerner [1999]), and then supplemented with the annual listing of venture
capital backed IPOs in Venture Capital Journal. Following Saxenian [1994], we define
Silicon Valley as California’s Alameda, San Mateo, and Santa Clara counties. Although
the hub of start-up activity in Massachusetts is around Route 128 (Middlesex County), the
state is small enough that it is not meaningful to make distinctions among the counties of
Massachusetts. We determine the headquarters’ location from Compustat. Spawning firms
6

These measures are also winsorized. In the case of EBITDA to assets we cut off any
ratios below -0.5 and above 0.5 and in the case of sales growth we cut off any rates above
10.

13

are much more likely to have been venture capital backed themselves (35.5% vs. 12.2%)
and to be located in the hubs of venture capital activity, Silicon Valley and Massachusetts.
The table also lists information on the degree of focus of the spawning and nonspawning firms. We consider a firm focused if it reports just one industry segment in its
filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission.7 Spawning firms tend to be more
focused even though they are substantially larger.
Not surprisingly, spawning firms have considerably more patents over the period
from 1980 to 1999, particularly in patent classes that are most relevant to venture capital,
i.e., patents with a primary assignment to category 2, “Computers and Communications,” or
category 3, “Drugs and Medical,” using the classification scheme in the NBER data file.
Finally, the table reports information on the average quality and originality of
patents in categories 2 and 3 for these companies. The standard measure of patent quality
(see the extended discussion in Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002]) is the number of citations the
patent receives. We use this citation measure of quality, adjusting for the year in which the
patent was granted and the sub-category of the patent.8

Thus, our quality measure is the

7

There are a number of limitations of this focus measure. One is that firms have discretion
in what businesses they choose to lump together into a business segment. Thus, some
single-segment firms that pool a number of businesses into one segment may be no more
focused than a multi-segment firm that breaks them out. Another limitation is that some of
the multiple segment firms may have quite related businesses across different segments.
Our measure takes no account of those relationships. Despite this measurement error, it is
likely that on average the firms we categorize as focused will indeed be more focused than
the other firms in the sample.
8

The NBER database includes four subcategories for Computers and Communications:
“Communications, “Computer Hardware and Software,” “Computer Peripherals,” and
“Information Storage.” There are four sub-categories for Drugs and Medical: “Drugs,”
“Surgery and Medical Instruments,” “Biotechnology,” and “Miscellaneous.”

14

firm fixed effect in a regression of a patent’s citations on a set of dummy variables for the
year in which the patent was granted and the patent sub-category. The table indicates that
the average patent quality of spawning firms is higher than that of non-spawning firms.
Recent research (summarized in Jaffe and Trajtenberg [2002]) has highlighted the
importance of the measure of patent originality. A patent is considered more original if it
cites patents across more patent categories, as it is more likely to synthesize knowledge
across a variety of disciplines. We use this measure reported in the NBER Patent Citations
Data File, again adjusting for the granting year of the patent and the patent’s sub-category.
The table shows that the average originality of patents held by spawning firms is lower than
that of non-spawning firms.

II. Analysis
We present the results here in five sub-sections. We start in sub-section II.A by
analyzing the factors that affect the total number of venture capital backed start-ups that
public companies spawn over the entire sample period, 1986-1999.

In the next two sub-

sections, II.B and II.C, we examine the extensive and intensive margins of spawning—
i.e., the factors that determine whether a firm spawns at all and the factors that determine
how much spawning a firm undertakes conditional on spawning at least one firm. We
then examine in sub-section II.D whether the factors that explain overall spawning levels
explain spawning levels on a yearly basis. In this sub-section, we also look at the annual
spawning levels in a model with firm fixed effects. Thus, we are able in this part of the
paper to examine the time-varying characteristics that affect whether a firm’s spawning

15

level is above or below its own mean. In subsection II.E, we examine the extent to which
the activities of the spawned firms are related to their parents.

A. The Determinants of Total Spawning
In this section, we analyze the factors that affect the total number of venture
capital backed companies spawned by public companies during the sample period 19861999. One issue that we face from the outset is that some firms will have very little
spawning activity simply because they specialize in areas that are of little interest to
venture capitalists. Indeed, historically, more than 80% of venture capital disbursements
have gone to firms in the information technology and health-related fields. Thus, for the
bulk of the analysis, we restrict our analysis to firms who were awarded at least one
patent between 1981 and 1999 in NBER patent categories 2 (computer and
communications) or 3 (drugs and medicine), which correspond to areas of greatest
interest to venture capitalists.
As the dependent variable, we use the logarithm of the number of venture capital
backed start-ups that the firm spawns over the sample period (plus the number one to
avoid dropping non-spawning firms).

When more than one person leaves a given

company in a given year to form a particular firm, we still count it as one firm that was
spawned. In some of the analyses, we look only at spawning of start-ups in technology
intensive businesses for which the patents in categories 2 and 3 are most relevant. As
shown in Table I, these spawned firms account for roughly two-thirds of the companies
spawned in a given year.

16

We start by looking at overall spawning because of our inability to identify the
spawning date with certainty for every venture capital backed company. In many cases,
VentureOne does not report the date on which the entrepreneur joined the start-up. In
these cases, we tried to fill in this information from publicly available information, but in
many of them, we were unsuccessful. When we could not find the information from
other sources, we used the founding date of the start-up. There are, however, a number of
cases in which the founding date of the company precedes the founding date of the public
company, indicating that the entrepreneur most likely joined at a later time. These
observations are dropped from the analysis when annual spawning levels are analyzed.
This tends to disproportionately reduce the measured spawning levels of young public
companies. Of course, looking at overall spawning levels has its own limitations, the
most important of which is that it does not allow us to examine the time dynamics of
spawning. Since there is no perfect solution to this problem, we analyze the determinants
of total spawning levels here and annual spawning levels in sub-section II.D below.
The first column of Table IV reports the results of a cross-sectional regression in
which the dependent variable is the log of a firm’s total spawning. The mean of this
variable is 0.482, indicating that the average firm spawns 0.619 firms between 1986 and
1999. The regressors in this analysis are: (1) the log of the total number of patents the
firm was granted between 1981 and 1999 in each of the six NBER patent categories (as
described in Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001]); (2) the mean of logarithm of the firm’s
assets over the sample period expressed in 1996 dollars; (3) the mean ratio of EBITDA to
assets; (4) the mean annual growth of real sales; (5) the mean of annual Q; (6) a dummy
variable that equals one if the firm was venture capital backed; (7) separate Silicon

17

Valley and Massachusetts dummies; (8) the mean of the firm’s focus dummy; (9) the
quality of patents in categories 2 and 3; and (10) the originality of the patents in
categories 2 and 3. Because the firms are in the sample for different numbers of years,
we also include a set of dummy variables for each year the firm is in the sample. The tstatistics are based on heteroskedasticity-adjusted standard errors that allow for nonindependence of observations across firms within the same 2-digit SIC code.
Not surprisingly, the coefficients of the patent quantities in categories 2 and 3 are
positive and highly statistically significant. The coefficient indicates that the elasticity of
spawning with respect to patenting in category 2 is 0.235 and that the elasticity in
category 3 is 0.141. It is noteworthy also that this elasticity is less than one; doubling a
company’s patents generates significantly less than twice as many spawned entities.
There may be several explanations of this finding. First, not all businesses are based on
patents and technological know-how; patents may be irrelevant for these spawned
entities. Second, many patents may have no immediate practical business value. If larger
firms with more patents are more likely to have such patents (perhaps because they have
internal patent departments that reduce the cost of applying for patent awards, and thus
make it worthwhile to apply for more marginal awards), the incremental impact of a
patent on spawning activity could be lower. A third possibility is that some patenting
may be an attempt to limit the extent to which employees take their ideas and start new
ventures. Finally, to the extent that we have included other measures of size, such as the
logarithm of real assets, these variables may be picking up some of the effect of an
increase in patenting.

18

Interestingly, the coefficients on the other four patent categories are all negative
and, in the case of mechanical patents (category 5) and other patents (category 6), they
are statistically significant. This finding suggests that having research activities outside
of the main venture capital related areas reduces the level of spawning. This is not
consistent with the Xerox view that spawning is a consequence of corporate bureaucracy.
It is, however, consistent with the Fairchild view to the extent that firms operating in
multiple areas of research tend to be less entrepreneurial in style and attract a less
entrepreneurial type of employee. We discuss this and related findings later in this
section.
The table also indicates that firms with more assets spawn more firms, which is
not surprising given that the dependent variable is not size adjusted.

There is no

statistically significant link between spawning and EBITDA over assets, nor with oneyear real sales growth. High Q firms do, however, spawn more. There are many potential
explanations for this finding.

One plausible explanation is that firms have high Q

because they are expected to develop new businesses. The ideas for these new businesses
are generated by the firm’s employees and some of them may choose to develop the ideas
on the outside, backed by venture capital.
The coefficient of the venture capital dummy is positive, large and highly
statistically significant. The estimate of 0.264 indicates that, all else equal, public
companies that were once venture capital backed spawn 26.4% more firms than those that
were not venture capital backed. The coefficient of the Silicon Valley dummy indicates
that public companies based in Silicon Valley spawn 37.7% more firms than those based
outside the two hubs of venture capital activity. The coefficient estimate on the

19

Massachusetts dummy is also large and statistically significant; while smaller than the
effect of being in Silicon Valley, the effect is comparable in size to that of being venture
capital backed.
The result that venture capital backed firms spawn more is consistent with the
Fairchild view of spawning. In this view, employees of venture capital backed firms
learn how to be entrepreneurs through the experience of working in an entrepreneurial
environment. They may also have greater exposure to the network of suppliers of goods,
capital, and labor, as well as customers. Furthermore, employees that select into venture
capital backed firms may be less risk averse, and thus more willing to accept the risks
associated with starting a new company. While it is difficult to determine the precise
mechanism through which employment at a venture capital backed firm affects the
amount of spawning, the effect is quite strong in the data. The finding does not appear to
be consistent with the alternative Xerox view of spawning.
The positive effect of being located in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts is also
consistent with the Fairchild view. In both regions, employees have a closer connection
to a network of suppliers of goods, capital and labor that is critical to the creation of a
new enterprise. Saxenian [1994] argues that being located in a region with other small
entrepreneurial firms makes it easier to find companies that are willing to supply critical
inputs. She argues that this effect is stronger in Silicon Valley than in Massachusetts
because the latter region tends to have larger, more vertically integrated firms. Although
we estimate a larger effect in Silicon Valley than in Massachusetts, it would be a stretch
to say that we have confirmation of Saxenian’s claim.

20

We also find that a firm’s average level of focus is positively related to the extent
of its spawning.

The estimated effect is also quite large.

A firm that is focused

throughout the sample period spawns 20% more than a company that is diversified
throughout. This finding appears at odds with the view that spawning is a response to
bureaucratic rigidities in large, technology-intensive firms. The result appears more
consistent with the Fairchild view.
The regression results also indicate that older public companies spawn fewer
venture capital backed start-ups. The estimated elasticity of 5.8% is small. Given the
imprecision with which we measure firm age, these results need to be interpreted with
some caution.
Finally, the regression includes measures of patent quality and originality. Firms
with higher quality patents in categories 2 and 3 appear to spawn more, while those with
lower average originality appear to spawn less. The coefficient of patent quality is
statistically significant, while the coefficient of patent originality is not.

An increase

from the 25th percentile of quality to the 75th percentile—an increase of 6.3 adjusted
citations—leads to an increase of 2.8% in the level of spawning, a small effect. Like the
age effect, the estimated effect of patent quality is rather unimpressive.
The second set of regressions in Table IV uses spawning in technology industries
as the dependent variable. We find the same basic patterns of results here as we did in
the regression with overall spawning. The last two columns repeat the first two but add
industry dummies for two-digit SIC codes.

The key findings are unaffected: the

coefficients of the venture capital, Silicon Valley, and Massachusetts dummies and the
coefficient of average focus all remain positive and statistically significant.

21

The

magnitudes of the coefficients also change very little. Mean Q, age, and patent quality
are no longer statistically significant, though their magnitudes change very little.
In unreported regressions, we examine the influence of repeat entrepreneurs.
“Serial entrepreneurs,” who work at multiple entrepreneurial firms, are said to be
important in many industries. It is reasonable to worry that serial entrepreneurs drive our
results that firms based in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts and backed by venture
capitalists spawn more. That is, these firms many not teach their employees how to be
entrepreneurs or expose them to networks, or even select for entrepreneurial types.
Instead, firms with these characteristics may tend to be younger and more likely to have
been founded in the recent past by entrepreneurs. These entrepreneurs may then leave
then to start other firms, leading to the appearance that these firms are more prolific
spawners.
We thus repeat the analysis, dropping cases where an entrepreneur had been
involved with a previous venture-backed firm. To do this, we create an identifier for
each entrepreneur, researching the sources noted above to determine whether a “Jim
Joyce” and a “James Joyce” in the VentureOne database are really the same person. In
all, the elimination of repeat entrepreneurs leads to the elimination of 9.7% of the
observations, where the entrepreneur was involved as a founder or key officer in a
previous venture-backed firm.

Of the repeat entrepreneurs in the sample, 83% are

involved with two firms, 13% with three, 3% with four, and less than one percent with
five or more firms.
The deletions have little impact on the results. Neither the magnitude nor the
statistical significance of the key results presented in Table IV changes. Similarly, when

22

we repeat the analyses reported in later tables, the deletion of the repeat entrepreneurs has
little impact.

B. The Characteristics of Firms that Spawn
In the sample of 1370 companies that patent in categories 2 and 3, 515 companies
spawn at least one venture capital backed firm and 855 spawn none. What are the factors
that determine whether a firm spawns at least one firm? To address this question, we
report the results of regressing a dummy variable that takes the value one if the firm
spawns at all on the same set of regressors as those reported in Table IV. Although we
report the ordinary least squares estimates in Table V, the logit results are substantively
similar.
Not surprisingly, firms with more patents in categories 2 and 3 are more likely to
spawn a venture capital backed start-up. A firm with only one patent in category 2 (the
25th percentile of patent quantity) has a 33.5% chance of spawning a venture capital
backed start-up, whereas a firm with 9 patents in category 2 (the 75th percentile) has a
54.6% chance of spawning a venture capital backed start-up. The estimated effect for
patents in category 3 is similar in magnitude. Patenting in the other patent categories—
particularly in categories 5 and 6—tends to reduce the probability of spawning.
The estimated effects of the critical variables of interest—prior venture capital
backing, location, and focus—are all large and statistically significant. The predicted
probability of spawning any start-up is 20.2% higher for venture capital backed public
companies than for firms that were not venture capital backed. The empirical model
predicts that non-venture capital backed public firms have a 33.0% probability of

23

spawning at least one company, while a venture capital backed public company has a
53.1% chance of spawning such a firm. The estimated effects are similar in magnitude
for firms located in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts. Firms located outside of either
have a 34.7% chance of spawning at least one start-up, while a public company located in
Silicon Valley has a 51.2% chance of spawning a start-up and one located in
Massachusetts has a 48.4% chance of spawning a start-up.
The estimated effect of the focus variable is somewhat smaller than those of
location and prior venture capital backing. A firm that is focused throughout the sample
period has a 51.8% chance of spawning at least one start-up, while a firm that was
diversified throughout the sample has a 43.4% chance of spawning a start-up. In
interpreting the magnitude of the focus coefficient, however, one has to keep in mind that
the regression also includes the number of patents outside of categories 2 and 3, which
also measures the degree of focus. Indeed, if one excludes the quantity of patents outside
of categories 2 and 3, the estimated coefficient of average focus doubles in magnitude
and is highly statistically significant in all specifications.
With respect to patent characteristics, patent quality appears to be significantly
and positively related to spawning at least one company, while the effect of originality is
negative albeit statistically insignificant.
The second column of Table V repeats this specification for spawning of
technology intensive businesses. The results are essentially unchanged. The last two

24

columns add 2-digit SIC code industry dummies. The estimated effects change little
across specifications, though patent quality is no longer statistically significant.9

C. The Intensity of Spawning
In this section, we examine the intensity of spawning, conditional on the firm
spawning at least one venture capital-financed firm.

Table VI re-estimates the

specifications in Table IV for the 515 companies that spawn at least one start-up. The
main difference between the coefficients estimated in Table IV and those estimated in
Table VI is that, although the estimated coefficient of the venture capital dummy is
positive, its magnitude is small and statistically insignificant. Thus, one might conclude
that prior venture capital backing affects whether a company spawns, but not how much
it spawns conditional on spawning.
The estimated effects of location continue to be large, though the coefficient
estimate of the Massachusetts dummy is now estimated imprecisely, perhaps because the
sample size is so much smaller now. The coefficient of focus is also positive and
borderline statistically significant at the 5% confidence level. The estimated effect of
quality is also positive and statistically significant.

None of these effects change

substantially when we restrict the dependent variable to the spawning of high-tech firms
(column 2) and add industry dummies (columns 3 and 4).
9

Patent quality in categories 2 and 3 appears to be higher if the company patents little
outside those categories. Thus, the negative coefficients of patenting outside categories 2
and 3 may proxy in part for poor patent quality in categories 2 and 3. Excluding the
patent quantities in categories other than 2 and 3 increases the coefficient of patent
quality, which becomes highly statistically significant.

25

D. The Determinants of Annual Spawning Levels
In this sub-section we analyze the determinants of spawning on an annual basis.
As discussed above, measuring annual spawning is imprecise given the data we have
because in some cases we do not know when the entrepreneur joined the start-up. When
we do not have this information, we assumed that it occurred at the founding of the startup.

If the start-up is founded before the spawning company goes public, then the

observation is dropped from the sample.

This approach means that we tend

underestimate to a greater extent the number of spawned entities from companies that
have gone public more recently. With this caveat in mind, we present the results of
pooled cross-section/time series analysis in Table VII and a firm fixed effect analysis in
Table VIII.
We observe the same basic pattern of results in the first column of Table VII.
Prior venture capital backing, a Silicon Valley or Massachusetts headquarters, and focus
are all positively related the annual spawning levels.

The effects are somewhat

attenuated by including industry dummies and by limiting the spawning to those in
technology-intensive industries as shown in columns 2 and 3 of Table VII.
The last column of Table VII reports the result of the between estimator:
regressing firm average annual spawning levels on firm averages of the regressors. This
approach is similar to the approach taken in Table IV, but relies on the more imprecise
measure of annual spawning as opposed to cumulative spawning. Although the results
are all consistent with those observed in Table IV, the coefficients are generally more
imprecisely estimated in Table VII.

26

Table VIII reports estimates of a regression equation with firm fixed effects. We
cannot, of course, estimate the effects of the time-invariant factors such as prior venture
capital backing and location. Thus, we include only those variables that change over
time. The main question that we can address with this approach is whether firms tend to
spawn more when their performance and growth are relatively good or when they
diminish. There are two alternative views. On the one hand, spawning may be higher
during relatively good times as employees are exposed to more entrepreneurial
opportunities. On the other hand, when growth slows or performance weakens one might
expect employees to be more aggressive in pursuing outside entrepreneurial opportunities
as the value of remaining at the company falls.
Table VIII shows that spawning is unrelated to Q and the EBITDA measure, but it
is negatively and significantly related to lagged 3-year sales growth. The estimated
coefficient, however, is small. The model implies that an increase in sales growth from
the 25th percentile to the 75th percentile reduces the log quantity of spawning from 0.089
to 0.085, a change of just 4.6%.

It is difficult to determine whether the effect is

genuinely small or is small because of the significant measurement error in calculating
annual spawning levels. In either case, however, the results appear to be consistent with
the view that employees leave firms not at the peak of their growth rates, but instead
when growth rates have fallen, i.e., employees pursue entrepreneurial opportunities
outside their firms when the rents from staying at the firm are diminished.
The regression also includes the logarithm of age and the firm focus measure.
Spawning appears to decline as a firm ages; the coefficient is significant at the 10%
confidence level. The coefficient on the focus variable is positive, consistent with our

27

earlier cross-sectional findings, but the estimated effect is statistically insignificant. In
this analysis with firm fixed effects, we can only identify the effect of focus through
changes in this variable. To the extent that focus changes little over time, the empirical
test does not have much statistical power.
The remaining columns of the table examine slightly different specifications. The
second column looks at spawning in high-tech industries. We continue to observe a
negative relationship between spawning and sales growth. The third column includes two
alternative measures of sales growth: mean industry sales growth over the prior three
years and firm-specific deviations from mean sales growth. The results indicate that it is
the firm-specific component of sales growth that drives the relationship to spawning.
One might be concerned that what is driving the sales growth results is that firms
with large reductions in sales or those that go bankrupt are laying off workers, some of
whom find new jobs and some of whom start new companies. If this were true we would
expect to see all of the results coming from an increase in spawning when sales drop and
not from a decrease in spawning when sales rise. To examine this possibility, we replace
the continuous measure of sales growth with dummy variables for two regions of sales
growth: sales growth greater than the 75th percentile of sales growth and sales growth less
than the 25th percentile of sales growth. The inter-quartile range is excluded so the
estimated coefficients are measured relative to this region of sales growth. The results
indicate that moving out of the highest quartile of sales growth is associated with
significantly greater spawning and that moving from moderate sales growth to the lowest
quartile of sales growth is also associated with the more spawning.

Though the

magnitude of these coefficients is roughly the same, only the coefficient on the high sales

28

growth dummy is statistically significant. This result is inconsistent with the hypothesis
that spawning is generated by layoffs.

E. Relatedness of Start-up to Parent
This section examines the extent to which venture capital backed start-ups enter
businesses that are related to those of the firms from which they are spawned. We
undertake this analysis for two reasons. First, we want to see whether our key findings
are driven by unobserved differences in the technologies of the firms that spawn many
new ventures and those that spawn relatively few new ventures. For example, one of our
main findings above is that public firms based in Silicon Valley or Massachusetts are
more likely to spawn new firms, as are public firms that were themselves once venture
capital backed. This may simply be because firms in these regions and with prior venture
capital backing have technologies that are of more interest to venture capitalists. If,
however, we find that these high spawners tend to spawn firms with technologies that are
less related to their own technologies, it would cast some doubt on this explanation.
The second reason to study the relatedness of the start-up to its spawning parent is
that it can shed light on the causes of spawning. Recall that in the Xerox example, much
of the spawning emanated from the Palo Alto Research Center, a group that was distant
from corporate headquarters and was pursuing technologies outside Xerox’s core
business. In this view, spawning occurred because headquarters was out of touch with its
peripheral businesses.

This example would imply that Xerox-type firms—large,

diversified corporations headquartered outside the main regions of venture capital activity

29

and with no prior link to venture capital—should be more likely to spawn outside their
core line of business.
To investigate the relatedness of start-ups to their spawning parents, we first need
a measure of relatedness. One possibility is to use industry codes of the start-up and the
spawning parent. We reject this approach because the start-up industry codes from
VentureOne are not Standard Industrial Classification codes used in the public company
Compustat database. Thus, one would have to map one set of codes into the other, an
imprecise and coarse mapping. Instead, we measure the relatedness of the two firms
based on the patents of the parent company and the patents associated with the industry
of the start-up. This approach also has some shortcomings, not least of which is that
many of the start-ups in our sample are not in industries that have significant numbers of
firms with patents.
One challenge of this approach is defining what it means for patents to be related
to each other. Above, it will be recalled, we employed the technology classification
scheme developed by Hall, Jaffe, and Trajtenberg [2001], who divided the patent classes
in the U.S. Patent Classification scheme into 36 distinct categories. Each of these 36
classes encompasses several U.S. patent classes. This classification scheme, while useful
as a control, is probably too broad for the purpose of measuring relatedness.
To get around this difficulty, we base the analysis of relatedness on the
International Patent Classification (IPC) scheme. The IPC system has its origins in the
Council of Europe's 1954 "European Convention on the International Classification of
Patents for Invention." The classification has been managed by an international (rather than

30

a purely European) agency since 1969. Since that year, U.S. patents have been classified by
patent examiners according to both the U.S. and IPC schemes (WIPO [1981]).
The IPC has at least two advantages over the U.S. classification (upon which the
NBER categories are based). First, the IPC scheme is based on the usefulness of the patent
for an industry or profession rather than being based on the structure and function of the
patent. Thus, the IPC scheme reflects the economic importance of new inventions, as
opposed to the technical focus of the U.S. scheme. Second, the first four levels of the IPC
classifications are nested. This is in contrast with the U.S. system, where 435/40 is a subset
of 435/39, which is in turn a subclass of 435/34, but 435/41 is not a subclass of any of these
(USPTO [2003]). The non-nesting of the U.S. scheme would make it inadequate for our
relatedness measure.
Because the IPC classification data is not included in the NBER Patent Citations
Data File, we obtain this information from Thomson Delphion, a data vendor. For the
public companies in our sample, we simply match the patents in our data to the Delphion
database and extract the primary IPC classification. Getting the IPC classifications on the
start-ups in our sample was more complex because they are generally not included in the
NBER database.10 Thus, we identify their patents by searching for them on the USPTO
website (www.uspto.gov). We restrict attention to start-ups in 21 industries with significant
numbers of patents: e.g., we include wireless communications equipment and biotechnology
but do not include business application software and physician-practice management. There
are 1457 entrepreneurs leaving public companies to start firms in these industries, 28.2% of
the entrepreneurs (for which we have industry data) who leave public companies.

31

For each start-up in these industries, we record the patent numbers of the first five
patents they received (although they usually they have fewer than five patents). Then for
each of the VentureOne industries, we identify all 2-digit IPC patent classes that have at
least five percent of the patents in that industry. For example, in wireless communication
equipment there are four patent classes with at least 5% of the patents in the industry:
measuring and testing (13.8%), basic electric elements (16.0%), basic electronic circuitry
(7.5%), and electric communication technique (55.3%), collectively accounting for 92.6%
of the patents in this industry.11 We then normalize these patent-class percentages by the
cumulative percentage, e.g., dividing 13.8% by 92.6% (14.9%) to get the share of the
measuring and testing patent class in all patent classes with a greater share than 5%.
To measure the relatedness of the spawning company to the start-up, we calculate
the share of the spawner’s patents that are in the main patent classes of the start-up’s
industry. Because some of the patent classes in the start-up industry are more common than
others—e.g., in wireless communication equipment, electric communication technique
patents are more common than basic electronic circuitry—we weight the patent classes in
this calculation by their industry share described in the preceding paragraph. For example,
suppose the spawning company has 20 patents in all, 5 in electric communication technique
(with a 59.7% share) and two in measuring and testing (with a 14.9% share), and the rest in
other patent classes. Then our measure of relatedness would be (59.7% x 5 + 14.9% x 2)/20
= 16.4%. The mean relatedness measure in our sample is 27.0% and the median is 22.6%.
The assignment of CUSIPs in the NBER Patent Citations Data File was done as of
1989. Firms that went public after 1989 do not have an assigned CUSIP in the file.
10

11

In the 21 industries, the cumulative percentage of patents with at least a 5% industry share
is typically between 80% and 100%.

32

We are now ready to examine the factors that affect the relatedness of the start-up to
the spawning parent. As discussed above, it may be that the high spawners tend to spawn
more simply because they have technologies that are more appropriate for venture capital.
In this case, we would expect to see more related spawning from companies in Silicon
Valley and Massachusetts and those that were also once venture capital backed. The
regressions in Table IX examine this possibility and others.
The dependent variable in the regression is the relatedness measure discussed above,
while the independent variables are similar to those in the earlier regressions. (We omit for
obvious reasons the patent-based measures.) We present two sets of regressions, both with
and without industry fixed effects. The industry dummies will control for cross-industry
differences in our relatedness measure.12
The results indicate that companies located in Silicon Valley and Massachusetts tend
to spawn less related ventures than companies outside these areas.

This pattern is

inconsistent with the view that the spawning patterns follow mechanically from the greater
propensity of firms based in entrepreneurial regions to spawn more because they have
technologies that are more relevant for venture capital investment. We similarly find a
negative relationship between relatedness and prior venture capital backing of the spawning
company; the coefficient is statistically significant in the first regression but insignificant in
the other. This is also inconsistent with the view that the higher spawning level of venture
capital backed firms is driven by differences in technology. The view is also inconsistent
Some industries have more patent classes represented than others. As a result, in these
industries the relatedness measure will tend to be lower than in industries with fewer
patent classes represented. Industry dummies for the spawned start-up control for the
cross-correlation that might follow if the industries with relatively more patent classes
also tend to be the ones that are, say, located in Silicon Valley.
12

33

with the Xerox-type spawning as that would imply that firms located outside the
entrepreneurial regions would tend to spawn more outside their core business. Instead, they
seem more likely to spawn related ventures.
The other findings are probably more mechanical in nature. Not surprisingly, larger
firms and less focused firms tend to do more unrelated spawning (although the latter result
appears only in the second regression). High Q firms and those with high lagged sales
growth are also more likely to spawn related ventures. This is probably because the supply
of good ideas in the core business is greater than in firms with low Q and low sales growth.
What do these results tell us about the spawning process? At this point, it is
difficult to draw definitive conclusions, but we can offer two hypotheses that are
consistent with the data. One hypothesis is that firms located in Silicon Valley and
Massachusetts are more committed to remaining focused on their core lines of business
and exploiting opportunities in their core. This pattern may stem from the fact that
remaining focused is a key business value that venture capitalists try to instill in
entrepreneurs and one that may have been critical in their success.13 Thus, these high
spawning entrepreneurial firms in the main regions of venture capital activity may be
more prone than other firms to reject new business opportunities outside their core lines.
A second hypothesis is that these firms are better than others in identifying business
opportunities in their core areas of specialization. In this case, venture capitalists would
be less willing to fund new ventures from these companies because of adverse selection
concerns. Thus, the new ventures that emerge from these firms are more likely to be
outside the core business. At this point, these hypotheses remain purely speculative. We
13

For evidence that supports this claim, see the discussions in Gupta [2000].

34

can, however, conclude that the data are inconsistent with the view that the results are
driven by systematic differences in the technologies of the high and low spawners.

III.

Conclusions and Suggestions for Future Research
This paper examines the determinants of entrepreneurial spawning, i.e., the

propensity of publicly traded corporations to spawn new venture capital backed firms.
While entrepreneurial activity has received a tremendous amount of attention from
academic researchers and the popular press, the source of new entrepreneurial firms has
received relatively little systematic attention. We show that existing public companies
are an important source of entrepreneurs for venture capital backed start-ups, particularly
public corporations with patents in areas of interest to venture capital. Younger firms,
that were backed by venture capitalists themselves and that are located in the main hubs
of venture capital activity (Silicon Valley and Massachusetts) are more likely to spawn
new firms. Moreover, firms focused in one main line of business are more likely to be
the source of entrepreneurial ventures.

Firms outside of Silicon Valley and

Massachusetts not originally backed by venture capitalists are more likely to spawn
businesses related to their core areas of specialization.
These findings appear to be inconsistent with the view that entrepreneurs start
new firms in response to their frustration with large, bureaucratic companies. Instead,
they suggest that the breeding grounds for entrepreneurial firms are other entrepreneurial
firms. It is in these environments that employees learn from their co-workers about what
it takes to start a new firm and are exposed to a network of suppliers and customers who
are used to dealing with start-up companies. These spawning entrepreneurial firms may

35

also implicitly select for less risk averse individuals who are willing to bear the greater
risks of starting a new firm.
Our findings have several implications.

In particular, they suggest that

entrepreneurial activity in a given region has increasing returns (Saxenian [1994]).
Stimulating entrepreneurship in a region with few existing entrepreneurial firms is
difficult; there may be many individuals with the technological know-how to start a new
venture capital backed firm, but many fewer who know how to start new companies. In
addition, the network of suppliers and customers may not be strong enough to support a
new venture.14 Policies that have sought to foster entrepreneurial and venture capitalactivity by providing capital or investment incentives may not be enough. Instead,
regions may need to attract firms with existing pools of workers who have the “training
and conditioning” to become entrepreneurs.
At the same time, the results suggest that the ultimate success (in terms of scale)
of individual venture capital backed firms may be bounded. The analysis shows that
when growth slows, employees are likely to leave their firms to start new ones. Thus,
there may be limits to how big a venture capital backed firm can get while maintaining
their most entrepreneurial employees.
There are a number of related research questions we plan to pursue. We list three
of them here. First, we hope to supplement this analysis with a survey of spawned
entrepreneurs. What reasons do they give for leaving their firm and starting a new one?
How do the responses vary depending on the type of company from which the
Lerner [1999] discusses the powerful political pressures that can lead to the scattering of
venture capital funding across regions, as well as presenting evidence consistent with this
view from one government program to finance small high-technology businesses.
14

36

entrepreneur was spawned? Second, how does spawning affect the parent? In particular,
does it have a negative effect on growth and performance of the spawning firm as its
most creative employees leave to start new ventures? Finally, how do the characteristics
of the spawning firms affect the success of the new ventures?

For example, are

entrepreneurs from more successful spawning firms more or less likely to be successful
themselves? And, how do the characteristics of the spawning firm’s patents affect the
likelihood of success of the new venture?

37

References
Berger Allen N., Nathan H. Miller, Mitchell A. Petersen, Raghuram G. Rajan, and
Jeremy C. Stein (2002). Does Function Follow Organizational Form? Evidence From
the Lending Practices of Large and Small Banks. Working Paper no. 8752, National
Bureau of Economic Research.
Berger, Philip G., and Eli Ofek (1995). Diversification's Effect on Firm Value. Journal
of Financial Economics 37: 39-65.
Braun, Ernest, and Stuart Macdonald (1982). Revolution in Miniature: The History and
Impact of Semiconductor Electronics Re-Explored in an Updated and Revised
Second Edition New York: Cambridge University Press.
Burton, M. Diane, Jesper Sørensen, and Christine Beckman (2002). Coming from Good
Stock: Career Histories and New Venture Formation. Research in the Sociology of
Organizations Forthcoming
Chesbrough, Henry (2002). Graceful Exits and Foregone Opportunities: Xerox’s
Management of its Technology Spin-off Organizations. Business History Review 76:
forthcoming.
Christensen, Clayton M. (1997). The Innovator’s Dilemma: When New Technologies
Cause Great Firms to Fail Boston: Harvard Business School Press.
Gompers, Paul A. (1997). An Examination of Convertible Securities in Venture Capital
Investments. Unpublished Working Paper, Harvard University.
Gompers, Paul A., and Josh Lerner (1999). The Venture Capital Cycle Cambridge: MIT
Press.
Gromb, Denis, and David S. Scharfstein (2002). Entrepreneurship in Equilibrium.
Working Paper no. 9001, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Gupta, Udayan (2000). Done Deals: Venture Capitalists Tell Their Stories Boston:
Harvard Business School Press.
Hall, Bronwyn H., Adam B. Jaffe, and Manuel Trajtenberg (2001). The NBER Patent
Citations Data File: Lessons, Insights and Methodological Tools. Working Paper no.
8498, National Bureau of Economic Research.
Hellmann, Thomas (2002). When Do Employees Become Entrepreneurs? Working
Paper no. 1770, Graduate School of Business, Stanford University.

38

Hellmann, Thomas, and Manju Puri (2000). The Interaction between Product Market and
Financing Strategy: The Role of Venture Capital. Review of Financial Studies 13: 959984.
Henderson, Rebecca (1993). Underinvestment and Incompetence as Responses to
Radical Innovation: Evidence from the Photolithographic Alignment Equipment Industry.
Rand Journal of Economics 24: 248-270.
Holmes, Thomas J., and James A. Schmitz, Jr. (1990). A Theory of Entrepreneurship
and Its Application to the Study of Business Transfers. Journal of Political Economy 98:
265-294.
Hunt, Brian, and Josh Lerner (1995). Xerox Technology Ventures: March 1995.
Harvard Business School Case 9-295-127 (and teaching note # 5-298-152).
Jaffe, Adam B., and Manuel Trajtenberg (2002). Patents, Citations and Innovations: A
Window on the Knowledge Economy Cambridge: MIT Press.
Jovanovic, Boyan (1979). Job Marching and the Theory of Turnover.
Political Economy 87: 972-990.

Journal of

Kaplan, Steven N., and Luigi Zingales (1997). Do Investment-Cash Flow Sensitivities
Provide Useful Measures of Financing Constraints? Quarterly Journal of Economics
112: 169-215.
Kaplan, Steven N., and Per Strömberg (2002). Financial Contracting Meets the Real
World: An Empirical Analysis of Venture Capital Contracts. Review of Economic
Studies Forthcoming.
Kortum, Samuel, and Josh Lerner (2000). Assessing the Impact of Venture Capital on
Innovation. Rand Journal of Economics 31: 674-692.
Lerner, Josh (1999). The Government as Venture Capitalist: The Long-Run Effects of the
SBIR Program. Journal of Business 72: 285-318.
Mitchell, Mark L., and Kenneth Lehn (1990). Do Bad Bidders Become Good Targets?
Journal of Political Economy 98: 372-398.
Saxenian, AnnaLee (1994). Regional Advantage: Culture and Competition in Silicon
Valley and Route 128 Cambridge: Harvard University Press.
Scharfstein, David S. (1998). The Dark Side of Internal Capital Markets II: Evidence
from Diversified Conglomerates. Working Paper no. 6352, National Bureau of Economic
Research.

39

Scharfstein, David S., and Jeremy C. Stein (2000). The Dark Side of Internal Capital
Markets: Divisional Rent-Seeking and Inefficient Investment. Journal of Finance 55:
2537-2564.
Schoar, Antoinette (2002). Effects of Corporate Diversification on Productivity. Journal
of Finance 57: 2379-2403.
Stein, Jeremy C. (2002). Information Production and Capital Allocation: Decentralized
versus Hierarchical Firms. Journal of Finance 57: 1891-1921.
U.S. Department of Commerce, Patent and Trademark Office [USPTO] (2003). Manual of
Classification Washington: USPTO.
World Intellectual Property Organization [WIPO] (1981). General Information on the
Third Edition of the International Patent Classification Geneva: WIPO.

40

Table I
Summary of Entrepreneurs
The sample is based on Venture One’s database of 15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital backed startups who received venture capital financings from 1986 to 1999. The previous employment history of the
founders is tabulated. Public companies are those identified from Compustat. The fourth column lists the
number of founders who are the CEO, President, or Chief Technology Officer of the start-up. The fifth
column lists the number of founders whose most recent employer was a public company.

Year
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999

Number of
Fraction from Public
Number of
Entrepreneurs Fraction Cos. When We Have
Number of Number of Technology CEO/Pres/ from Public from Public Previous Company
Entrepreneurs Start-ups Start-ups
CTO
Companies
Cos.
Identified
144
483
221
268
145
30.0%
45.9%
171
628
260
325
196
31.2%
43.6%
172
694
267
359
229
33.0%
44.2%
176
721
292
392
246
34.1%
43.6%
214
843
333
463
295
35.0%
44.3%
222
840
345
484
307
36.5%
45.1%
237
1065
408
567
342
32.1%
41.4%
221
1016
384
606
380
37.4%
46.3%
253
1172
446
747
368
31.4%
41.3%
257
1290
527
906
417
32.3%
41.4%
372
1623
680
1236
599
36.9%
44.6%
361
1448
669
1109
535
36.9%
42.6%
365
1747
809
1376
692
39.6%
45.0%
232
1717
804
1396
717
41.8%
46.5%

41

Table II
Summary of Information on Previous Employer of Founders
The sample is derived from public companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999. A spawned
entrepreneur is an employee who leaves a public company to start a venture capital backed firm. Data on
founders come from the VentureOne database of 15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital backed start-ups
during the period 1986-1999. Panel A lists all public companies that spawn at least ten entrepreneurial
teams during the sample period, 1986-1999, and the number of entrepreneurial teams they spawn during the
sample period. (Multiple individuals departing to a single firm are regarded as a single entrepreneurial
team.) Panel B lists all industries in which public companies spawn at least 20 entrepreneurs in total and the
number of entrepreneurs they spawn.
Panel A: Top Public Spawning Companies

Company
IBM
AT&T
Sun Microsystems
Apple Computer
Hewlett-Packard
Oracle
General Electric
Microsoft
Xerox
Baxter
Intel
Disney
Silicon Graphics
Lotus Development Corp.
Motorola
DEC
Cadence Design Systems
Johnson & Johnson
Verizon
Novell

Number of Spawned
Entrepreneurial Teams
70
60
55
48
46
41
37
30
29
29
28
28
27
26
25
24
21
21
19
18

Company
Nortel Networks
Unisys
National Semiconductor
Advanced Micro Devices
Mentor Graphics
Cirrus Logic
Genentech
Bristol Myers Squibb
Raychem
Dun & Bradstreet
SmithKline Beecham
MCI
Pfizer
Texas Instruments
Legent
Tandem Computer
Bank of America
Peoplesoft
Morgan Stanley
Adaptec

42

Number of Spawned
Entrepreneurial Teams
17
17
17
16
15
14
14
14
14
14
13
13
13
13
12
12
11
11
11
11

Table II (Continued)
Panel B: Top Three Digit Industries for Spawners
Number of Spawned
Entrepreneurial Teams

Industry
Computer Programming and Data Processing
Computer and Office Equipment
Drugs
Communication Equipment
Surgical, Medical, and Dental Instruments
Electronic Components and Accessories
Telephone Communications
Laboratory, Analytical, and Optical Equipment
Security Brokers, Dealers, And Flotation
Radio And Television Broadcasting Stations
Commercial Banks
Non-Store Retailers
Special Industry Machinery, Except Metalworking

1009
588
348
212
204
185
178
83
61
52
50
30
24

43

Table III
Characteristics of Public Spawners vs. Non-spawners
The sample is derived from public companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999. Spawners
are identified as those public companies in which at least one employee left to start a venture capital backed
firm. Data on founders come from the VentureOne database of 15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital
backed start-ups during the period 1986-1999. The table compares the characteristics of public companies
that spawn at least one entrepreneur during the sample period 1986-1999 (the first three columns) to the
characteristics of public companies that never spawn during the sample period (the second three columns).
All dollar figures are in millions of 1999 dollars. Patent category 2 refers to computer and communication
patents as classified in the NBER Patent Citations Data File and category 3 refers to medical and drug
patents. The differences in the means are all statistically significant based on heteroskedasticity-consistent
t-statistics that adjust for non-independence of observations of the same firm over time.

Sales ($MMs)
Assets ($MMs)
Employees (000s)
Winsorized Sales Growth*
Winsorized Tobin’s Q*
EBITDA/Assets
Venture Capital-Backed
Silicon Valley
Massachusetts
Number of Spawned
Entrepreneurs
Any patents
Number of Patents in
Category 2
Number of Patents in
Category 3
Patent Quality
Patent Originality
*

Median
$185.2
$191.7
23.1
19.3%
2.18
0.111

2

Spawners
Mean
Observations
$3,428.6
515
$4,949.1
515
44.2
515
52.6%
515
2.75
515
515
0.058
515
35.5%
515
19.8%
515
9.9%
4.07
28.4%

515
515

4

137.5

515

0
0.618
0.019

51.2
1.336
0.019

515
515
515

Median
$116.1
$100.5
0.8
11.2%
1.71
0.107

Non-spawners
Mean
Observations
$1,343.3
855
855
$1,732.6
855
8.0
855
37.6%
855
2.54
855
0.054
855
12.2%
855
5.9%
855
5.9%

28.4%

855

2

15.9

855

0
-0.922
0.062

10.8
-0.606
0.059

855
855
855

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as being at this level.

44

Table IV
Regression Analyses of Spawning Levels
The table presents regression results for the cumulative number of spawned entrepreneurs for each firm in our sample. The sample is
derived from public companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999 with patents in either Computer and Communications
or Drugs and Medical based on the NBER Patent Citations Data File classification scheme. The dependent variable in the regressions
is the natural logarithm of the cumulative number of venture capital backed entrepreneurs spawned over the whole sample period.
The information on entrepreneurs comes from a sample of 15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital backed start-ups in the
VentureOne database of venture capital financing who received venture capital financing between 1986 and 1999. Independent
variables include the natural logarithm of inflation-adjusted firm size, the firm’s sales growth over the previous three years winsorized
at the 99th percentile, Tobin’s Q for the firm winsorized at the 99th percentile, the natural logarithm of patents in six patent categories,
dummy variables indicating whether the firm was backed by venture capitalists, dummy variables indicating if the firm was located in
Silicon Valley or Massachusetts, measures for the firm’s patent originality, the natural logarithm of firm age, and a dummy variable
that equals one if the firm reports only one industry segment in Compustat. All regressions include year dummies for every year that
the firm is in the sample, though the coefficients are not shown; some include industry fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent tstatistics in parentheses adjust for non-independence of observations of the same firm over time.
Dependent Variable: Log of Number of Entrepreneurs Spawned
Technology
Technology
Spawning
Spawning
Total Spawning
Total Spawning
Independent Variables
Log of Chemical Patents
Log of Computer and Communications
Patents
Log of Drugs and Medical Patents
Log of Electrical and Electronic Patents
Log of Mechanical Patents
Log of Other Patents
Log of Real Assets
Mean EBITDA/Assets
Mean Winsorized Sales Growth Over
Previous Year*
Mean Winsorized Tobin's Q*
Venture Capital-Backed
Silicon Valley-Based
Massachusetts-Based
Focused Firm
Log of Firm Age
Patent Quality
Patent Originality
Constant
Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Industry Fixed Effects
*

(1)
-0.0191
[-1.18]
0.2203
[6.75]
0.1443
[8.99]
-0.0259
[-0.82]
-0.0376
[-2.45]
-0.0614
[-4.19]
0.1250
[7.77]
-0.1380
[-1.42]

(2)
-0.0146
[-1.08]
0.1958
[6.34]
0.1449
[9.99]
0.0012
[0.05]
-0.0457
[-2.81]
-0.0616
[-5.23]
0.0897
[7.40]
-0.0891
[-1.23]

(3)
-0.0093
[-0.51]
0.1864
[8.60]
0.1384
[6.74]
0.0008
[0.04]
-0.0673
[-3.12]
-0.0556
[-2.50]
0.1504
[9.11]
-0.3679
[-2.89]

(4)
-0.0067
[-0.39]
0.1707
[8.35]
0.1431
[7.27]
0.0221
[1.17]
-0.0752
[-3.66]
-0.0579
[-2.81]
0.1143
[7.26]
-0.2788
[-2.27]

0.0122
[0.88]
0.0219
[3.70]
0.2335
[6.11]
0.3772
[6.93]
0.2355
[3.62]
0.1952
[2.69]
-0.0575
[-2.36]
0.0061
[4.74]
-0.0841
[-1.05]
-0.8499
[-6.21]
1,370

0.0062
[0.42]
0.0157
[3.70]
0.2135
[9.61]
0.3875
[7.08]
0.2066
[2.96]
0.1484
[2.64]
-0.0603
[-2.60]
0.0066
[4.23]
0.0257
[0.49]
-0.7153
[-6.25]
1,370

0.0131
[0.73]
0.0149
[1.45]
0.1895
[3.89]
0.3461
[5.17]
0.2013
[3.26]
0.1893
[3.42]
-0.0488
[-1.96]
0.0043
[1.73]
-0.1473
[-1.81]
-0.9714
[-9.48]
1,370

0.0082
[0.42]
0.0115
[1.18]
0.1728
[3.56]
0.3606
[5.43]
0.1793
[2.91]
0.1438
[2.76]
-0.0552
[-2.38]
0.0049
[2.08]
-0.0279
[-0.37]
-0.8285
[-8.35]
1,370

0.418

0.403

0.433

0.400

No

No

Yes

Yes

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as equal to the 99th percentile.

Table V
Regression Analyses of Likelihood of Doing Any Spawning
The table presents regressions of the probability of a sample firm having any spawning activity. The sample is derived from public
companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999 with patents in either Computer and Communications or Drugs and
Medical based on the NBER Patent Citations Data File classification scheme. The dependent variable in the regressions is a dummy
variable that equals one if the firm ever spawns at least one venture capital backed entrepreneurs. The information on entrepreneurs
comes from a sample of 15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital backed start-ups in the VentureOne database of venture capital
financing who received venture capital financing between 1986 and 1999. Independent variables include the natural logarithm of
inflation-adjusted firm size, the firm’s sales growth over the previous three years winsorized at the 99th percentile, Tobin’s Q for the
firm winsorized at the 99th percentile, the natural logarithm of patents in six patent categories, dummy variables indicating whether the
firm was backed by venture capitalists, dummy variables indicating if the firm was located in Silicon Valley or Massachusetts,
measures for the firm’s patent originality, the natural logarithm of firm age, and a dummy variable that equals one if the firm reports
only one industry segment in Compustat. All regressions include year dummies for each year that the firm is in our sample, though
the coefficients are not shown; some include industry fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses adjust for
non-independence of observations of the same firm over time.
Dependent Variable: Dummy Variable Indicating Any Spawning
Technology
Technology
Spawning
Spawning
Total Spawning
Total Spawning
Independent Variables
Log of Chemical Patents
Log of Computer and Communications
Patents
Log of Drugs and Medical Patents
Log of Electrical and Electronic Patents
Log of Mechanical Patents
Log of Other Patents
Log of Real Assets
Mean EBITDA/Assets
Mean Winsorized Sales Growth Over
Previous Year*
Mean Winsorized Tobin's Q*
Venture Capital-Backed
Silicon Valley-Based
Massachusetts-Based
Focused Firm
Log of Firm Age
Patent Quality
Patent Originality
Constant
Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Industry Fixed Effects
*

(1)
-0.0035
[-0.35]
0.0921
[7.14]
0.0755
[7.66]
-0.0015
[-0.09]
-0.0276
[-1.95]
-0.0446
[-2.85]
0.0654
[8.40]
-0.1451
[-2.56]

(2)
-0.0062
[-0.99]
0.0902
[7.26]
0.0842
[11.71]
0.0107
[0.79]
-0.0367
[-3.31]
-0.0478
[-4.50]
0.0544
[7.32]
-0.1290
[-2.25]

(3)
0.0059
[0.44]
0.0746
[5.71]
0.0669
[5.32]
0.0105
[0.73]
-0.0496
[-3.03]
-0.0438
[-2.75]
0.0830
[8.72]
-0.2911
[-2.99]

(4)
0.0009
[0.08]
0.0729
[6.11]
0.0811
[6.97]
0.0211
[1.56]
-0.0592
[-4.11]
-0.0449
[-3.11]
0.0707
[7.82]
-0.2570
[-2.78]

0.0263
[1.59]
0.0024
[0.49]
0.2024
[8.56]
0.1644
[4.39]
0.1363
[3.43]
0.0838
[2.22]
-0.0271
[-1.23]
0.0032
[3.30]
-0.0816
[-1.19]
-0.2417
[-3.34]
1,370

0.0094
[0.58]
0.0010
[0.34]
0.1865
[9.54]
0.1947
[4.93]
0.1405
[3.56]
0.0592
[2.13]
-0.0389
[-1.97]
0.0039
[3.11]
0.0047
[0.11]
-0.2460
[-4.95]
1,370

0.0259
[1.61]
-0.0002
[-0.03]
0.1780
[4.89]
0.1431
[3.34]
0.1146
[2.53]
0.0756
[1.92]
-0.0205
[-1.19]
0.0021
[1.10]
-0.1202
[-1.75]
-0.3253
[-4.69]
1,370

0.0098
[0.61]
-0.0002
[-0.03]
0.1688
[4.71]
0.1766
[4.10]
0.1247
[2.79]
0.0571
[1.58]
-0.0327
[-2.05]
0.0029
[1.57]
-0.0255
[-0.40]
-0.3321
[-5.00]
1,370

0.275

0.300

0.277

0.292

No

No

Yes

Yes

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as equal to the 99th percentile.

Table VI
Regression Analyses of Cumulative Spawning Levels Conditional on Any Spawning
The table presents regressions of the cumulative spawning rates for firms, conditional on the firms doing any spawning during our
sample period. The sample is derived from public companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999 with patents in either
Computer and Communications or Drugs and Medical based on the NBER Patent Citations Data File classification scheme. The
dependent variable in the regressions is the natural logarithm of the cumulative number of venture capital backed entrepreneurs
spawned over the entire sample period from these public companies. The information on entrepreneurs comes from a sample of
15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital backed start-ups in the VentureOne database of venture capital financing who received
venture capital financing between 1986 and 1999. Independent variables include the natural logarithm of inflation-adjusted firm size,
the firm’s sales growth over the previous three years winsorized at the 99th percentile, Tobin’s Q for the firm winsorized at the 99th
percentile, the natural logarithm of patents in six patent categories, dummy variables indicating whether the firm was backed by
venture capitalists, dummy variables indicating if the firm was located in Silicon Valley or Massachusetts, measures for the firm’s
patent originality, the natural logarithm of firm age, and a dummy variable that equals one if the firm reports only one industry
segment in Compustat. All regressions include year dummies for each year that the firm is in our sample, though the coefficients are
not shown; some include industry fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses adjust for non-independence of
observations of the same firm over time.
Dependent Variable: Conditional Spawning Level
Technology
Technology
Total Spawning
Spawning
Total Spawning
Spawning
Independent Variables
Log of Chemical Patents
Log of Computer and Communications
Patents
Log of Drugs and Medical Patents
Log of Electrical and Electronic Patents
Log of Mechanical Patents
Log of Other Patents
Log of Real Assets
Mean EBITDA/Assets
Mean Winsorized Sales Growth Over
Previous Year*
Mean Winsorized Tobin's Q*
Venture Capital-Backed
Silicon Valley-Based
Massachusetts-Based
Focused Firm
Log of Firm Age
Patent Quality
Patent Originality
Constant
Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Industry Fixed Effects
*

(1)
-0.0135
[-0.77]
0.1963
[4.60]
0.1047
[9.14]
-0.0439
[-1.03]
-0.0306
[-0.59]
-0.0263
[-0.51]
0.1433
[7.82]
-0.1071
[-0.76]

(2)
-0.0014
[-0.06]
0.2056
[4.62]
0.1111
[8.10]
-0.0346
[-0.80]
-0.0326
[-0.77]
-0.0236
[-0.40]
0.0844
[3.18]
0.0090
[0.06]

(3)
-0.0016
[-0.05]
0.1333
[4.24]
0.1064
[3.55]
-0.0169
[-0.60]
-0.0595
[-1.67]
0.0120
[0.29]
0.1870
[6.36]
-0.5791
[-2.86]

(4)
0.0182
[0.52]
0.1447
[3.89]
0.1015
[2.96]
-0.0206
[-0.64]
-0.0535
[-1.20]
0.0235
[0.46]
0.1321
[4.04]
-0.4348
[-1.86]

-0.0141
[-0.91]
0.0390
[5.31]
0.0261
[0.56]
0.3091
[4.81]
0.1773
[1.58]
0.1987
[1.98]
-0.0933
[-1.31]
0.0081
[2.11]
-0.0352
[-0.30]
-0.2614
[-1.36]
515

0.0171
[0.74]
0.0351
[4.14]
0.0267
[0.54]
0.2790
[3.81]
0.1356
[1.10]
0.1124
[1.27]
-0.0837
[-1.74]
0.0103
[1.74]
0.0462
[0.46]
-0.1001
[-0.51]
428

-0.0086
[-0.43]
0.0418
[2.50]
0.0229
[0.37]
0.2774
[3.94]
0.1565
[1.88]
0.1469
[1.58]
-0.0980
[-1.78]
0.0070
[1.73]
-0.1135
[-0.79]
-0.5022
[-3.29]
515

0.0279
[1.00]
0.0305
[1.70]
0.0068
[0.10]
0.2528
[3.52]
0.0972
[1.00]
0.0844
[0.83]
-0.1059
[-1.76]
0.0089
[2.16]
-0.0387
[-0.24]
-0.3132
[-1.84]
428

0.440

0.406

0.443

0.401

No

No

Yes

Yes

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as equal to the 99th percentile.

Table VII
Cross Sectional Regression Analyses of Annual Spawning Levels
The regression are pooled cross-sectional regressions or the between estimators from fixed effects regressions of annual spawning
levels for publicly traded firms. The sample is derived from public companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999 with
patents in either Computer and Communications or Drugs and Medical based on the NBER Patent Citations Data File classification
scheme. The dependent variable in the regressions is the natural logarithm of the number of venture capital backed entrepreneurs
spawned in a given year from these public companies. The information on entrepreneurs comes from a sample of 15,297 founders of
5,112 venture capital backed start-ups in the VentureOne database of venture capital financing who received venture capital financing
between 1986 and 1999. Independent variables include the natural logarithm of inflation-adjusted firm size, the firm’s sales growth
over the previous three years winsorized at the 99th percentile, Tobin’s Q for the firm winsorized at the 99th percentile, the natural
logarithm of patents in six patent categories, dummy variables indicating whether the firm was backed by venture capitalists, dummy
variables indicating if the firm was located in Silicon Valley or Massachusetts, measures for the firm’s patent originality, the natural
logarithm of firm age, and a dummy variable that equals one if the firm reports only one industry segment in Compustat. All
regressions include year dummies, though the coefficients are not shown; some include industry fixed effects. All regressions include
year dummies, though the coefficients are not shown; some include industry or firm fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent tstatistics in parentheses adjust for non-independence of observations of the same firm over time.

Total Spawning
Independent Variables
Log of Chemical Patents
Log of Computer and
Communications Patents
Log of Drugs and Medical Patents
Log of Electrical and Electronic
Patents
Log of Mechanical Patents
Log of Other Patents
Log of Real Assets
Mean Winsorized Sales Growth
Over Previous Three Year*
Mean EBITDA/Assets
Mean Winsorized Tobin's Q*
Log of Firm Age
Venture Capital-Backed
Silicon Valley-Based
Massachusetts-Based
Focused Firm
Patent Quality
Patent Originality
Constant
Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Industry Fixed Effects
*

Dependent Variable: Annual Spawning Level
Between Estimates from Firm Fixed
Technology
Effects Regressions of Annual
Total Spawning
Total Spawning Levels
Spawning

(1)
-0.0045
[-0.61]
0.1047
[7.34]
0.0366
[3.45]
-0.0161
[-1.94]
-0.0119
[-1.53]
-0.0232
[-3.14]
0.0281
[7.73]
-0.0004
[-0.19]

(2)
-0.0029
[-0.37]
0.0935
[7.03]
0.0354
[3.15]
-0.0069
[-0.86]
-0.0191
[-2.17]
-0.0198
[-2.52]
0.0325
[6.68]
-0.0012
[-0.54]

(3)
-0.0005
[-0.08]
0.0756
[6.90]
0.0345
[3.39]
0.0025
[0.36]
-0.0158
[-2.06]
-0.0226
[-3.24]
0.0244
[6.20]
-0.0005
[-0.24]

(4)
-0.0022
[-0.22]
0.1429
[13.79]
0.0331
[3.68]
-0.0540
[-4.69]
-0.0054
[-0.43]
-0.0248
[-1.83]
0.0277
[8.04]
0.0039
[1.27]

0.0183
[0.65]
0.0089
[2.63]
-0.0112
[-2.10]
0.0370
[2.41]
0.1289
[4.78]
0.0245
[1.80]
0.0308
[3.12]
0.0012
[2.04]
-0.0163
[-0.87]
-0.1392
[-4.87]
10,914

-0.0343
[-1.09]
0.0071
[2.19]
-0.0074
[-1.34]
0.0193
[1.27]
0.1274
[4.74]
0.0182
[1.35]
0.0315
[3.13]
0.0007
[1.11]
-0.0252
[-1.25]
-0.1665
[-5.68]
10,875

-0.0191
[-0.73]
0.0037
[1.38]
-0.0053
[-1.05]
0.0187
[1.35]
0.1217
[5.01]
0.0106
[0.87]
0.0295
[3.22]
0.0008
[1.56]
-0.0084
[-0.48]
-0.1239
[-5.08]
10,875

-0.0366
[-0.95]
0.0073
[2.08]
-0.0090
[-1.07]
0.0134
[0.95]
0.1028
[6.22]
0.0225
[1.23]
0.0386
[2.38]
0.0006
[0.70]
-0.0207
[-0.67]
-0.1738
[-1.45]

0.227

0.249

0.217

10,914
0.342

No

Yes

Yes

NA

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as equal to the 99th percentile.

Table VIII
Firm Fixed-Effects Regression Analyses of Annual Spawning Levels
The table presents the firm fixed-effects regressions for the sample of publicly traded spawning firms. The sample is derived from
public companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999 with patents in either Computer and Communications or Drugs and
Medical based on the NBER Patent Citations Data File classification scheme. The dependent variable in the regressions is the natural
logarithm of the number of venture capital backed entrepreneurs spawned in a given year from these public companies. The
information on entrepreneurs comes from a sample of 15,297 founders of 5,112 venture capital backed start-ups in the VentureOne
database of venture capital financing who received venture capital financing between 1986 and 1999. Independent variables include
the natural logarithm of inflation-adjusted firm size, the firm’s sales growth over the previous three years winsorized at the 99th
percentile, the firm’s industry sales growth over the previous three years winsorized at the 99th percentile and deviations from that
industry sales growth over the previous three years winsorized at the 99th percentile, Tobin’s Q for the firm Winsorized at the 99th
percentile, the natural logarithm of patents in six patent categories, the natural logarithm of firm age, and a dummy variable that equals
one if the firm reports only one industry segment in Compustat. All regressions include year dummies, though the coefficients are not
shown; some include industry or firm fixed effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses adjust for nonindependence of observations of the same firm over time.
Dependent Variable: Annual Spawning Level
Technology
Spawning
Total Spawning
Total Spawning Total Spawning
Independent Variables
Log of Chemical Patents
Log of Computer and Communications
Patents
Log of Drugs and Medical Patents
Log of Electrical and Electronic Patents
Log of Mechanical Patents
Log of Other Patents
Log of Real Assets
Winsorized Sales Growth Over Previous
Three Year*
Winsorized Deviation from Industry Sales
Growth Over Previous Three Year*

(1)
-0.0018
[-0.25]
0.0506
[6.94]
0.0092
[1.35]
0.0002
[0.04]
-0.0076
[-1.20]
-0.0001
[-0.01]
0.0375
[6.29]
-0.0059
[-3.04]

(2)
0.0090
[1.43]
0.0319
[4.96]
0.0062
[0.95]
0.0055
[0.97]
-0.0068
[-1.28]
-0.0036
[-0.65]
0.0291
[5.56]
-0.0037
[-2.08]

(3)
-0.0018
[-0.25]
0.0504
[6.94]
0.0093
[1.36]
0.0002
[0.04]
-0.0074
[-1.18]
0.0000
[0.00]
0.0373
[6.27]

(4)
-0.0020
[-0.28]
0.0501
[6.85]
0.0092
[1.35]
-0.0001
[-0.02]
-0.0077
[-1.21]
-0.0001
[-0.02]
0.0392
[6.47]

-0.0060
[-3.08]

Winsorized Industry Sales Growth Over
Previous Three Year*

0.0048
[0.37]

Sales Growth of Firm in the Highest
Quartile of Sales Growth

-0.0121
[-2.09]

Sales Growth of Firm in the Lowest
Quartile of Sales Growth

0.0101
[1.49]

Mean EBITDA/Assets
Mean Winsorized Tobin's Q*
Log of Firm Age
Focused Firm
Constant
Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
*

-0.0173
[-0.74]
0.0006
[0.22]
-0.0246
[-1.83]
0.0023
[0.27]
-0.0768
[-1.35]
10,929

-0.0125
[-0.57]
-0.0015
[-0.64]
-0.0004
[-0.03]
0.0091
[1.25]
-0.1478
[-2.92]
10,929

-0.0185
[-0.78]
0.0005
[0.22]
-0.0245
[-1.82]
0.0023
[0.27]
-0.0789
[-1.39]
10,929

-0.0099
[-0.41]
0.0007
[0.00]
-0.0247
[-1.82]
0.0023
[0.27]
-0.0912
[-1.59]
10,929

0.476

0.438

0.476

0.476

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as equal to the 99th percentile.

Table IX
Regression Analyses of Likelihood of Related Spawning
The table presents regressions of the degree of relatedness between a spawning and spawned firm. The sample is derived from public
companies listed in Compustat during the period 1986-1999 with patents in either Computer and Communications or Drugs and
Medical based on the NBER Patent Citations Data File classification scheme. The dependent variable is the measure of relatedness
described in the text. Independent variables include the natural logarithm of inflation-adjusted firm size, the firm’s sales growth over
the previous three years winsorized at the 99th percentile, Tobin’s Q for the firm winsorized at the 99th percentile, dummy variables
indicating whether the firm was backed by venture capitalists, dummy variables indicating if the firm was located in Silicon Valley or
Massachusetts, and a dummy variable that equals one if the firm reports only one industry segment in Compustat. All regressions
include year dummies for each year that the firm is in our sample, though the coefficients are not shown; one includes industry fixed
effects. Heteroskedasticity-consistent t-statistics in parentheses adjust for non-independence of observations of the same firm over
time.
Dependent Variable: Measure of Relatedness
Independent Variables
Log of Real Assets
Mean Winsorized Sales Growth Over
Previous Year*
Mean Winsorized Tobin's Q*
Venture Capital-Backed
Silicon Valley-Based
Massachusetts-Based
Focused Firm
Constant
Number of Observations
Adjusted R-squared
Industry Fixed Effects
*

Basic Specification

Industry Dummies

(1)
-0.0226
[-4.88]

(2)
-0.0151
[-4.41]

0.0288
[3.44]
0.0202
[2.88]
-0.0467
[-2.00]
-0.0462
[-2.22]
-0.0803
[-2.80]
0.0003
[0.01]
0.3680
[5.83]
844

0.0183
[4.10]
0.0188
[5.10]
-0.0140
[-0.93]
-0.0339
[-2.18]
-0.0567
[-2.42]
0.0380
[2.05]
0.2993
[6.59]
844

0.228

0.541

No

Yes

Observations with greater than the 99th percentile are coded as equal to the 99th percentile.

