NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

STOCK MARKET CYCLES, FINANCIAL LIBERALIZATION
AND VOLATILITY
Sebastian Edwards
Javier Gomez Biscarri
Fernando Perez de Gracia
Working Paper 9817
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9817
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research
©2003 by Sebastian Edwards, Javier Gomez Biscarri, and Fernando Perez de Gracia. All rights reserved.
Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that
full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Stock Market Cycles, Financial Liberalization and Volatility
Sebastian Edwards, Javier Gomez Biscarri, and Fernando Perez de Gracia
NBER Working Paper No. 9817
July 2003
JEL No. F30, C22, G15
ABSTRACT
In this paper we analyze the behavior of stock markets in six emerging countries. More specifically,
we describe the bull and bear cycles of four Latin American and two Asian countries, comparing
their characteristics during both phases and the degree of concordance of bullish periods. We divide
our sample in two subperiods in order to account for differences induced by the financial
liberalization processes that these countries went through in the early 1990's. We find that cycles
in emerging countries tend to have shorter duration and larger amplitude and volatility than in
developed countries. However, after financial liberalization Latin American stock markets have
behaved more similarly to stock markets in developed countries whereas Asian countries have
become more dissimilar. Concordance of cycles across markets has increased significantly over
time, especially for Latin American countries after liberalization.

Sebastian Edwards
Anderson School of Management
UCLA
110 Westwood Plaza
P.O. Box 951481
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1581
and NBER
sedwards@anderson.ucla.edu

Javier Gomez Biscarri

Fernando Perez de Gracia

1

Introduction

During the last decade the emerging markets have been characterized by a high degree
of financial instability. This has been particularly the case in Latin America, where
currency crises have become recurrent, and where equity markets have experienced
dramatic swings. Partially motivated by this instability, a number of authors have
recently investigated the behavior of Latin American financial markets.1 Fischer
(2002), for example, has analyzed the implications of the Latin American currency
crises for the future of the international monetary system. Eichengreen (2003), De
Gregorio et al. (2000), and Edwards (1999) have investigated the role played by
capital mobility in Latin America during the financial crises of the 1990s. Goldstein
(2003) has looked more specifically at the forces behind the financial turmoil in Brazil
during 2002.
Rigobon (2002) has focused on alternative volatility measures in both equity and
bond markets in the period surrounding recent financial crises. Kaminsky and Reinhart (2002) have investigated how interest rates, equity returns and bond spreads
behave in times of global financial stress. Their main interest was to analyze whether
these variables exhibited co-movement across countries. Bekaert and Harvey (2000)
analyzed equity returns in a group of emerging markets, including six Latin American
countries, before and after the financial reforms. Edwards and Susmel (2003) investigated the time pattern of interest rate volatility in four Latin American countries,
1

During the late 1980s and early 1990s the vast majority of the Latin American countries embarked on ambitious market-oriented reforms. The reform blueprint has come to be known as the
“Washington Consensus.” A number of authors have argued that this reform process has failed, and
that the Latin American countries have grown at slower rates and have become more unstable. For
an analysis of the reforms see, for example, Edwards (1995). See Stiglitz (2002) for criticism of the
reform process. Edwards (2003) assesses the validity of Stiglitz’s critique.

2

and compared them to that of Hong Kong. Other recent studies on financial volatility and contagion in the emerging markets, including Latin America, are Karolyi and
Stulz (1996), Eichengreen and Mody (2000), Forbes and Rigobon (2002), Bekaert,
Harvey and Lumsdaine (2002a,b), Bekaert, Harvey and Ng (2002), Janakiramanan
and Lamba (1998), Chakrabarti and Roll (2002), Edwards (2000) and Chen et al.
(2002).
An important question, and one that we address in this paper, is whether stock
markets have similar features in the emerging nations and in the advanced countries.
The answer to this question is particularly germane to the current debate on the
role of financial liberalization and macroeconomic instability in the emerging and
transition economies. Some authors — including Krugman (2000) and Stiglitz (2002)
— have argued that the emerging nations’ financial markets are poorly developed and
thus they do not function properly — e.g. in the way advanced countries’ financial
markets do. Under these circumstances, the argument goes, the emerging nations
should not liberalize fully their capital markets; instead, they should impose some
form of controls that regulate cross-border movements of portfolio capital.
More specifically, in this paper we analyze stock market cycles in a group of
Latin American countries: We investigate the characteristics of stock market cycles in
Argentina, Brazil, Chile and Mexico during 1975 — 2001, and we focus on the behavior
of “bear” and “bull” markets, as defined by Pagan and Sossounov (2003), among
others: “Bull” and “bear” phases of stock markets are identified with periods of a
generalized upward trend (positive returns) and periods of a generalized downward
trend, respectively.2 We make a distinction between the pre- and post-financial reform
2

Two explanations have been put forward for the existence of bull and bear markets. One view,
traditionally held by Keynes (1936), Galbraith (1954) and Shiller (1989, 2000) among others, is

3

periods of the 1980s and 1990s, and we concentrate on the following characteristics of
stock market cycles: Duration, amplitude and volatility. In addition, we analyze the
extent to which returns depart from a triangular representation, and we investigate
the occurrence of big expansions and contractions. The results from this cycle analysis
are then used to compare the behavior of these four Latin American equity markets
with those of two Asian nations — South Korea and Thailand —, as well as with those
of the US and Germany.
The emerging stock markets analyzed in this paper — Argentina, Brazil, Chile,
Mexico, South Korea and Thailand — represent a highly diverse sample: During
the period under consideration they had diﬀerent regulations regarding international
capital mobility, diﬀerent domestic supervisory systems and diﬀerent exchange rate
regimes.3 Moreover, all of them, with the exception of Chile, faced serious crises
during the last few years. This diverse data set, then, allows us to investigate the
behavior of bull and bear markets under diﬀerent institutional settings and under
diﬀerent external environments. We are particularly interested in addressing the
following questions:
• Is it possible to (unequivocally) detect bull and bear markets in these Latin
American and Asian countries?
• Do bull and bear markets in emerging countries behave similarly to those in the
more advanced nations?
that major bull and bear markets are purely due to irrational “animal spirit.” An alternative view
(DeLong, 1992; Siegel, 1998) states that, although prices deviate from fundamentals in the short
run, that is, in periods of months or a few years, in the long run - decades or even generationsproportional diﬀerences between market prices and fundamentals are kept within bounds. Under
this interpretation, the major bull and bear markets reflect large shifts in consensus perceptions of
fundamentals and expectations of the future.
3
For details on the characteristics of the financial markets in the diﬀerent countries and their
refom processes see Bekaert and Harvey (2000).

4

• Has stock market volatility been diﬀerent across these countries? Has it changed
through time? Is stock market volatility diﬀerent in these countries than in the
benchmarks represented by two advanced countries (the US and Germany)?
• How do bear and bull market cycles compare across the emerging markets in
our sample? What do these comparisons tell us — if anything — about the eﬀects of
financial liberalization?
• Is it possible to explain the behavior of stock market cycles in our emerging
markets using traditional models, including those in the “random walk” family?
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: In Section 2 we present the methodology used to identify bull and bear markets. In Section 3 we discuss the results
of our cycle analysis, and we conclude that bear and bull phases have behaved in a
significantly diﬀerent way in emerging and advanced countries, but the diﬀerences
seem to diminish in the post-financial liberalization period. In Section 4 we deal with
the issue of concordance or synchronicity of the cycles across countries. The main
findings in this section point at the increasing synchronicity of the stock markets in
emerging countries, which move in a more parallel way during the 1990s than they
did in earlier periods. Both the financial liberalization processes of the early 1990s
and the financial crises of that decade seem to have contributed to this increased
synchronicity. Section 5 complements the analysis in Sections 3 and 4 by looking at
a specific characteristic of the cycle that allows for formal significance tests on the
shape, and some predictability features, of the cycle phases. Finally, in Section 6 we
present a brief summary of the results and some concluding remarks regarding the
directions for future research that our paper opens.

5

2

Identifying Market Phases: A Non-Parametric
Approach

There are two main approaches to locating the expansionary / contractionary phases
of the cycles in an economic variable.4 The first one advocates a parametric specification of the data generating process, where two diﬀerent regimes are allowed, one
that corresponds to the expansions — and therefore contains some type of upward
trend —, and another one that corresponds to the contractions and therefore contains
a downward trend. Examples of this approach are Goodwin (1993), Diebold and
Rudebusch (1996), Kim and Nelson (1999), Hamilton and Lin (1993), Ramchand
and Susmel (1998) and Maheu and McCurdy (2000). The second approach takes
a nonparametric perspective and, instead of fitting a fully specified statistical data
generating process, looks at the original data series in search for the specific features
of the cycle. That is, this procedure looks for periods of generalized upward trend,
which will be identified with the expansions, and periods of a generalized downward
trend which will be identified with the contractions. The key feature of the analysis
is the location of turning points, peaks and troughs, in the series. These turning
points determine the diﬀerent phases of the cycle, which can be subsequently analyzed. This method was first applied by Bry and Boschan (1971) to the analysis of
business cycles, and has since been used by Watson (1994), Artis et al. (1996) and
Harding and Pagan (2000, 2002) for business cycles, and by Pagan and Sossounov
4
We do not comment on the advantages / disadvantages of one approach vs. the other. A
fascinating discussion can be found in the exchange between Hamilton (2003) and Harding and
Pagan (2003a,b). Alternative methods such as the use of long-returns — twelve month returns, for
example — can also be used to focus on the medium term evolution of the stock market. However,
the two methodologies we comment specifically attempt to locate the two types of phases — bull and
bear phases — and thus directly address the analysis of stock cycles.

6

(2003) and Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia (2002) for stock market analysis.
In this paper we opt for the nonparametric approach, as it allows for great flexibility in analyzing some important features of the stock market cycles. In addition, this
approach allows us to compare the actual stock market cycle to parametric benchmarks, and to investigate issues related to predictability of the market.
We proceed as follows: We first identify the stock market phases in our six emerging countries by locating the peaks and troughs of a stock index. We then compute
a battery of statistics for the phases in each country. This allows us to measure the
main characteristics of Latin American stock markets and to compare their behavior
to that of the Asian countries and of the US and Germany, the two countries we have
chosen as “representatives” of the developed economies.

2.1

Locating Peaks and Troughs

The first step in the analysis of the cycle phases requires the location of the turning
points — peaks and troughs that signal the change in the trend of the market — of the
stock market index.
Throughout the paper, pt denotes the natural log of the stock price, Pt . A
peak/trough in the series of stock prices is defined if pt is the highest/lowest in a
window of width 8 months.5 That is, there is a peak at t if
[pt−8 ; :::; pt−1 < pt > pt+1 ; :::; pt+8 ]

(1)

and there is a trough at t if
[pt−8 ; :::; pt−1 > pt < pt+1 ; :::; pt+8 ]
5

(2)

The results may be slightly sensitive to the choice of the window width. We use eight months,
for a total width of the window of 16 months, as suggested by Pagan and Sossounov (2003).

7

In order to ensure that we do not identify spurious phases we include the following
four censoring criteria:
1) We eliminate turns within eight months of the beginning/end of the series.
2) Peaks or troughs next to the endpoints of the series are eliminated if they are
lower/higher than the endpoints.
3) Complete cycles of less than sixteen months of total duration are also eliminated.
4) Phases of less than four months are eliminated unless the fall/rise exceeds 20%
(the traditional rule of thumb for identifying a stock market cumulative movement
as bullish or bearish).
After every censoring operation, alternation is enforced so that a peak will always
follow a trough and viceversa. Alternation is achieved by taking the highest (lowest)
of two consecutive peaks (troughs). In Section 3 we present the results obtained from
applying this approach to dating bull and bear markets in six emerging markets as
well as in the US and Germany.

2.2

Stock Markets Cycles: Duration, Amplitude and Volatility

Once the bear and bull phases have been identified, we calculate a battery of statistics
for each country. These statistics allow us to obtain some key information about the
behavior of stock prices in each of the phases. This behavior can then be compared
across countries and across phases, in search for relevant diﬀerences in stock market
evolution. We use five diﬀerent measures of cyclical behavior. Three directly relate
to the shape of the phases of the cycle, while the other two focus on volatility within
the cycle and on the existence of “big swings.”
8

As a preliminary step, we define a dummy variable, St , which takes the value 1 if
there is a bull market at time t, i.e. if pt − pt−1 = ∆pt belongs to the bull market.6
Given that St = 1 if there is a bullish market at t, we calculate two ancillary statistics:
P
Total time spent in an expansion is Tt=1 St and total time spent in a contraction
PT
is
t=1 Bt , where Bt = 1 − St is an indicator for bearish market. The Number
PT
of peaks (expansions) can be counted as N T P =
t=1 St (1 − St+1 ) − 1 (NTP is

short for “Number of Trough to Peak”) and the Number of troughs (contractions)
P
is N P T = Tt=1 Bt (1 − Bt+1 ) − 1.7 We also define the cumulated change over any

expansion as Ztbull = St Zt−1 + St ∆pt , Z0 = 0. Zt contains the running sum of returns

∆pt for bullish markets (similar definition with Bt for bearish markets) with the sum
reset to zero whenever St = 0.
The five indicators of the phases of the market that we study are:
1) Duration (D): Average duration in months of expansions and contractions can
be calculated as
b bull =
D

T
T
1 X
1 X
b
St , Dbear =
Bt
N T P t=1
N P T t=1

(3)

2) Amplitude (A): Amplitude of the phases, in percentage, refers to the total
return or total loss from the trough to the peak in a bull market or from the peak to
the trough in the case of a bear market. Given that pt = ln(Pt ), the amplitude of any
single phase can be simply calculated as the sum of returns (∆pt ) over the complete
6

Throughout the paper we refer to ∆pt as “returns” though it more accurately corresponds to
capital gains. Most of the parallel studies (Pagan and Sossounov, 2003; Aggarwal et al., 1999) use
capital gains instead of returns, and we follow that same approach.
7
Given that we only analyze complete phases, the initial and final phases are not counted. That
is the reason for the “−1” term in the formulas. However, if the initial and final phase are the same,
then the adjustment does not apply to the other type of phase. For example,
PT if the initial and final
phases are bullish, the number of complete bull phases would be N T P = t=1 St (1 − St+1 ) − 1 and
P
the number of bear phases would be N P T = Tt=1 Bt (1 − Bt+1 ):

9

phase and therefore average amplitude corresponds to:
bbull =
A

T
T
1 X
1 X
b
St ∆pt , Abear =
Bt ∆pt
N T P t=1
N P T t=1

(4)

3) Volatility (V ): We measure volatility by the average size of the monthly return
in bullish and bear phases:
1
V bull = PT

t=1 St

T
X
t=1

St |∆pt | ; V bear = PT

1

t=1 Bt

T
X
t=1

Bt |∆pt |

(5)

where |∆pt | is the absolute change of the log of stock prices.
4) Proportion of big expansions (B + ) and contractions (B − ): The proportion of
expansions and contractions that are bigger than 0.2 or smaller than -0.2 in percentage
return is:
B

+

B

−

T
¤
1 X £
=
I St (1 − St+1 )Ztbull > 0:2
N T P t=1

(6)

T
¤
1 X £
=
I Bt (1 − Bt+1 )Ztbear < −0:2
N T P t=1

Given that (Ztbull ) and (Ztbear ) represent the cumulative return throughout the
phase and up to time t, the summation term is calculating the value of the cumulative
return at the end of the phase, that is, at the peak/trough. This is equivalent to the
amplitude of the phase. The indicator function I[a] is therefore counting the number
of phases with amplitude bigger than 0.2 or smaller than -0.2.8
5) Excess Index (EX): This index captures deviations of returns in the bullish or
bearish markets from a “triangle approximation.” A pure random walk with no drift
would produce triangular cycles, with excess measures not significantly diﬀerent from
zero in either bull or bear phases. Random walks with drift tend to produce bullish
8

We use 0.2 as a measure of a “big” phase given that a 20% return / loss is the rule of thumb
traditionally used by practitioners to identify the existence of a bull and bear market.

10

phases with positive excess measure and bearish phases with negative excess measure,
and this eﬀect is accentuated when autocorrelation or conditional heteroskedasticity
are allowed (See Pagan and Sossounov, 2003 for a detailed discussion). This excess
index is calculated as:
d=
EX

³
´
b
b
b
b
C − 0:5A · D − 0:5A
b
D

(7)

for both expansions and contractions. The first and second terms in the numerator
b and the
approximate the area between the real path followed by the series (area C)

b · D).
b The third term corrects for the discrete
triangular path (area measured by 0:5A
b 9 The denominator makes
approximation used in computing the real path with C.
the measure relative to the size of the phase. Figure 1 shows the possible shapes of
the market phases and their relation to the sign of the EX index.
[Insert Figure 1]

3

Bull and Bear Phases in Selected Emerging Markets: Basic Results

We use monthly data on stock returns for Argentina, Brazil, Chile, Korea, Mexico
and Thailand. These data correspond to the S&P/IFCG Emerging Market Indexes
of Standard & Poor’s, formerly calculated by the IFC.10 The series run from 1975:12
9

The average cumulated change (C ) for both phases of the cycle can be calculated as
bbull
C

bbear
C

=

=

t
T
T
1 X bull
1 XX
Zt =
Sj ∆pj
N T P t=1
N T P t=1 j=1

t
T
T
1 X bear
1 XX
Z
=
Bj ∆pj
N P T t=1 t
N P T t=1 j=1

This measure is a discrete time approximation to the integral below (above) the bull (bear) market.
These indexes, formerly calculated by the IFC, are dollar denominated price indexes of the stock
markets in each country. We use the Global index and not the Investable, which is a narrower index
10

11

to 2001:01, thus yielding a total of 302 observations spanning 26 years.11
Starting in the late 1980s, all six countries in our sample embarked on major
financial reform processes that resulted in a liberalization of financial transactions
and in growing domestic capital markets. An important question, and one that is at
the center of recent criticisms of the reform process and the “Washington Consensus,”
is whether stock market cycles have exhibited an increase in amplitude and volatility —
i.e. increased instability — in the post-financial liberalization era. In order to address
this issue, in the analysis that follows we make a distinction between the pre and
post-liberalization periods. We follow Bekaert, Harvey and Lundblad (2001, Table 1)
to date the beginning of each liberalization episodes. The following dates were used:
• Argentina: 1989
• Brazil: 1991
• Chile: 1992
• Mexico: 1989
• South Korea: 1992
• Thailand: 1988
For each country the turning points that define the phases were estimated using
the methodology described in Section 2.1. Figure 2 contains the evolution of the
stock indexes for each of the countries, where the bullish periods have been shaded to
that is only available from the 1990’s on. The S&P/IFC Global index represents the performance of
the most active stocks in each market analyzed and attempts to be the broadest possible indicator
of market movements, corresponding to at least 75% of total capitalization. For further information
on these widely used indexes, consult www.standardandpoors.com.
11
Data availability and comparability also dictated the final set of countries analyzed. Some local
indexes, such as Brazil’s Bovespa and Chile’s IGPA, were available for longer periods, but we opted
for using a uniformly calculated index to make comparison across countries more meaningful and
not subject to the diﬀerent methodologies used by the countries. Still, one would ideally use as long
a series as possible.

12

facilitate visual inspection. The graphs include four lines that signal the four major
financial crises that aﬀected emerging markets (EM’s) in the 1990s: The Mexican
crisis (identified in December 1994), the Asian crisis (September 1997), the Russian
crisis (August 1998) and the Brazilian crisis (January 1999).
[Insert Figure 2]
The dates of the estimated peaks and troughs for each country, along with those
of the US are shown in Table 1. The table has been arranged so that the lining up
of peaks and troughs can be easily examined visually. The first finding that comes
from inspection of both the graphs and the dates in Table 1 is that all recent major
financial crises in our sample erupted several months into the bear phase. Moreover,
in some cases the crisis erupts very close to the end of a bear cycle. This is, for
instance, the case of the December 1994 Mexican crisis, which happened two months
before the trough in February 1995 and after the country had spent a whole year in
a bear phase. Korea and Thailand had spent a considerable time in a bear phase
(three and one and a half years, respectively) before the Asian crisis exploded. The
markets in both countries took almost an additional year to bottom out and start the
recovery. In Brazil, the January 1999 crisis coincides with the trough of an 18 month
bear market. Argentina, finally, reached a peak in February 2000, which means that
by the time of the crisis in late 2001 the Argentine market had spent almost two years
in a bear phase.12 This finding, however, should be taken with a grain of salt. Indeed,
although our results are highly suggestive, they do not necessarily imply that bear
markets are good predictors of currency and financial crises. Answering this question
12

Notice that this is also the case for earlier crises, such as the Mexican crisis of August 1982.

13

fully is, however, beyond the scope of this paper.13
[Insert Table 1]
Table 2 presents results for the five statistics calculated for both the bull and bear
markets in our six EM’s. Additionally, we include the values of these statistics for
the US and German stock markets.14 The Table consists of three panels, that present
the results of the full sample, and the results for the pre and post-reform periods.15
The data on the US and Germany in Panel B correspond to the 1975-1989 period;
those in Panel C are for 1990-2001.
[Insert Table 2]
The results for the two subperiods are particularly interesting, and indicate that,
contrary to what the critics of the market oriented reform processes have argued, the
degree of equity markets instability has declined in our four Latin American nations
after the crises. The main results in Table 2 may be summarized as follows:
Duration: After the financial reforms of the late 1980s and early 1990s, average
duration of bear markets declined in all four Latin American countries, as it did in
Thailand. In Korea, on the other hand, average duration of bear markets increased
in the post reform period. The duration of bull markets declined in the post-reform
period in four of the six emerging markets — the exceptions being Argentina and
Mexico.
13

The crisis early warnings model developed by Goldman Sachs (2002) does include a decline in
the stock market as a useful leading indicator.
14
These results correspond to our own calculation for the US market during the period 1975:01
to 2000:12, using the turning points estimated by Pagan and Sossounov (2003). In the case of the
German market, the results correspond to the period from 1970:01 to 1999:11 estimated by Gómez
Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia (2002).
15
The data for the diﬀerent emerging markets have been divided by using as the split date the
peak or trough that is the closest to the liberalization date, so that we keep complete phases both
in the pre and post-reform periods.

14

As a consequence, in the most recent (post-reform) period duration of bear markets continues to be higher and duration of bull markets continues to be lower in all
six emerging markets than in the US.
Amplitude: The amplitude of both bull and bear phases has been significantly
larger in the emerging countries than in the developed nations. Emerging stock
markets seem to oﬀer a significant premium, or excess return, during expansions, that
compensates for the big losses during contractions, and for the substantially higher
volatility. For the emerging markets there appears to be an ordering of countries,
where those with bigger gains are also those with bigger losses. This phenomenon is
also present in the case of European nations analyzed by Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de
Gracia (2002). The figures for the emerging countries are staggering, though: During
the 25 year period, average gains during bullish periods range from 79% (Korea)
to 142% (Argentina); average losses during bearish periods go from 68% (Korea) to
123% (Argentina).16
Although amplitude of both bull and bear markets continues to be very high
in comparison to the US and Germany, it has declined in all four Latin American
countries during the post-reform period. In the two Asian countries, on the other
hand, the amplitude of bear phases goes up dramatically in the post-reform period,
mostly because of the influence of the Asian crises. Amplitude of bull phases in Asia
is similar in the pre- and post-reform periods.
Volatility: Within each phase volatility is generally much larger in the emerging
markets than in advanced countries. This is the case both in the pre- and post-reform
Note that when the returns are significantly large in absolute value, using pt − pt−1 = ln(Pt ) −
t−1
ln(Pt−1 ) as a measure of return will yield diﬀerent results from using PtP−P
, and a loss bigger
t−1
than 100% is actually possible. For example, if Pt = 25 and Pt−1 = 100, the first formula results in
a 139% loss whereas the second results in a 75% loss.
16

15

periods. However, in the post financial liberalization period, volatility has declined
significantly in every Latin American country in our sample. Notice that the value of
volatility is smaller in the second subperiod for bull phases in all four Latin American
countries and for bear phases in Argentina, Chile and Mexico. In the case of Asian
countries, on the other hand, their markets evolved in the opposite way, and after
1990 their stock market fluctuations seem to behave more like those of pre-1990s
Latin America: Volatility of both bull and bear phases is larger in post-reform Korea
and Thailand than before financial liberalization.
The increased volatility of bear phases in the second subperiod for Brazil, Korea
and Thailand is mostly attributable to their own, very profound and unique, crises,
and not to increased general instability: Notice that no volatility increase happened
in the bull periods of Brazil or in either phase in Argentina, Chile and Mexico.
Consequently, these findings cast some doubt on the statements by critics of financial
liberalization which point at a generalized increase in volatility following the opening
of emerging capital markets.
Excess Index: As reflected in Table 2, the values of the EX index for our emerging
countries diﬀer substantially from those of the US or Germany. The EM’s tend to
present widely varying EX indexes in both bull and bear phases. The signs are not
always positive and negative respectively, but some present bull phases with negative
value of the EX index and bear phases with positive value. This evidence on the EX
index is in line with one of the key findings in Pagan and Sossounov (2003): Stock
market phases do not look triangular, as it would be implied by a simple random
walk. Instead the beginning and end of both the bull and bear phase display some
“acceleration,” by which the large returns or losses are not distributed evenly across
16

the phase, but are instead concentrated close to one of the turning points. It would
be tempting to automatically identify these nonzero values of the EX index with
a departure from the random walk behavior and therefore from unpredictability, as
it is done by Pagan and Sossounov. However, Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia
(2002) show that this is not exactly correct. Simulations in their paper prove that
a random walk with drift but no autocorrelation — and therefore, unpredictable beyond the regular market return — generates cycles with EX measures significantly
diﬀerent from zero in both phases. This implies that our results for the EM’s could
be consistent with stock markets following random walks with drift, with or without
autocorrelated returns. If one wants to use the EX index to test for the existence of
some predictability in the market or for departures from the random walk behavior
the values of the index that are consistent with statistical models of unpredictable
returns need, thus, to be calculated case by case. We take up this task, which yields
important conclusions, in the last section of the paper.
Big Expansions and Contractions: The B + and B − suggest that during the postreform subsample most bear phases have been “bigger” than in the pre-reform period.
Indeed, as these indexes show, after 1990 all contractions of Latin American and Asian
stock markets have been large, except one in Chile, the country whose cycles look
more similar to those of the developed economies. We attribute this eﬀect mostly to
the eﬀect of the Asian crisis — notice that there are fewer years in the post-reform
period, and thus fewer bear phases — and not to the increased instability: As we
have seen in the results on amplitude and volatility the evidence favors a generalized
reduction in instability, once the eﬀect of the bear market caused by the Asian crisis
is isolated.
17

4

Financial Reforms and Stock Market Cycles Across
Countries

In this section we extend our bull and bear markets analysis and look at the joint
evolution of the six emerging stock markets investigated above. We are particularly
interested in understanding whether stock market phases tend to “coincide” in time
across emerging countries. That is, we try to identify whether, at a given moment
in time, stock markets in EM’s are in the same phase of the stock market cycle. We
also try to ascertain whether this comovement or concordance across equity markets
has intensified during the post-reform period. Since during the late 1980s and early
1990s these countries relaxed their controls on international capital mobility, we would
expect an increase in the degree of comovement across their equity markets.17
The rest of the section is organized as follows. First, we provide a simple analysis
that compares the timing of the peaks and troughs of the stock market series across
time. This analysis shows how coincident in time the turning points have been across
our Latin American and Asian countries. Then we look more formally at the long run
coincidence of the phases. We provide statistical measures of the degree of bilateral
coincidence of bull and bear markets across countries throughout the entire sample.
Finally, we show a dynamic measure of concordance that tracks the evolution of the
synchronicity of cycle phases during the most recent post-reform years. This latter
measure allows us to comment on whether the stock markets of our EM’s have become
more concordant over time.
17

The fact that emerging markets’ equities are considered to be an “asset class” provides greater
support to the hypothesis that comovements across these countries should have increased in the
post-reform period.

18

4.1

Peaks and Troughs in Bull and Bear Phases

In Table 1 we presented the peaks and troughs identified for the equity cycles of our
four Latin American nations, the two Asian nations and the US. These data show
that before the financial market liberalizations of the late 1980s and early 1990s the
peaks and troughs of our six emerging countries were not aligned at all. Furthermore,
they were not aligned with those identified for the US. In fact, all six countries seemed
to follow widely diﬀering patterns before 1990. For example, Argentina’s phases from
1975 to 1987 do not have a single turning point in common with, or within a seven
month window of, those of Brazil. The same holds true for the rest of the countries:
Peaks and troughs do not coincide in time until the US stock market crisis of 1987,
when three of the EM’s — Argentina, Brazil and Mexico — present a trough almost
simultaneously to that in the US. It is slightly surprising that it is the troughs that
coincide in time, and not the peaks. This leads to think that US investors pulled
out of both the US and international markets at the time of the crisis, regardless of
whether the markets were going up or down, and when the market recovered, capital
flowed back into all four markets simultaneously.18 After the crash, turning points
become misaligned again until 1990 when, coinciding with the worldwide recession,
Brazil, Chile, Korea, Thailand and the US present a trough.
After 1990, a time when the countries in our sample had either initiated, or were
about to launch their reforms, individual cycles begin to exhibit evident comovement.
With the exception of Korea, that does not present a cycle in 1996-1997, the other
18

The literature on the eﬀects of the 1987 US stock market crisis is by now abundant. King and
Wadhwami (1990), Lee and Kim (1993) and Choudhry (1996) are among the earlier contributions
that document an increase in world stock market comovements after the crisis. Forbes and Rigobon
(2002) review some of those contributions in the context of contagion of financial crises.

19

five countries all present very similar patterns, with peaks around the second quarter
of 1992, one during 1994, one in late 1997 (around the time of the Asian crisis), and
a final peak in early 2000. Troughs also come almost simultaneously in late 1992,
early 1995 (after the peso crisis in Mexico) and a final one in late 1998, following
the Russian crisis. Only Brazil seemed to be aﬀected by its own crisis: It is the only
country whose stock market did not bottom out in September 1998 at the time of
the LTCM crisis — as did all the others —, but kept its downward slide until January
1999, when it started to recover after the devaluation of the real.
It is interesting to note that the diﬀerent financial crises of the 1990s had dissimilar
eﬀects across EM’s. According to the data, the Mexican crisis aﬀected Argentina and
Brazil, but it did not aﬀect Chile, Korea or Thailand. In contrast, all six countries
were significantly aﬀected by the collapse of the Asian markets in 1997. We do not
have enough data on the Russian equity market in order to carry a similar analysis
of the eﬀects of that crisis on Russia’s own market. However, it can be seen that the
Russian crisis of August 1998 did not have any noticeable eﬀects in the EM’s in our
sample. In fact, it seems that the crisis marked the beginning of the recovery after
the Asian flu, rather than sending the markets into another downslide. As mentioned
above, the crisis in Brazil did not spillover to other markets.19
These findings suggest that in the post-reform period, emerging equity markets —
or at least the emerging markets considered in this paper — were becoming significantly
more integrated with each other. We turn now to a more formal analysis of the
concordance or synchronicity of the stock market phases in our EM’s.
19

Notice that we do not pretend to have established statistical causality.

20

4.2

Concordance of the Cycle Phases: Are the Cycles Aligned?

In order to analyze formally the extent of the comovements of the stock market data
in our six emerging countries, we use an index of synchronicity of the bull and bear
phases which allows us to compare statistically the degree of alignment or concordance
of the cycle phases in two or more countries. This index of phase concordance is the
concordance index (CI), used in Harding and Pagan (2000, 2002). This index is
calculated, for countries i and j, as
T
T
¤
¢ ¡
¢¤
1 X£ i j ¡
1 X£ i j
j
i
CIij =
St · St + Bt · Bt =
St · St + 1 − Sti · 1 − Stj
T t=1
T t=1

(8)

where Sti = 1 identifies a bullish market at time t in country i and Bti = 1 identifies
a bearish market at time t in country i. This index calculates the number of the T
periods for which the two countries are in the same phase, either bull or bear, and
averages out over the T periods.20
The values of the CI range from zero (perfect misalignment of phases) to one
20

This index is, in our view, superior to cross-correlations of returns. Indeed, cross-correlations
have four main limitations. First, unconditional cross-correlations of returns are subject to sectorial
composition of the stock indexes and do not account for movements in fundamentals (see Wolf, 1996).
Second, the use of simple cross-correlations would be aﬀected by the existence, not infrequent in the
case of stock market movements, of outliers. By identifying the phases with a binary variable, we
avoid the artificial increase in cross-correlation that results from extremely big returns. Third, given
that returns have an upward drift, the correlation of returns tends to be positive and statistically
significant due to that trending behavior. Given that we are not interested in the concordance or
correlation per se, but on the concordance of the innovation to the return process - which expresses
the way new information aﬀects returns - the correlation would have to be computed with the
estimated residuals of the return process, thus being subject to the statistical process that returns
are assumed to follow. Fourth, the behavior of volatility or of higher moments of the returns would
also aﬀect the cross-correlation measure of the concordance of cycles, whereas the CI is invariant
to the underlying distribution of returns once the phases have been identified. Finally, we are not
interested in forecasting returns or in the short term movements of the market: Our main concern is
to calculate the concordance of phases in the stock markets, and these phases correspond to medium
to long run movements. Using cross-correlations of returns would put too much emphasis on short
term movements. The methodology used to construct the phase indicators guarantees that we focus
on the medium term trends of the stock market. For these five reasons we believe that the CI
provides a more intuitive measure of the concordance of the cycle phases, and, given the objective
of our study, a more correct one.

21

(perfect alignment). However, given that random walks with drift generate cycles
with longer and bigger bullish phases than bearish phases, it is clear that even if
the shocks to the random walks are perfectly independent, the CI will be slightly
bigger than 0.5, the value we would obtain if the phases were purely random draws
from a 50:50 Bernoulli distribution. Therefore, a formal significance test requires us to
calculate the critical values in a case by case fashion. Thus, we simulated independent
random walks with the same drift, return autocorrelation and variance as the series
in each country. Then we calculated the simulated distribution of all bilateral CI’s
and found the interval contained between the 2.5% and 97.5% percentiles. When the
empirical index is outside of that confidence interval, the hypothesis that the two
series have phases that come from independent processes can be rejected. This gives
evidence of significant concordance of stock market behavior in those two countries.21
Table 3 presents the CI’s for the diﬀerent pairs of countries. In Table 4 and
for comparison purposes we include the simple cross correlations of returns, for the
same sample period. Each table includes three panels. The first panel contains the
values of the indexes for the full sample. The second and third panels split the
sample into two subperiods: Given our discussion above, we analyze the concordance
of market phases before and after financial liberalization, although given that the
dates of liberalization are slightly diﬀerent for the diﬀerent countries, we use now
21

Notice that this is also the case for the coeﬃcients of correlation of returns: Traditional critical
values for significance of the coeﬃcient of correlation between two series are biased downward for
time series with a drift and autocorrelation in returns. Thus, the significance test would have to be
performed on the innovations to the two series, estimated by first fitting a statistical model to the
returns. Given the higher dependency that these estimated innovations would have on the specific
model chosen to fit the returns, we have opted against oﬀering a significance test for the simple
coeﬃcients of correlation. However, we still use their evolution in time and their magnitude to
compare the results to those of the CI and of the RCI (next subsection).

22

1990 as the common splitting date.
[Insert Tables 3 and 4]
The values of the CI for the full sample (1975-2000) are not particularly interesting; they are in general larger than 0.5, but most of them are not significant. The
exceptions to this result are the pairs Argentina-Mexico, Chile-Mexico and Thailand
with Korea and Mexico.22 However, once we split the sample into the pre-1990 and
the post-1990 years, the evidence changes. For the pre-1990 period only Chile and
Mexico, among our Latin American countries, show evidence of a significant concordance. Interestingly enough, Thailand is the only country showing significant
comovements, negative in the case of Brazil, with more than one country. In spite of
this, however, we interpret the overall evidence in Panel B of Table 3 as suggesting
quite strongly that before 1990 concordance of cycles among EM’s was rather weak
and generally non significant.
Panel C in Table 3 presents the CI’s for the post 1990 period. As may be seen,
during this period the Latin American equity markets become significantly concordant: In the second subperiod, Argentina shows positive concordance with Brazil
and Mexico, and, weaker, with Thailand. Brazil shows concordance with Mexico
and Chile. Chile, on the other hand, sees the concordance of its market phases increase with respect to Brazil and Korea, but decrease with respect to Mexico. Notice
that after 1990 evidence for concordance of phases in the Thai stock market weakens
The values of the CI’s are parallel to those of the simple coeﬃcients of correlation. Estimated
correlation coeﬃcients tend to be positive and small. The highest values correspond to the pairs
of countries with higher bilateral CI, and, as we have highlighted in the table, the CI’s that are
statistically significant correspond to the highest values of the simple correlations, those above
0.223. Thus, conclusions of the static analysis would not change much were we to use the CI or the
correlations of returns.
22

23

significantly.
These results suggest that it is possible to distinguish three groups of countries
during the post reform period. The first one is a closely linked group formed by
Argentina, Brazil and Mexico. Notice that all three of these countries faced crises
during this period, and throughout most of the period under consideration they were
not classified as investment grade countries by the rating agencies. The second group
is formed by Chile and Korea, that have become more concordant with each other,
but less concordant with other countries. While Korea faced a massive crisis in 1997,
Chile did not have one during this period. Nevertheless, both of these countries were
investment grade during most of the 1990-2000. Finally, Thailand doesn’t seem to fit
with any of the other two groups. During 1990-2000 its concordance with all other
countries, except perhaps with Argentina, declines. It is interesting to note that,
although the CI is quite high for all US-other country pairs, it is only statistically
significant for Mexico and Argentina. This indicates that while the emerging markets
have become significantly more integrated among themselves, the degree of integration
with the US equity market has not necessarily proceeded at the same pace.
We now analyze whether a more dynamic analysis of the time evolution of the
concordance indexes supports a story of increased market concordance.

4.3

Is there a Tendency Toward Further Concordance?

Instead of focusing on two subperiods — pre- and post-liberalization — we analyze
whether the degree of concordance has tended to change — gradually, perhaps —
through time. More specifically, we are interested in finding out if after the reforms
there is a tendency towards an increased degree of concordance across countries. In

24

general, one would expect that financial reforms that open up domestic financial markets — even if they do so partially — would increase the extent of market comovement
across countries. This would be particularly the case if the countries in question are
considered to form a (semi) homogeneous “asset class.” Indeed, even if restrictions
to capital mobility are only partially lifted, we would expect a (gradual) increase in
the CI through time. In order to address this issue we calculate a set of rolling CI’s
(RCI’s), using a window of width 50. That is, we calculate the series of RCI’s as
RCIij¿ =

¿
¤
1 X £ i j
St · St + Bti · Btj :
50 t=¿ −49

(9)

The results obtained for RCIij50 to RCIij302 are plotted in Figures 3-6.23 For comparison purposes, in these figures we also include the evolution of rolling coeﬃcients of
correlation of returns, calculated as:
R½¿ij

P¿

(ri;t − r i ) (rj;t − r j )
qP
2
¿
2
(r
−
r
)
i;t
i
t=¿ −49
t=¿ −49 (rj;t − rj )

= qP
¿

t=¿ −49

(10)

where ri;t corresponds to the return ∆pt for country i during period t and r i is the
average return for country i during the 50 periods in the rolling window.
[Insert Figures 3-6]
The RCI’s and R½’s give information about the evolution in the behavior of
concordance in the emerging countries in our sample. A trend upward (downward)
in the index signals increased (decreased) stock market concordance.
23

Formal significance testing should be performed by simulating the distribution of the critical
values. We simulated critical values for the RCI’s by generating series with the estimated drift and
return autocorrelation of each of the four countries, calculating the RCI’s for each simulated series
and taking the 2.5% and the 97.5% percentiles of the simulated values in each period. Given that
the drifts for the diﬀerent countries are similar, the confidence bands for the RCI for each country
pair turn out to be also similar, with 0.72 being the upper critical value. For simplicity, we do not
include the confidence bands in the graphs, although these are available upon request.

25

The rolling cross correlations of returns presented in these figures were never
substantially high, in either direction, during the first years of the sample. The trend
reverses, however, after the early 1990s, when an increase in correlations is evident,
especially among Latin American countries. Concordance of cycle phases has also
tended to be quite high in the years after liberalization; indeed, this index moves close
to one in the last periods for a number of country-pairs. There are some diﬀerences
in the evolution of both measures, though, that make the two complementary rather
than redundant. For example, Brazil and Chile during the early 1980s presented a
very significant negative concordance of cycles, whereas correlations gave no evidence
of a significant relationship. Another interesting diﬀerence appears in the case of
Chile with the other three Latin American countries. Return correlations start to
trend up in the mid 1990s, whereas the concordance of phases only starts to increase
well after the Asian crisis. Consequently, both measures tell the same story about
the high concordance of Latin American markets after financial liberalization, but the
dynamic behavior identified is rather diﬀerent. We believe that the main limitation
of cross correlations in our setting is that the abnormal returns during the crises
in the second half of the 1990s generate large “outliers” that tend to blur the real
concordance of the behavior of the stock markets in the medium term.
The RCI’s in Figures 3-6 suggest that equity markets in our Latin American
countries have become increasingly concordant in the last few years. This trend has
been persistent, as it is the case of Argentina, Brazil, Mexico, or it has had ups and
downs for the pairs Chile-Argentina and Chile-Mexico. The case of Chile — the only
country in the sample that did not suﬀer a currency crisis during the post reform
period — is particularly interesting. As mentioned above, the RCI of Chile with
26

Argentina and Mexico drops significantly at the time of the Tequila crisis, reflecting
the fact that Chile did not suﬀer from Mexican-originated contagion (Edwards and
Susmel, 2003), and it stays low through the Asian crisis. In both cases the RCI’s
recover pre-crisis levels by the end of the sample, thus signaling that the Chilean
economy has indeed become highly concordant with its close neighbors but at the
same time it is somehow insured against contagion from crises that aﬀect its neighbors.
Korea and Thailand show high concordance of states and correlation of returns
with each other only in the last two years. Thus, the Asian flu did not bring about
a higher comovement of the two markets, which up to that moment seemed to have
evolved quite independently from each other and also with respect to Latin American
countries. After experiencing a decline during the latter part of the 1980s and early
1990s, the RCI’s for Korea end up being well above significance levels with respect to
Argentina, Brazil and Chile, although they never reach levels similar to those of the
Latin American countries among themselves. Thailand, on the other hand, does not
show signs of concordance with any Latin American country except, maybe, Chile.
It did show significant concordance in the earlier years — before the crisis, around the
liberalization dates —, but this concordance has in fact decreased in recent periods.
Our results therefore show strong concordance of Latin American stock markets
and a clear tendency towards stronger concordance in the most recent years, especially
after financial liberalization. Korea and Thailand have become less concordant with
respect to all the other countries although Korea seems to be recovering and entering
in phase again with the Latin American countries in the most recent years.
These findings suggest that liberalization processes have indeed contributed to a
much stronger comovement of the stock markets in the emerging countries — both in
27

the short term, as measured by the correlations of returns, and in the medium term,
as measured by the concordance indices —, and this result is quite consistent across
the board. The financial crises have introduced some noise in these relationships,
especially around the years of the Asian flu. After the eﬀects of the Asian crisis
died away — the Russian and Brazilian crisis did not have a similar eﬀect — all Latin
American countries and Korea give evidence of strong comovement, whereas Thailand
seems to have become detached from the rest of the group. These results are in
contrast with studies such as Wolf (1996), that claim that Asian equity markets have
experienced a big increase in the degree of comovement during the 1990s whereas
comovements for the Latin American countries remained small even after the reforms.

5

The Shape of Emerging Cycle Phases: A Simulation Exercise

One of the advantages of our approach is that it allows us to compare the actual
stock market cycle to benchmarks characterized by random walk-type models. As
pointed out above, if the true data generating process is indeed a random walk, the
cyclical behavior would follow a triangular path. If, however, empirical cycles depart
from those generated by a random walk, the cyclical pattern could take a number of
alternative forms. Figure 1 depicted the four possible shapes of the market behavior
depending on whether the market is bullish or bearish and on the sign of the EX
index.24
24

In theory, all five cycle characteristics discussed in Section 2 could be used in this way to test
some statistical model. However, it turns out that most statistical models can replicate fairly well all
measures except for the excess index. This index, therefore, turns out to be the one that can most
successfully be used for a formal testing of whether a statistical model is consistent with observed
market behavior.

28

In order to gain a deeper understanding of whether stock market phases depart
from what random walk-based models would imply, we perform a simulation experiment.25 First we fit three statistical models of returns to all six of our markets for
the three diﬀerent subperiods — full sample, 1975-1989 and 1990-2001. These three
models diﬀer with respect to the behavior of the volatility of the error term. The
three models estimated are:26
I) A random walk with drift and AR(1) increments
∆pt = ¹ + ½∆pt−1 + ¾"t ; "t → nid(0; 1)

(11)

II) A random walk with drift and AR(1)/GARCH(1,1) eﬀects
∆pt = ¹ + ½∆pt−1 + ¾ t "t ; "t → nid(0; 1)

(12)

¾2t = ® + ¯u2t−1 + °¾ 2t ; ut = ¾ t "t
III) A random walk with drift and AR(1)/EGARCH(1,1) eﬀects
∆pt = ¹ + ½∆pt−1 + ¾ t "t ; "t → nid(0; 1)

(13)

ln ¾ 2t = Á0 + Á1 "t−1 + Á2 |"t−1 | + Á3 ln ¾2t−1
Note that all three models include the possibility of returns being autocorrelated,
and therefore if there is indeed some autocorrelation in the market, it will show up in
the coeﬃcient ½.27 We are therefore interested in detecting features that may point
at predictabilities beyond that of a simple autocorrelation of returns.
25

Our procedure is a parametric bootstrap where we simulate returns from the implied distribution
it falls under the category of parametric bootstrap (Maddala and Li, 1996).
26
These three models have been chosen because they are the ones that best replicate the features
of the empirical cycles (see Pagan and Sossounov, 2003). More complicated models such as regimeswitching models or processes with stochastic volatility have been analyzed, but their performance
in fitting the features of the data is much poorer than that of the three simpler models we consider.
27
Strictly speaking, therefore, if ½ 6= 0 the three models are not random walks. We do not comment
on the values of the estimated coeﬃcients. Across countries and for the three diﬀerent estimation
periods, the values of ½ diﬀer substantially, some of them being statistically significant.

29

Second, we simulated 1,000 series of returns — of length equal to the number of
observations available in each country’s stock market series — for all six countries,
given the estimated parameters for the above three models. We calculated the excess
measures for each of the 1,000 simulated series and constructed the simulated distribution of the excess measure under each of the three models. From these simulated
distributions we find the 2.5% and 97.5% critical values.
Third, we compared the values of the empirical excess measures estimated for the
original series of the four countries (fourth and tenth rows in Table 2), with the critical
values that result from simulating the stock market with the estimated parameters
of the three models.28 The results of the simulated critical values for the diﬀerent
countries and models appear in Table 3.
[Insert Table 3]
These results indicate that all three statistical models fail to replicate correctly the
value of the EX index for all of our countries. Moreover, this failure is not symmetric
across time periods or across phases. In fact, the divergence between the EX indexes
implied by the three random walk models and the computed EX indexes is more
noticeable during bull markets in the 1975-1989 period, and during bear markets in
the 1990-2001 period.
Period 1975-1989 : Indeed, the shape of bull phases during the 1975-1989 period
is only well replicated for Korea, for which an EGARCH specification seems coherent
with the empirical value of the index. However, for the other five countries the
empirical value of the EX index is significantly outside the simulated confidence
28

All parameter values are available upon request. We omit them from the exposition in order to
simplify the discussion.

30

interval. In the case of Argentina, Brazil, Mexico and Thailand the shape of the bull
phase tends to be like that in Figure 1B, where the market accelerates as the peak
is being reached. In the case of Chile, the shape corresponds to that in Figure 1A,
so the bigger returns are located at the beginning of the expansion. Bear phases,
on the other hand, are correctly replicated for Argentina and Chile, but not for the
two Asian countries — where bear phases resemble Figure 1D, with the big negative
returns present at the beginning of the phase — or for Brazil and Mexico — where the
phases behave as in Figure 1C, with an acceleration of the negative returns at the
end of the phase.
Period 1990-2001: It is interesting to note that in this post liberalization period
bull phases are well accounted for in the cases of Brazil, Chile, Korea and Mexico.
In other words, bull phases of most emerging markets become consistent with simple
statistical models of returns. Argentina and Thailand, however, still show some
departures — the phases in both countries having the shape in Figure 1B — but the
magnitude of the departure is smaller than in the period prior to liberalization. Bear
phases present another regularity. In all cases — except Thailand — the phases after
liberalization resemble Figure 1C: Large negative returns are present at the end of
the bear phase, when the market is reaching the bottom of the cycle. This would be
in line with the finding that the troughs tended to come a few months after the onset
of the diﬀerent financial crises, and thus provide with some evidence in favor of the
usefulness of the EX index in characterizing stock market behavior.
It seems, therefore, that with financial liberalization the behavior of the stock
markets in emerging economies became more in line with what would be implied
by simple models of stock market behavior — compatible with market eﬃciency or
31

with some mild predictability. Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia (2002) also found
some departures from the random walk excess measure in their analysis of European
markets. In the case of Europe, departures were much smaller in magnitude and nonsignificant in most of the cases, but they were of a similar form to those we detect in
the post-liberalization period for emerging countries. This also reinforces the finding
in Section 3, where emerging stock markets were found to become more similar to
those in developed economies after financial liberalization.
These results are also important for they point at a feature of stock market predictability that cannot easily be accommodated by traditional statistical models and
that is not apparent from a casual examination of the series. Figure 2 does give
some evidence of this result, but it is always diﬃcult to disentangle the part of the
departure from the triangle path that could be due to the drift of the random walk,
or to variance eﬀects. More complicated processes, such as stochastic volatility or
regime switching models also fail to replicate this eﬀect, plus they do a very poor
job in replicating some of the other features (see Pagan, 2002, Pagan and Sossounov,
2003, and Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia, 2002). In the case of a two regime
switching model (Hamilton, 1989), for example, the two regimes are indeed identified
with the bull and bear phases, but no distinction is made between the behavior of
the series during the first and last months of each of the phases, a feature that, as we
have seen, appears in the data analyzed.

6

Conclusions

The possible consequences of financial liberalization processes in Latin America continue to be a subject of discussion and controversy. For some researchers, the alleged
32

short term increase in instability may prevent countries from reaping the longer term
gains.29 Consequently, the analysis of the medium term eﬀects of financial opening
and its relation with induced instability becomes a key aspect of the broad research
project of understanding financial market transitions in emerging economies. In this
paper we have analyzed some of the implications for stock market behavior of the
financial liberalization process in Latin America and Asia. In order to emphasize the
medium term eﬀects, our analysis is focused not on simple returns but on the cycles of
the stock market, which characterize the stock market behavior over longer periods.
We analyzed the characteristics of market cycles — distinguishing the bull and bear
phases — for four Latin American and two Asian countries. In addition to identifying
the bull and bear phases in the stock price cycles we measured several characteristics
of the phases, such as duration, amplitude, volatility within the phase and the shape
of the cycle.
We placed special emphasis on the possible diﬀerences in behavior caused by
the financial liberalization processes. We found that, while the characteristics of the
stock market cycles in emerging markets diﬀer quite markedly from those in developed
economies — namely, bull phases tend to be shorter, bear phases are longer, amplitude
and volatility of both phases is significantly higher than in developed markets —, the
financial liberalization processes have contributed to making Latin American stock
markets more similar to those in more developed economies. Latin American stock
markets after liberalization are less unstable: Volatility is lower in both cycle phases
and the amplitude of the phases has been significantly reduced, coming closer to
that of developed countries. This is not the case, however, for Asian countries, that
29

For example, Aizenman (2002) examines the apparent trade-oﬀ between the short-term induced
instability and the long-run contribution to growth caused by financial opening.

33

seem to have been aﬀected too intensely by the financial crisis of late 1997. There is
evidence that these countries, especially Korea, are recovering their stability in the
most recent years, but it is still too early to assess the medium-term consequences —
if any — of the crisis.
We also calculated concordance indexes for the countries in the sample, in an
attempt to detect whether the countries tend to be in the same phase of the stock
market cycle or not, and whether there has been a tendency for concordance to
increase over time. We showed that the behavior pre and post financial reform has
changed significantly, generally leading to a higher concordance of Latin American
countries, which by the end of our sample period were in almost perfect synchronicity,
and to a lower concordance of the Asian countries. These results are parallel, although
some diﬀerences have been noted, to those based on correlations of returns. The
analysis based on return correlations, however, is probably aﬀected too much by
short-term movements of the market and, given the significant presence of outlying
returns during crisis periods, they tend to give a distorted picture of the medium
term evolution of the individual markets and of their concordance.
An interesting corollary is obtained from the analysis of the shape of the cycle
phases. Before financial liberalization, the shape of the cycles in Latin American and
Asian countries revealed significant predictabilities, by which returns showed “acceleration” patterns depending on the closeness to the turning point — peak or trough.
These patterns were more marked than those in developed economies, thus making
the evolution of the stock market more predictable and signalling the possible existence of ineﬃciencies. After liberalization, the emerging markets exhibit a behavior
much more similar to that in the developed countries: Even though bear phases still
34

show some acceleration eﬀect at the end of the phase — mostly because of the financial
crises of the late 1990s — the departures from what would be implied by statistical
models of market evolution — and the departures from the behavior in developed
economies — have been significantly reduced.
Our analysis is a first step that opens up a broad and ambitious research program.
Once the stock market cycles have been identified and analyzed in their own stance,
several related questions arise. First, what is the relationship between real cycles
and stock market cycles? Do recessions and expansions in emerging countries have
similar characteristics as bull and bear markets across countries and with respect to
the developed countries? Can the diﬀering characteristics of emerging stock markets,
and the changes in those characteristics, be traced to the real side? So far, little
work has been done on real cycles in emerging countries, mostly due to the lack of
adequate data.
Second, our finding of increased synchronicity in emerging stock markets raises
a causality question: Can the reasons be found in the real side of the economy —
increased convergence of fundamentals, increased symmetry in exogenous shocks that
hit the economies — or is it merely a financial phenomenon — i.e. these countries just
“look similar” to outside investors that can now enter the newly liberalized markets?
This point raises the issue of whether emerging markets should indeed be considered
an “asset class” of their own.
Third, our results suggest that future work would benefit from a deeper examination of the institutional aspects of emerging markets. Broad and potentially fruitful
questions arise such as the relationship between stock market behavior and institutional depth and development — including both political and economic institutions —
35

or the relationship between financial liberalization and other economic changes that
emerging countries have gone through — trade liberalization or the privatization of
productive sectors.
Finally, from the financial side, our results are important in the context of the literature of investment allocation and international risk diversification. The eﬀects we
have identified after liberalization of the markets — that is, after the markets become
increasingly available for outside investors — seem to provide relevant information for
fund allocation. We have detected a higher synchronicity of emerging market behavior
— which could translate into lower benefits of diversification across emerging countries
— and also that returns and volatility both decrease with liberalization. These eﬀects
are likely to aﬀect significantly the optimal allocation of investment funds. A related
question concerns the relationship of emerging stock markets with world portfolios:
Is this relationship diﬀerent during bull and bear phases? If it is, then again optimal
rules for fund allocation may be significantly aﬀected.
As we can see, a number of interesting questions remain unanswered. We believe
that our analysis has given a first step in the direction of gaining a deeper understanding of the behavior of stock markets, although much exciting work remains to
be done.
Acknowledgements
An earlier version of this paper was presented at the VII Annual Meeting of
LACEA (Madrid, October 2002). We thank participants at the University of California, Santa Cruz conference on “Regional and International Implications of the
Financial Instability in Latin America” for fruitful discussions. We are particularly
grateful to Joshua Aizenman, Diego Valderrama, Jim Lothian and the referee for most
36

helpful comments and suggestions. Financial aid from the Universidad de Navarra
(Proyecto PIUNA 2001-9) is gratefully acknowledged.

37

References
Aggarwal, R., Inclan, C., Leal, R.,1999. Volatility in Emerging Stock Markets.
Journal of Financial and Quantitative Analysis 34, 33-55.
Aizenman, J., 2002. Financial Opening: Evidence and Policy Options. Paper
presented at the Challenges to Globalization NBER-CEPR conference, May 2002.
Ammer, J., Mei, J., 1996. Measuring International Economic Linkages with Stock
Market Data. Journal of Finance 51, 1743-1764.
Artis, M.J., Kontolemis, Z.G., Osborn, D.R., 1997. Business Cycles for G7 and
European Countries. Journal of Business 70, 249-279.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., 2000. Capital Flows and the Behavior of Emerging
Equity Markets. In Edwards, S., (Ed.), Capital Flows and the Emerging Economies:
Theory, Evidence and Controversies. NBER, Cambridge, MA, pp. 159-194.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., Lumsdaine, R.L., 2002a. The Dynamics of Emerging
Market Equity Flows. Journal of International Money and Finance 21, 295-350.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., Lumsdaine, R.L., 2002b. Dating the Integration of
World Capital Markets. Journal of Financial Economics 65, 203-249.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., Lundblad, C., 2001. Emerging Equity Markets and
Economic Development. Journal of Development Economics 66, 465-504.
Bekaert, G., Harvey, C.R., Ng, A., 2002. Market Integration and Contagion.
Mimeo.
Bry, G., Boschan, C., 1971. Cyclical Analysis of Time Series: Selected Procedures
and Computer Programs. NBER, New York.
Chakrabarti, R., Roll, R., 2002. East Asia and Europe during the 1997 Asian
Collapse: A Clinical Study of a Financial Crisis. Journal of Financial Markets 5,
38

1-30.
Chen, G.M., Firth, M., Rui, O.M., 2002. Stock Market Linkages: Evidence from
Latin America. Journal of Banking and Finance 26, 1113-1141.
Choudhry, T., 1996. Stock Market Volatility and the Crash of 1987: Evidence from
Six Emerging Markets. Journal of International Money and Finance 15, 969-981.
De Gregorio, J., Edwards, S., Valdes, R., 2000. Controls on Capital Inflows: Do
they work? Journal of Development Economics 63, 59-83.
DeLong, J.B., 1992. Bull and Bear in the United States. In: Newman, P., Milgate,
M., Eatwell, J., (Eds.), The New Palgrave Dictionary of Money and Finance. Mac
Millan Press Limited, London, pp 253-255.
Diebold, F.X., Rudebusch, G.D., 1996. Measuring Business Cycles: A Modern
Perspective. Review of Economics and Statistics 78, 67-77.
Edwards, S., 1995. Crisis and Reform in Latin America: From Despair to Hope.
Oxford University Press, Oxford.
Edwards, S., 1999. How Eﬀective are Capital Controls? Journal of Economic
Perspectives 13, 65-84.
Edwards, S., 2000. Contagion. World Economy 23, 873-900.
Edwards, S., 2003. Review of Joseph E. Stiglitz’s Globalization and its Discontents. Journal of Development Economics 70, 252-257.
Edwards, S., Susmel, R., 2003. Interest Rate Volatility and Contagion in Emerging
Markets: Evidence from the 1990s. Review of Economics and Statistics (forthcoming).
Eichengreen, B., 2003. Capital Flows and Crises. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Eichengreen, B., Mody, A., 2000. What Explains the Changing Spreads on Emerging Market Debt? In: Edwards, S. (ed.), The Economics of International Capital
39

Flows. University of Chicago Press, Chicago.
Fischer, S., 2002. Financial Crises and Reform of the International Financial
System. NBER Working Paper 9297.
Forbes, K., Rigobon, R., 2002. No Contagion, only Interdependence: Measuring
Stock Market Comovements. Journal of Finance 57, 2223-2261.
Galbraith, J.K., 1954. The Great Crash. Riverside Press, Cambridge, UK.
Goldman Sachs, 2002. GS Watch. A New Framework for Predicting Financial
Crises in Emerging Markets.
Goldstein, M., 2003. Debt Sustainability, Brazil, and the IMF. IIE Working Paper
03-1.
Gómez Biscarri, J., Pérez de Gracia, F., 2002. Stock Market Cycles and Stock
Market Development in Spain. Universidad de Navarra Department of Economics
Working Paper 01/02.
Goodwin, T.H., 1993. Business-Cycle Analysis with a Markov-Switching Model.
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 11, 331-339.
Hamilton, J.D., 1989. A New Approach to the Economic Analysis of Nonstationary Time Series and the Business Cycle. Econometrica 57, 357-384.
Hamilton, J.D., 2003. Comment on ‘A Comparison of Two Business Cycle Dating
Methods.’ Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 27, 1691-1693.
Hamilton, J.D., Lin, G., 1996. Stock Market Volatility and the Business Cycle.
Journal of Applied Econometrics 11, 573-593.
Harding, D., Pagan, A.R., 2000. Knowing the Cycle. In: Backhouse, R.E.,
Salanti, A., (Eds.), Macroeconomics and the Real World - Volume 1: Econometric
Techniques and Macroeconomics. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 23-42.
40

Harding, D., Pagan, A.R., 2002. Dissecting the Cycle: A Methodological Investigation. Journal of Monetary Economics 49, 365-381.
Harding, D., Pagan, A.R., 2003a. A Comparison of two Business Cycle Dating
Methods. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 27, 1681-1690.
Harding, D., Pagan, A.R., 2003b. Rejoinder to James Hamilton. Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control 27, 1695-1698.
Janakiramanan, S., Lamba, A.S., 1998. An Empirical Examination of Linkages
between Pacific-Basin Stock Markets. Journal of International Financial Markets 8,
155-173.
Kaminsky, G., Reinhart, C., 2002. Financial Markets in Times of Stress. Journal
of Development Economics 69, 451-470.
Karolyi, G.A., Stulz, R., 1996. Why Do Markets Move Together? An Investigation
of US-Japanese Stock Return Comovements. Journal of Finance 51, 951-986.
Keynes, J.M., 1936. The General Theory of Employment, Interest and Money.
Reprinted in The Collected Writings of John Maynard Keynes, vol.7. Macmillan
Press Limited, London, 1973.
Kim, C., Nelson, C.R., 1999. State-Space Models with Regime Switching. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA.
King, M., Wadhwani, S., 1990. Transmission of Volatility between Stock Markets.
Review of Financial Studies 3, 5-33.
Krugman, P., 2000. The Return of Depression Economics. Norton, New York.
Lee, S.B., Kim, K.J., 1993. Does the October 1987 Crash strengthen the Comovements among National Stock Markets? Review of Financial Economics 3, 89102.
41

Maddala, G.S., Li, H., 1996. Bootstrap Based Tests in Financial Modeling. In:
Maddala, G.S. and Rao, C.R., (Eds.), Handbook of Statistics Vol. 14: Statistical
Methods in Finance. North-Holland Publishers, Amsterdam, pp. 463-488.
Maheu, J.M., McCurdy, T.H., 2000. Identifying Bull and Bear Markets in Stock
Returns. Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 18, 100-112.
Pagan, A.R., 2002. Learning about Models and their Fit to the Data. International Economic Journal 16, 1-18.
Pagan, A.R., Sossounov, K.A. 2003. A Simple Framework for Analyzing Bull and
Bear Markets. Journal of Applied Econometrics 18, 23-46.
Ramchand, L., Susmel, R. 1998. Volatility and Cross Correlation across Major
Stock Markets. Journal of Empirical Finance 5, 397-416.
Rigobon, R., 2003. On the Measurement of the International Propagation of
Shocks: Is it Stable? Journal of International Economics (forthcoming).
Shiller, R.J., 1989. Market Volatility. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
Shiller, R.J., 2000. Irrational Exuberance. Broadway Books, New York.
Siegel, J.J., 1998. Stocks for the Long Run. McGraw-Hill, New York.
Stiglitz, J., 2002. Globalization and its Discontents. Norton, New York.
Watson, M.W., 1994. Business-Cycle Durations and Postwar Stabilization of the
US Economy. American Economic Review 84, 24-46.
Wolf, H., 1996. Comovements among Emerging Equity Markets. In: Glick, R.,
(Ed.), Managing Capital Flows and Exchange Rates. Perspectives from the Pacific
Basin. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge, MA., pp. 267-285.

42

Table 1: Dates of
ARG
T rough
P eak
1976:08
T rough 1977:10
P eak
T rough
P eak
1980:02
T rough
P eak
T rough 1982:10
P eak
T rough
P eak
1984:03
T rough
P eak
T rough 1985:05
P eak
1985:09
T rough 1987:10
P eak
T rough
P eak
1988:09
T rough 1989:02
P eak
T rough
P eak
T rough
P eak
1992:05
T rough 1992:11
P eak
1994:01
T rough 1995:02
P eak
T rough
P eak
1997:09
T rough 1998:08
P eak
2000:02

the Peaks and Troughs
BRA
CHI
KOR

MEX
1976:10

T HAI

US
1976:12
1978:02

1978:08 1979:04 1978:10
1980:06

1980:11

1981:03
1982:05

1980:12
1981:06
1982:05 1982:12 1982:03 1982:07
1983:04
1983:08 1983:06
1983:08 1983:06 1983:11
1984:05
1984:02
1984:05
1984:12
1985:02 1985:05 1985:07 1986:05
1986:04
1987:09
1987:08
1987:12
1987:12
1987:11
1988:07
1988:12
1989:04
1989:03
1990:03
1990:12 1990:10 1990:08
1991:07
1992:07
1992:04 1992:06
1992:11 1993:04
1994:09
1994:10
1995:03
1995:06
1996:12
1997:07 1997:07
1999:01 1998:08 1998:09
2000:03 2000:01 1999:12

1990:07 1990:05
1990:11 1990:10

1992:03
1992:09
1994:01 1993:12 1994:01
1995:02 1995:01 1994:06
1996:01
1997:09
1998:08 1998:08
2000:03 1999:06 2000:08

Peaks and troughs for the US come from Pagan and Sossounov (2003). The last peak
identified for the US comes from our own calculation.

43

Table 2: Characteristics of the Bull and Bear Markets for the Specific
Countries
PANEL A: FULL SAMPLE
ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI U S a GERa
Bull
D
20.2
20.3
23.7
18.4
26.7
21
31.9
26.8
A
1.42
1.26
0.88
0.79
1.42
0.84
0.52 0.528
EX
0.045 -0.012 0.316 0.224 0.019
0.05
0.05 0.036
V
0.143 0.116 0.066 0.075 0.084
0.058 0.026 0.034
0.88
0.86
0.83
0.43
0.86
0.67
0.86
0.88
B+
Bear
D
15
14.3
15.5
18.1
15.7
26
8.7
13.6
A
-1.23 -1.14 -0.69 -0.679 -1.13
-0.5
-0.14 -0.28
EX
-0.14 -0.09 -0.089 -0.077 0.076 -0.134 0.006 -0.025
V
0.144 0.146 0.074 0.081 0.113
0.04
0.024 0.042
−
1
1
0.83
0.71
1
0.67
0.14
0.4
B
Sample period for all countries is 1975:12 to 2001:01, thus yielding a total number of
observations of 302. For the US we use our own calculation using the peaks and troughs in
Pagan and Sossounov (2003) and the S&P500 index. For Germany we use the peaks and
troughs in Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia (2002), for the period 1970:01 to 1999:11.
D: Average duration in months
A: Average amplitude in % return (or loss)
EX: Excess from a triangle approximation
V: Volatility within the phase in average size of % return per month
B: Proportion of “big swings”
a
Our own calculations.

44

Table 2 (continued): Characteristics of the Bull and Bear Markets for
the Specific Countries
PANEL B: PRE-REFORM (1975-1989 for the US and Germany)
ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI U S a GERa
Bull
D
15
20.7
36
19
23.3
20.3
28.3
25.4
A
1.66
1.44
1.22
0.76
1.70
0.85
0.49
0.47
EX
0.065 -0.026 0.411 0.313 -0.182
0.02
-0.015 0.045
V
0.178 0.144 0.066 0.069 0.099
0.069 0.029 0.036
+
1
0.67
0.5
0.5
1
0.67
0.75
0.6
B
Bear
D
18
17.5
22.5
13.6
21.3
21
12
8
A
-1.56 -1.48 -1.31 -0.47
-1.5
-0.83
-0.18
-0.21
EX
-0.145 -0.086 -0.042 -0.058 0.147 -0.108
0.02
0.004
V
0.157 0.137
0.09
0.074 0.114
0.068 0.024 0.036
0.8
1
1
0.4
0.67
0.83
0.25
0.4
B−
PANEL C: POST-REFORM (1990-2001 for the US and Germany)
ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI U S a GERa
Bull
D
25.5
16.5
17.5
17.7
29.3
19.7
36.7
24.7
A
1.18
0.91
0.70
0.83
1.2
0.87
0.56
0.62
EX
0.082 0.123 0.127 0.098 0.162 -0.024 0.118 0.012
V
0.122 0.093 0.065 0.084 0.074
0.08
0.023 0.039
B+
0.75
0.75
0.75
0.33
0.75
0.33
0.67
1
Bear
D
10
17
12
29.5
10
16
4.3
7
A
-0.69 -1.29 -0.38 -1.19
-0.76
-1.16 -0.08 -0.26
EX
0.088 0.107 0.002 0.039 0.135
-0.17 0.005 0.042
V
0.106 0.153 0.06 0.088
0.11
0.12
0.025 0.059
B−
1
1
0.75
1
1
1
0
0.25
Sample period for all countries is 1975:12 to 2001:01, thus yielding a total number of
observations of 302. For the US we use our own calculation using the peaks and troughs in
Pagan and Sossounov (2003) and the S&P500 index. For Germany we use the peaks and
troughs in Gómez Biscarri and Pérez de Gracia (2002), for the period 1970:01 to 1999:11.
D: Average duration in months
A: Average amplitude in % return (or loss)
EX: Excess from a triangle approximation
V: Volatility within the phase in average size of % return per month
B: Proportion of “big swings”
a
Our own calculations.

45

Table 3: Concordance Index
PANEL A: FULL SAMPLE
CI ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI U S
ARGEN T IN A
1 0.579 0.642 0.460 0.762a
0.636 0.639
BRAZIL
1
0.5 0.536 0.586
0.387 0.483
CHILE
1 0.652 0.689a
0.629 0.632
KOREA
1 0.586 0.659a 0.483
MEXICO
1 0.702a 0.632
T HAILAN D
1 0.573
PANEL B: PRE-REFORM (1975-1989)
CI ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI
US
ARGEN T IN A
1 0.426 0.639 0.420 0.604
0.586 0.586
BRAZIL
1 0.361 0.485 0.444 0.249b 0.379
CHILE
1 0.627 0.751a
0.627 0.686a
KOREA
1 0.627 0.692a 0.562
MEXICO
1 0.710a 0.568
T HAILAN D
1 0.550
PANEL C: POST-REFORM (1990-2001)
CI ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI
US
a
a
a
ARGEN T IN A
1 0.774
0.647 0.511 0.962
0.699 0.707a
BRAZIL
1 0.677a 0.602 0.767a
0.564 0.617
CHILE
1 0.684a
0.609
0.632 0.564
KOREA
1 0.534
0.617 0.383
MEXICO
1 0.692a 0.714a
T HAILAN D
1 0.602
The a indicates significance at the 5% confidence level with positive correlation.
b
indicates significant negative correlation. The confidence intervals have been
calculated from simulated series using a random walk with drift and AR(1)
increments,

∆pt = ¹ + ½∆pt−1 + ¾"t ; "t → nid(0; 1)

that represents the best fitting model to the stock market cycle characteristics.
Parameters of this model were estimated for all six countries, and then 10,000
series of length 302 were simulated and the CI calculated. The 2.5% and 97.5%
quantiles of the simulated distribution of the CI are used as critical values. The
specific values are available upon request. The CI with respect to the US has
been calculated with the series of bullish/bearish markets for the US in Table
1.

46

Table 4: Simple Correlations of Returns
PANEL A: FULL SAMPLE
½ ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI
ARGEN T IN A
1
0.03 0.17 -0.0256 0.192a
0.084
BRAZIL
1 0.112
0.076 0.104
0.091
CHILE
1
0.129 0.225a
0.223
KOREA
1 0.137 0.376a
MEXICO
1 0.262a
T HAILAN D
1
PANEL B: PRE-REFORM (1975-1989)
½ ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI
ARGEN T IN A
1 -0.07 0.114 -0.11 0.106 -0.011
BRAZIL
1 -0.04 0.074 0.067 -0.071b
CHILE
1 0.041 0.153a
0.121
KOREA
1 0.071 -0.011a
MEXICO
1 0.255a
T HAILAN D
1
PANEL C: POST-REFORM (1990-2001)
½ ARG BRA CHI KOR MEX T HAI
ARGEN T IN A
1 0.306a 0.433 0.124 0.555a 0.283a
BRAZIL
1 0.392a 0.086 0.407a
0.201
CHILE
1 0.257a
0.422
0.381
KOREA
1 0.242
0.542
MEXICO
1 0.341a
T HAILAN D
1
The a indicate that the CI in Table 4 is outside of the 5% confidence interval
and shows positive correlation. b indicates significant negative correlation.

47

Table 5
Simulated Critical Values of the EX index

Model I Lower CV
FULL

Upper CV

Model II Lower CV
SAMPLE

Upper CV

Model IIILower CV
Upper CV

Model I Lower CV
1975
1989

Upper CV

Model II Lower CV
Upper CV

Model IIILower CV
Upper CV

Model I Lower CV
1990
2001

Upper CV

Model II Lower CV
Upper CV

Model IIILower CV
Upper CV

ARG
Bull Bear
0.195 -0.216
0.388 -0.085
0.1432 -0.335
0.3785 -0.108
0.1013 -0.282
0.3397 -0.141
0.2381 -0.264
0.4938 -0.103
0.1328 -0.407
0.3275 -0.179
0.1273 -0.333
0.3857 -0.178
0.1299 -0.132
0.2658 -0.051
0.1742 -0.089
0.343 -0.015
0.0856 -0.099
0.1664 -0.039

BRA
Bull Bear
0.1036 -0.196
0.2148 -0.09
0.0931 -0.284
0.2647 -0.109
0.1006 -0.296
0.2502 -0.125
0.0888 -0.232
0.1922 -0.113

0.1337
0.258
0.1373
0.269
0.1163
0.2436

-0.154
-0.065
-0.106
-0.034
-0.176
-0.078

CHI
Bull Bear
0.153 -0.081
0.2939 -0.018
0.1118 -0.07
0.2206 -0.018
0.1141 -0.067
0.2211 -0.011
0.1839 -0.087
0.3578 -0.007
0.1242 -0.08
0.2457 -0.02
0.1667 -0.089
0.334 -0.01
0.1078 -0.074
0.2138 -0.021
0.1015 -0.084
0.2064 -0.026
0.0752 -0.095
0.1586 -0.041

KOR
Bull Bear
0.0854 -0.124
0.1769 -0.052
0.1253 -0.09
0.2611 -0.015
0.1439 -0.096
0.2549 -0.009
0.1308 -0.054
0.2532 0.005
0.2073 -0.043
0.405 0.0852
0.2104 -0.04
0.3992 0.0747
0.0594 -0.234
0.139 -0.112
0.0705 -0.167
0.1723 -0.068
0.1214 -0.223
0.2218 -0.026

MEX
Bull Bear
0.1382 -0.178
0.2839 -0.077
0.1169 -0.15
0.2488 -0.055
0.1533 -0.136
0.2988 -0.043
0.153 -0.219
0.3279
-0.1
0.1072 -0.24
0.2522 -0.095
0.1486 -0.168
0.3212 -0.065
0.1305 -0.156
0.2605 -0.063
0.1356 -0.105
0.2688 -0.033
0.1137 -0.172
0.248 -0.075

THAI
Bull Bear
0.0816 -0.141
0.1638 -0.061
0.0682 -0.362
0.33 -0.07
0.0628 -0.203
0.1856 -0.086
0.1106 -0.045
0.2141 0.0057
0.06 -0.085
0.1468 -0.027
0.0384 -0.078
0.1155 -0.043
0.0623 -0.266
0.1423 -0.131
0.079 -0.221
0.1925 -0.097
0.0866 -0.303
0.1663 -0.114

The missing CV's for Brazil represent that the estimated parameters did not yield a stationary process for the variance, which
therefore prevented the EX index from being simulated

A

D
A ) A B u ll M ark e t w ith E X > 0

B ) A B u ll M a rk et w ith E X < 0

C ) A B e ar M ark e t w ith E X > 0

D ) A B e a r M a rk et w ith E X < 0

Figure 1: Shape of the Bull / Bear Phases and value of the Excess measure. Of course,
the axes correspond to time and stock prices. Consequently, D corresponds to our measure
of duration of the phase and A to the amplitude.

49

ARGENTINA

BRAZIL

8

6.5
6.0

7

5.5
6
5.0
5
4.5
4

4.0

3

3.5
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

1985

CHILE

1990

1995

2000

1995

2000

1995

2000

KOREA

9

7.0

8

6.5

7

6.0

6

5.5

5

5.0

4

4.5

3

4.0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

MEXICO

1985

1990

THAILAND

9

7.5

8

7.0
6.5

7

6.0
6
5.5
5

5.0

4

4.5

3

4.0
1980

1985

1990

1995

2000

1980

1985

1990

Figure 2: Country Stock Indexes. Evolution of (Log) Prices, 1975-2001. Bullish Phases
shaded. The four lines correspond to the Mexican, Asian, Russian and Brazilian crises

50

Brazil

States
1

Returns
1

Chile

States
1

Returns
1

0.9

0.8

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.5

0

0.5

0

0.4

-0.2

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8

0.1

-0.8
Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

-0.2

0.4

-0.4

0.3

-0.6

0.2

-0.6

-0.8

0.1

-0.8
Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-80

-1
Jan-84

0

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-80

Jan-82

Thailand

0

0.5

-1

States
1

0.2

0.6

-0.4

0

0.4

0.7

-0.2

0.1

Jan-86

0.6

0.8

0

0.2

Jan-84

0.8

0.9

0.2

0.3

Jan-82

Jan-80
1

0.6
0.4

0.4

Returns
1

0.8

0.6
0.5

Mexico

States
1.1

Returns
1

0.7

-1

Jan-82

Korea

States
0.8

0

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Returns
1

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.5

0

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8
Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Figure 3: Argentina. Comparison of rolling correlation indexes of simple returns (dashed
line) and rolling concordance indexes of bull/bear states (solid line). The rolling window
has size 50.

51

Chile

States
0.9

Returns
1
0.8

0.8

Korea

States
0.8

Returns
1
0.8

0.7

0.6

0.7

0.6
0.6

0.4

0.6

0.4
0.5

0.2

0.5

0
0.4

-0.2

0.3

0.2
0

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

-0.4

0.2

0.2

-0.6

-0.6
0.1

-0.8

0

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

-0.2
-0.4

0.2

-0.6
0.1

-0.8
-1
Jan-80

0

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

Jan-84

0
0.3

-1
Jan-80

0.2

Jan-00

0.5

0.4

0.4

Jan-98

0.2

Jan-96

0.6

0.6
0.5

Jan-94

0.4

0.8

Jan-92

0.7

Returns
1

0.6

Jan-90

0.6

Jan-88

0.8

0.8

Thailand

States
0.7

Jan-86

0.9

Jan-82

Jan-80

Returns
1

0

-1

Jan-84

Mexico

States
1

-0.8

0

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Jan-82

0.1

Figure 4: Brazil. Comparison of rolling correlation indexes of simple returns (dashed line)
and rolling concordance indexes of bull/bear states (solid line). The rolling window has size
50.

52

Korea

States
1

Returns
1

Mexico

States
1

Returns
1

0.9

0.8

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.8

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.6

0.2

0.5

0

0.5

0

0.4

-0.2

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8

0.1

-0.8

Thailand

States
0.9

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Returns
1
0.8

0.8

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.5

0
0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8
Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Figure 5: Chile. Comparison of rolling correlation indexes of simple returns (dashed line)
and rolling concordance indexes of bull/bear states (solid line). The rolling window has size
50.

53

Korea-Mexico

States
1

Returns
1

Korea-Thailand

States
1.1

Returns
1

0.9

0.8

1

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.9

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.5

0

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8

0.1

-0.8

0.2

0.6

0

0.5

-0.2

0.4

-0.4

0.3

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

Mexico-Thailand

States
1

0.4

0.7

-1
Jan-80

0

0.8

Returns
1

0.9

0.8

0.8

0.6

0.7

0.4

0.6

0.2

0.5

0

0.4

-0.2

0.3

-0.4

0.2

-0.6

0.1

-0.8
Jan-00

Jan-98

Jan-96

Jan-94

Jan-92

Jan-90

Jan-88

Jan-86

Jan-84

Jan-82

-1
Jan-80

0

Figure 6: Mexico, Korea and Thailand. Comparison of rolling correlation indexes of
simple returns (dashed line) and rolling concordance indexes of bull/bear states (solid line).
The rolling window has size 50.

54

