NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

THE DETERMINANTS OF PARTICIPATION
IN A SOCIAL PROGRAM:
EVIDENCE FROM A PROTOTYPICAL JOB TRAINING PROGRAM
James J. Heckman
Jeffrey A. Smith
Working Paper 9818
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9818
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

James Heckman is Henry Schultz Distinguished Service Professor of Economics at the University of Chicago,
and a Senior Fellow of the American Bar Foundation. Jeffrey Smith is Associate Professor of Economics at
the University of Maryland. This research was supported by NSF SBR 91-11-455 and SBR 93-21-048 and
by grants from the Russell Sage Foundation, the Lynde and Harry Bradley Foundation of Milwaukee,
Wisconsin, the American Bar Foundation and the Social Science and Humanities Research Council of
Canada. We thank Jingjing Hsee for her programming, Theresa Devine for her comments and assistance with
the SIPP data, Karen Conneely and Edward Vytlacil for their excellent research assistance and Larry Katz,
and seminar participants at the NBER Labor Studies Group and the University of Western Ontario for their
comments. This paper was presented as an invited lecture at the SOLE meetings, San Francisco, May, 1998.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research
©2003 by James J. Heckman and Jeffrey A. Smith. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

The Determinants of Participation in a Social Program:
Evidence from a Prototypical Job Training Program
James J. Heckman and Jeffrey A. Smith
NBER Working Paper No. 9818
July 2003
JEL No. J24
ABSTRACT
This paper decomposes the participation process of a prototypical program into eligibility,
awareness, application, acceptance and enrollment. With this decomposition, we determine the
sources of unequal participation for different groups, and demonstrate that variables often have very
different effects at different stages in the participation process. Our analysis shows that personal
choices substantially affect participation and that awareness of program eligibility is a major source
of variation in participation.

James J. Heckman
Department of Economics
University of Chicago
1126 East 59th Street
Chicago, IL 60637
and NBER
jjh@uchicago.edu

Jeffrey A. Smith
Department of Economics
University of Maryland
College Park, MD 20742-7211
and NBER
smith@econ.umd.edu

1. Introduction
This paper presents a framework for studying participation in social programs that
decomposes the participation process into multiple stages: eligibility, awareness,
application, acceptance and enrollment, allowing for distinct determinants at each stage.
We apply our framework to analyze unique data gathered as part of an evaluation of a
prototypical voluntary social program.
Understanding the process of participation in social programs is interesting for at
least three reasons. First, it allows analysts to determine the sources of inequality in the
receipt of government services. Our framework allows us to go beyond simple
comparisons of the mean participation rates of different groups to learn at what stage in
the process, if any, differences in participation rates occur. Overall differences in
participation may have very different equity implications, and very different implications
for changes in policy, depending on whether they result from differences in eligibility for
the program, awareness of the program, application to the program, acceptance into the
program, or enrollment in the program.
Second, patterns of program participation can reveal useful information about
program operation. In programs governed by performance management systems, which
now includes most major U.S. social programs, participation patterns may reveal the
effects of the incentives embodied in those performance standards systems. Here the
decomposition of the participation process into particular stages aids in disentangling the
effects of choices made by program staff and choices made by potential participants.
Third, information regarding the participation process has important implications
for program evaluation strategies. For example, the propensity score matching methods

2

developed and applied in Heckman, Ichimura and Todd (1997,1998) and Heckman,
Ichimura, Smith and Todd (1998) build directly on estimates of the probability of
participation conditional on observable characteristics. Other econometric evaluation
methods, such as instrumental variables, also require an understanding of the
participation process. Knowledge of how the determinants of participation vary by the
stage of the participation process can inform choices about where in the process to draw a
comparison group, about what variables to collect in a survey, and about what
identification strategy to adopt. Heckman and Robb (1985), Heckman, LaLonde and
Smith (1999), and Heckman and Navarro-Lozano (2003) describe the role of the program
participation decision in econometric evaluations in detail.
We apply our framework to analyze participation in the Job Training Partnership
Act (JTPA), a prototypical voluntary social program. Participation in JTPA depends on
the choices of both potential participants and government bureaucrats. It is not an
entitlement program. In contrast, the existing literature on program participation focuses
on entitlement programs such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) and
its successor Temporary Aid to Needy Families (TANF), Food Stamps, or
Unemployment Insurance.1 Persons eligible for such programs are legally entitled to
their benefits, so that participation depends primarily on the decisions of potential
participants, although there is clearly room for bureaucratic discretion in interpreting
eligibility rules (see, e.g., Parsons, 1991).
1

On AFDC and Food Stamps see, e.g., Blank and Ruggles (1996) and Blank (2001). On Unemployment
Insurance see, e.g., Anderson and Meyer (1997), McCall (1995) and Storer and Van Audenrode (1995).
For discussions in other contexts see Ashenfelter (1983), Riphan (2001), Witte and Queralt (2002), and
Remler, Rachlin and Glied (2001). For earlier discussions of participation in training programs see
Anderson, Burkhauser and Raymond (1993), Anderson, Burkhauser, Raymond and Russell (1991),
Ashenfelter and Card (1985), Card and Sullivan (1988), Sandell and Rupp (1988), Zweimüller and WinterEbmer (1996) and Jacobsen, LaLonde and Sullivan (2002).

3

Our empirical analysis is deliberately descriptive. We seek to establish empirical
regularities about the participation process for a prototypical social program using the
rich information available on the JTPA program. These regularities suggest interesting
behavioral relationships governing the process of program participation. As such, they
demonstrate the value of our framework and suggest its applicability for the study of
other programs.
We document that the JTPA eligibility rules had a substantial effect on the access
of particular groups to program services. We also find wide variation in participation
rates conditional on eligibility across groups defined by race, age, education, fluency in
English, marital status, participation in government transfer programs, recent labor force
status and family income. On the surface, this evidence supports the conclusions of a U.S.
General Accounting Office (1991) report that charged the JTPA program with failing to
distribute its services equitably across groups within the eligible population. Similar
distributional concerns have been raised in regard to other government programs.
By decomposing the program participation process into stages, we determine the
sources of unequal participation for different groups. For example, for persons with low
levels of schooling, the favorable effect of the JTPA eligibility rules on the probability of
participation was undone by low rates of program awareness and of application and
acceptance into the program. On the other hand, for persons with a relatively high level
of schooling, a low rate of eligibility was partially offset by a relatively high probability
of program awareness. In addition, we find that informational barriers such as low levels
of schooling and lack of fluency in English act to discourage participation conditional on
eligibility, but that these barriers do not fully account for the low participation rate of

4

Hispanics noted by Gonzales and Romero (1989) and Sandell and Rupp (1988). Our
evidence suggests that personal choices have a major influence in determining who
participates in government programs. More generally, our analysis demonstrates that
program eligibility is a necessary but by no means sufficient condition for participation.
Many groups of special interest to policymakers, such as high school dropouts and
welfare recipients, have high rates of eligibility but low probabilities of program
participation conditional on eligibility.
Caseworkers in the JTPA program faced the incentives created by the JTPA
performance standards systems, which rewarded local JTPA training sites for the labor
market performance of their enrollees. Anderson, Burkhauser and Raymond (1993),
among others, argue that performance standards led JTPA staff to screen out hard-toserve applicants who may have difficulty obtaining work even after completing a training
program. We find evidence consistent with cream skimming by JTPA staff, particularly
at the stage of program enrollment. However, in some cases what appears initially to be
cream skimming by JTPA staff turns out instead to reflect differences across groups in
program awareness. This finding casts doubt on the value of the evidence from the
literature that estimates the nature and extent of cream skimming by comparing the
characteristics of program eligibles and program participants.
Finally, in regard to program evaluation, we expand on the analysis in Heckman
and Smith (1999) and document the important role of labor force status dynamics,
especially recent transitions to unemployment, in driving participation in JTPA among
the eligible. This factor operates most strongly at the stage of application and acceptance
into the program among eligible persons who are aware of JTPA. This evidence has

5

important implications for the types of data that should be collected in non-experimental
evaluations of employment and training programs.
This paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents our framework. Section 3
describes the JTPA program in detail and shows that it is very similar to other public
employment and training programs in the U.S. and abroad, including its successor, the
Workforce Investment Act (WIA), in terms of administrative structure, population
served, and types of services offered. It resembles in broad outline a large class of
voluntary programs aimed at the disadvantaged. Thus lessons drawn in this paper apply
more widely. Section 4 describes our data.
Sections 5, 6, 7 and 8 examine in detail four stages in the participation process:
eligibility, program awareness, application and acceptance into the program and formal
enrollment. In Section 9, we decompose the overall program participation process in
order to examine how factors such as race, education, labor force status, participation in
transfer programs and family income operate through eligibility, awareness, acceptance
and enrollment to determine the overall probability of participation in JTPA. The final
section summarizes our findings and draws conclusions about the usefulness of our
framework for studying program participation.

2. A Framework for Analyzing Participation in Social Programs
For a person to participate in a voluntary social program, he or she must be eligible for it,
must be aware of it, must apply for it, must be accepted into it and must be formally
enrolled in it. Figure 1 depicts the process of selection into a program. Different factors
govern each stage of the program participation process. Eligibility criteria are determined

6

by legislators and interpreted by bureaucrats. Program awareness depends on outreach
efforts by program operators, on the extent to which a person is generally informed about
the availability of social programs, on the economic situation of prospective applicants
who might benefit from a program, and on access to networks of friends and neighbors
who have heard about or participated in a program.
The decision to apply to a program is made by the prospective participant and
depends in part on the expected benefits and perceived opportunity costs of participation.
Acceptance into a program depends on bureaucratic preferences over applicant types,
which in many programs are determined in part by formal performance standards
systems. Acceptance also depends on the willingness of the applicant to pursue the
application process to its conclusion and on further changes in opportunity costs, such as
sudden illnesses or the arrival of job offers, during the application process.
Formal enrollment depends on both bureaucratic and personal preferences. For
example, the JTPA performance standards system counted only the employment and
wages of enrollees in a specified period following termination from the program. As a
result, local JTPA bureaucrats had an incentive to gain additional information about the
potential employability of persons accepted into the program and to use it to guide their
enrollment decisions. At the same time, the passage of time between acceptance and
enrollment leads to changes in opportunity costs that may cause accepted applicants to
decline enrollment even if it is offered.
To describe the participation process, consider the following conditional
probabilities for a person with characteristics x: (1) the probability of eligibility; (2) the
probability of program awareness given eligibility; (3) the probability of application

7

given eligibility and awareness; (4) the probability of acceptance given application; and
(5) the probability of formal enrollment conditional on acceptance into a program. In
formal terms, we have

(1a)

Pr(el = 1| x) ,

(1b)

Pr(aw = 1| el = 1, x) ,

(1c)

Pr(ap = 1| aw = 1, el = 1, x)

(1c)

Pr(ac = 1| ap = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) ,

(1d)

Pr(en = 1| ac = 1, ap = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) ,

where el = 1 if a person is eligible for a program and zero otherwise, aw = 1 if a person is
aware of a program and zero otherwise, ap = 1 if a person applies to a program and zero
otherwise, ac = 1 if a person applies to and is accepted into a program and zero
otherwise, and en = 1 if a person is formally enrolled in a program and zero otherwise.
As persons only participate in the program if they are eligible el = 1 , are aware
aw = 1 , apply ap = 1 , are accepted ac = 1 , and formally enroll en = 1 , we can decompose

the probability of participation given X = x , Pr( par = 1| x) , into the five components on
the right-hand side of the following equation:

(2)

Pr( par = 1| x) =
Pr(en = 1| ac = 1, ap = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) Pr(ac = 1| ap = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x)

8

Pr(ap = 1| aw = 1, el = 1, x) Pr(aw = 1| el = 1, x) Pr(el = 1| x) ,

where par = 1 if a person participates in a program and zero otherwise. By estimating
each of the five component probabilities, we can determine the effect of each variable in
x on the overall probability of participation and can determine where and how it
influences program participation. A variable that has no effect on the overall probability
of participation may have strong, but offsetting, effects on the component probabilities.
In the sections that follow, we apply this framework to analyze participation in the
JTPA program. Data limitations force us to combine application and acceptance into a
single step. We equate acceptance into the program with reaching the stage of random
assignment during the experimental evaluation of JTPA. Only eligible applicants who
completed the aptitude and achievement tests required at most JTPA training sites and
who received a written JTPA service plan were subject to random assignment. These
conditions required a substantial commitment by JTPA training centers to continued
interaction with the applicant, but fall short of formal enrollment into JTPA.
Section 9 presents two sets of decompositions based on (2). The first set includes
all four stages: eligibility, awareness, application and acceptance, and enrollment. In the
second set, we decompose Pr(ac = 1| el = 1, x) , the probability of application and
acceptance conditional on eligibility, into separate stages of awareness given eligibility
and acceptance given awareness. Focusing solely on these two stages allows us to
examine the effects of explanatory variables not included in the full decomposition due to
data limitations.

9

3. The JTPA Program

The Job Training Partnership Act (JTPA) was the primary U.S. federal employment and
training program for the disadvantaged until replaced by the programs financed under the
Workforce Investment Act (WIA) of 1998. JTPA provided classroom training in
occupational skills, remedial education, job search assistance, work experience and onthe-job training at private firms for approximately one million persons each year.
There were two primary avenues to eligibility for JTPA. The first and most important
avenue was economic disadvantage, which occurred if one of two criteria were met: (1)
low family income in the six months prior to application to the program; or (2) being in a
family receiving cash public assistance such as Aid to Families with Dependent Children
(AFDC) and general assistance or Food Stamps.2 According to the U.S. Department of
Labor (1993a), in Program Year 19913 around 93 percent of JTPA participants qualified
because they were economically disadvantaged. A second avenue to eligibility was an
“audit window'' that allowed up to 10 percent of participants at each JTPA training center
to be non-economically disadvantaged persons with other barriers to employment such as
limited ability in English. Due to the subjective nature of these barriers, and the resulting
difficulty in determining who is affected by them, we only examine persons who are
eligible by virtue of being economically disadvantaged. Devine and Heckman (1996)

The act also specifies additional eligibility criteria for several small groups. In the Survey of Income and
Program Participation (SIPP) data used in our analysis, we are not able to accurately measure foster child
status, disability or homelessness on a monthly basis, and so are unable to implement the special eligibility
rules applicable to these groups in selecting our sample of eligibles. However, these groups represent a
very small portion of the overall eligible population, and many of those eligible under the special
provisions will also be eligible under the basic family income and program participation criteria described
in the text.
3
Program Year (PY) 1991 covers the period from July 1991 to June 1992.
2

10

discuss the eligibility rules for JTPA and their implications for the composition of the
eligible population.4
There are three important features of the criteria that determined eligibility for
JTPA through economic disadvantage. First, eligibility depended on family income
rather than on individual income. Second, only family income in the past six months was
relevant. Third, current receipt of welfare benefits by any family member made a person
eligible for the program. The short window for income eligibility allowed highly skilled
and normally highly paid workers to become eligible for JTPA after being out of work
only a few months.
There are some differences between the eligibility criteria and services offered in
JTPA compared to its predecessors CETA (Comprehensive Employment and Training
Act) and MDTA (Manpower Development and Training Act), and its successor, the WIA
program. Barnow (1993) suggests that these differences are modest in regard to CETA
and MDTA. U.S. Department of Labor (1998) and O’Shea and King (2001) document
the details of the WIA program. All four programs focus on displaced workers, persons
with low income and transfer program participants, and all four offered roughly the same
set of services, with the earlier programs focused somewhat more on substantive training,
either in a classroom or on the job, and the later programs focused somewhat more on
“work first” strategies such as job search assistance. MDTA and CETA also offered
public service employment, which was not offered in JTPA and is not offered under
4

Two other details regarding JTPA eligibility deserve note. First, the implementation of the rules varied
somewhat across localities, as states and training centers had some discretion over exactly what did and did
not constitute family income and what did and did not constitute a family for the purposes of the program.
Devine and Heckman (1996) show that such differences are too small to affect the patterns discussed here.
Second, the eligibility rules described here are those in place at the time our data were collected. Some
small changes in rules took place after that time; see Devine and Heckman (1996) or U.S. Department of
Labor (1993b).

11

WIA. Overall, the broad similarity in eligibility rules and services offered suggests that
our analysis applies to all of these programs and to future programs patterned after them.
Moreover, the U.S. JTPA program is also quite similar in terms of target groups,
administration, and services offered to programs provided to unemployed workers in
Canada and to the New Deal for Young People, New Deal for 25 Plus and New Deal for
Lone Parent programs in the United Kingdom.5

4. Data

The primary source of our data is the National JTPA Study (NJS), an experimental
evaluation of the JTPA program conducted from 1987 to 1989.6 In the course of this
evaluation, persons accepted into JTPA at a non-random sample of sixteen JTPA training
centers were randomly assigned into either a control group excluded from JTPA (for 18
months) or a treatment group given access to JTPA services. In order to learn more about
the JTPA-eligible population, and to facilitate the development of better nonexperimental evaluation methods, data were collected on JTPA-eligible non-participants
(ENPs) at four of the sixteen centers. These centers are Corpus Christi, Texas, Fort
Wayne, Indiana, Jersey City, New Jersey and Providence, Rhode Island.
Detailed information on demographic characteristics, labor market histories,
transfer program participation and family composition and income was collected on the
ENPs and on experimental control group members at the same four sites. We use this
information for our analyses of awareness of JTPA and of application and acceptance

5

For Canada, see the information on the Human Resources Development Canada website, www.hrdc.gc.ca.
For the New Deal programs in the United Kingdom, see the New Deal website, www.newdeal.gov.uk.
6
See Doolittle and Traeger (1987) for a discussion of the implementation of the NJS and Bloom et al.
(1997) and Orr et al. (1996) for summaries of the impact estimates.

12

into JTPA. For the experimental treatment group, we have only limited information
collected shortly before random assignment. We use these data to study enrollment into
JTPA at the four sites. Appendix A describes the National JTPA Study data in detail.
The National JTPA Study did not collect data on persons ineligible for JTPA. In
order to analyze the determinants of eligibility we use a national sample drawn from the
1986 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The SIPP is well
suited to this purpose because it contains sufficient information to precisely determine
JTPA eligibility. We treat the SIPP panel as a series of repeated cross-sections, and create
a data set consisting of person-months. The SIPP sample is described in detail in
Appendix B.

5. The Determinants of Eligibility for the JTPA Program

This section examines the determinants of eligibility for JTPA. Table 1 defines the
explanatory variables used in this paper. Tables 2a and 2b present the results of logit
analyses of the determinants of eligibility. Table 2a presents results for adult (age 22 and
above) men and women, and Table 2b presents the results for male and female out-ofschool youth (ages 16 to 21). We focus on these four demographic groups for three
reasons. First, they are the groups employed in the experimental impact reports and in
our other work utilizing these data. Second, because of concerns around family
responsibilities and education, we would expect men and women, and youth and adults,
to behave differently. Third, we have no data on in-school youth, as this group was
excluded from the experimental analysis.

13

The first column for each demographic group in Tables 2a and 2b displays
estimated coefficients and associated standard errors (in parentheses) from logit models
of the probability of eligibility derived from the SIPP data. The second column displays
estimates of the mean derivative of the probability of eligibility with respect to each
characteristic (in square brackets) along with p-values from tests of the null hypotheses
that each population coefficient equals zero.7 The notes to each table document the
within-sample predictive performance of each model. As discussed in Appendix C, these
estimates adjust for the dependence induced by the use of person-month observations,
with each respondent allowed to contribute multiple months.
A number of interesting findings emerge from this analysis. First, even after
controlling for family income and productivity characteristics, race and ethnicity are very
important determinants of the probability of eligibility. For example, for adult females,
the average difference in the probability of eligibility for blacks and Hispanics relative to
whites exceeds 0.12, holding resource variables constant.
Being married has a large negative estimated effect on the eligibility probabilities
for all groups except adult males. The eligibility status of adult males is driven primarily
by their own income, while for adult females and for youth, eligibility status depends in
large part on the earnings of other family members. For all demographic groups except
adult males, the presence of an own child age less than six living in the home
substantially increases the probability of eligibility for JTPA. Children raise the income
cutoff for eligibility by increasing the household size but do not add to the family income.
In addition, years of schooling have an important impact on eligibility for all groups.
7

We present mean derivatives and not derivatives evaluated at the mean of the X. That is, we calculate the
derivative (or finite difference for binary variables) for each observation and report the (weighted) sample
mean.

14

Not surprisingly, the probability of eligibility decreases monotonically with
family income for all four demographic groups. The magnitude of the estimated average
derivatives is very large for family income categories corresponding to incomes above
$6000. For adult males, raising family income from less than $3000 to between $9000
and $12,000 produces an average decrease in the probability of JTPA eligibility of 0.268.
For male and female youth, the estimated average derivatives are larger still, reflecting
the differential importance of family resources in determining eligibility for these groups.
The small set of characteristics included in the specifications reported in Table 2
do well at predicting within-sample eligibility status. For all four groups, over 70 percent
of the eligibles and almost 90 percent of the non-eligibles are correctly predicted when
we use the overall eligibility rate within each group to define the cutoff for predicting
eligibility. Taken together, our results demonstrate that the eligibility rules for JTPA
produced substantial group differences in access to subsidized government training.

6. The Determinants of Awareness of the JTPA Program

This section investigates the determinants of awareness of the JTPA program using data
on the controls and eligible non-participants at four JTPA sites. The concept of program
awareness is an elusive but important one. Differential access to information about the
program can affect awareness and thereby influence participation. Language barriers are
an obvious case in point. However, awareness also depends on the incentives a person
has to participate in the program. In some cases the desire to participate may influence
awareness rather than awareness independently influencing participation.

15

As we lack evidence on individual information-gathering activities, we are unable
to determine the extent to which information costs, and therefore program awareness,
play a causal role in determining program participation choices. However, the evidence
presented in this section indicates that awareness of JTPA among those eligible for it is
by no means universal, and that program awareness appears to be related to the likelihood
of participation in the program, to education, and to language skills. We also present
evidence that a sizeable fraction of persons who are eligible for the program do not
believe that they are eligible for it. Taken together, this evidence suggests that barriers to
information are an important determinant of program participation.
Each member of the ENP sample was asked whether or not he or she had heard of
the JTPA program. In keeping with the decentralized nature of the JTPA program, local
training sites often select operating names other than JTPA. To overcome this problem,
ENPs were asked about their awareness of JTPA under several different names, including
the program’s primary name in their locality. Persons who indicated that they were
aware of the JTPA program were then asked whether or not they believed themselves to
be presently eligible for it. Persons participating in the program are assumed to be aware
of it and of their own eligibility for it.
Table 3 presents rates of awareness and self-reported eligibility for eligible nonparticipants in each major demographic group. The first column presents the fraction of
the ENPs who have heard of JTPA. These fractions are surprisingly low. For all four
groups, the awareness rate is below 50 percent. The rate is higher for youth than for
adults, which may indirectly reflect requirements that sites expended 40 percent of their
training resources on youth, who constitute well less than 40 percent of the eligible

16

population (a similar requirement, reduced to 30 percent, holds for the WIA program).
The second column gives the fraction of those persons aware of the program who think
that they are eligible for it. Note that all of the ENPs are determined to be eligible at the
time of their screening interviews and that nearly all are still eligible at the time the
question was asked in the baseline interview. Conditional on awareness, only 36 percent
of adult males, 46 percent of adult females and around 55 percent of youth realize that
they qualify for JTPA services. Taking the product of these two probabilities yields the
unconditional probability of awareness and self-reported eligibility appearing in the third
column. Barely 12 percent of adult male eligibles can identify both the program and their
own eligibility for it. Even among youth, only about 25 percent of eligibles are both
aware of the program and of their own eligibility for it. These figures suggest that there
are substantial costs associated with finding out about social programs such as JTPA and
about the rules governing access to their services, and that information costs play an
important role in producing demographic differentials in program participation.
The results from a logit analysis of the determinants of awareness of the
JTPA program appear in Tables 4a and 4b. These tables have the same basic structure as
Tables 2a and 2b. For all four demographic groups, black eligibles are relatively more
likely than white eligibles to know about JTPA. Adult Hispanic eligibles are relatively
less likely than whites to know about JTPA, with the difference being statistically
significant in both cases. The negative and statistically significant coefficient estimates
for Hispanic adult eligibles arise even after controlling for facility with the English
language and for level of education.8 It has often been noted (see, e.g., Tienda and

8

The English language ability variable should be interpreted with caution as it arises from different
underlying measures in the ENP and control group samples. For the ENPs, lack of English ability is

17

Jensen, 1988) that Hispanics participate less in government programs compared to nonHispanics with the same basic economic characteristics. Language skills and educational
deficits play a role in explaining this phenomenon but more than just language deficits
are involved. If Hispanics are less likely to utilize public services, or if they participate in
networks with fewer public service recipients, then they are less likely to be aware of
JTPA and of other programs.
Consistent with the standard human capital model (see, e.g., Becker 1964), older
adults have statistically significantly lower probabilities of awareness of the program than
persons age 22 to 29. This may reflect the reduced demand for skill enhancement
programs with age documented in Leigh (1995). The pattern with respect to education is
hump-shaped. Persons with the lowest levels of schooling have lower conditional
probabilities of awareness than those who have completed high school. This evidence
supports the notion of substantial information processing costs among those with very
low levels of schooling. A lower likelihood of participating in JTPA, and hence a lower
value to information about the program, accounts for the evidence that the most educated
persons are less aware of the program.
Among adults, divorced, widowed or separated eligibles have a higher probability
of awareness than do those who are single. The difference is both statistically and
substantively significant for adult males. For three of the four groups, living in a family
that receives Food Stamps has a positive effect on the probability of being aware of
JTPA, while living in a family that receives AFDC has a positive effect only for adult
males and for female youth. The estimated effect of living in a family receiving Food
measured by the language in which the respondent chose to complete the baseline survey, while for the
controls it is obtained from a question on language preference administered around the time of random
assignment.

18

Stamps is large, with mean numerical derivatives of 0.164 and 0.133, and it is statistically
significant for both adult males and females. As nearly all of the adult female AFDC
recipients also receive Food Stamps, the negative (essentially zero) coefficient on the
AFDC variable indicates the additional effect of receiving both AFDC and Food Stamps,
rather than just Food Stamps. Interpreted in this way, the absence of any AFDC effect
becomes less surprising. The strong effects observed for Food Stamp receipt are
consistent with the practice in that program of providing recipients with information
about training opportunities.
Unemployed eligibles have a higher probability of program awareness for all four
demographic groups. This difference between the unemployed and the employed is
statistically significant for both male and female adults. In contrast, eligible individuals
who are out of the labor force have lower probabilities of awareness than employed
eligibles for all four demographic groups. These results are consistent with the relative
value of information about JTPA for the two groups.
While the concept of program awareness is a conceptually problematic one, the
evidence presented here indicates that learning about the JTPA program and its eligibility
requirements is not costless, and that the likelihood of becoming aware of the program
varies in predictable ways. In particular, we find that differences in information costs, in
information processing and language skills, and in the expected value of information
about the JTPA program, which is itself a function of the probability of participation in
the program and its expected benefit, can account for the patterns we observe in the data.

7. The Determinants of Application and Acceptance into JTPA

19

This section presents a logit analysis of the determinants of application and acceptance
into the JTPA program conditional on awareness of the program using data on controls
and ENPs from the National JTPA Study. We combine the application and acceptance
stages here because we lack the data to examine them separately. Combining these two
stages in the program participation process means that the patterns we observe reflect the
joint influence of individual decisions to apply and to persist through the (sometimes
lengthy) application process and of JTPA staff decisions to accept or encourage some
applicants while rejecting or discouraging others.
Tables 5a and 5b report estimates of logit models of application and acceptance
into the JTPA program as a function of observed characteristics for the four demographic
groups. Coefficient estimates and estimated standard errors take account of the choicebased nature of the sample. The training site indicators included in the model have no
behavioral interpretation, as the relative numbers of ENPs and controls at each site is an
artifact of the study design. The notes to Tables 5a and 5b summarize the within-sample
predictive success of the models. Appendix C provides additional details regarding the
methods used to obtain the reported results.
The most dramatic result in Tables 5a and 5b is the powerful effect of recent labor
force status dynamics on application and acceptance into JTPA.9 For both adult males
and adult females, all of the labor force status pattern indicators have coefficients
statistically different from zero, though many of the coefficients cannot be statistically
distinguished from one another. In general, persons entering unemployment either from
outside the labor force or from employment are the most likely to enter the JTPA
program. For adult men, individuals who recently became unemployed, either by leaving
9

Heckman and Smith (1999) discuss the importance of these variables at greater length.

20

employment or by reentering the labor force, have higher application and acceptance
probabilities than the long term (over six months) unemployed. This difference does not
appear for women.
Older adults have a lower conditional probability of application and acceptance,
consistent with conventional arguments that the return to training declines with age. The
effect of years of completed schooling on acceptance into the program shows a hillshaped pattern for adults, with individuals with less than 10 or more than 15 years of
schooling having differentially low estimated application and acceptance probabilities.
This pattern reveals that it is more than just low rates of awareness that cause those with
less than a high school education to have low rates of participation in JTPA conditional
on eligibility. For youth, the probability of application and acceptance increases
monotonically in years of schooling.
Relative to single, never married persons, currently married persons have a
statistically significantly lower probability of application and acceptance for three of the
four demographic groups. Among adult men, but not the other three demographic
groups, divorced, widowed and separated persons also have lower probabilities of
application and acceptance into JTPA.
The effect of living in a family receiving AFDC is negative for all four groups,
and statistically significant for three. In contrast, family Food Stamp receipt has a
positive influence in all cases. Interpreting the AFDC coefficient as the marginal effect
of family AFDC receipt in addition to Food Stamps, it appears that among aware
eligibles, AFDC recipients have much lower probabilities of application and/or
acceptance into JTPA than do those receiving only Food Stamps. As the effect of young

21

children in the home is being controlled for, this difference does not result from young
children acting as a barrier to work or training outside the home.
The effects of family income differ across groups. High levels of family income
reduce the probability of application and acceptance among adult males, have little effect
for adult females, and raise the probability of participation for both youth groups. The
availability of income from other family members to provide support during training
appears to encourage youth to apply to JTPA.
Absent from the specifications reported here are measures of the state of the local
economy at the four sites during the time that the ENP and control samples were
collected. In work not reported in detail here, we estimate models including both countylevel monthly unemployment rates averaged over the counties constituting each of the
sites, and interactions between these unemployment rates and the site indicators.
Surprisingly, given the strong effects of individual unemployment found here, these
variables never attain statistical significance and never have a noticeable impact on the
proportion of correct predictions. One reason for this is that the number of ENPs whose
month of measured eligibility occurs in a given calendar month depends not only on the
size of the eligible population in that month, but also on the administrative schedule of
the consulting firm conducting the surveys. A second reason is that the flow into the
program, as measured by the number of persons randomly assigned in each calendar
month, depends on other factors beyond the local economy, including the academic
schedule of the community colleges that provide much of the JTPA training at these sites.
In Appendix D, we report estimates of the determinants of application and
acceptance into JTPA conditional on eligibility rather than on awareness. In general, the

22

main findings are the same in the two analyses. In particular, the labor force status
transition variables dominate both sets of results. The differences between the two are
consistent with the patterns in the two conditional analyses, so that factors whose main
impact is on awareness are statistically significant when we condition on eligibility but
are not when we condition on both eligibility and awareness.
Our analysis of application and acceptance into JTPA conditional on eligibility
reveals the fundamental importance of labor force status dynamics in determining who
applies and is accepted into the program conditional on program awareness. A number of
other factors including age, schooling, marital status and family income play important
supporting roles.

8. The Determinants of Enrollment in JTPA

Formal enrollment constitutes the final stage in the JTPA participation process. In this
section we examine the determinants of the transition from acceptance into the program,
defined here as reaching random assignment, to formal enrollment.10 A key difference
between acceptance and enrollment is that only the outcomes of persons formally
enrolled in JTPA influenced the rewards (or punishments) that a site received under the
JTPA performance standards system. Training centers in JTPA had considerable
discretion regarding whether (and when) to enroll persons accepted into the program.
The performance standards system provided an incentive for training centers to delay
enrollment until accepted applicants provided evidence that they were likely to obtain a

10

Heckman, Smith and Taber (1998) discuss non-enrollment within the experimental treatment group and
its implications for the evaluation of JTPA. See also the general discussions of treatment group dropout
and control group substitution in Heckman, Hohmann, Smith and Khoo (2000) and Heckman, LaLonde and
Smith (1999).

23

job or to otherwise count favorably toward center performance. In practice, this often
meant that individuals receiving job search assistance were not enrolled until they found
a job and that persons assigned to receive subsidized on-the-job training at private firms
were not enrolled until a firm willing to provide them with such training had been
located. For persons assigned to receive classroom training, training centers would often
wait until trainees successfully attended class before enrolling them in the program.
Thus, we expect that the incentives provided by the performance standards system should
result in higher probabilities of enrollment for persons with characteristics associated
with employability, such as higher levels of schooling or recent employment experience.
Another factor influencing enrollment decisions for persons recommended for
classroom training is their ability to maintain themselves during the time they are
enrolled in training. Classroom training typically lasts longer than employment-related
services such as job search assistance. At the same time, unlike earlier programs such as
CETA, JTPA provided no stipends to trainees except in unusual circumstances. Thus, the
willingness of a person to pursue classroom training may depend on the availability of a
stable income from outside sources. Two important sources of income are transfer
programs such as AFDC and family income. Given that persons with limited access to
outside income may not take classroom training that is offered, and that enrollment
usually does not occur until a person begins attending classes, we would expect AFDC
and family income to have positive effects on the probability of enrollment, particularly
for adult women and female youth, who are relatively more likely to receive classroom
training (see, e.g., Kemple, Doolittle and Wallace, 1993).

24

At the same time, the lag between acceptance into the program and enrollment in
it may lead to changes in the opportunity costs of participation. Accepted applicants may
receive job offers that dominate the training offered by JTPA, or they may experience
illness or family problems that make it impossible for them to enroll. Thus, the patterns
we observe represent the combined influence of bureaucratic decisions regarding
enrollment and of individual decisions to continue in or drop out of the program in
response to changes in opportunity costs.
Tables 6a and 6b present the results of logit analyses of enrollment for the four
demographic groups. The notes to the tables discuss the within-sample predictive
performance of the model, which is quite good. We find that the four training centers
have very different overall enrollment rates, even controlling for the observable
characteristics of their accepted applicants. For all four demographic groups, accepted
applicants at the Fort Wayne and Jersey City centers have enrollment probabilities
substantially lower than similar persons at Corpus Christi, which is the omitted training
center in our analysis. These differences reflect in part the differing mix of services
offered at the various sites. Corpus Christi offered mainly classroom training. This form
of service leads to a higher enrollment rate than other JTPA services (see Kemple,
Doolittle and Wallace, 1993). In contrast, Fort Wayne and, to a lesser extent, Jersey City,
primarily offered on-the-job training and job search assistance. Centers offering these
services will have lower enrollment rates among accepted applicants because those who
fail to locate a job or for whom no firm is willing to provide on-the-job training often do
not ever get enrolled in the program.

25

Conditional on acceptance into JTPA, older adults are less likely to enroll than
younger adults. This finding is consistent with the lower expected returns to training for
older persons, which would make them relatively more likely to drop out of the program
in response to a given outside opportunity. Family participation in the Food Stamp
program has a negative effect for three of the four demographic groups, with the effect
both large and statistically significant for adult females. To the extent that Food Stamp
recipients are less likely to find employment than other accepted applicants, this is
consistent with creaming induced by the operation of JTPA performance standards. Also
consistent with these incentives is our finding that for women and male youth, having no
employment experience strongly reduces the probability of enrollment.
Finally, we estimate a large positive effect of family income on the enrollment
probability for adults. Family income may allow an accepted applicant to undertake
training even in the absence of a stipend. Thus, even though higher family income lowers
eligibility it raises the probability of enrollment among accepted applicants.
Taken together, our findings on the determinants of enrollment, particularly the
effects of recent employment and participation in a transfer program, provide support for
the hypothesis that bureaucrats attempt to maximize the employability of those persons
selected for enrollment in the JTPA program from among the accepted applicants.

9. Decomposing the Process of Selection into JTPA

26

In order to determine at what stage – enrollment (en), awareness (aw), acceptance (ac) or
eligibility (el) – and in which direction particular observable characteristics operate to
determine participation in the program, we use the chain rule to decompose the
probability of participation in the following way:

∂ Pr(en = 1| x)
=
∂x

(3)

 ∂ Pr(en = 1| ac = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) 

 Pr(ac = 1| aw = 1, el = 1, x) Pr(aw = 1| el = 1, x) Pr(el = 1| x)
∂x
 ∂ Pr(ac = 1| aw = 1, el = 1, x) 
+ Pr(en = 1| ac = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) 
 Pr(aw = 1| el = 1, x) Pr(el = 1| x)
∂x

 ∂ Pr(aw = 1| el = 1, x) 
+ Pr(en = 1| ac = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) Pr(ac = 1| aw = 1, el = 1, x) 
 Pr(el = 1| x)
∂x

 ∂ Pr(el = 1| x) 
+ Pr(en = 1| ac = 1, aw = 1, el = 1, x) Pr(ac = 1| aw = 1, el = 1, x) Pr(aw = 1| el = 1, x) 
 .
∂x

This equation decomposes the effect of a change in x on the probability of participation in
the program into its effect on each constituent probability weighted by the remaining
probabilities. In each term, the component in square brackets is the effect of a change in
x on one of the conditional probabilities leading to participation in the program.11 For
dichotomous variables, we replace derivatives with finite changes.
Using (3), we can assess through which channels, if any, variation in x operates to
affect the probability of participation in JTPA. In this section, we present results for two
different decompositions. The two decompositions differ in terms of the number of steps
included, the set of variables included, and the data used to perform the decomposition.
These criteria are interrelated because the probability estimates are derived from different
11

These relationships can be expressed more concisely using logarithmic derivatives. We do not use that
approach here because logarithmic derivatives are more difficult to interpret.

27

data sets and not all of the data sets contain all of the variables used to estimate the
conditional probabilities discussed in the preceding sections. Reducing the number of
stages enables us to estimate the effects of more characteristics. In addition, for certain
variables some of the stages in (3) are effectively eliminated. For example, belonging to
a family that receives AFDC or Food Stamps makes the probability of eligibility equal to
one. It is only informative to examine the effects of AFDC and Food Stamp receipt on
the remaining components of the decomposition.
The first decompositions we present appear in Tables 7a to 7d. The format of
each table corresponds directly to equation (3). The estimates of the probability of
eligibility are based on the SIPP data. The estimates for the conditional probabilities of
awareness, of application and acceptance, and of enrollment all draw on data from the
four sites in the National JTPA Study, with the first two constructed using the ENP and
control data and the last obtained from the experimental treatment group. As in the
earlier tables, the reported derivatives consist of sample averages of individual
derivatives (or finite differences). They are not the derivatives evaluated at the sample
means of the characteristics.12
The first column in the table presents the overall effect of a change in the
indicated characteristic x on the probability of enrollment; this is the term on the left-hand
side of (3). These values are expressed in terms of the expected change in the probability
of participation resulting from the indicated change in characteristics, multiplied by 100
for ease of presentation. To put the terms in context, note that the unconditional
probability of participation is around 0.03, so that an overall effect of -0.867, which is the
effect for adult males of switching from a family income of $0-$3,000 to one over
12

Appendix C contains a detailed discussion of the simulations.

28

$15,000, translates into a change in the probability of -0.00867, or a reduction of nearly
one-third relative to the unconditional probability.
The second, fourth, sixth and eighth columns of the first panel present the four
chain rule terms that compose the overall effect. Thus, for the decomposition in Tables
7a to 7d, the weighted eligibility term is given by the first term on the right-hand side of
(3), the weighted acceptance term by the second term in (3), the weighted awareness term
by the third term in (3), and the weighted enrollment term by the fourth term in (3). The
third, fifth, seventh and ninth columns present the percentage of the overall effect
attributable to each of the four components. Thus, the third column indicates the
percentage of the overall effect that results from the effect of the indicated change in x on
the conditional probability of eligibility, which is given by the ratio of the weighted
eligibility term to the overall effect multiplied by 100. The second panel of each table
presents the unweighted effect of the indicated change in x on each of the conditional
probabilities. This unweighted effect is just the average partial derivative (or finite
difference) of the probability with respect to the characteristic.
The results for race and ethnicity are especially striking. Blacks consistently have
an overall probability of participation higher than that of whites. For three of the four
demographic groups, this higher overall probability decomposes into higher conditional
probabilities of eligibility and awareness, but lower conditional probabilities of
acceptance and enrollment. Decomposing the overall effect in this way makes it clear
where blacks fall out of the participation process, and suggests that policy measures
designed to increase their participation should focus on application, acceptance and
enrollment, rather than on changes in eligibility rules or on outreach efforts to increase

29

awareness. This evidence indicates that the concerns expressed in the GAO report
discussed in the introduction to this paper regarding minority participation may be
relevant. Administrative discretion may have played a role in reducing black participation
in JTPA, and may continue to do so under WIA.
A different pattern emerges for the categorical age variables. For adults, older
persons nearly always have lower conditional probabilities at every stage in the
participation process relative to persons age 22-29. The same is true of youth, where a
modest overall negative effect for 19-21 year olds relative to 16-18 year olds is mirrored
at each stage in the process except for the application and acceptance stage for male
youth and the eligibility and enrollment stages for female youth.
Overall, being married rather than being single decreases the probability of
participation in JTPA for all four demographic groups. The dominant factor lowering
enrollment among married persons is a strong negative effect of marriage on the
conditional probability of application and acceptance. For adult males, this negative term
outweighs a positive effect of marriage on the conditional probabilities of eligibility,
awareness and enrollment. The probability of participation for divorced, widowed or
separated persons exceeds that for single persons in three of the four groups. For adult
males, positive effects of having once been married on eligibility, awareness and
enrollment dominate the negative acceptance term, while all but the eligibility term are
positive for adult females.
For adults, the relationship between the overall probability of participation into
JTPA and years of completed schooling is roughly hill-shaped, with its peak occurring at
10-11 years of completed schooling for men and 13-15 years for women. The

30

decompositions reveal that the overall relationship results from combining a negative
relationship between years of schooling and eligibility, and generally hill-shaped
relationships between schooling and awareness, application and acceptance, and
enrollment. For youth, the overall relationship between participation and years of
completing school peaks at 10-11 years for males and at less than 10 years for females.
For three of the four demographic groups, the overall effect of having an own
child under six years of age in the home breaks down into a positive component due to
increased conditional probabilities of eligibility and enrollment, and negative components
due to decreased probabilities of awareness and acceptance. The overall effect is
negative for men and positive for women.
The overall probability of participation in JTPA decreases monotonically in
family income for adult males and male and female youth, and peaks in the $3000-$9000
category for adult females. The strong negative relationship between family income and
the probability of eligibility described in section four dominates the overall effect in
almost every case. The exception is the peak for adult females, which results from the
influence of a similarly peaked pattern in the relationship between family income and the
conditional probabilities of awareness and of application and acceptance for that group.
Tables 8a to 8d present a second set of decompositions. In these tables, we
decompose the probability of application and acceptance conditional on eligibility into
components due to awareness and due to application and acceptance given awareness.
Omitting the stages of eligibility and enrollment allows us to simulate using the same
ENP and control data from the National JTPA Study that we use to estimate the
conditional probabilities of awareness and of application and acceptance. Omitting the

31

enrollment stage allows us to include variables representing recent labor force status
transitions, which are not available in the treatment group data we use to estimate the
probability of enrollment. Otherwise, the format of the tables and the construction of the
individual terms parallels that for the decompositions already discussed.
The basic patterns for those variables, such as age and schooling, included in the
earlier decompositions remain essentially the same, so we do not dwell on them here. Of
great interest are the decompositions of the overall effects of family receipt of AFDC and
Food Stamps on the application and acceptance probabilities. The overall effect of
AFDC receipt is negative for all four groups. For both groups of adults, the overall effect
decomposes into a small effect due to awareness, combined with a large negative effect
of living in a family receiving AFDC on the probability of application and acceptance
conditional on awareness. For male youth, living in a family receiving AFDC has
negative effects of roughly equal size on awareness and on application and acceptance
given awareness, while for female youth positive awareness and negative application and
acceptance effects roughly cancel to yield a small overall effect.
All four demographic groups show a positive impact of living in a family
receiving Food Stamps on the probability of application and acceptance. For all the
groups except female youth, this effect decomposes into roughly equal positive effects of
Food Stamp receipt on the probabilities of awareness and of application and acceptance
conditional on awareness. For female youth, the contribution of the awareness term is
negligible, leaving the impact of living in a family receiving Food Stamps on application
and acceptance to dominate the overall effect. Interpreting the estimated effect of family
receipt of AFDC as the additional effect of AFDC receipt given that the family receives

32

Food Stamps, we find that AFDC provides additional information about JTPA but acts to
discourage application and acceptance.
Finally, examination of the decompositions for the variables representing the two
most recent labor force statuses at the time of random assignment or eligibility screening
shows that in all cases it is the effect of these statuses on the probability of application
and acceptance conditional on awareness that accounts for their large positive effects on
the unconditional probability of application and acceptance. The estimated effects of
labor force transitions on awareness are small and are of mixed sign, with negative
estimated effects usually associated with transitions out of the labor force.
These decompositions offer unique insights regarding the effects of characteristics
such as race, age, education, program participation, labor force status and family income
on the various stages of the process by which individuals select and are selected into the
JTPA program. For many characteristics, such as race and ethnicity, the same
characteristic has competing effects at different stages of the process. Other
characteristics, such as age among adults, operate in the same direction on the conditional
probabilities of program eligibility, awareness, application and acceptance, and formal
enrollment. Sorting out the effects of particular characteristics at each step enriches our
understanding of the overall participation process.

10. Summary and Conclusions

In this paper, we develop a framework for studying the determinants of
participation in social programs. Our framework decomposes participation into a series
of stages: eligibility, awareness, application, acceptance and enrollment. Compared to

33

simple comparisons of the characteristics of program eligibles and program participants,
our framework allows a deeper examination of issues related to the equity of the
distribution of program benefits, to the effects of administrative choices under the
influence of administrative performance standards systems, and to the optimal design of
non-experimental evaluations of program impacts.
Several major empirical lessons emerge from this study. Although they arise
from data on JTPA, the similarity between JTPA and many other programs in the U.S.
and elsewhere that we document in Section 3 suggests they likely apply more broadly.
First, there is evidence of cream skimming in the program that is consistent with the
incentives embodied in the JTPA performance standards system. Among applicants
accepted into the program, blacks, persons with less than a high school education,
persons from poorer families and those without recent employment experience are less
likely to be enrolled than are persons in other racial and ethnic groups, persons with a
high school education, persons from richer families and persons with recent employment
experience. While these patterns are consistent with cream skimming, our analysis does
not reveal the separate influences of self-selection and selection by program staff.13
Second, there is strong evidence that informational barriers play a major role in
determining differences in program participation rates, but these barriers do not fully
account for the differentially low participation rate of Hispanics identified by Gonzales
and Romero (1989) and Sandell and Rupp (1988). We have already discussed the role of
13

In other work (Heckman, Smith and Taber, 1996), we use data from a single site in the National JTPA
Study to look solely at the transition from application to enrollment, the stage of the participation process
over which case workers presumably have the greatest control. We find evidence that caseworkers select
the applicants likely to do the worst, rather than the best, in the absence of the program. This suggests that
caseworker preferences for serving the most disadvantaged may overcome the incentives provided by the
performance standards system in some contexts. However, the findings in Heckman, Smith and Taber
(1996) could also result from more employable applicants leaving the program for employment prior to
enrolling.

34

education in improving awareness of the program. Controlling for other factors, persons
who are not fluent in English are less likely to be aware of the program. However,
differences in educational levels and in language ability are not the sole reason why
Hispanics are less likely to participate in the program than other groups. After taking
account of these differences, Hispanics were less likely to participate in JTPA.
Third, labor force status dynamics, in particular recent unemployment histories,
played an important role in determining who applied and was accepted into JTPA from
among the population of eligible persons aware of the program. Eligible persons aware
of JTPA who were unemployed at the time they were deciding whether or not to
participate in the program, particularly those unemployed persons who had recently lost a
job or re-entered the labor force, have relatively high probabilities of application and
acceptance into JTPA. In contrast, persons in the midst of a stable employment spell or a
stable spell out of the labor force were quite unlikely to apply and be accepted into JTPA.
The JTPA program was in part a form of job search for the unemployed, and so attracted
persons who were actively seeking work.
This finding indicates the importance of collecting information on detailed labor
force status transitions at the monthly level in non-experimental evaluations of
employment and training programs. Conditioning on earnings is not enough, as the set of
individuals with zero earnings includes individuals who are unemployed and individuals
who are out of the labor force, two groups that have very different patterns of program
participation and labor market outcomes.
Finally, we demonstrate that changes in eligibility rules will have only a weak
effect on the participation of many groups. While the JTPA eligibility rules effectively

35

denied access to program services to many groups, such as those with high family
incomes, they were powerless to induce particular groups within the eligible population
to participate. Put simply, you can lead a horse to water, but you can’t make it drink. For
example, individuals with low levels of schooling have very high rates of eligibility but
relatively low rates of participation conditional on eligibility. Even more striking is the
case of AFDC recipients, who were automatically eligible for JTPA but who had a low
participation probability relative to other groups within the eligible population. Getting
these groups to participate in employment and training programs such as JTPA and WIA
requires more than just making them eligible for program services.
Our framework yields substantial insights regarding program equity, the effects of
administrative performance management systems, and the design of non-experimental
program evaluations. The evidence we present reveals the complex nature of the
program participation process, with some variables having conflicting effects on
participation at different stages in the process, and others operating in the same direction
at every stage. These insights are achieved by decomposing the participation process. our
analysis indicates the potential value of collecting the data required to perform similar
decompositions for other programs.

36

Bibliography

Amemiya, Takeshi. Advanced Econometrics. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press,
1985.
Anderson, Kathryn; Burkhauser, Richard; and Raymond, Jennie. “The Effect of
Creaming on Placement Rates Under the Job Training Partnership Act.” Industrial and
Labor Relations Review, 46 (1993): 613-624.
Anderson, Kathryn; Burkhauser, Richard; Raymond, Jennie; and Russell, Clifford.
“Mixed Signals in the Job Training Partnership Act.” Growth and Change, 22 (1991): 3248.
Anderson, Patricia, and Meyer, Bruce. 1997. “Unemployment Insurance and the AfterTax Value of Benefits.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 112 (1997): 913-937.
Ashenfelter, Orley. “Determining Participation in Income-Tested Social Programs.”
Journal of the American Statistical Association 78 (1983): 517-525.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Card, David. “Using the Longitudinal Structure of Earnings to
Estimate the Effect of Training Programs.” The Review of Economics and Statistics 47
(1985): 648-660.
Barnow, Burt. “Getting It Right: Thirty Years of Changing Federal, State, and Local
Relationships in Employment and Training Programs.” Publius: The Journal of
Federalism 23 (1993): 75-94.
Becker, Gary. Human Capital: A Theoretical and Empirical Analysis, with Special
Reference to Education. New York: Columbia University Press, 1964.
Blank, Rebecca. “What Causes Public Assistance Caseloads to Grow?” Journal of
Human Resources 36 (2001): 85-118.
Blank, Rebecca, and Ruggles, Patricia. “When Do Women Use Aid to Families with
Dependent Children and Food Stamps? The Dynamics of Eligibility vs. Participation.”
Journal of Human Resources 24 (1989) 54-87.
Bloom, Howard; Orr, Larry; Bell, Stephen; Cave, George; Doolittle, Fred; Lin, Winston;
and Bos, Johannes. “The Benefits and Costs of JTPA Title II-A Programs: Findings from
the National Job Training Partnership Act Study.” Journal of Human Resources 32
(1997): 549-576.
Card, David, and Sullivan, Daniel. “Measuring the Effect of Subsidized Training
Programs on Movements In and Out of Employment.” Econometrica 56 (1988): 497-530.

37

Devine, Theresa, and Heckman, James. “The Structure and Consequences of Eligibility
Rules for a Social Program.” In Research in Labor Economics, Volume 15, edited by
Solomon Polachek, pp. 111-170. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press. 1996.
Doolittle, Fred, and Traeger, Linda. Implementing the National JTPA Study. New York,
NY: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 1990.
Gonzales, J. and Romero F. “Falling Through The Cracks: Hispanic Underrepresentation
in The Job Training Partnership Act.” Working Paper H46. National Council of La Raza,
1989.
Heckman, James; Hohmann, Neil; Smith, Jeffrey; and Khoo, Michael. “Substitution and
Drop Out Bias in Social Experiments: A Study of an Influential Social Experiment.”
Quarterly Journal of Economics 115 (2000): 651-694.
Heckman, James; Ichimura, Hidehiko; and Todd, Petra. “Matching as an Econometric
Evaluation Estimator: Evidence from Evaluating a Job Training Programme.” Review of
Economic Studies 64 (1997): 605-654.
Heckman, James; Ichimura, Hidehiko; and Todd, Petra. “Matching as an Econometric
Evaluation Estimator.” Review of Economic Studies 65 (1998): 261-294.
Heckman, James; Ichimura, Hidehiko; Smith, Jeffrey; and Todd, Petra. “Characterizing
Selection Bias Using Experimental Data.” Econometrica 66 (1998): 1017-1098.
Heckman, James; LaLonde, Robert; and Smith, Jeffrey. “The Economics and
Econometrics of Active Labor Market Programs.” In Handbook of Labor Economics,
Volume 3A, pp. 1865-2097. Amsterdam: North-Holland, 1999.
Heckman, James and Salvador Navarro-Lozano. “Using Matching, Instrumental
Variables and Control Functions to Estimate Econometric Models.” NBER Working
Paper No. 9497, February 2003.
Heckman, James, and Robb, Richard. “Alternative Methods for Evaluating the Impact of
Interventions.” In James Heckman and Burton Singer, eds., Longitudinal Analysis of
Labor Market Data, pp. 156-246. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press for
Econometric Society Monograph Series, 1985.
Heckman, James, and Smith, Jeffrey. “The Pre-Programme Dip and the Determinants of
Participation in a Social Programme: Implications for Simple Programme Evaluation
Strategies.” Economic Journal 109 (1999): 313-348.
Heckman, James; Smith, Jeffrey; and Taber, Christopher. “Accounting for Dropouts in
Evaluations of Social Programs.” Review of Economics and Statistics 80 (1998): 1-14.

38

Heckman, James; Smith, Jeffrey; and Taber, Christopher. “What Do Bureaucrats Do?
The Effects of Performance Standards and Bureaucratic Preferences on Acceptance into
the JTPA Program.” In Advances in the Study of Entrepreneurship, Innovation and
Economic Growth: Reinventing Government and the Problem of Bureaucracy, Volume 7,
edited by Gary Libecap, pp. 191-217. Greenwich, CT: JAI Press, 1996.
Jacobson, Louis; LaLonde, Robert; and Sullivan, Daniel. “Measures of Program
Performance and the Training Choices of Displaced Workers.” In Targeting Employment
Services, edited by Randall Eberts, Christopher O’Leary and Stephen Wandner, pp. 187214. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E. Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 2002.
Kemple, James; Doolittle, Fred; and Wallace, John. The National JTPA Study: Site
Characteristics and Participation Patterns. New York, NY: Manpower Demonstration
Research Corporation, 1993.
Leigh, Duane. Assisting Workers Displaced by Structural Change. Kalamazoo, MI: W.E.
Upjohn Institute for Employment Research, 1995.
McCall, Brian. “The Impact of Unemployment Insurance Benefit Levels on Recipiency.”
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics 13 (1995): 189-198.
Orr, Larry; Bloom, Howard; Bell, Stephen; Doolittle, Fred; Lin, Winston; and Cave,
George. Does Training Work for the Disadvantaged? Evidence from the National JTPA
Study. Washington, DC: Urban Institute Press, 1996.
O’Shea, Daniel, and King, Christopher. “The Workforce Investment Act of 1998:
Restructuring Workforce Development Initiatives in States and Localities.” Report No.
12. Albany, NY: Nelson Rockefeller Institute of Government.
Parsons, Donald. “Self-Screening in Targeted Public Transfer Programs.” Journal of
Political Economy 99 (1991): 859-876.
Remler, Dahlia; Rachlin, Jason; and Glied, Sherry. “What Can the Take-Up of Other
Programs Teach Us About How to Improve Take-Up of Health Insurance Programs?”
Working Paper No. 8185. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
March 2001.
Riphahn, Regina. “Rational Poverty or Poor Rationality? The Take-Up of Social
Assistance Benefits.” Review of Income and Wealth 47 (2001): 379-398.
Sandell, Steven, and Rupp, Kalman. “Who is Served in JTPA Programs: Patterns of
Participation and Intergroup Equity.” Research Report RR-88-03. Washington, DC:
National Commission for Employment Policy, February 1988.
Smith, Jeffrey. “Sampling Frame for the Eligible Non-Participant Sample. Unpublished
manuscript. Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Department of Economics, 1994.

39

Storer, Paul; Van Audenrode, Marc. “Unemployment Insurance Take-Up Rates in
Canada: Facts, Determinants and Implications.” Canadian Journal of Economics 28
(1995): 822-835.
Tienda, Marta, and Jensen, Leif. “Poverty and Minorities: A Quarter-Century Profile of
Color and Socioeconomic Disadvantage.” In Divided Opportunities: Minorities, Poverty
and Social Policy, edited by Gary Sandefur and Marta Tienda, pp. 25-33. New York, NY:
Plenum, 1988.
U.S. General Accounting Office. “Job Training Partnership Act: Racial and Gender
Disparities in Services.” GAO/HRD-91-148. Washington, DC: U.S. General Accounting
Office, 1991.
U.S. Department of Labor. Job Training Quarterly Survey: JTPA Title IIA and III
Enrollments and Terminations During Program Year 1991 (July 1991-June 1992).
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration,
Office of Strategic Planning and Policy Development, Division of Performance
Management and Evaluation, 1993a.
U.S. Department of Labor. Title II Eligibility Documentation. Washington, DC: U.S
Department of Labor, Employment and Training Administration, 1993b.
U.S. Department of Labor. Summary of Workforce Development Provisions of the
Workforce Investment Act of 1998 (P.L. 105-220). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of
Labor, Employment and Training Administration, 1998.
[http://www.doleta.gov/usworkforce/summarywia.htm]
Witte, Ann Dryden, and Queralt, Magaly. “Take-Up Rates and Trade Offs After the Age
of Entitlement: Some Thoughts and Empirical Evidence for Child Care Subsidies.”
Working Paper No. 8886. Cambridge, MA: National Bureau of Economic Research,
April 2002.
Zweimuller, Josef, and Winter-Ebmer, Rudolf. “Manpower Training Programmes and
Employment Stability.” Economica 63 (1996): 113-130.

40

Table 1
Definitions of Variables
Site Indicators
Ft. Wayne, Jersey City and Providence indicate the site of residence. Corpus Christi is the omitted site.
Race and Ethnicity
Black, Hispanic and other race/ethnicity indicate race or ethnicity. Whites are the omitted group.
Age
Age categories indicate age at the time of eligibility determination or of the participation decision. The omitted
category is 16-18 years for youth and 22-29 years for adults.
Highest Grade Completed
Schooling categories indicate the highest grade of formal schooling completed. The omitted category is exactly
twelve years.
Low English Ability
This variable indicates low ability in English. For the ENPs, this means that the person completed the baseline
interview in a language other than English. For the controls, it means that the person indicated a language other
than English in response to a survey question on language preference.
Marital Histories
These categories indicate the respondent’s marital status history. The omitted category is single, never married.
In Table 8, the divorced, widowed and separated category is broken up into two categories, one for persons who
were last married from 1-24 months ago and one for persons who were last married more than 24 months ago.
Presence of Young Children
Children less than six indicates an own child less than six years old in the household.
Current AFDC Receipt
This variable indicates that the respondent was receiving benefits under the Aid to Families with Dependent
Children program, either as a case head or as part of someone else’s case.
Current Food Stamp (FS) Receipt
This variable indicates that the respondent was in a household receiving food stamps.
Current Labor Force Status
These variables indicate whether the respondent was employed, unemployed (not working but looking for work)
or out of the labor force (not employed and not looking for work). The omitted category is currently employed.
Labor Force Status Transitions
These categories in Tables 5 and 8 indicate the two most recent labor force statuses in the seven months up to
and including the month of the participation decision. The second status in each pattern indicates the labor force
status at the time of the participation decision. The first status indicates the status of the most recent prior spell
during the preceding six months. Thus, the pattern “employed - > unemployed” indicates someone who was
unemployed at the time of the participation decision but whose most recent prior labor force status within the
preceding six months was employed. Persons in the same labor force status for all seven months have repeated
patterns of the form “OLF - > OLF”. The omitted pattern is “employed - > employed”, indicating persistent
employment. In some cases, the “employed - > OLF” and “unemployed - > OLF” categories are collapsed due
to small sample sizes.
Time Since Most Recent Employment
These categories indicate the number of months since the person was last employed. The omitted category is
currently employed.
Family Income in the Last Year
These categories indicate total family earnings in the past year. The omitted category is less than $3000. For
some tables, the original six categories are combined into four due to small sample sizes.

Table 2a
Determinants of JTPA Eligibility: Adults

Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-54
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade 13-15
Highest grade > 15
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Family Income 3K-6K
Family Income 6K-9K
Family Income 9K-12K
Family Income 12K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Adult Males
Number of observations: 80598
1.315
[0.060]
(0.034)
0.000
1.070
[0.048]
(0.036)
0.000
1.352
[0.062]
(0.087)
0.000
-0.860
[-0.038]
(0.030)
0.000
-0.939
[-0.042]
(0.040)
0.000
-1.586
[-0.064]
(0.049)
0.000
0.737
[0.033]
(0.034)
0.000
0.292
[0.012]
(0.033)
0.000
-0.231
[-0.009]
(0.031)
0.000
-0.064
[-0.003]
(0.036)
0.074
0.157
[0.006]
(0.035)
0.000
0.177
[0.007]
(0.042)
0.000
-0.205
[-0.008]
(0.036)
0.000
0.113
[0.019]
(0.050)
0.024
-1.814
[-0.206]
(0.048)
0.000
-3.103
[-0.268]
(0.056)
0.000
-3.857
[-0.295]
(0.056)
0.000
-4.966
[-0.331]
(0.048)
0.000
-0.474
[0.000]
(0.033)
0.000

Adult Females
Number of observations: 89196
2.172
[0.129]
(0.032)
0.000
2.270
[0.136]
(0.030)
0.000
1.551
[0.090]
(0.051)
0.000
0.018
[0.001]
(0.026)
0.489
0.144
[0.007]
(0.030)
0.000
0.047
[0.002]
(0.035)
0.176
0.974
[0.060]
(0.029)
0.000
0.514
[0.031]
(0.028)
0.000
-0.408
[-0.022]
(0.025)
0.000
-1.652
[-0.075]
(0.032)
0.000
1.366
[-0.074]
(0.029)
0.000
0.043
[0.003]
(0.031)
0.162
0.646
[0.035]
(0.027)
0.000
-0.367
[-0.039]
(0.044)
0.000
-1.737
[-0.154]
(0.043)
0.000
-2.671
[-0.214]
(0.043)
0.000
-3.318
[-0.249]
(0.044)
0.000
-4.461
[-0.301]
(0.037)
0.000
4.714
[0.000]
(0.043)
0.000

Source: Authors’ calculations using person-month data from 1986 SIPP full panel.
Notes: Omitted categories in the logit are white, age 22-29, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children
and family income less then $3,000. Using the sample proportion eligible as the cutoff value, the within-sample
prediction rates for adult males are 72.48 percent for eligibles and 91.10 percent for non-eligibles. The corresponding
rates for adult females are 79.82 percent for eligibles and 88.32 percent for non-eligibles.

Table 2b
Determinants of JTPA Eligibility: Youth

Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 19-21
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade > 12
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Family Income 3K-6K
Family Income 6K-9K
Family Income 9K-12K
Family Income 12K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Male Youth
Number of observations: 10280
1.111
[0.056]
(0.164)
0.000
2.255
[0.121]
(0.103)
0.000
1.514
[0.078]
(0.195)
0.000
-0.434
[-0.021]
(0.082)
0.000
1.959
[0.100]
(0.105)
0.000
1.469
[0.074]
(0.109)
0.000
-0.150
[-0.007]
(0.107)
0.160
-1.657
[-0.068]
(0.168)
0.000
-3.041
[-0.106]
(0.380)
0.000
1.161
[0.061]
(0.168)
0.000
-2.582
[-0.387]
(0.153)
0.000
-4.370
[-0.547]
(0.165)
0.000
-4.595
[-0.561]
(0.157)
0.000
-5.935
[-0.631]
(0.204)
0.000
-6.628
[-0.660]
(0.153)
0.000
6.246
[0.000]
(0.170)
0.000

Female Youth
Number of observations: 11165
2.446
[0.155]
(0.092)
0.000
1.114
[0.068]
(0.076)
0.000
2.065
[0.129]
(0.408)
0.000
0.124
[0.007]
(0.070)
0.079
0.915
[0.057]
(0.107)
0.000
0.134
[0.008]
(0.086)
0.118
-0.617
[-0.036]
(0.072)
0.000
0.609
[0.036]
(0.082)
0.000
1.511
[0.094]
(0.242)
0.000
1.468
[0.090]
(0.081)
0.000
-1.306
[-0.201]
(0.102)
0.000
-3.008
[-0.436]
(0.126)
0.000
-4.237
[-0.552]
(0.144)
0.000
-5.057
[-0.61]
(0.142)
0.000
-6.585
[-0.695]
(0.103)
0.000
6.164
[0.000]
(0.117)
0.000

Source: Authors’ calculations using person-month data from 1986 SIPP full panel.
Notes: Omitted categories in the logit are white, age 16-18, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children
and family income less then $3,000. Using the sample proportion eligible as the cutoff value, the within-sample
prediction rates for male youth are 71.95 percent for eligibles and 90.67 percent for non-eligibles. The corresponding
rates for female youth are 72.72 percent for eligibles and 91.32 percent for non-eligibles.

Table 3
Awareness of and Self-Reported Eligibility for the JTPA Program: JTPA Eligible Non-Participants

Adult Males
Adult Females
Male Youth
Female Youth

Self-Reported
Awareness of JTPA
0.3539
(0.0167)
0.4165
(0.0124)
0.4722
(0.0373)
0.4667
(0.0289)

Self-Reported
Eligibility for JTPA
Conditional on Awareness
0.3598
(0.0311)
0.4594
(0.0214)
0.5672
(0.0610)
0.5410
(0.0453)

Self-Reported
Eligibility for JTPA
Unconditional on Awareness
0.1274
(0.0116)
0.1913
(0.0099)
0.2678
(0.0330)
0.2525
(0.0251)

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Respondents are coded as aware of JTPA if they report having heard of JTPA by its most common local name.
Respondents are coded as self-reported eligibles if they are aware of JTPA and report that they believe themselves to be
presently eligible for it.

Table 4a
Determinants of JTPA Awareness Among JTPA Eligible Non-Participants: Adults

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Low English ability
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-54
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade 13-15
Highest grade > 15
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC receipt
Current Food Stamp receipt
Currently unemployed
Currently out of the labor force
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Adult Males
Number of observations: 1551
0.261
[0.055]
(0.233)
0.264
0.071
[0.015]
(0.210)
0.736
-0.268
[-0.054]
(0.231)
0.245
0.414
[0.094]
(0.272)
0.128
-0.486
[-0.102]
(0.210)
0.021
-0.290
[-0.063]
(0.279)
0.298
-0.763
[-0.147]
(0.180)
0.000
-0.345
[-0.073]
(0.165)
0.037
-0.372
[-0.078]
(0.201)
0.064
0.010
[0.002]
(0.349)
0.977
-0.476
[-0.100]
(0.179)
0.008
-0.144
[-0.031]
(0.210)
0.494
0.102
[0.022]
(0.239)
0.671
-0.387
[-0.082]
(0.279)
0.166
0.019
[0.004]
(0.181)
0.918
0.718
[0.156]
(0.273)
0.009
-0.079
[-0.016]
(0.161)
0.623
0.088
[0.019]
(0.499)
0.859
0.756
[0.164]
(0.251)
0.003
0.805
[0.176]
(0.289)
0.005
-0.182
[-0.037]
(0.258)
0.481
-0.152
[-0.030]
(0.347)
0.662
-0.070
[-0.014]
(0.343)
0.838
0.377
[0.080]
(0.340)
0.267
-0.359
[0.000]
(0.393)
0.361

Adult Females
Number of observations: 2436
-0.187
[-0.039]
(0.203)
0.356
-0.174
[-0.036]
(0.191)
0.364
-0.683
[-0.142]
(0.197)
0.001
0.288
[0.063]
(0.194)
0.138
-0.360
[-0.077]
(0.185)
0.051
-0.348
[-0.074]
(0.255)
0.174
-1.334
[-0.254]
(0.144)
0.000
-0.114
[-0.024]
(0.137)
0.405
-0.235
[-0.050]
(0.174)
0.177
-0.126
[-0.027]
(0.253)
0.619
-0.836
[-0.180]
(0.135)
0.000
-0.126
[-0.028]
(0.173)
0.468
-0.263
[-0.058]
(0.201)
0.190
-0.646
[-0.141]
(0.292)
0.027
-0.239
[-0.051]
(0.162)
0.142
0.112
[0.024]
(0.164)
0.494
-0.062
[-0.013]
(0.130)
0.635
-0.086
[-0.018]
(0.218)
0.694
0.625
[0.133]
(0.187)
0.001
0.628
[0.136]
(0.250)
0.012
-0.221
[-0.047]
(0.140)
0.115
0.604
[0.129]
(0.239)
0.012
0.389
[0.083]
(0.239)
0.104
0.156
[0.033]
(0.215)
0.469
0.238
[0.000]
(0.287)
0.407

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Omitted categories in the logit are Corpus Christi, white, age 22-29, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children,
not currently receiving AFDC, not currently receiving food stamps, currently employed, and family income less than $3,000. Using
the sample proportion aware of JTPA as the cutoff, the within-sample prediction rates for adult males are 63.29 percent for aware
eligibles and 62.95 percent for unaware eligibles. The corresponding rates for adult females are 69.44 percent for aware eligibles and
61.82 percent for unaware eligibles.

Table 4b
Determinants of JTPA Awareness Among JTPA Eligible Non-Participants: Youth

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Low English ability
Age 19-21
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade > 12
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC receipt
Current Food Stamp receipt
Currently unemployed
Currently out of the labor force
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Male Youth
Number of observations: 530
0.054
[0.011]
(0.661)
0.935
-0.147
[-0.031]
(0.727)
0.839
-0.412
[-0.087]
(0.666)
0.536
1.183
[0.242]
(0.739)
0.109
0.189
[0.040]
(0.652)
0.772
1.348
[0.277]
(1.370)
0.325
-2.972
[-0.439]
(0.751)
0.000
-0.891
[-0.187]
(0.528)
0.091
-0.025
[-0.005]
(0.630)
0.968
0.280
[0.059]
(0.592)
0.636
-0.254
[-0.053]
(0.729)
0.728
1.323
[0.266]
(0.819)
0.106
-0.584
[-0.119]
(0.830)
0.482
-0.242
[-0.050]
(0.758)
0.750
-0.838
[-0.170]
(1.087)
0.441
0.494
[0.103]
(0.813)
0.543
0.522
[0.110]
(0.575)
0.363
-0.990
[-0.203]
(0.594)
0.095
-0.907
[-0.188]
(0.915)
0.321
-0.395
[-0.082]
(0.938)
0.673
-0.703
[-0.146]
(1.031)
0.495
0.613
[0.000]
(1.019)
0.547

Female Youth
Number of observations: 700
0.150
[0.033]
(0.490)
0.759
-0.509
[-0.111]
(0.461)
0.270
-0.686
[-0.153]
(0.438)
0.117
0.902
[0.204]
(0.464)
0.052
0.298
[0.068]
(0.416)
0.475
-0.813
[-0.167]
(0.610)
0.183
-2.373
[-0.393]
(0.664)
0.000
-0.212
[-0.048]
(0.300)
0.478
-0.672
[-0.153]
(0.368)
0.068
-0.077
[-0.018]
(0.405)
0.849
0.063
[0.014]
(0.496)
0.898
0.136
[0.031]
(0.370)
0.713
-0.951
[-0.203]
(0.444)
0.032
-0.164
[-0.037]
(0.323)
0.613
0.329
[0.073]
(0.420)
0.433
-0.026
[-0.006]
(0.410)
0.950
0.362
[0.081]
(0.471)
0.442
0.000
[0.000]
(0.342)
1.000
0.040
[0.009]
(0.441)
0.928
-0.321
[-0.072]
(0.555)
0.563
-0.410
[-0.092]
(0.534)
0.442
0.272
[0.000]
(0.633)
0.668

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Omitted categories in the logit are Corpus Christi, white, age 16-18, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children,
not currently receiving AFDC, not currently receiving food stamps, currently employed, and family income less than $3,000. Using
the sample proportion aware of JTPA as the cutoff, the within-sample prediction rates for male youth are 72.31 percent for aware
eligibles and 64.86 percent for unaware eligibles. The corresponding rates for female youth are 67.43 percent for aware eligibles and
53.64 percent for unaware eligibles.

Table 5a
Determinants of Acceptance Into JTPA
Aware ENP and Control Samples: Adults

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-54
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade 13-15
Highest grade > 15
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC receipt
Current Food Stamp receipt
Unemployed -> Employed
OLF -> Employed
Employed -> Unemployed
Unemployed -> Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
Employed or Unemployed -> OLF

Adult Males
Number of observations: 1024
2.334
[0.117]
(0.450)
0.000
1.120
[0.040]
(0.482)
0.020
1.547
[0.054]
(0.507)
0.002
0.159
[0.008]
(0.304)
0.600
-0.170
[-0.007]
(0.442)
0.701
1.228
[0.079]
(0.455)
0.007
-0.564
[-0.028]
(0.263)
0.032
-0.836
[-0.038]
(0.396)
0.035
-0.766
[-0.036]
(0.518)
0.139
-0.950
[-0.040]
(0.341)
0.005
-0.103
[-0.006]
(0.331)
0.755
0.327
[0.020]
(0.332)
0.325
-1.420
[-0.053]
(0.550)
0.010
-0.875
[-0.043]
(0.314)
0.005
-0.571
[-0.031]
(0.316)
0.071
-0.166
[-0.007]
(0.349)
0.634
-1.545
[-0.047]
(0.691)
0.025
0.189
[0.009]
(0.323)
0.558
1.752
[0.068]
(0.390)
0.000
2.372
[0.120]
(0.447)
0.000
3.861
[0.328]
(0.430)
0.000
2.615
[0.146]
(0.536)
0.000
4.048
[0.360]
(0.566)
0.000
5.421
[0.610]
(0.937)
0.000

Employed -> OLF
Unemployed -> OLF
OLF -> OLF
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

1.550
(0.556)
-1.196
(0.531)
-0.448
(0.480)
-1.895
(0.507)
-3.385
(0.564)

[0.055]
0.005
[-0.075]
0.024
[-0.034]
0.351
[-0.098]
0.000
[0.000]
0.000

Adult Females
Number of observations: 1520
1.878
[0.118]
(0.256)
0.000
1.228
[0.060]
(0.238)
0.000
1.720
[0.084]
(0.280)
0.000
-0.060
[-0.003]
(0.199)
0.763
0.964
[0.067]
(0.240)
0.000
-0.169
[-0.008]
(0.494)
0.732
-0.291
[-0.016]
(0.160)
0.069
-0.226
[-0.013]
(0.224)
0.313
-0.276
[-0.016]
(0.334)
0.408
-0.194
[-0.010]
(0.172)
0.258
-0.112
[-0.006]
(0.184)
0.543
0.413
[0.027]
(0.208)
0.047
-0.500
[-0.024]
(0.767)
0.515
-0.909
[-0.042]
(0.214)
0.000
0.142
[0.010]
(0.167)
0.398
-0.185
[-0.010]
(0.159)
0.245
-0.975
[-0.050]
(0.232)
0.000
0.205
[0.012]
(0.191)
0.282
1.722
[0.080]
(0.325)
0.000
1.122
[0.039]
(0.370)
0.002
2.782
[0.210]
(0.277)
0.000
2.862
[0.223]
(0.320)
0.000
2.326
[0.144]
(0.324)
0.000
1.400
(0.314)
2.242
(0.452)
1.093
(0.260)
0.269
(0.232)
-0.023
(0.339)
0.034
(0.313)
-4.857
(0.385)

[0.055]
0.000
[0.134]
0.000
[0.037]
0.000
[0.016]
0.246
[-0.001]
0.946
[0.002]
0.914
[0.000]
0.000

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Estimates reflect weighting to account for choice-based sampling. Omitted categories in the logit are Corpus Christi, white, age 22-29, highest grade equals 12,
never married, no young children, not currently receiving AFDC, not currently receiving Food Stamps, “Employed -> Employed”, and family income less than $3,000.
The categories “Employed -> OLF” and “Unemployed -> OLF” are combined due to small sample sizes. Using the population proportion of persons accepted into
JTPA (assumed to be three percent overall) to determine the cutoff, the within sample prediction rates for adult males are 81.06 for controls (applied and accepted into
JTPA) and 81.38 for ENPs (did not apply or not accepted into JTPA). The corresponding rates for adult females are 65.94 for controls and 71.43 for ENPs.

Table 5b
Determinants of Acceptance Into JTPA
Aware ENP and Control Samples: Youth

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 19-21
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade > 12
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Current AFDC Receipt
Current Food Stamp receipt
Child age < 6 years
Unemployed -> Employed
OLF -> Employed
Employed -> Unemployed
Unemployed -> Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
Employed or Unemployed -> OLF

Male Youth
Number of observations: 436
2.268
[0.127]
(0.647)
0.000
1.445
[0.060]
(0.649)
0.026
3.627
[0.246]
(0.632)
0.000
-0.793
[-0.030]
(0.515)
0.124
0.717
[0.046]
(0.628)
0.254
-4.207
[-0.080]
(1.252)
0.001
0.285
[0.013]
(0.460)
0.536
-0.104
[-0.005]
(0.508)
0.838
-0.187
[-0.009]
(0.475)
0.693
0.472
[0.028]
(0.845)
0.576
-1.225
[-0.042]
(0.637)
0.055
0.155
[0.009]
(1.226)
0.899
-1.455
[-0.043]
(0.980)
0.137
0.555
[-0.043]
(0.580)
0.339
-1.294
[0.030]
(0.676)
0.056
2.110
[0.120]
(0.629)
0.001
-1.331
[-0.021]
(0.890)
0.135
2.087
[0.118]
(0.537)
0.000
2.211
[0.130]
(0.706)
0.002
1.285
[0.054]
(0.764)
0.093
1.959
[0.106]
(0.806)
0.015

Employed -> OLF
Unemployed -> OLF
OLF -> OLF
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

2.387
(0.699)
3.867
(0.748)
1.552
(0.746)
1.011
(0.764)
-6.787
(0.976)

[0.150]
0.001
[0.309]
0.000
[0.055]
0.038
[0.028]
0.186
[0.000]
0.000

Female Youth
Number of observations: 540
0.750
[0.040]
(0.506)
0.139
0.462
[0.022]
(0.545)
0.396
1.218
[0.067]
(0.471)
0.010
0.227
[0.011]
(0.434)
0.601
0.097
[0.005]
(0.439)
0.825
0.971
[0.064]
(0.798)
0.223
-0.451
[-0.024]
(0.328)
0.169
-0.028
[-0.001]
(0.421)
0.947
-0.392
[-0.018]
(0.440)
0.373
0.236
[0.014]
(0.441)
0.592
-0.527
[-0.022]
(0.436)
0.227
0.316
[0.018]
(0.662)
0.633
-0.934
[-0.007]
(0.399)
0.019
1.311
[-0.042]
(0.370)
0.000
-0.139
[0.083]
(0.339)
0.681
1.776
[0.059]
(0.564)
0.002
2.243
[0.095]
(0.597)
0.000
3.648
[0.293]
(0.664)
0.000
2.638
[0.137]
(0.591)
0.000
3.292
[0.229]
(0.614)
0.000
1.462
(0.498)
0.845
(0.886)
1.201
(0.549)
-0.386
(0.536)
0.261
(0.691)
1.765
(0.535)
-4.732
(0.753)

[0.041]
0.003
[0.017]
0.340
[0.030]
0.029
[-0.015]
0.472
[0.013]
0.706
[0.149]
0.001
[0.000]
0.000

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Estimates reflect weighting to account for choice-based sampling. Omitted categories in the logit are Corpus Christi, white, age 16-18, highest grade equals 12,
never married, no young children, not currently receiving AFDC, not currently receiving Food Stamps, “Employed -> Employed”, and family income less than $3,000.
The categories “Employed -> OLF” and “Unemployed -> OLF” are combined due to small sample sizes. Using the population proportion of persons accepted into
JTPA (assumed to be three percent overall) as the cutoff, the within sample prediction rates for male youth are 68.66 for controls (applied and accepted into JTPA) and
76.47 for ENPs (did not apply or not accepted into JTPA). The corresponding rates for female youth are 67.91 for controls and 69.57 for ENPs.

Table 6a
Determinants of Enrollment into JTPA
Experimental Treatment Group: Adults

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Low English ability
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-54
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade 13-15
Highest grade > 15
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC Receipt
Current Food Stamp Receipt
Employed 1-6 months ago
Employed 7-12 months ago
Employed > 12 months ago
Never employed
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Adult Males
Number of Observations: 1886
-0.692
[-0.163]
(0.177)
0.000
-1.157
[-0.274]
(0.204)
0.000
0.447
[0.090]
(0.198)
0.024
-0.180
[-0.041]
(0.129)
0.165
0.271
[0.060]
(0.181)
0.135
-0.024
[-0.005]
(0.283)
0.933
0.288
[0.065]
(0.241)
0.231
-0.105
[-0.023]
(0.114)
0.358
-0.483
[-0.109]
(0.165)
0.003
-0.370
[-0.083]
(0.285)
0.195
-0.129
[-0.029]
(0.140)
0.357
-0.210
[-0.047]
(0.130)
0.105
0.001
[0.000]
(0.156)
0.993
-0.204
[-0.046]
(0.260)
0.432
0.325
[0.073]
(0.154)
0.034
0.273
[0.061]
(0.135)
0.044
0.109
[0.024]
(0.154)
0.480
0.132
[0.029]
(0.353)
0.709
-0.070
[-0.016]
(0.132)
0.595
-0.060
[-0.013]
(0.164)
0.715
-0.058
[-0.013]
(0.210)
0.781
0.032
[0.007]
(0.211)
0.880
-0.085
[-0.019]
(0.227)
0.709
-0.108
[-0.024]
(0.122)
0.378
0.057
[0.013]
(0.165)
0.728
0.483
[0.105]
(0.204)
0.018
0.498
[0.000]
(0.365)
0.172

Adult Females
Number of Observations: 2012
-1.030
[-0.232]
(0.177)
0.000
-1.280
[-0.292]
(0.195)
0.000
-0.563
[-0.121]
(0.199)
0.005
-0.240
[-0.056]
(0.132)
0.069
0.196
[0.045]
(0.176)
0.265
0.637
[0.141]
(0.350)
0.068
-0.082
[-0.019]
(0.210)
0.697
0.056
[0.013]
(0.115)
0.629
-0.324
[-0.075]
(0.160)
0.042
0.055
[0.013]
(0.305)
0.856
-0.168
[-0.038]
(0.132)
0.203
-0.041
[-0.009]
(0.124)
0.738
-0.035
[-0.008]
(0.151)
0.817
-0.216
[-0.049]
(0.302)
0.475
0.106
[0.024]
(0.167)
0.525
0.203
[0.046]
(0.121)
0.093
0.336
[0.077]
(0.115)
0.004
0.158
[0.036]
(0.138)
0.253
-0.237
[-0.054]
(0.117)
0.044
0.308
[0.071]
(0.150)
0.040
0.216
[0.050]
(0.198)
0.276
0.287
[0.066]
(0.177)
0.106
0.061
[0.014]
(0.192)
0.750
0.211
[0.049]
(0.118)
0.073
0.441
[0.100]
(0.166)
0.008
0.599
[0.135]
(0.256)
0.019
0.596
[0.000]
(0.350)
0.088

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Estimation includes observations with imputed covariates due to relative high levels of item non-response. Omitted categories in the logit are
Corpus Christi, white, normal English ability, age 22-29, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children, not currently receiving AFDC,
not currently receiving Food Stamps, currently employed, and family income less than $3,000. Using the sample proportion of accepted applicants
enrolled into JTPA as the cutoff, the within-sample prediction rates for adult males are 62.48 percent for enrollees and 67.94 percent for nonenrollees. The corresponding rates for adult females are 57.64 percent for enrollees and 66.41 percent for non-enrollees.

Table 6b
Determinants of Enrollment into JTPA
Experimental Treatment Group: Youth

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic

Male Youth
Number of Observations: 923
-1.213
[-0.241]
(0.273)
0.000
-1.350
[-0.274]
(0.297)
0.000
-0.554
[-0.096]
(0.276)
0.045
-0.291
[-0.061]
(0.191)
0.127
-0.044
[-0.009]
(0.241)
0.854

Other race-ethnicity
Low English ability
Age 19-21
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade > 12
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC Receipt
Current Food Stamp Receipt
Employed 1-6 months ago
Employed 7-12 months ago
Employed > 12 months ago
Never employed
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

-0.360
(0.392)
-0.429
(0.175)
0.060
(0.213)
0.000
(0.192)
0.064
(0.405)
0.138
(0.335)
0.338
(0.729)
0.279
(0.313)
-0.699
(0.336)
0.157
(0.219)
-0.228
(0.254)
-0.467
(0.341)
-0.413
(0.409)
-0.657
(0.302)
-0.057
(0.185)
-0.463
(0.234)
0.301
(0.278)
2.505
(0.586)

[-0.070]
0.358
[-0.087]
0.014
[0.012]
0.779
[0.000]
0.999
[0.013]
0.874
[0.028]
0.680
[0.066]
0.643
[0.055]
0.373
[-0.151]
0.038
[0.032]
0.474
[-0.044]
0.370
[-0.093]
0.170
[-0.082]
0.312
[-0.134]
0.030
[-0.012]
0.758
[-0.099]
0.048
[0.058]
0.279
[0.000]
0.000

Female Youth
Number of Observations: 962
-1.266
[-0.253]
(0.271)
0.000
-1.557
[-0.324]
(0.266)
0.000
-0.597
[-0.103]
(0.276)
0.031
-0.223
[-0.048]
(0.210)
0.287
0.212
[0.043]
(0.250)
0.396
0.531
[0.102]
(0.533)
0.319
0.113
[0.023]
(0.391)
0.773
0.036
[0.007]
(0.167)
0.830
0.084
[0.017]
(0.204)
0.680
0.131
[0.027]
(0.183)
0.476
-0.111
[-0.023]
(0.355)
0.755
-0.052
[-0.011]
(0.302)
0.864
0.424
[0.083]
(0.381)
0.267
0.092
[0.019]
(0.193)
0.632
0.135
[0.028]
(0.241)
0.576
-0.060
[-0.012]
(0.195)
0.757
-0.220
[-0.044]
(0.239)
0.357
-0.415
[-0.085]
(0.332)
0.211
-0.353
[-0.072]
(0.328)
0.282
-0.276
[-0.055]
(0.280)
0.324
0.086
[0.018]
(0.176)
0.627
0.207
[0.042]
(0.272)
0.446
0.116
[0.024]
(0.280)
0.680
1.453
[0.000]
(0.557)
0.009

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Estimation includes observations with imputed covariates due to relative high levels of item non-response. Omitted categories in the logit are
Corpus Christi, white, normal English ability, age 16-18, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children, not currently receiving AFDC,
not currently receiving Food Stamps, currently employed, and family income less than $3,000. Using the sample proportion of accepted applicants
enrolled into JTPA as the cutoff, the within-sample prediction rates for male youth are 60.20 percent for enrollees and 65.08 percent for nonenrollees. The corresponding rates for female youth are 57.51 percent for enrollees and 68.75 percent for non-enrollees.

-0.00008
(0.00000)
-0.01537
(0.00018)
0.01412
(0.00016)
-0.00210
(0.00002)

0.03899
(0.00044)
0.03110
(0.00035)

-0.00752
(0.00009)
-0.05034
(0.00058)
-0.05886
(0.00067)

-0.03595
(0.00041)
0.04676
(0.00053)
0.00643
(0.00007)

Weighted
Enrollment
Term

-14.64
(0.05)

0.10
(0.00)
-63.33
(0.44)
77.48
(0.31)
0.86
(0.00)

-70.33
(0.45)
32.06
(0.16)

3.63
(0.01)
21.09
(0.05)
18.91
(0.04)

-22.74
(0.15)
-46.98
(0.30)
3.28
(0.02)

Percent of
Overall

Black

0.01429
(0.00016)

12.49
(0.03)
7.00
(0.02)
-1.32
(0.01)

Highest grade > 15

Highest grade 13-15

Highest grade 10-11

Highest grade < 10

Div-wid-sep

Married

Age 50-54

Age 40-49

Age 30-39

Other race-ethnicity

Hispanic

Child age < 6 years

-0.04095
(0.00047)
-0.03338
(0.00038)
0.01143
(0.00013)

Table 7a
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Adult Males (80,598 observations)
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Overall
Eligibility
Percent of Awareness Percent of
Acceptance
Percent of
Effect
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Change from White to:
0.15813
0.17989
113.76
0.06623
41.88
-0.05204
-32.91
(0.00174)
(0.00194)
(0.21)
(0.00068)
(0.20)
(0.00054)
(0.21)
-0.09954
0.12535
-125.93
-0.08245
82.83
-0.18921
190.08
(0.00121)
(0.00137)
(1.30)
(0.00086)
(0.54)
(0.00198)
(1.03)
0.19616
0.17773
90.61
-0.07631
-38.90
0.08834
45.03
(0.00202)
(0.00193)
(0.16)
(0.00081)
(0.19)
(0.00084)
(0.19)
Change from Age 22-29 to:
-0.20738
-0.07229
34.86
-0.04524
21.81
-0.08232
39.69
(0.00213)
(0.00078)
(0.05)
(0.00046)
(0.05)
(0.00083)
(0.06)
-0.23873
-0.08673
36.33
-0.04657
19.51
-0.05507
23.07
(0.00252)
(0.00095)
(0.06)
(0.00048)
(0.04)
(0.00056)
(0.04)
-0.31125
-0.12920
41.51
-0.00039
0.012
-0.12280
39.45
(0.00330)
(0.00139)
(0.05)
(0.00000)
(0.00)
(0.00127)
(0.05)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
-0.05544
0.01257
-22.68
0.01334
-24.07
-0.12037
217.11
(0.00052)
(0.00014)
(0.15)
(0.00014)
(0.14)
(0.00117)
(0.69)
0.09699
0.02779
28.66
0.10393
107.16
-0.06582
-67.86
(0.00106)
(0.00030)
(0.10)
(0.00106)
(0.18)
(0.00068)
(0.37)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
-0.07920
0.08490
-107.19
-0.06366
80.37
-0.010038
126.74
(0.00091)
(0.00093)
(0.93)
(0.00067)
(0.44)
(0.00105)
(0.53)
0.02426
0.03716
153.13
-0.01861
-76.70
0.02108
86.89
(0.00027)
(0.00041)
(0.52)
(0.00019)
(0.46)
(0.00021)
(0.44)
0.01822
-0.02288
-125.56
0.00813
44.64
0.01885
103.44
(0.00019)
(0.00026)
(0.88)
(0.00008)
(0.25)
(0.00019)
(0.41)
-0.24466
-0.00939
3.84
-0.05869
23.99
-0.17448
71.32
(0.00245)
(0.00010)
(0.01)
(0.00060)
(0.04)
(0.00174)
(0.05)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
-0.09757
-0.02979
30.53
-0.00915
9.38
-0.07291
74.72
(0.00097)
(0.00032)
(0.07)
(0.00009)
(0.02)
(0.00072)
(0.10)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
32.17
-0.02445
7.46
-0.15696
47.89
(0.04)
(0.00025)
(0.02)
(0.00161)
(0.06)
53.29
-0.03367
7.06
-0.15563
32.64
(0.05)
(0.00035)
(0.02)
(0.00158)
(0.04)
37.04
0.01048
-1.21
-0.56750
65.48
(0.09)
(0.00011)
(0.01)
(0.00274)
(0.07)

Family income 3K-9K
-0.32777
-0.10544
(0.00344)
(0.00116)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.47674
-0.25404
(0.00484)
(0.00259)
Family income > 15K
-0.86666
-0.32102
(0.00493)
(0.00250)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.

Table 7a (continued)
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Unweighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Adult Males (80,598 observations)
Overall
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Effect
Eligibility Term
Awareness
Acceptance
Enrollment Term
Term
Term
Change from White to:
Black
0.15813
0.06693
0.11697
-0.00968
-0.07041
(0.00174)
(0.00018)
(0.00005)
(0.00005)
(0.00005)
Hispanic
-0.09954
0.04687
-0.14448
-0.03352
0.08792
(0.00121)
(0.00013)
(0.00011)
(0.00020)
(0.00000)
Other race-ethnicity
0.19616
0.06753
-0.13250
0.01774
0.01230
(0.00202)
(0.00020)
(0.00009)
(0.00009)
(0.00000)
Change from Age 22-29 to:
Age 30-39
-0.20738
-0.02757
-0.08029
-0.01583
-0.01445
(0.00213)
(0.00007)
(0.00004)
(0.00009)
(0.00000)
Age 40-49
-0.23873
-0.03277
-0.08247
-0.01053
-0.09820
(0.00252)
(0.00009)
(0.00004)
(0.00006)
(0.00003)
Age 50-54
-0.31125
-0.04864
-0.00068
-0.02274
-0.11663
(0.00330)
(0.00014)
(0.00000)
(0.00013)
(0.00008)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
Married
-0.05544
0.00468
0.02359
-0.02424
0.07681
(0.00052)
(0.00001)
(0.00001)
(0.00012)
(0.00006)
Div-wid-sep
0.09699
0.01056
0.18502
-0.01223
0.05862
(0.00106)
(0.00003)
(0.00006)
(0.00007)
(0.00002)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
-0.07920
0.03184
-0.11108
-0.01834
-0.00016
(0.00091)
(0.00008)
(0.00007)
(0.00010)
(0.00000)
Highest grade 10-11
0.02426
0.01406
-0.03287
0.00410
-0.02980
(0.00027)
(0.00004)
(0.00001)
(0.00002)
(0.00000)
Highest grade 13-15
0.01822
-0.00856
0.01443
0.00364
0.02700
(0.00019)
(0.00002)
(0.00000)
(0.00002)
(0.00000)
Highest grade > 15
-0.24466
-0.00355
-0.10503
-0.03325
-0.00404
(0.00245)
(0.00001)
(0.00003)
(0.00017)
(0.00000)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
-0.09757
-0.01129
-0.01621
-0.01379
0.02742
(0.00097)
(0.00003)
(0.00001)
(0.00007)
(0.00001)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
-0.32777
-0.03797
-0.04304
-0.02817
-0.08075
(0.00344)
(0.00013)
(0.00000)
(0.00017)
(0.00006)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.47674
-0.08709
-0.05927
-0.03101
-0.06552
(0.00484)
(0.00035)
(0.00000)
(0.00019)
(0.00000)
Family income > 15K
-0.86666
-0.27189
0.01851
-0.22959
0.02226
(0.00493)
(0.00040)
(0.00001)
(0.00043)
(0.00000)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. The standard errors reflect variation due to the sample used to
perform the simulations.

Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-54
Married
Div-wid-sep
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade 13-15
Highest grade > 15
Child age < 6 years
Family income 3K-9K
Family income 9K-15K
Family income > 15K

-0.08450
(0.00037)
-0.18756
(0.00084)
-0.33806
(0.00098)

Table 7b
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Adult Females (89,196 observations)
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Overall
Eligibility
Percent of Awareness Percent of
Acceptance
Percent of Enrollment
Effect
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Term
Change from White to:
0.18225
0.17694
97.09
0.04858
26.66
-0.01011
-5.55
-0.03316
(0.00074)
(0.00074)
(0.08)
(0.00024)
(0.09)
(0.00005)
(0.01)
(0.00016)
0.05725
0.06722
117.41
-0.03759
-65.65
-0.03785
-66.11
0.06547
(0.00027)
(0.00028)
(0.26)
(0.00018)
(0.28)
(0.00018)
(0.25)
(0.00033)
0.08121
0.06315
77.76
-0.05323
-65.54
0.00495
6.10
0.06633
(0.00037)
(0.00026)
(0.15)
(0.00025)
(0.22)
(0.00002)
(0.02)
(0.00033)
Change from Age 22-29 to:
-0.06881
0.00439
-6.38
-0.00849
12.34
-0.07057
102.56
0.00587
(0.00031)
(0.00002)
(0.01)
(0.00004)
(0.02)
(0.00032)
(0.00)
(0.00003)
-0.13415
0.00954
-7.11
-0.02645
19.72
-0.08264
61.60
-0.03461
(0.00064)
(0.00004)
(0.02)
(0.00013)
(0.03)
(0.00039)
(0.00)
(0.00017)
-0.17226
-0.02104
12.21
-0.02611
15.16
-0.13052
75.77
0.00540
(0.00078)
(0.00008)
(0.02)
(0.00013)
(0.02)
(0.00061)
(0.05)
(0.00003)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
-0.25809
-0.11003
42.63
-0.03753
14.54
-0.13273
51.43
0.02221
(0.00096)
(0.00037)
(0.03)
(0.00018)
(0.02)
(0.00054)
(0.03)
(0.00011)
0.05775
-0.00537
-9.30
0.00975
16.88
0.02610
45.20
0.02727
(0.00028)
(0.00002)
(0.02)
(0.00005)
(0.03)
(0.00012)
(0.03)
(0.00014)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
-0.00028
0.12478
-45004.11
-0.09553
34456.05
-0.01200
4329.50
-0.01752
(0.00039)
(0.00050)
(
(0.00048)
(
(0.00006)
(5926.98)
(0.00009)
61725.88)
47143.37)
-0.02252
0.00440
-19.54
-0.00229
10.17
-0.01690
75.04
-0.00773
(0.00011)
(0.00002)
(0.05)
(0.00001)
(0.02)
(0.00008)
(0.06)
(0.00004)
0.00983
-0.02878
-292.81
-0.02655
-270.11
0.06390
650.14
0.00125
(0.00010)
(0.00012)
(2.80)
(0.00013)
(2.40)
(0.00030)
(5.07)
(0.00001)
-0.17329
-0.11342
65.45
-0.08481
48.94
0.04682
-27.02
-0.02190
(0.00072)
(0.00045)
(0.07)
(0.00039)
(0.04)
(0.00022)
(0.03)
(0.00011)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
0.00212
0.03731
1763.02
-0.00557
-263.19
-0.06759
-3193.65
0.03797
(0.00012)
(0.00015)
(103.67)
(0.00003)
( 15.97)
(0.00033)
(194.88)
(0.00019)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
-2322.85
0.06882
1891.74
0.01681
462.23
0.00250
(139.38)
(0.00034)
(108.34)
(0.00008)
( 27.00)
(0.00001)
132.98
0.03819
-27.08
-0.02034
14.42
0.02862
(0.13)
(0.00019)
(0.11)
(0.00009)
(0.04)
(0.00014)
89.09
0.00612
-1.61
-0.08725
22.99
0.03971
(0.00)
(0.00003)
(0.01)
(0.00036)
(0.05)
(0.00020)
0.00364
(0.00022)
-0.14105
(0.00068)
-0.37947
(0.00114)

Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.

Percent of
Overall

-18.20
(0.05)
114.36
(0.36)
81.68
(0.18)

-8.53
(0.02)
25.80
(0.03)
-3.13
(0.01)

-8.61
(0.02)
47.21
(0.04)

6320.56
(8658.46)

34.34
(0.03)
12.70
(0.10)
12.64
(0.02)

1794.02
(107.23)

68.81
(4.04)
-20.29
(0.08)
-10.46
(0.04)

Table 7b (continued)
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Unweighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Adult Females (89,196 observations)
Overall
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Effect
Eligibility Term
Awareness
Acceptance
Enrollment
Term
Term
Term
Change from White to:
Black
0.18225
0.11936
0.10254
-0.00213
-0.07239
(0.00074)
(0.00025)
(0.00000)
(0.00000)
(0.00003)
Hispanic
0.05725
0.04523
-0.07589
-0.00796
0.13711
(0.00027)
(0.00010)
(0.00003)
(0.00001)
(0.00006)
Other race-ethnicity
0.08121
0.04237
-0.10664
0.00105
0.13905
(0.00037)
(0.00009)
(0.00004)
(0.00000)
(0.00000)
Change from Age 22-29 to:
Age 30-39
-0.06881
0.00292
-0.01759
-0.01495
0.01270
(0.00031)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
(0.00003)
(0.00000)
Age 40-49
-0.13415
0.00633
-0.05442
-0.01792
-0.07575
(0.00064)
(0.00001)
(0.00002)
(0.00004)
(0.00003)
Age 50-54
-0.17226
-0.01395
-0.05343
-0.02759
0.01166
(0.00078)
(0.00004)
(0.00003)
(0.00004)
(0.00000)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
Married
-0.25809
-0.08046
-0.07888
-0.03365
0.04852
(0.00096)
(0.00017)
(0.00004)
(0.00004)
(0.00002)
Div-wid-sep
0.05775
-0.00355
0.02033
0.00566
0.05814
(0.00028)
(0.00001)
(0.00001)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
-0.00028
0.08384
-0.18277
-0.00254
-0.03823
(0.00039)
(0.00017)
(0.00014)
(0.00001)
(0.00001)
Highest grade 10-11
-0.02252
0.00292
-0.00474
-0.00356
-0.01680
(0.00011)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
Highest grade 13-15
0.00983
-0.01898
-0.05459
0.01348
0.00270
(0.00010)
(0.00005)
(0.00000)
(0.00002)
(0.00000)
Highest grade > 15
-0.17329
-0.07569
-0.17394
0.00970
-0.04777
(0.00072)
(0.00020)
(0.00009)
(0.00002)
(0.00002)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
0.00212
0.02473
-0.01154
-0.01397
0.08169
(0.00012)
(0.00006)
(0.00001)
(0.00003)
(0.00004)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
0.00364
-0.05266
0.14643
0.00361
0.00541
(0.00022)
(0.00015)
(0.00006)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.14105
-0.11255
0.08099
-0.00431
0.06103
(0.00068)
(0.00035)
(0.00000)
(0.00001)
(0.00000)
Family income > 15K
-0.37947
-0.26155
0.01266
-0.02135
0.08726
(0.00114)
(0.00039)
(0.00001)
(0.00003)
(0.00000)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. The standard errors reflect variation due to the sample used to
perform the simulations.

Table 7c
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Male Youth (10,280 observations)
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Overall
Eligibility
Percent of Awareness Percent of Acceptance
Percent of
Effect
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Change from White to:
Black
0.18985
0.13157
69.30
0.19817
104.38
-0.08387
-44.18
(0.00359) (0.00251)
(0.59)
(0.00360)
(1.21)
(0.00185)
(0.94)
Hispanic
0.16202
0.27921
172.33
0.00435
2.68
-0.16337
-100.84
(0.00461) (0.00559)
(2.31)
(0.00008)
(0.07)
(0.00334)
(3.13)
Other race-ethnicity
0.11554
.21151
183.06
0.19799
171.37
-.35420
-306.57
(0.00528) (0.00417)
(6.88)
(0.00348)
(7.34)
(0.00742)
(16.67)
Change from Age 16-18 to:
Age 19-21
-0.04099
-0.05230
127.60
-0.12499
304.94
0.17496
-426.86
(0.00217) (0.00098)
(5.88)
(0.00224)
(15.65)
(0.00386)
(26.88)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
Married
-0.09644
-0.14673
152.14
.22705
-235.42
-0.20505
212.61
(0.00327) (0.00262)
(3.74)
(0.00400)
(7.59)
(0.00430)
(4.65)
Div-wid-sep
-0.45773
-0.18594
40.62
-0.16515
36.08
-0.12806
27.98
(0.00827) (0.00319)
(0.18)
(0.00311)
(0.10)
(0.00267)
(0.16)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
0.27423
0.19428
70.85
0.00450
1.64
0.05394
19.67
(0.00480) (0.00358)
(0.36)
(0.00008)
(0.01)
(0.00110)
(0.25)
Highest grade 10-11
0.31709
0.15118
47.68
0.06286
19.82
0.09853
31.07
(0.00559) (0.00287)
(0.35)
(0.00112)
(0.13)
(0.00200)
(0.27)
Highest grade > 12
-0.15662
-0.00644
4.11
-0.08392
53.58
-0.06819
43.54
(0.00291) (0.00012)
(0.05)
(0.00152)
(0.17)
(0.00140)
(0.20)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
-0.06653
0.13831
-207.91
-0.02807
42.20
-0.20069
301.67
(0.00296) (0.00276)
(9.74)
(0.00051)
(1.50)
(0.00411)
(9.40)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
-0.02934
-0.38646
1317.34
-0.09657
329.20
0.47009
-1602.39
(0.00890) (0.00892)
(577.07)
(0.00178)
(147.80)
(0.00977)
(750.37)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.62620
-0.36139
57.71
0.00376
-0.60
-0.18625
29.74
(0.01208) (0.00660)
(0.13)
(0.00007)
(0.01)
(0.00378)
(0.08)
Family income > 15K
-1.1310
-0.85797
75.86
-0.07077
6.26
-0.22640
20.02
(0.00927) (0.00564)
(0.21)
(0.00126)
(0.07)
(0.00358)
(0.18)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.

-0.01638
(0.00038)
-0.08230
(0.00188)
0.02411
(0.00056)

0.02392
(0.00057)

0.02152
(0.00051)
0.00451
(0.00011)
0.00192
(0.00005)

0.02827
(0.00067)
0.02142
(0.00051)

-0.03866
(0.00091)

-0.05602
(0.00127)
0.04183
(0.00098)
0.06022
(0.00144)

Weighted
Enrollment
Term

55.82
(25.52)
13.14
(0.08)
-2.13
(0.04)

-35.95
(1.18)

7.85
(0.10)
1.42
(0.02)
-1.23
(0.01)

-29.31
(0.66)
-4.68
(0.04)

94.32
(5.52)

-29.51
(0.59)
25.82
(0.80)
52.12
(2.69)

Percent of
Overall

Table 7c (continued)
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Unweighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Male Youth (10,280 observations)
Overall
Unweghted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Effect
Eligibility
Awareness
Acceptance
Enrollment
Term
Term
Term
Term
Change from White to:
Black
0.18985
0.06224
0.23652
-0.01464
-0.10033
(0.00359)
(0.00033)
(0.00027)
(0.00011)
(0.00009)
Hispanic
0.16202
0.12856
0.00515
-0.02811
0.07099
(0.00461)
(0.00071)
(0.00001)
(0.00023)
(0.00011)
Other race-ethnicity
0.11554
0.09938
0.24597
-0.05971
0.10316
(0.00528)
(0.00059)
(0.00029)
(0.00051)
(0.00017)
Change from Age 16-18 to:
Age 19-21
-0.04099
-0.02447
-0.14922
0.02848
-0.06538
(0.00217)
(0.00013)
(0.00014)
(0.00020)
(0.00006)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
Married
-0.09644
-0.06715
0.28561
-0.03700
0.04882
(0.00327)
(0.00043)
(0.00023)
(0.00032)
(0.00007)
Div-wid-sep
-0.45773
-0.08370
-0.18808
-0.02320
0.03693
(0.00827)
(0.00060)
(0.00048)
(0.00018)
(0.00006)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
0.27423
0.09339
0.00533
0.01010
0.03660
(0.00480)
(0.00051)
(0.00001)
(0.00007)
(0.00005)
Highest grade 10-11
0.31709
0.07254
0.07497
0.01866
0.00780
(0.00559)
(0.00039)
(0.00009)
(0.00013)
(0.00001)
Highest grade > 12
-0.15662
-0.00299
-0.09993
-0.01283
0.00333
(0.00291)
(0.00002)
(0.00013)
(0.00009)
(0.00000)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
-0.06653
0.06409
-0.03296
-0.03545
0.04130
(0.00296)
(0.00038)
(0.00006)
(0.00029)
(0.00006)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
-0.02934
-0.13607
-0.10801
0.09427
-0.02889
(0.00890)
(0.00150)
(0.00018)
(0.00035)
(0.00003)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.62620
-0.17195
0.00445
-0.03412
-0.14599
(0.01208)
(0.00229)
(0.00001)
(0.00027)
(0.00013)
Family income > 15K
-1.13101
-0.57966
-0.08677
-0.05300
0.04362
(0.00927)
(0.00228)
(0.00010)
(0.00026)
(0.00006)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. The standard errors reflect variation due to the sample used to
perform the simulations.

Table 7d
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Female Youth (11,165 observations)
Weighted
Weighted
Weighted
Overall
Eligibility
Percent of Awareness Percent of Acceptance
Percent of
Effect
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Term
Overall
Change from White to:
Black
0.60673
0.25958
42.78
0.15867
26.15
0.23113
38.09
(0.00343) (0.00170)
(0.17)
(0.00122)
(0.08)
(0.00153)
(0.13)
Hispanic
0.33973
0.13234
38.95
0.07296
21.48
0.03803
11.19
(0.00237) (0.00086)
(0.18)
(0.00055)
(0.07)
(0.00031)
(0.04)
Other race-ethnicity
0.52914
0.21732
41.07
-0.15091
-28.52
0.39674
74.98
(0.00323) (0.00135)
(0.24)
(0.00124)
(0.12)
(0.00309)
(0.24)
Change from Age 16-18 to:
Age 19-21
-0.13182
0.00600
-4.55
-0.04413
33.48
-0.09964
75.58
(0.00103) (0.00004)
(0.04)
(0.00033)
(0.09)
(0.00080)
(0.09)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
Married
-0.11438
0.04948
-43.26
0.02279
-19.93
-0.21716
189.86
(0.00122) (0.00031)
(0.52)
(0.00017)
(0.15)
(0.00170)
(0.81)
Div-wid-sep
0.43598
0.16794
38.52
-0.13812
-31.68
0.34108
78.23
(0.00272) (0.00102)
(0.22)
(0.00113)
(0.13)
(0.00267)
(0.23)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
0.02402
0.10392
432.68
-0.13596
-566.07
0.03667
152.69
(0.00062) (0.00064)
(10.15)
(0.00105)
(17.22)
(0.00030)
(4.69)
Highest grade 10-11
-0.04111
0.00763
-18.55
-0.03043
74.01
-0.03857
93.82
(0.00034) (0.00005)
(0.16)
(0.00023)
(0.21)
(0.00032)
(0.27)
Highest grade > 12
-0.23797
-0.08057
33.86
-0.00592
2.49
-0.15552
65.35
(0.00153) (0.00052)
(0.16)
(0.00004)
(0.01)
(0.00120)
(0.16)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
0.04561
0.16064
352.24
-0.01929
-42.29
-0.11019
-241.62
(0.00111) (0.00095)
(7.62)
(0.00015)
(1.20)
(0.00094)
(7.36)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
-0.21200
-0.20549
96.93
0.04033
-19.02
-0.02672
12.60
(0.00173) (0.00166)
(0.09)
(0.00030)
(0.10)
(0.00022)
(0.08)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.26501
-0.31212
117.78
-0.01785
6.73
0.05881
-22.19
(0.00243) (0.00277)
(0.12)
(0.00014)
(0.03)
(0.00049)
(0.11)
Family income > 15K
-0.29814
-0.64432
216.11
-0.06660
22.34
0.43046
-144.38
(0.00588) (0.00390)
(3.51)
(0.00050)
(0.46)
(0.00460)
(4.09)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.

-0.02013
(0.00021)
0.00615
(0.00006)
-0.01767
(0.00018)

0.01445
(0.00015)

0.01939
(0.00020)
0.02026
(0.00021)
0.00405
(0.00004)

0.03049
(0.00032)
0.06509
(0.00070)

0.00594
(0.00006)

-0.04265
(0.00043)
0.09640
(0.00103)
0.06597
(0.00071)

Weighted
Enrollment
Term

9.49
(0.06)
-2.32
(0.01)
5.93
(0.13)

31.68
(0.95)

80.72
(2.47)
-49.28
(0.33)
-1.70
(0.01)

-26.66
(0.20)
14.93
(0.08)

-4.51
(0.02)

-7.03
(0.04)
28.38
(0.14)
12.47
(0.07)

Percent of
Overall

Table 7d (continued)
JTPA Participation Simulation Results
Unweighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Participation in JTPA
1986 SIPP Panel Sample of JTPA Eligibles: Female Youth (11,165 observations)
Overall
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Unweighted
Effect
Eligibility
Awareness
Acceptance
Enrollment
Term
Term
Term
Term
Change from White to:
Black
0.60673
0.07514
0.18894
0.08124
-0.06723
(0.00343)
(0.00020)
(0.00012)
(0.00038)
(0.00006)
Hispanic
0.33973
0.03805
0.08826
0.01283
0.14839
(0.00237)
(0.00010)
(0.00004)
(0.00007)
(0.00011)
Other race-ethnicity
0.52914
0.06344
-0.17801
0.13083
0.10252
(0.00323)
(0.00017)
(0.00019)
(0.00058)
(0.00011)
Change from Age 16-18 to:
Age 19-21
-0.13182
0.00172
-0.05334
-0.03352
0.00931
(0.00103)
(0.00000)
(0.00000)
(0.00016)
(0.00001)
Change from Single, Never Married to:
Married
-0.11438
0.01431
0.02747
-0.07153
0.04781
(0.00122)
(0.00004)
(0.00002)
(0.00036)
(0.00003)
Div-wid-sep
0.43598
0.04896
-0.16342
0.11298
0.10116
(0.00272)
(0.00013)
(0.00015)
(0.00052)
(0.00011)
Change from Highest Grade = 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
0.02402
0.03018
-0.16072
0.01233
0.03028
(0.00062)
(0.00008)
(0.00015)
(0.00006)
(0.00003)
Highest grade 10-11
-0.04111
0.00219
-0.03662
-0.01290
0.03163
(0.00034)
(0.00001)
(0.00002)
(0.00007)
(0.00003)
Highest grade > 12
-0.23797
-0.02355
-0.00714
-0.05464
0.00635
(0.00153)
(0.00005)
(0.00000)
(0.00028)
(0.00001)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
0.04561
0.04769
-0.02320
-0.03586
0.02259
(0.00111)
(0.00012)
(0.00002)
(0.00019)
(0.00002)
Change from Family Income < $3,000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
-0.21200
-0.05959
0.04868
-0.00894
-0.03154
(0.00173)
(0.00019)
(0.00002)
(0.00005)
(0.00002)
Family income 9K-15K
-0.26501
-0.09455
-0.02149
0.01981
0.00962
(0.00243)
(0.00035)
(0.00001)
(0.00010)
(0.00001)
Family income > 15K
-0.29814
-0.19203
-0.08038
0.11196
-0.02763
(0.00588)
(0.00017)
(0.00002)
(0.00045)
(0.00002)
Source: Authors’ calculations using 1986 SIPP full panel.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. The standard errors reflect variation due to the sample used to
perform the simulations.

Table 8a
JTPA Simulation Results – Two Step Decomposition
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Acceptance into JTPA
National JTPA Study Eligible Non-Participant Sample: Adult Males (1552 observations)
Overall
Weighted
Percent
Weighted
Effect
Awareness
of
Acceptance
Term
Overall
Term
Change from White to:
Black
2.5149
(0.0675)
1.5521
(0.0495)
61.72
(0.66)
.9628
(0.0257)
Hispanic
-2.9536
(0.0902)
-2.6335
(0.0844)
89.16
(0.25)
-0.3201
(0.0087)
Other race-ethnicity
5.8446
(0.1485)
-1.4193
(0.0457)
-24.28
(0.85)
7.2639
(0.1668)
Change from Age 22-29 to:
Age 30-39
-3.7082
(0.0993)
-1.3499
(0.0433)
36.40
(0.62)
-2.3583
(0.0664)
Age 40-49
-4.2680
(0.1146)
-1.2858
(0.0412)
30.13
(0.55)
-2.9822
(0.0838)
Age 50-54
-2.5991
(0.0765)
.1994
(0.0064)
-7.67
(0.22)
-2.7985
(0.0803)
Change from Highest Grade 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
-6.5763
(0.1825)
-2.1992
(0.0693)
33.44
(0.54)
-4.3771
(0.1279)
Highest grade 10-11
-1.4067
(0.0380)
-0.7153
(0.0233)
50.85
(0.70)
-0.6914
(0.0193)
Highest grade 13-15
2.1957
(0.0557)
.5977
(0.0192)
27.22
(0.57)
1.5980
(0.0430)
Highest grade > 15
-7.3700
(0.2089)
-1.6050
(0.0516)
21.78
(0.40)
-5.7650
(0.1688)
Change from not receiving AFDC to:
Current AFDC receipt
-5.5477
(0.1714)
.4306
(0.0138)
-7.76
(0.22)
-5.9783
(0.1800)
Change from not receiving Food Stamps to:
Current Food Stamp receipt
4.4612
(0.1165)
2.8726
(0.0897)
64.39
(0.68)
1.5886
(0.0424)
Change Two Most Recent Labor Force Statuses from Employed -> Employed to:
Unemployed -> Employed
11.1319
(0.2484)
2.8784
(0.0920)
25.86
(0.60)
8.2535
(0.1969)
OLF -> Employed
15.2249
(0.3061)
2.6670
(0.0845)
17.52
(0.45)
12.5578
(0.2646)
Employed -> Unemployed
23.9905
(0.4532)
2.8125
(0.0946)
11.72
(0.31)
21.1780
(0.3998)
Unemployed ->
15.9797
(0.3196)
3.6041
(0.1122)
22.55
(0.55)
12.3756
(0.2652)
Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
28.6514
(0.4525)
6.4026
(0.2087)
22.35
(0.59)
22.2488
(0.3654)
Employed -> OLF
25.9317
(0.3865)
-1.6591
(0.0530)
-6.40
(0.22)
27.5908
(0.3904)
Unemployed -> OLF
30.8787
(0.4021)
-4.9403
(0.1627)
-16.00
(0.67)
35.8191
(0.3365)
OLF -> OLF
6.8828
(0.1859)
-0.0298
(0.0009)
-0.43
(0.01)
6.9126
(0.1864)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
-0.9468
(0.0270)
-0.5962
(0.0190)
62.97
(0.71)
-0.3506
(0.0114)
Change from Family Income < $3000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
-5.2227
(0.1744)
-0.1078
(0.0034)
2.06
(0.06)
-5.1149
(0.1725)
Family income 9K-15K
-2.4054
(0.0750)
-0.1520
(0.0048)
6.32
(0.18)
-2.2535
(0.0722)
Family income > 15K
-6.8375
(0.2571)
1.6230
(0.0511)
-23.74
(0.94)
-8.4605
(0.2804)
Change from Corpus Christi site indicator to:
Fort Wayne site
12.6473
(0.3162)
1.0828
(0.0346)
8.56
(0.22)
11.5644
(0.2958)
Jersey City site
6.3780
(0.1534)
.3288
(0.0105)
5.16
(0.15)
6.0492
(0.1490)
Providence site
6.4292
(0.1691)
-1.5965
(0.0509)
-24.83
(0.95)
8.0257
(0.1824)
Change from Never Married to:
Currently married
-4.9098
(0.1401)
.4562
(0.0145)
-9.29
(0.31)
-5.3660
(0.1467)
Married 1-24 months
4.3002
(0.1261)
4.2079
(0.1252)
97.85
(0.04)
.0923
(0.0025)
Married > 24 months
5.3340
(0.1391)
3.6192
(0.1166)
67.85
(0.73)
1.7147
(0.0441)

Percent
of
Overall
38.28
10.84
124.28

(0.66)
(0.25)
(0.85)

63.60
69.87
107.67

(0.62)
(0.55)
(0.22)

66.56
49.15
72.78
78.22

(0.54)
(0.70)
(0.58)
(0.40)

107.76

(0.23)

35.61

(0.68)

74.14
82.48
88.28
77.45

(0.60)
(0.44)
(0.31)
(0.55)

77.65
106.40
116.00
100.43

(0.59)
(0.22)
(0.67)
(0.03)

37.03

(0.71)

97.94
93.68
123.74

(0.04)
(0.19)
(0.94)

91.44
94.84
124.83

(0.23)
(0.16)
(0.95)

109.29
2.15
32.15

(0.31)
(0.07)
(0.73)

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. These standard errors reflect variation in the samples used to do the simulations.

Table 8b
JTPA Simulation Results – Two Step Decomposition
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Acceptance into JTPA
National JTPA Study Eligible Non-Participant Sample: Adult Females (2438 observations)
Overall
Weighted
Percent
Weighted
Effect
Awareness
of
Acceptance
Term
Overall
Term
Change from White to:
Black
0.3406
(0.0082)
.5807
(0.0110) 170.49
(1.57)
-0.2401
(0.0044)
Hispanic
2.5843
(0.0514)
-1.5509
(0.0312)
-60.01
(1.29)
4.1352
(0.0709)
Other race-ethnicity
-0.5642 (0.0140)
-0.9772
(0.0192) 173.22
(1.55)
0.4130
(0.0074)
Change from Age 22-29 to:
Age 30-39
-1.5293 (0.0272)
-0.2304
(0.0044)
15.07
(0.18)
-1.2989
(0.0238)
Age 40-49
-1.0421 (0.0184)
-0.3973
(0.0075)
38.12
(0.30)
-0.6449
(0.0120)
Age 50-54
-0.9142 (0.0163)
-0.3667
(0.0071)
40.12
(0.30)
-0.5474
(0.0102)
Change from Highest Grade 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
-2.6424 (0.0495)
-2.0099
(0.0393)
76.06
(0.21)
-0.6325
(0.0119)
Highest grade 10-11
-0.8521 (0.0151)
-0.2605
(0.0050)
30.57
(0.27)
-0.5916
(0.0109)
Highest grade 13-15
1.4035
(0.0265)
-0.5493
(0.0103)
-39.14
(0.72)
1.9527
(0.0332)
Highest grade > 15
-3.5102 (0.0668)
-1.4343
(0.0283)
40.86
(0.26)
-2.0760
(0.0410)
Change from not receiving AFDC to:
Current AFDC receipt
-3.9558 (0.0809)
-0.0051
(0.0001)
.13
(0.00)
-3.9507
(0.0808)
Change from not receiving food stamps to:
Current Food Stamp
2.4674
(0.0416)
1.3765
(0.0242)
55.79
(0.30)
1.0908
(0.0201)
receipt
Change Two Most Recent Labor Force Statuses from Employed -> Employed to:
Unemployed ->
10.1978 (0.1374)
.2336
(0.0044)
2.29
(0.04)
9.9642
(0.1353)
Employed
OLF -> Employed
6.0237
(0.0963)
-0.6424
(0.0123)
-10.66
(0.17)
6.6660
(0.1040)
Employed ->
20.0536 (0.2370)
1.9825
(0.0363)
9.89
(0.15)
18.0711
(0.2195)
Unemployed
Unemployed ->
19.1886 (0.2369)
1.1889
(0.0234)
6.20
(0.12)
17.9997
(0.2287)
Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
13.1690 (0.1825)
.8147
(0.0151)
6.19
(0.09)
12.3543
(0.1737)
Employed -> OLF
7.3442
(0.1160)
.2988
(0.0056)
4.07
(0.06)
7.0454
(0.1125)
Unemployed -> OLF
13.9890 (0.1926)
-0.6109
(0.0118)
-4.37
(0.08)
14.5999
(0.1989)
OLF -> OLF
4.2671
(0.0845)
-0.9764
(0.0188)
-22.88
(0.45)
5.2435
(0.0952)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
-0.8987 (0.0173)
-0.1516
(0.0029)
16.87
(0.21)
-0.7471
(0.0151)
Change from Family Income < $3000 to:
Family income 3K-9K
2.1865
(0.0390)
1.1198
(0.0208)
51.22
(0.38)
1.0667
(0.0215)
Family income 9K-15K
1.0367
(0.0183)
.6227
(0.0117)
60.07
(0.38)
0.4140
(0.0083)
Family income > 15K
0.5172
(0.0107)
-0.0683
(0.0013)
-13.20
(0.22)
0.5855
(0.0116)
Change from Corpus Christi site indicator to:
Fort Wayne site
7.6811
(0.1556)
-0.6637
(0.0124)
-8.64
(0.19)
8.3448
(0.1608)
Jersey City site
5.4065
(0.0990)
-0.7513
(0.0147)
-13.90
(0.24)
6.1578
(0.1084)
Providence site
7.3382
(0.1506)
-2.0068
(0.0412)
-27.35
(0.62)
9.3450
(0.1711)
Change from Never Married to:
Currently married
-3.7900 (0.0758)
-0.3984
(0.0077)
10.51
(0.13)
-3.3915
(0.0697)
Married 1-24 months
3.1004
(0.0569)
-0.0496
(0.0009)
-1.60
(0.02)
3.1499
(0.0576)
Married > 24 months
6.3540
(0.1107)
.5205
(0.0100)
8.19
(0.11)
5.8335
(0.1038)

Percent
of
Overall
-70.49
160.01
-73.22

(1.57)
(1.29)
(1.55)

84.93
61.88
59.88

(0.17)
(0.30)
(0.30)

23.94
69.43
139.14
59.14

(0.21)
(0.27)
(0.72)
(0.26)

99.87

(0.00)

44.21

(0.30)

97.71

(0.00)

110.66
90.11

(0.18)
(0.15)

93.80

(0.11)

93.81
95.93
104.37
122.88

(0.09)
(0.04)
(0.05)
(0.46)

83.13

(0.20)

48.78
39.93
113.20

(0.38)
(0.37)
(0.23)

108.64
113.90
127.35

(0.18)
(0.23)
(0.62)

89.49
101.60
91.81

(0.12)
(0.00)
(0.12)

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. These standard errors reflect variation in the samples used to do the simulations.

Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 19-21
Currently married
Div-wid-sep
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade > 12
Current AFDC receipt
Current Food Stamp
receipt

Table 8c
JTPA Simulation Results – Two Step Decomposition
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Acceptance into JTPA
National JTPA Study Eligible Non-Participant Sample: Male Youth (530 observations)
Overall
Weighted
Percent
Weighted
Effect
Awareness
of
Acceptance
Term
Overall
Term
Change from White to:
4.8041
(0.2699)
6.6041
(0.2893) 137.47
(2.52)
-1.7999
(0.0720)
5.9390
(0.2145)
.2688
(0.0123)
4.53
(0.22)
5.6701
(0.2112)
-3.1888
(0.3835)
6.6837
(0.3157) -209.60
(28.11)
-9.8724
(0.4783)
Change from Age 16-18 to:
-1.1238
(0.2264)
-5.3078
(0.2366) 472.32
(109.67)
4.1840
(0.1576)
Change from Never Married to:
2.1384
(0.3343)
7.4097
(0.3489) 346.50
(54.91)
-5.2712
(0.2273)
-3.4641
(0.1330)
-2.0780
(0.0950)
59.99
(1.04)
-1.3862
(0.0561)
Change from Highest Grade 12 to:
-0.3731
(0.0267)
-0.6401
(0.0292) 171.56
(6.06)
0.2670
(0.0103)
1.9636
(0.0810)
1.6799
(0.0760)
85.55
(0.59)
0.2837
(0.0110)
-1.8382
(0.0667)
-0.6697
(0.0305)
36.43
(1.04)
-1.1685
(0.0468)
Change from not receiving AFDC to:
-11.1117 (0.4965)
-4.2387
(0.1942)
38.15
(0.74)
-6.8730
(0.3298)
Change from not receiving Food Stamps to:
3.7423
(0.1253)
1.8386
(0.0835)
49.13
(1.20)
1.9037
(0.0692)

Percent
of
Overall
-37.47
95.47
309.60

(2.52)
(0.22)
(28.11)

-372.32

(109.67)

-246.50
40.01

(54.91)
(1.04)

-71.56
14.45
63.57

(6.06)
(0.59)
(1.04)

61.85

(0.74)

50.87

(1.20)

Change Two Most Recent Labor Force Statuses from Employed -> Employed to:
14.4300
(0.3934)
1.1809
(0.0536)
8.18
(0.40)
13.2491
(0.3886)

91.82

(0.40)

Unemployed ->
Employed
OLF -> Employed
Employed ->
Unemployed
Unemployed ->
Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
Employed -> OLF
Unemployed -> OLF
OLF -> OLF

-4.5935
16.6120

(0.2030)
(0.4569)

.5569
3.5322

(0.0255)
(0.1670)

-12.12
21.26

(0.57)
(0.93)

-5.1505
13.0798

(0.2159)
(0.4174)

112.12
78.74

(0.57)
(0.93)

10.3782

(0.2823)

3.2308

(0.1478)

31.13

(1.11)

7.1474

(0.2211)

68.87

(1.11)

0.3517
26.9129
5.5548
6.9113

(0.0666)
(1.1099)
(0.3447)
(0.5004)

1.5967
35.7427
-2.0068
13.7529

(0.0634)
(0.8344)
(0.0916)
(0.4157)

454.01
132.81
-36.13
198.99

(72.52)
(2.70)
(2.89)
(10.08)

Child age < 6 years

-9.2754

(0.4498)

-7.2856

(0.3823)

78.55

(0.67)

Family income 3K-9K
Family income 9K-15K
Family income > 15K

9.3512
-2.6233
-4.7303

(0.4811)
(0.1288)
(0.1979)

13.9722
0.5377
-0.8725

(0.4734)
(0.0256)
(0.0425)

149.42
-20.50
18.44

(3.64)
(1.17)
(0.69)

Fort Wayne site
Jersey City site
Providence site

10.3470
3.0515
18.4090

(0.3620)
(0.1968)
(0.6361)

-1.2450
(0.0573) -354.01
(72.52)
-8.8298
(0.4202)
-32.81
(2.70)
7.5616
(0.3597) 136.13
(2.89)
-6.8417
(0.3147)
-98.99
(10.08)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
-1.9897
(0.0911)
21.45
(0.67)
Change from Family Income < $3000 to:
-4.6211
(0.2073)
-49.42
(3.64)
-3.1610
(0.1402) 120.50
(1.17)
-3.8578
(0.1714)
81.56
(0.69)
Change from Corpus Christi site indicator to:
.3657
(0.0169)
3.53
(0.17)
-1.4890
(0.0675)
-48.80
(3.80)
-2.3738
(0.1081)
-12.89
(0.76)

9.9813
4.5406
20.7827

(0.3578)
(0.2061)
(0.6359)

96.47
148.80
112.89

(0.17)
(3.80)
(0.75)

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. These standard errors reflect variation in the samples used to do the simulations.

Table 8d
JTPA Simulation Results – Two Step Decomposition
Weighted Effects of Changes in Characteristics on the Probability of Acceptance into JTPA
National JTPA Study Eligible Non-Participant Sample: Female Youth (701 observations)
Overall
Weighted
Percent
Weighted
Effect
Awareness
of
Acceptance
Term
Overall
Term
Change from White to:
Black
3.9275
(0.1724)
3.0290
(0.1451)
77.12
(0.49)
0.8985
(0.0322)
Hispanic
1.0273
(0.0415)
.5037
(0.0249)
49.03
(0.75)
0.5236
(0.0189)
Other race-ethnicity
2.8539
(0.1085)
-2.4043
(0.1197)
-84.25
(5.34)
5.2582
(0.1592)
Change from Age 16-18 to:
Age 19-21
-2.3024 (0.0867)
-0.5579
(0.0272)
24.23
(0.54)
-1.7445
(0.0634)
Change from Never Married to:
Currently married
-1.5024 (0.0587)
.6539
(0.0321)
-43.52
(1.63)
-2.1563
(0.0833)
Div-wid-sep
-1.1802 (0.0922)
-2.5635
(0.1267) 217.21
(7.55)
1.3833
(0.0481)
Change from Highest Grade 12 to:
Highest grade < 10
-2.0172 (0.0973)
-2.0554
(0.0984) 101.89
(0.00)
0.0381
(0.0014)
Highest grade 10-11
-1.7373 (0.0661)
-0.4037
(0.0200)
23.24
(0.50)
-1.3336
(0.0487)
Highest grade > 12
1.0272
(0.0355)
-0.0518
(0.0025)
-5.04
(0.16)
1.0790
(0.0375)
Change from not receiving AFDC to:
Current AFDC receipt
-2.3463 (0.0926)
1.2829
(0.0633)
-54.68
(2.33)
-3.6292
(0.1378)
Change from not receiving food stamps to:
Current Food Stamp
6.5595
(0.2010)
.1105
(0.0054)
1.68
(0.06)
6.4490
(0.1971)
receipt
Change Two Most Recent Labor Force Statuses from Employed -> Employed to:
Unemployed ->
9.5744
(0.2550)
-0.4118
(0.0203)
-4.30
(0.18)
9.9862
(0.2662)
Employed
OLF -> Employed
11.3506 (0.2832)
-1.8182
(0.0898)
-16.02
(0.81)
13.1688
(0.3136)
Employed ->
24.0502 (0.4336)
-1.4540
(0.0712)
-6.05
(0.31)
25.5041
(0.4422)
Unemployed
Unemployed ->
17.0906 (0.4181)
1.2007
(0.0580)
7.03
(0.29)
15.8899
(0.3908)
Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
21.6456 (0.4132)
.3991
(0.0197)
1.84
(0.09)
21.2465
(0.4105)
Employed -> OLF
8.6803
(0.2773)
1.4078
(0.0686)
16.22
(0.52)
7.2725
(0.2306)
Unemployed -> OLF
7.1564
(0.2625)
3.3152
(0.1614)
46.32
(0.97)
3.8412
(0.1313)
OLF -> OLF
4.6998
(0.1774)
-1.0262
(0.0503)
-21.84
(0.98)
5.7260
(0.2065)
Change from No Child < 6 Years of Age to:
Child age < 6 years
-1.3768 (0.0594)
-0.8447
(0.0417)
61.36
(0.74)
-0.5320
(0.0210)
Change from Family Income < $3000 to:
Family Income 3K-9K
-0.8170 (0.0328)
.1014
(0.0050)
-12.41
(0.43)
-0.9184
(0.0366)
Family Income 9K-15K
-0.7310 (0.0416)
-0.9901
(0.0490) 135.45
(1.50)
0.2591
(0.0101)
Family Income > 15K
8.3821
(0.2512)
-1.1948
(0.0593)
-14.25
(0.59)
9.5768
(0.2877)
Change from Corpus Christi site indicator to:
Fort Wayne site
3.5282
(0.1269)
.3522
(0.0173)
9.98
(0.30)
3.1761
(0.1138)
Jersey City site
0.3881
(0.0532)
-1.5274
(0.0769) -393.62 (69.52)
1.9155
(0.0728)
Providence site
3.5378
(0.1675)
-2.1585
(0.1040)
-61.01
(3.86)
5.6963
(0.2075)

Percent
of
Overall
22.88
50.97
184.25

(0.49)
(0.75)
(5.34)

75.77

(0.54)

143.52
-117.21

(1.63)
(7.55)

-1.89
76.76
105.04

(0.05)
(0.51)
(0.15)

154.68

(2.33)

98.32

(0.07)

104.30

(0.18)

116.02
106.05

(0.81)
(0.32)

92.97

(0.29)

98.16
83.78
53.68
121.84

(0.08)
(0.53)
(0.97)
(0.99)

38.64

(0.74)

112.41
-35.45
114.25

(0.43)
(1.50)
(0.59)

90.02
493.62
161.01

(0.30)
(69.53)
(3.86)

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Bootstrap standard errors appear in parentheses. These standard errors reflect variation in the samples used to do the simulations.

Figure 1
The JTPA Selection Process
Eligibility for JTPA

↓
Awareness of JTPA

↓
Application to JTPA

↓
Acceptance into JTPA

↓
Enrollment into JTPA

Appendix A: Data from the National JTPA Study
A. Eligible Non-Participant (ENP) Sample
The ENP sample is based on a sample of dwelling units drawn from the areas served by
the Corpus Christ, Texas, Fort Wayne, Indiana, Jersey City, New Jersey and Providence,
Rhode Island JTPA training centers. The sampling frame excluded low poverty areas
containing up to, but not more than, five percent of those in each site with incomes at or
below 125 percent of the poverty level in 1980. In the remaining areas around each
center, each dwelling unit had an equal probability of selection for the initial screener
interviews. These interviews gathered information sufficient to determine the eligibility
status of each person in the surveyed household. The initial screening interviews were
conducted from January 1988 to December 1989, and had an overall response rate at the
four sites of 90 percent. See Smith (1994) for a detailed description of the ENP sampling
frame.
Attempts were made to administer the Full Baseline Survey (FBS) to all of the
JTPA-eligible persons identified on the screeners at each site who were (1) eligible for
JTPA via economic disadvantage; (2) 16 to 54 years of age; (3) not in junior high or high
school; and (4) not permanently disabled. Persons over age 54 were known in advance to
have a low participation rate in JTPA and so were excluded in order to focus the available
resources on groups more likely to participate in the program. Youth in junior high or
high school were excluded in order to match a similar exclusion in the experimental
evaluation. The FBS interviews were completed between June 1988 and December 1989,
with a quarter of the completed interviews occurring five or more months after the initial

screening. The overall response rate of potential ENPs to the FBS was 78 percent,
yielding a sample of 3004 ENPs at the four sites.1
Following their inclusion in the ENP sample, roughly three percent (104) of the
ENPs were later randomly assigned as part of the experimental component of the
National JTPA Study. As a result, a small number of respondents appear in both the
experimental and ENP samples analyzed in this paper. Because of their small number, we
do not omit these persons from either group.
All ENPs with valid values for the relevant variables were used to construct the
rates shown in Table 3, to estimate the awareness logits presented in Table 4, to estimate
the acceptance logits reported in Table 5 and in Appendix D, to estimate the awareness
and acceptance logits underlying the decompositions in Tables 7 and 8, and to construct
the decompositions presented in Table 8.

B. Experimental Control Group Sample
The control group sample consists of persons randomly assigned to the experimental
control group at four of the sixteen JTPA training centers taking part in the experimental
evaluation component of the National JTPA Study. Control group members were not
allowed to receive any JTPA services in the 18 months after random assignment. At the
Corpus Christi and Fort Wayne centers, random assignment began in December 1987 and
concluded in January 1989, while in Jersey City and Providence it ran from November

1

The ENP sample was originally intended to match the control sample in size at each of the four centers.
The final sample sizes have Corpus Christi with 1060 ENPs and 489 controls, Ft. Wayne with 529 ENPs
and 1191 controls, Jersey City with 892 ENPs and 530 controls, and Providence with 523 ENPs and 507
controls.

1987 to September 1989. During these periods, a total of 2717 persons were assigned to
the control group at the four centers.
All controls with valid values for the relevant variables were used to estimate the
awareness logits presented in Table 4, to estimate the acceptance logits presented in
Table 5 and in Appendix D, and to estimate the awareness and acceptance logits
underlying the decompositions presented in Tables 7 and 8.

C. Experimental Treatment Group Sample
The treatment group sample consists of persons randomly assigned to the experimental
treatment group at the same four sites in the National JTPA Study at which the control
and ENP samples were drawn. Treatment group members were allowed to (but often did
not) receive JTPA services in the 18 months after random assignment. A total of 5914
persons were randomly assigned to the experimental treatment group at the four sites.
Enrollment information is based on data collected from site administrative records by
MDRC. All treatment group members with valid values for the relevant variables were
used to estimate the enrollment logits presented in Table 6 and underlying the
decompositions presented in Table 7.

D. Imputations
Missing values due to item non-response were imputed for the ENPs and controls for
variables used in the awareness and acceptance logits. Missing values of dichotomous
variables, such as the presence of an own child less than six years of age in the
household, were replaced with the predicted probabilities estimated in a logit equation.

Missing values of indicator variables corresponding to particular values of categorical
variables with more than two categories, such as the five indicators for the categories of
the highest grade completed variable, were replaced by the predicted probabilities
obtained from a multinomial logit model with the categorical variable as the dependent
variable.
In all cases, the estimating equations used to produce the imputations included the
following: (1) indicators for race/ethnicity, (2) indicators for age categories, (3) indicators
for receipt of a high school diploma or a GED, (4) site indicators and (5) interactions
between control status and all of these variables. These variables were chosen because
they had no (or very few) missing values in the sample. Imputed values were constructed
separately for each of the four demographic target groups. A similar imputation
procedure was followed for the experimental treatment group for values of variables used
in estimating the enrollment equations missing due to item non-response. A sensitivity
analysis comparing the results generated using the imputed values to results obtained
through listwise deletion of observations with missing values and through the inclusion of
missing value indicators shows the reported results to be robust to the method used to
handle item non-response.

Appendix B: SIPP Sample of JTPA Eligibles
The national sample that we use to estimate the determinants of JTPA eligibility is drawn
from the 1986 Panel of the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP). The
SIPP is a continuing longitudinal self-weighting survey of the non-institutional
population of the United States with a focus on current income and participation in social
programs. A new panel is introduced every year with each panel followed for about 2.5
years. Respondents are divided into four rotation groups with a different group
interviewed in each calendar month. In the 1986 SIPP Panel used here, three of the
rotation groups are interviewed seven times, and one is interviewed six times. At least
one rotation group is represented from October 1985 to March 1988. The calendar dates
in which all four of the rotation groups are represented are January 1986 to December
1987. This period is immediately prior to the period during which the ENP and
experimental control and treatment group samples from the National JTPA Study were
determined eligible for JTPA. The reference period for each SIPP interview is the four
calendar months preceding the interview month. Devine and Heckman (1996) show that
attrition from the SIPP panel has little effect on substantive results regarding JTPA
eligibility.
Establishing the JTPA eligibility status of respondents in the SIPP requires
operational definitions of families and of family income. A person’s family members
include all other SIPP respondents who were living with the person and related by blood,
marriage, or adoption. A person’s family could be comprised of different people in each
month. A person is eligible via participation in a cash welfare program in a given month
if anyone in the person’s current family receives AFDC payments, general assistance, or

other cash welfare in that month. A person is eligible via participation in the food stamp
program in a given month if anyone in the person’s current family receives food stamps
in that month. A person is eligible by virtue of low family income if the sum of family
income in the previous six months is less than the higher of the poverty income guideline
or the BLS lower living standard income level applicable to the month of eligibility
determination and to the respondent’s geographic location and family size. Family
income in the previous six months is defined as the sum of the income in each month of
all of the people who were in the person’s family in that month.2
Family income need not be the same for two people who are currently in the same
family because they may have been in different families during the six months prior to
eligibility determination. The definition of eligibility used here corresponds to Definition
B in Devine and Heckman (1996) and captures only eligibility via economic
disadvantage.
Note that in the SIPP data we are not able to accurately measure foster child
status, disability or homelessness on a monthly basis, and so we are unable to implement
the special eligibility rules applicable to these groups in selecting our sample of eligibles.
However, these groups represent only a very small fraction of the eligible population, and
many of those eligible under the special provisions will also be identified as eligible
using the basic family income and program participation criteria that apply to all
individuals.
We established the eligibility status of each sample member in each month after
the seventh month of the panel for which data were available. Eligibility cannot be

2

See Devine and Heckman (1996) for a list of the types of income that do and do not count in determining
JTPA eligibility.

established with certainty for all sample members during the first six months of the panel
because the requisite six months of prior data on family income are not available. To
match the ENP sample, we exclude persons outside the 16 to 54 age range along with
persons enrolled in junior high or high school. All persons with valid values for the
relevant variables were used to estimate the eligibility logits presented in Table 2 and
those underlying the decompositions presented in Table 7. The same sample was used to
construct the decompositions displayed in Table 7.

Appendix C: Construction of the Reported Results
A. Logit Estimates
The logit estimates of the determinants of eligibility presented in Table 2 are obtained
using the SIPP sample. As we use the SIPP in person-month form, dependence may exist
between person-month observations corresponding to the same person. We estimate logit
equations allowing for semi-parametric heterogeneity to take account of this potential
dependence.
The logit estimates of awareness of JTPA presented in Table 4, the logit estimates
of acceptance presented in Table 5 and in Appendix D, and the logit estimates of
awareness and of application and acceptance into JTPA conditional on awareness
underlying the decompositions in Table 7 and Table 8 are based on weighted logit
equations, with estimated standard errors adjusted to take account of choice based
sampling as in Amemiya (1985). The choice-based sampling in this case results from the
over-representation of the controls relative to their proportion of the eligible population.
Weights are derived from the assumption that controls represent three percent of the
eligible population, from the sample proportions of ENPs who indicate awareness of the
program, and from the assumption that all controls are aware of JTPA.
The logit estimates of the determinants of enrollment presented in Table 6 are
obtained from ordinary unweighted logit equations. For all of the logit estimates we
present, the numerical derivatives are based on finite differences averaged over the
sample, not on derivatives at the sample mean.

B. Decompositions
The decompositions presented in Tables 7 and 8 are based on estimates of the conditional
probabilities of JTPA eligibility, awareness, acceptance and enrollment obtained as
described above. To construct the values shown in Table 7, each term in equation (3) was
calculated for each person-month observation in the SIPP sample. The values reported in
Table 7 are the sample average for each term or combination of terms. The values in
Table 8 were constructed in the same manner, but using the ENP sample rather than the
SIPP sample. In both tables, derivatives are approximated using finite differences.

Appendix D: Determinants of Application and Acceptance Conditional on Eligibility
In this appendix, we present the results of a logit analysis of the determinants of
application and acceptance into JTPA conditional on eligibility. The estimates appear in
Tables D1a and D1b. These results complement the estimates of the determinants of
application and acceptance conditional on awareness presented in Table 5 in the main
text.

Table D1a
Determinants of JTPA Participation
Weighted ENP and Control Samples: Adults

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 30-39
Age 40-49
Age 50-54
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade 13-15
Highest grade > 15
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC receipt
Current Food Stamp receipt
Unemployed -> Employed
OLF -> Employed
Employed -> Unemployed
Unemployed -> Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
Employed -> OLF
Unemployed -> OLF
OLF -> OLF
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Adult Males
Number of observations: 1552
1.938
[0.054]
(0.313)
0.000
1.063
[0.021]
(0.307)
0.001
1.102
[0.019]
(0.344)
0.001
0.107
[0.003]
(0.270)
0.690
-0.364
[-0.008]
(0.304)
0.232
0.340
[0.010]
(0.410)
0.406
-0.417
[-0.011]
(0.235)
0.076
-0.970
[-0.022]
(0.307)
0.002
-0.380
[-0.010]
(0.388)
0.327
-0.601
[-0.013]
(0.268)
0.025
0.297
[0.009]
(0.254)
0.243
0.608
[0.020]
(0.304)
0.045
-1.479
[-0.024]
(0.418)
0.000
-0.411
[-0.010]
(0.258)
0.112
0.043
[0.001]
(0.288)
0.881
-0.182
[-0.004]
(0.258)
0.480
-1.254
[-0.020]
(0.527)
0.017
0.482
[0.013]
(0.246)
0.051
1.952
[0.039]
(0.319)
0.000
2.102
[0.046]
(0.398)
0.000
3.320
[0.134]
(0.334)
0.000
2.884
[0.094]
(0.391)
0.000
3.802
[0.189]
(0.475)
0.000
2.819
[0.089]
(0.635)
0.000
3.637
[0.169]
(0.720)
0.000
1.279
[0.018]
(0.409)
0.002
-0.320
[-0.010]
(0.383)
0.403
0.039
[0.001]
(0.394)
0.921
-1.521
[-0.032]
(0.483)
0.002
-4.828
[0.000]
(0.516)
0.000

Adult Females
Number of observations: 2438
1.238
[0.037]
(0.203)
0.000
0.725
[0.017]
(0.182)
0.000
0.635
[0.013]
(0.213)
0.003
0.177
[0.005]
(0.173)
0.307
0.424
[0.012]
(0.187)
0.023
0.009
[0.000]
(0.449)
0.985
-0.319
[-0.009]
(0.136)
0.019
-0.316
[-0.009]
(0.175)
0.071
-0.395
[-0.011]
(0.271)
0.145
-0.556
[-0.014]
(0.147)
0.000
-0.115
[-0.003]
(0.162)
0.479
0.182
[0.006]
(0.189)
0.336
-0.446
[-0.012]
(0.417)
0.285
-0.883
[-0.019]
(0.176)
0.000
0.209
[0.007]
(0.147)
0.154
-0.233
[-0.006]
(0.133)
0.078
-0.736
[-0.018]
(0.199)
0.000
0.392
[0.011]
(0.167)
0.019
1.582
[0.036]
(0.264)
0.000
0.954
[0.015]
(0.309)
0.002
2.749
[0.117]
(0.245)
0.000
2.667
[0.109]
(0.249)
0.000
2.220
[0.071]
(0.267)
0.000
1.252
[0.024]
(0.259)
0.000
1.924
[0.052]
(0.334)
0.000
0.773
[0.011]
(0.213)
0.000
0.463
[0.014]
(0.196)
0.018
0.142
[0.004]
(0.279)
0.612
0.014
[0.000]
(0.268)
0.959
-4.963
[0.000]
(0.298)
0.000

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Dependent variable is control status. The sample includes all ENPs and controls (not just those aware of JTPA) and is weighted to account for choice-based
sampling. Omitted categories in the logit are Corpus Christi, white, age 22-29, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children, not currently receiving
AFDC, not currently receiving Food Stamps, “Employed -> Employed”, and family income less than $3,000. Using the population proportion of JTPA participants
(controls), which we assume to be three percent, as the cutoff value, the within-sample prediction rates for adult males are 84.20 for non-participants (ENPs) and 82.89
for participants (controls). The corresponding rates for adult females are 75.72 for non-participants and 69.62 for participants.

Table D1b
Determinants of JTPA Participation
Weighted ENP and Control Samples: Youth

Ft. Wayne
Jersey City
Providence
Black
Hispanic
Other race-ethnicity
Age 19-21
Highest grade < 10
Highest grade 10-11
Highest grade > 12
Currently married
Div-Wid-Sep
Child age < 6 years
Current AFDC receipt
Current Food Stamp receipt
Unemployed -> Employed
OLF -> Employed
Employed -> Unemployed
Unemployed -> Unemployed
OLF -> Unemployed
Employed -> OLF
Unemployed -> OLF
OLF -> OLF
Family Income 3K-9K
Family Income 9K-15K
Family Income > 15K
Constant

Male Youth
Number of observations: 530
0.951
[0.029]
(0.429)
0.027
0.386
[0.009]
(0.485)
0.426
1.474
[0.045]
(0.494)
0.003
0.410
[0.014]
(0.384)
0.285
-0.494
[-0.011]
(0.492)
0.315
-1.846
[-0.028]
(0.899)
0.040
0.153
[0.004]
(0.347)
0.660
0.589
[0.015]
(0.441)
0.182
0.673
[0.018]
(0.385)
0.081
-0.164
[-0.003]
(0.598)
0.784
0.298
[0.009]
(0.461)
0.518
-0.439
[-0.010]
(0.817)
0.591
-1.059
[-0.021]
(0.498)
0.033
-0.721
[-0.015]
(0.730)
0.323
-0.046
[-0.001]
(0.441)
0.917
2.125
[0.089]
(0.482)
0.000
-0.166
[-0.002]
(0.511)
0.745
1.593
[0.051]
(0.442)
0.000
1.162
[0.030]
(0.579)
0.045
1.000
[0.024]
(0.597)
0.094
2.016
[0.080]
(0.633)
0.001
0.993
[0.023]
(0.774)
0.199
0.191
[0.003]
(0.567)
0.737
1.450
[0.058]
(0.574)
0.012
0.110
[0.002]
(0.602)
0.855
0.048
[0.001]
(0.642)
0.940
-5.681
[0.000]
(0.725)
0.000

Female Youth
Number of observations: 701
1.047
[0.034]
(0.392)
0.008
0.515
[0.013]
(0.375)
0.169
1.032
[0.028]
(0.407)
0.011
0.742
[0.021]
(0.303)
0.014
0.457
[0.011]
(0.351)
0.193
-1.058
[-0.014]
(0.650)
0.103
-0.535
[-0.016]
(0.265)
0.044
-0.394
[-0.011]
(0.324)
0.224
-0.235
[-0.007]
(0.351)
0.504
0.084
[0.003]
(0.365)
0.818
-0.563
[-0.013]
(0.346)
0.104
0.241
[0.008]
(0.403)
0.550
-0.241
[-0.007]
(0.260)
0.354
-0.988
[-0.025]
(0.363)
0.006
1.363
[0.052]
(0.337)
0.000
1.599
[0.030]
(0.466)
0.001
1.394
[0.023]
(0.449)
0.002
3.218
[0.149]
(0.472)
0.000
2.379
[0.070]
(0.473)
0.000
3.018
[0.126]
(0.509)
0.000
1.554
[0.028]
(0.421)
0.000
1.106
[0.016]
(0.725)
0.127
0.709
[0.008]
(0.414)
0.087
-0.466
[-0.010]
(0.452)
0.302
0.031
[0.001]
(0.528)
0.953
1.423
[0.068]
(0.441)
0.001
-5.297
[0.000]
(0.610)
0.000

Source: Authors’ calculations using National JTPA Study data.
Notes: Dependent variable is control status. The sample includes all ENPs and controls (not just those aware of JTPA) and is weighted to account for choice-based
sampling. Omitted categories in the logit are Corpus Christi, white, age 16-18, highest grade equals 12, never married, no young children, not currently receiving
AFDC, not currently receiving Food Stamps, “Employed -> Employed”, and family income less than $3,000. Using the population proportion of JTPA participants
(controls), which we assume to be three percent, as the cutoff value, the within-sample prediction rates for male youth are 69.27 for non-participants (ENPs) and 66.10
for participants (controls). The corresponding rates for adult females are 73.58 for non-participants and 67.16 for participants.

