NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

WHAT HAPPENS AFTER A TECHNOLOGY SHOCK?
Lawrence J. Christiano
Martin Eichenbaum
Robert Vigfusson
Working Paper 9819
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9819
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

Christiano and Eichenbaum thank the National Science Foundation for financial assistance. The views in this
paper are solely the responsibility of the authors and should not be interpreted as reflecting the views of the
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System or of any person associated with the Federal Reserve
System. We are grateful for discussions with Susanto Basu, Lars Hansen, Valerie Ramey, and Harald Uhlig.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research
©2003 by Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson. All rights reserved. Short
sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full
credit including © notice, is given to the source.

What Happens After a Technology Shock?
Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum, and Robert Vigfusson
NBER Working Paper No. 9819
July 2003
JEL No. C1, E3
ABSTRACT
We provide empirical evidence that a positive shock to technology drives per capita hours worked,
consumption, investment, average productivity and output up. This evidence contrasts sharply with
the results reported in a large and growing literature that argues, on the basis of aggregate data, that
per capita hours worked fall after a positive technology shock. We argue that the difference in results
primarily reflects specification error in the way that the literature models the low-frequency
component of hours worked.
Lawrence J. Christiano
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston Il 60208
and NBER
l-christiano@northwestern.edu
Martin Eichenbaum
Department of Economics
Northwestern University
Evanston Il 60208
and NBER
eich@northwestern.edu
Robert Vigfusson
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
20th Street and Constitution Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20551
robert.j.vigfusson@frb.gov

1

Introduction

Standard real business cycle models imply that per capita hours worked rise after a permanent shock to technology. Despite the a priori appeal of this prediction, there is a large and
growing literature that. argues it is inconsistent with the data. This literature uses reduced
form time series methods in conjunction with minimal identifying assumptions that hold
across large classes of models to estimate the actual eﬀects of a technology shock. The results reported in this literature are important because they call into question basic properties
of many structural business cycle models.
Consider, for example, the widely cited paper by Gali (1999). His basic identifying
assumption is that innovations to technology are the only shocks that have an eﬀect on
the long run level of labor productivity. Gali (1999) reports that hours worked fall after a
positive technology shock. The fall is so long and protracted that, according to his estimates,
technology shocks are a source of negative correlation between output and hours worked.
Because hours worked are in fact strongly procyclical, Gali concludes that some other shock
or shocks must play the predominant role in business cycles with technology shocks at best
playing only a minor role. Moreover, he argues that standard real business cycle models
shed little light on whatever small role technology shocks do play because they imply that
hours worked rise after a positive technology shock. In eﬀect, real business cycle models are
doubly dammed: they address things that are unimportant, and they do it badly at that.
Other recent papers reach conclusions that complement Gali’s in various ways (see, e.g.,
Shea (1998), Basu, Kimball and Fernald (1999), and Francis and Ramey (2001)). In view of
the important role attributed to technology shocks in business cycle analyses of the past two
decades, Francis and Ramey perhaps do not overstate too much when they say (p.2) that
Gali’s argument is a ‘...potential paradigm shifter’.
Not surprisingly, the result that hours worked fall after a positive technology shock has
attracted a great deal of attention. Indeed, there is a growing literature aimed at constructing
general equilibrium business cycle models that can account for this result. Gali (1999) and
others have argued that the most natural explanation is based on sticky prices. Others, like
Francis and Ramey (2001) and Vigfusson (2002), argue that this finding is consistent with
real business cycle models modified to allow for richer sets of preferences and technology,
such as habit formation and investment adjustment costs.1
We do not build a model that can account for the result that hours fall after a technology
shock. Instead, we challenge the result itself. Using the same identifying assumption as Gali
(1999), Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2002), and Francis and Ramey (2001), we find that
a positive technology shock drives hours worked up, not down.2 In addition, it leads to a
rise in output, average productivity, investment, and consumption. That is, we find that a
permanent shock to technology has qualitative consequences that a student of real business
cycles would anticipate.3 At the same time, we find that permanent technology shocks play
1

Other models that can account for the Gali (1999) finding are contained in Christiano and Todd (1996)
and Boldrin, Christiano and Fisher (2001).
2
Chang and Hong (2003) obtain similar results using disaggregated data.
3
That the consequences of a technology shock resemble those in a real business cycle model may well
reflect that the actual economy has various nominal frictions, and monetary policy has successfully mitigated
those frictions. See Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2002) for empirical evidence in favor of this

1

a very small role in business cycle fluctuations. Instead, they are quantitatively important
at frequencies of the data that a student of traditional growth models might anticipate.
Since we make the same fundamental identification assumption as Gali (1999), Gali,
Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2002) and Francis and Ramey (2001), the key questions is: What
accounts for the diﬀerence in our findings? By construction, the diﬀerence must be due
to diﬀerent maintained assumptions. As it turns out, a key culprit is how we treat hours
worked. For example, if we assume, as do Francis and Ramey, that per capita hours worked
is a diﬀerence stationary process and work with the growth rate of hours (the diﬀerence
specification), then we too find that hours worked falls after a positive technology shock.
But if we assume that per capita hours worked is a stationary process and work with the
level of hours worked (the level specification), then we find the opposite: hours worked rise
after a positive technology shock.
Standard, univariate hypothesis tests do not yield much information about which specification is correct. They cannot reject the null hypothesis that per capita hours worked are
diﬀerence stationary. They also cannot reject the null hypothesis that hours worked are stationary. This is not surprising in light of the large literature that documents the diﬃculties
that univariate methods have in distinguishing between a diﬀerence stationary stochastic
process and a persistent stationary process.4
So we have two answers to the question, ‘what happens to hours worked after a positive
technology shock?’ Each answer is based on a diﬀerent statistical model, depending on the
specification of hours worked. Each model appears to be defensible on standard classical
grounds. To judge between the competing specifications, we assess their relative plausibility.
To this end, we ask, ‘which specification has an easier time explaining the observation that
hours worked falls under one specification and rises under the other?’ Using this criterion,
we find that the level specification is preferred.
We now discuss the results that lead to this conclusion. First, the level specification
encompasses the diﬀerence specification. We show this by calculating what an analyst who
adopts the diﬀerence specification would find if our estimated level specification were true.
For reasons discussed below, by diﬀerencing hours worked this analyst commits a specification
error. We find that such an analyst would, on average, infer that hours worked fall after a
positive technology shock even though they rise in the true data-generating process. Indeed
the extent of this fall is very close to the actual decline in hours worked implied by the
estimated diﬀerence specification. In addition, the level specification easily encompasses the
impulse responses of the other relevant variables.
Second, the diﬀerence specification does not encompass the level specification. We calculate what an analyst who adopts the level specification would find if our estimated diﬀerence
specification were true. The mean prediction is that hours fall after a technology shock. So,
focusing on means alone, the diﬀerence specification cannot account for the actual estimates
associated with the level representation. However, the diﬀerence specification predicts that
the impulse responses based on the level representation vary a great deal across repeated
samples. This uncertainty is so great that the diﬀerence specification can account for the
level results as an artifact of sampling uncertainty. As it turns out, this result is a Pyrrhic
interpretation.
4
See, for example, DeJong, Nankervis, Savin, and Whiteman (1992).

2

victory for the diﬀerence specification. The prediction of large sampling uncertainty stems
from the diﬀerence specification’s prediction that an econometrician working with the level
specification encounters a version of the weak instrument problem analyzed in the literature
(see, for example, Staiger and Stock, 1997). In fact, a standard weak instrument test finds
little evidence in the data.
To quantify the relative plausibility of the level and diﬀerence specifications, we compute
the type of posterior odds ratio considered in Christiano and Ljungqvist (1988). The basic
idea is that the more plausible of the two specifications is the one that has the easiest
time explaining the facts: (i) the level specification implies that hours worked rises after a
technology shock, (ii) the diﬀerence specification implies that hours worked falls, and (iii)
the outcome of the weak instruments test. Focusing only on facts (i) and (ii), we find that
the odds are roughly 2 to 1 in favor of the level specification over the diﬀerence specification.
However, once (iii) is incorporated into the analysis, we find that the odds overwhelmingly
favor the level specification.
This finding may seem strange in light of the literature which argues that it is hard to
determine whether a time series is stationary or contains a unit root.5 The resolution of
this apparent contradiction is that the literature in question relies on univariate methods,
while we rely on multivariate methods. Hansen (1995) shows that incorporating information
from related time series has the potential to enormously increase the power of unit root tests
(see also Elliott and Jansson, 2003). This phenomenon is what underlies our encompassing
results.
We assess the robustness of our results against alternative specifications of the low frequency component of per capita hours worked. In particular, we consider the possibility of
a quadratic trend in hours worked. We show that there is a trend specification that has
the implication that hours worked drops after a positive shock to technology. Using the
methodology described above, we argue that the preponderance of the evidence favors the
level specification relative to this alternative trend specification.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2 discusses our strategy for
identifying the eﬀects of a permanent shock to technology. Section 3 presents the results from
a bivariate analysis using data on hours worked and the growth rate of labor productivity.
Later we show that on some dimensions inference is sensitive to only including two variables
in the analysis. But the bivariate systems are useful because they allow us to highlight the
basic issues in a simple setting and they allow us to compare our results to a subset of the
results in the literature. Section 4 reports our encompassing results and the posterior odds
ratio for the bivariate systems. In Section 5 we expand the analysis to include more variables.
Here, we establish the benchmark system that we use later to assess the cyclical eﬀects of
technology shocks. Section 6 explores the robustness of our analysis to the possible presence
of deterministic trends. In addition, we examine the subsample stability of our time series
model. In Section 7 we report our findings regarding the overall importance of technology
shocks in cyclical fluctuations. Section 8 contains concluding remarks.
5

For example, see Christiano and Eichenbaum (1990).

3

2

Identifying the Eﬀects of a Permanent Technology
Shock

In this section, we discuss our strategy for identifying the eﬀects of permanent shocks to
technology. We follow Gali (1999), Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2002) and Francis and
Ramey (2001) and adopt the identifying assumption that the only type of shock which aﬀects
the long-run level of average labor productivity is a permanent shock to technology. This
assumption is satisfied by a large class of standard business cycle models. See, for example,
the real business cycle models in Christiano (1988), King, Plosser, Stock and Watson (1991)
and Christiano and Eichenbaum (1992) which assume that technology shocks are a diﬀerence
stationary process.6
As discussed below, we use reduced form time series methods in conjunction with our
identifying assumption to estimate the eﬀects of a permanent shock to technology. An advantage of this approach is that we do not need to make all the usual assumptions required to
construct Solow-residual based measures of technology shocks. Examples of these assumptions include corrections for labor hoarding, capital utilization, and time-varying markups.7
Of course there exist models that do not satisfy our identifying assumption. For example, the
assumption is not true in an endogenous growth model where all shocks aﬀect productivity
in the long run. Nor is it true in an otherwise standard model when there are permanent
shocks to the tax rate on capital income. These caveats notwithstanding, we proceed as in
the literature.
We estimate the dynamic eﬀects of a technology shock using the method proposed in
Shapiro and Watson (1988). The starting point of the approach is the relationship:
∆ft = µ + β(L)∆ft−1 + α̃(L)Xt + εzt .

(1)

Here ft denotes the log of average labor productivity and α̃(L), β(L) are polynomials of
order q and q − 1 in the lag operator, L, respectively. Also, ∆ is the first diﬀerence operator
and we assume that ∆ft is covariance stationary. The white noise random variable, εzt ,
is the innovation to technology. Suppose that the response of Xt to an innovation in some
non-technology shock, εt , is characterized by Xt = γ(L)εt , where γ(L) is a polynomial in nonnegative powers of L. We assume that each element of γ(1) is non-zero. The assumption that
non-technology shocks have no impact on ft in the long run implies the following restriction
on α̃(L) :
α̃(L) = α(L)(1 − L),
(2)
where α(L) is a polynomial of order q − 1 in the lag operator. To see this, note first that
the only way non-technology shocks can have an impact on ft is by their eﬀect on Xt , while
the long-run impact of a shock to εt on ft is given by:

6

α̃(1)γ(1)
.
1 − β(1)

If these models were modified to incorporate permanent shocks to agents’ preferences for leisure or to
government spending, these shocks would have no long run impact on labor productivity, because labor
productivity is determined by the discount rate and the underlying growth rate of technology.
7
See Basu, Fernald and Kimball (1999) for an interesting application of this alternative approach.

4

The assumption that ∆ft is covariance stationary guarantees |1 − β(1)| < ∞. This assumption, together with our assumption on γ(L), implies that for the long-run impact of εt on ft
to be zero it must be that α̃(1) = 0. This in turn is equivalent to (2).
Substituting (2) into (1) yields the relationship:
∆ft = µ + β(L)∆ft−1 + α(L)∆Xt + εzt .

(3)

We obtain an estimate of εzt by using (3) in conjunction with estimates of µ, β(L) and α(L).
If one of the shocks driving Xt is εzt , then Xt and εzt will be correlated. So, we cannot
estimate the parameters in β(L) and α(L) by ordinary least squares (OLS). Instead, we
apply the standard instrumental variables strategy used in the literature. In particular, we
use as instruments a constant, ∆ft−s and Xt−s , s = 1, 2, ...,q.
Given an estimate of the shocks in (3), we obtain an estimate of the dynamic response of ft
and Xt to εzt as follows. We begin by estimating the following q th order vector autoregression
(VAR):
Yt = α + B(L)Yt−1 + ut , Eut u0t = V,
(4)
where
Yt =

µ

∆ft
Xt

¶

,

and ut is the one-step-ahead forecast error in Yt . Also, V is a positive definite matrix. The
parameters in this VAR, including V, can be estimated by OLS applied to each equation.
In practice, we set q = 4. The fundamental economic shocks, et , are related to ut by the
following relation:
ut = Cet , Eet e0t = I.
Without loss of generality, we suppose that εzt is the first element of et . To compute the
dynamic response of the variables in Yt to εzt , we require the first column of C. We obtain this
column by regressing ut on εzt by ordinary least squares. Finally, we simulate the dynamic
response of Yt to εzt . For each lag in this response function, we computed the centered 95
percent Bayesian confidence interval using the approach for just-identified systems discussed
in Doan (1992).8

3

Bivariate Results

This section reports results based on a simple, bivariate VAR in which ft is the log of business
labor productivity. The second element in Yt is the log of hours worked in the business sector
divided by a measure of the population.9 Our data on labor productivity growth and per
capita hours worked are displayed in the first row of Figure 1.
We consider two sample periods. The longest period for which data are available on the
variables in our VAR is 1948Q1-2001Q4. We refer to this as the long sample. The start
8

This approach requires drawing B(L) and V repeatedly from their posterior distributions. Our results
are based on 2, 500 draws.
9
Our data were taken from the DRI Economics database. The mnemonic for business labor productivity is
LBOUT. The mnemonic for business hours worked is LBMN. The business hours worked data were converted
to per capita terms using a measure of the civilian population over the age of 16 (mnemonic, P16).

5

of this sample period coincides with the one in Francis and Ramey (2001) and Gali (1999).
Francis and Ramey (2001) and Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2002) work, as we do, with
per capita hours worked, while Gali (1999) works with total hours worked. Since much of
the business cycle literature works with post-1959 data, we also consider a second sample
period given by 1959Q1-2001Q4. We refer to this as the short sample.
We choose to work with per capita hours worked, rather than total hours worked, since
this is the object that appears in most general equilibrium business cycle models. There are
two additional reasons for this choice. First, for our short sample period, there is evidence
against the diﬀerence stationary specification of log total hours worked. We found this
evidence using a version of the covariates adjusted Dicky-Fuller test proposed in Hansen
(1995).10 Specifically, we regressed the growth rate of total hours worked on a constant, time,
the lag level of log total hours worked and 4 lags of the growth rate of total hours worked
and 4 lags of productivity growth. We then performed an F test for the null hypothesis
that the coeﬃcient on the lag level of log total hours worked and the coeﬃcient on time are
jointly zero. This amounts to a test of the null hypothesis that log total hours worked is
diﬀerence stationary, against the alternative that it is stationary about a linear trend. The
F statistics for the long and short sample periods are 5.72 and 9.07, respectively. According
to tabulated critical values, the F statistic for the long sample exceeds the 10 percent critical
value. However, the F statistic for the short sample exceeds the 1 percent critical value.11
Because the short sample plays an important role in our analysis, we are uncomfortable
adopting the diﬀerence stationary specification. Second, suppose we assume, as in Gali
(1999), that the log of hours is stationary about a linear trend. We find this specification
unappealing because it implies that permanent shocks, originating from demographic factors,
to total hours and total output are ruled out. Note that by working with per capita hours,
we do not exclude the possibility that demographic shocks have permanent eﬀects on total
hours worked and total output.
We now turn to our results. Panel A of Figure 2 displays the response of log output and
log hours to a positive technology shock, based on the long sample. A number of interesting
results emerge here. First, the impact eﬀect of the shock on output and hours is positive (1.17
percent and 0.34 percent, respectively) after which both rise in a hump shaped pattern. The
responses of both output and hours are statistically significantly diﬀerent from zero over the
20 quarters displayed. Second, in the long run, output rises by 1.33 percent. By construction
the long run eﬀect on hours worked is zero. Third, since output rises by more than hours
does, labor productivity also rises in response to a positive technology shock.
Panel B of Figure 2 displays the analogous results for the short sample period. As
before, the impact eﬀect of the shock on output and hours is positive (0.94 and 0.14 percent,
10

Other tests have been proposed by Elliott and Jansson (2003). We work with a version of Hansen’s
CADF test for two reasons. First, Elliott and Jansson show in simulations that the CADF test can have
better size properties but weaker power than their test. We are particularly concerned that the size of our
test is correct. Second, the CADF test is essentially the same as our test for weak instruments, and so using
the CADF test enhances consistency of the test statistics used in the paper.
11
We used the tabulated critical values in ‘Case 4’, Table B.7, of Hamilton (1994, p. 764). To check these,
we also computed bootstrap critical values by simulating a bivariate, 4-lag VAR fit to data on the growth
rate of productivity and the growth rate of total hours. The calculations were performed using the short
and long sample periods. The results of these experiments coincide with what is reported in the text.

6

respectively), after which both rise in a hump-shaped pattern. The long run impact of the
shock is to raise output by 0.96 percent. Again, average productivity rises in response to
the shock and there is no long run eﬀect on hours worked. The rise in output is statistically
diﬀerent from zero at all horizons displayed. The rise in hours is statistically significantly
diﬀerent from zero between one and three years after the shock. So regardless of which
sample period we use, the same picture emerges: a permanent shock to technology drives
hours, output and average productivity up.
The previous results stand in sharp contrast to the literature according to which hours
worked falls after a positive technology shock. The diﬀerence cannot be attributed to our
identifying assumptions or the data that we use. To see this, note that we reproduce the
bivariate-based results in the literature if we assume that Xt in (1) and (3) corresponds to
the growth rate of hours worked rather than the level of hours worked. The two panels in
Figure 3 display the analogous results to those in Figure 2 with this change in the definition
of Xt .
According to the point estimates displayed in Panels A and B of Figure 3, a positive shock
to technology induces a rise in output, but a persistent decline in hours worked.12 Confidence
intervals are clearly very large. Still, the initial decline in hours worked is statistically
significant. This result is consistent with the bivariate analysis in Gali (1999) and Francis
and Ramey (2001).
The question is: Which results are more plausible, those based on the level specification
or the diﬀerence specification? We turn to this question in the next section.

4

Analyzing the Bivariate Results

The previous section presented conflicting answers to the question: how do hours worked
respond to a positive technology shock? Each answer is based on a diﬀerent statistical
model, corresponding to whether we assume that hours worked are diﬀerence stationary
or stationary in levels. To determine which answer is more plausible, we need to select
between the underlying statistical models. The first subsection below addresses the issue
using standard classical diagnostic tests and shows that they do not convincingly discriminate
between the competing models. The following sections address the issue using encompassing
methods.

4.1

Standard Classical Diagnostic Tests

We begin by testing the null hypothesis of a unit root in hours worked using the Augmented
Dickey Fuller (ADF) test. For both sample periods, this hypothesis cannot be rejected at
the 10 percent significance level.13 Evidently we cannot rule out the diﬀerence specification,
12

For the long sample, the contemporaneous eﬀect of the shock is to drive output up by 0.56 percent and
hours down by 0.31 percent. The long run eﬀect of the shock is to raise output by 0.84 percent and hours
worked by 0.06 percent. For the short sample, the contemporaneous eﬀect of the shock is to raise output
0.43 percent and reduce hours worked by 0.30 percent. The long run eﬀect of the shock is to raise output
by 0.74 percent and hours worked by 0.05 percent.
13
For the long and short sample, the ADF test statistic is equal to −2.46 and −2.49, respectively. The
critical value corresponding to a 10 percent significance level is −2.57. In Appendix C, we compute the

7

at least based on this test. Of course it is well known that standard unit root tests have
very poor power properties relative to the alternative that the time series in question is a
persistent stationary stochastic process. So while it is always true that failure to reject a null
hypothesis does not mean we can reject the alternative, this caveat is particularly relevant
in the present context.
To test the null hypothesis that per capita hours is a stationary stochastic process (with
no time trend) we use the KPSS test (see Kwiatkowski et al. (1992)).14 For the short sample
period, we cannot reject, using standard asymptotic distribution theory, the null hypothesis
at the five percent significance level.15 For the long sample period, we can reject the null
hypothesis at this level. However, it is well known that the KPSS test (and close variants
like the Leybourne and McCabe (1994) test) rejects the null hypothesis of stationarity too
often if the data-generating process is a persistent but stationary time series.16 It is common
practice to use size-corrected critical values that are constructed using data simulated from a
particular data-generating process.17 We did so using the level specification VAR estimated
over the long sample. Specifically, using this VAR as the data-generating process, we generated 1000 synthetic data sets, each of length equal to the number of observations in the
long sample period, 1948-2001.18 For each synthetic data set we constructed the KPSS test
statistic. In 90 and 95 percent of the data sets, the KPSS test statistic was smaller than 1.89
and 2.06, respectively. The value of this statistic computed using the actual data over the
period 1948-2001 is equal to 1.24. Thus we cannot reject the null hypothesis of stationarity
at conventional significance levels.

4.2

Encompassing Tests: A Priori Considerations

The preceding subsection showed that conventional classical methods are not useful for
selecting between the level and diﬀerence specifications of our VAR. An alternative way to
select between the competing specifications is to use an encompassing criterion. Under this
criterion, a model must not just be defensible on standard classical diagnostic grounds. It
must also be able to predict the results based on the opposing model. If one of the two views
fails this encompassing test, the one that passes is to be preferred.
In what follows we review the impact of specification error and sampling uncertainty on
critical values based on bootstrap simulations of the estimated diﬀerence model based on the long and short
samples. The 10 percent critical values are -2.87 and -2.78, respectively. These critical values also result in
a failure to reject at the 10 percent significance level.
14
In implementing this test we set the number of lags in our Newey-West estimator of the relevant covariance matrix to eight.
15
The value of the KPSS test statistic is 0.4. The asymptotic critical values corresponding to ten and five
percent significance levels are 0.347 and 0.46, respectively.
16
See Table 3 in Kwiatkowski et al. (1992) and also Caner and Kilian (1999) who provide a careful
assessment of the size properties of the KPSS and Leybourne and McCabe tests.
17
Caner and Kilian (1999) provide critical values relevant for the case in which the data generating process
is a stationary AR(1) with an autocorrelation coeﬃcient of 0.95. Using this value we fail to reject, at the
five percent significance level, the null hypothesis of stationarity over the longer sample period.
18
The maximal eigenvalue of the estimated level specification VAR is equal to 0.972. We also estimated
univariate AR(4) representations for hours worked using the synthetic data sets and calculated the maximal
roots for the estimated univariate representations of hours worked. In no case did the maximal root exceed
one. Furthermore, 95 percent of the simulations did not have a root greater than 0.982.

8

the ability of each specification to encompass the other. Other things equal, the specification,
that will do best on the encompassing test, is the one that predicts the other model is
misspecified. This consideration leads us to expect the level specification to do better. This
is because the level specification implies the first diﬀerence specification is misspecified ,
while the diﬀerence specification implies the level specification is correctly specified. This
consideration is not definitive because sampling considerations also enter. For example, the
diﬀerence specification implies that the level specification suﬀers from a weak instrument
problem. Weak instruments can lead to large sampling uncertainty, as well as bias. These
considerations may help the diﬀerence specification.
4.2.1

Level Specification

Suppose the level specification is true. Then the diﬀerence specification is misspecified. To
see why, recall the two steps involved in estimating the dynamic response of a variable to
a technology shock. The first involves the instrumental variables equation used to estimate
the technology shock itself. The second involves the vector autoregression used to obtain the
actual impulse responses.
Suppose the econometrician estimates the instrumental variables equation under the mistaken assumption that hours worked is a diﬀerence stationary variable. In addition, assume
that the only variable in Xt is log hours worked. The econometrician would diﬀerence Xt
twice and estimate µ along with the coeﬃcients in the finite-ordered polynomials, β(L) and
α(L), in the system:
∆ft = µ + β(L)∆ft−1 + α(L)(1 − L)∆Xt + εzt .
Suppose that Xt has not been overdiﬀerenced, so that its spectral density is diﬀerent from
zero at frequency zero. Then, in the true relationship, the term involving Xt is actually
ᾱ(L)∆Xt , where ᾱ(L) is a finite ordered polynomial. In this case, the econometrician commits a specification error because the parameter space does not include the true parameter
values. The only way α(L)(1 − L) could ever be equal to ᾱ(L) is if α(L) has a unit pole, i.e.,
if α(L) = ᾱ(L)/(1 − L). But, this is impossible, since no finite lag polynomial, α(L), has
this property. So, incorrectly assuming that Xt has a unit root entails specification error.
We now turn to the VAR used to estimate the response to a shock. A stationary series
that is first diﬀerenced has a unit moving average root. It is well known that there does
not exist a finite-lag vector autoregressive representation of such a process. So here too,
proceeding as though the data are diﬀerence stationary entails a specification error.
Of course, it would be premature to conclude that the level specification is likely to
encompass the diﬀerence specification’s results. For this to occur, the level specification has
to predict not just that the diﬀerence specification entails specification error. It must be
that the specification error is enough to account quantitatively for the finding one obtains
when adopting the diﬀerence specification.
4.2.2

Diﬀerence Specification

Suppose the diﬀerence specification is true. What are the consequences of failing to assume
a unit root in hours worked, when there in fact is one? To answer this question, we must
9

address two sets of issues: specification error and sampling uncertainty. With respect to the
former, note that there is no specification error in failing to impose a unit root. To see this,
first consider the instrumental variables regression:
∆ft = µ + β(L)∆ft−1 + α(L)∆Xt + εzt .

(5)

Here, the polynomials, β(L) and α(L), are of order q and q − 1, respectively. The econometrician does not impose the restriction α(1) = 0 when it is, in fact, true. This is not a
specification error, because the parameter space does not rule out α(1) = 0. In estimating
the VAR, the econometrician also does not impose the restriction that hours worked is difference stationary. This also does not constitute a specification error because the level VAR
allows for a unit root (see Sims, Stock and Watson (1990)).
We now turn to sampling uncertainty. Recall that the econometrician who adopts the
level specification uses lagged values of Xt as instruments for ∆Xt . But if Xt actually has a
unit root, this entails a type of weak instrument problem. Lagged Xt ’s are poor instruments
for ∆Xt because ∆Xt is driven by relatively recent shocks while Xt is heavily influenced by
shocks that occurred long ago. At least in large samples, there is little information in lagged
Xt ’s for ∆Xt .19
Results in the literature suggest that weak instruments can lead to substantial sampling
uncertainty. This uncertainty could help the diﬀerence specification encompass the level
results simply as a statistical artifact. In addition, weak instruments can lead to bias, which
could also help the diﬀerence specification.
The implications of the literature (see, for example, Staiger and Stock (1997)) for the
weak instrument problem are suggestive, though not definitive in our context.20 Since the
precise nature of the problem is somewhat diﬀerent here, we now briefly discuss it.21 First,
we analyze the properties of the instrumental variables estimator. We then turn to the
impulse response functions.
Suppose the instrumental variables relation is given by (5) with µ = 0. Let the predetermined variables in this relationship be written as:
z̄t = [∆ft−1 , ..., ∆ft−q , ∆Xt−1 , ..., ∆Xt−q ].
So, the right hand side variables in (5) are given by xt = [z̄t , ∆Xt ]. The econometrician who
adopts the level specification uses instruments composed of q lagged ∆ft ’s and q + 1 lagged
19

To see this, consider the extreme case in which Xt is a random walk. In this case, Xt−1 is the sum of
shocks at date t − 1 and earlier, while ∆Xt is a function only of date t shocks. In this case, there is no
overlap between ∆Xt and Xt−1 . More generally, when ∆Xt is covariance stationary, it is a square summable
function of current and past shocks, while Xt−1 is not. In this sense, the weight placed by Xt−1 on shocks
in the distant past is larger than the weight placed by ∆Xt on those shocks.
20
For a discussion of this in the context of instrumental variables regressions of consumption growth on
income, see Christiano (1989) and Boldrin, Christiano and Fisher (1999).
21
A similar weak instrument problem is studied in dynamic panel models. This literature considers the
case when the lagged level of a variable is used to instrument for its growth rate and the variable is nearly
a unit root process. The literature studies the consequences of the resulting weak instrument problem when
the panel size increases, holding the number of time periods fixed (see Blundell and Bond 1998, and Hahn,
Hausman, and Kuersteiner 2003.) Our focus is on what happens as the number of observations increases.

10

Xt ’s. This is equivalent to working with the instrument set zt = [z̄t , Xt−1 ]. Relation (5) can
be written as:
∆ft = xt δ + εzt .
The instrumental variables estimator, δIV , expressed as a deviation from the true parameter
value, δ, is
¶−1 µ X
¶
µ X
1
1
IV
0
0 z
δ −δ =
zt xt
zt εt .
(6)
T
T
P
Here
signifies summation over t = 1, ..., T. To simplify notation, we also do not index the
estimator, δ IV , by T . Relation (6) implies
δ

IV

−δ =

·

L

→

1
T

P

1
TP

·

z̄t0 z̄t
Xt−1 z̄t

Qz̄z̄
ϕ

P

1
TP

z̄t0 ∆Xt
1
Xt−1 ∆Xt
T
¸−1 µ ¶
0
Qz̄∆X
,
%
ζ

¸−1 ·

1
T

P

1
TP

z̄t0 εzt
Xt−1 εzt

¸

L

where ‘→’ signifies ‘converges in distribution’. Here, ϕ, ζ and % are well defined random
variables, constructed as functions of integrals of Brownian motion (see, e.g., Proposition
18.1 in Hamilton, 1994, pages 547-548). According to the previous expression, δ IV − δ has
a non-trivial asymptotic distribution. By contrast, suppose ‘strong’ instruments, such as
∆Xt−s , s > 0, are used. Then, the asymptotic distribution of δ IV − δ collapses onto a single
point and there is no sampling uncertainty. This is the sense in which our type of weak
instruments lead to large sampling uncertainty. See Appendix B for an analytic example.
Now consider the large sample distribution of our estimator of impulse response functions.
Denote the contemporaneous impact on ht of a one-standard deviation shock to technology
by Ψ0 = E(ut εzt )/σ εz . Here, ut denotes the disturbance in the VAR equation for ∆Xt . We
denote the estimator of Ψ0 by ΨIV
0 :
ΨIV
0
ρIV

¸1/2
1X 2
ût
= ρ
,
T
P z,IV
1
ût εt
T
=
·
¸ .
£ 1 P 2 ¤1/2 1 P ³ z,IV ´2 1/2
ût
εt
T
T
IV

·

Here, ût is the fitted value of ut and εz,IV
is the instrumental variables estimator of the
t
technology shock:22
¡
¢
εz,IV
= ∆ft − xt δ IV = xt δ − δIV + εzt .
t
The formulas provided by Hamilton (1994, Theorem 18.1) can be used to show that the
asymptotic distribution of ΨIV
exists and is a function of the asymptotic distribution of
0
δ − δ IV (see Appendix B for an illustration). This result follows from two observations.
First, the parameter estimates underlying ût converge in probability to their true value. So,
22

Here, ût is the fitted residual corresponding to u2t , the second disturbance in (4). We delete the subscript,
2, to keep from cluttering the notation.

11

1
T

P

û2t converges in probability to σ 2u , the variance of ut . This is true even when the VAR is
estimated using the level of Xt (see Sims, Stock and Watson, 1990). Second, by assumption
both xt and εzt are stationary variables with well-defined first and second moments. It follows
that the asymptotic distribution of ΨIV
0 is non-trivial because the asymptotic distribution of
δ IV is non-trivial. The exact asymptotic distribution of ΨIV
0 can be worked out by application
of the results in Hamilton (1994, theorem 18.1).
The previous reasoning establishes that the weak instrument problem leads to high sampling uncertainty in ΨIV
0 . In addition, there is no reason to think that the asymptotic
IV
distribution of Ψ0 is even centered on Ψ0 . Appendix B presents an example where ΨIV
0 is
centered at zero.
The previous analysis raises the possibility that the moments of estimators of interest to
us may not exist. In fact, it is not possible to guarantee that the asymptotic distribution
of δ IV has well-defined first and second moments. For example, in numerical analysis of a
special case reported in Appendix B, we find that the asymptotic distribution of δIV resembles
a Cauchy distribution, which has a median, but no mean or variance. For the simulation
methodology that we use below, it is crucial that distributions of impulse response estimators
have first and second moments. Fortunately, all the moments of the asymptotic distribution
IV
of ΨIV
is a correlation and σ̂ u converges
0 are well defined. This follows from the facts that ρ
in probability to σ u . These two observations imply that the asymptotic distribution of ΨIV
0
has compact support, being bounded above by σ u and below by −σ u .
To summarize, in this subsection we investigated what happens when an analyst estimates
an impulse response function using the level specification when the diﬀerence specification
is true. Our results can be summarized as follows. First and second moments of the estimator are well defined. However, the estimator may be biased and may have large sampling
uncertainty.

4.3

Does the Level Specification Encompass the Diﬀerence Specification Results?

To assess the ability of the level specification to encompass the diﬀerence specification,
we generated two groups of one thousand artificial data sets from the estimated VAR in
which the second element of Yt is the log level of hours worked. In the first and second
group, the VAR corresponds to the one estimated using the long and short sample period,
respectively. So in each case the data generating mechanism corresponds to the estimated
level specification. The number of observations in each artificial data set of the two groups
is equal to the corresponding number of data points in the sample period.
In each artificial data sample, we proceeded under the (incorrect) assumption that the
diﬀerence specification was true, estimated a bivariate VAR in which hours worked appears
in growth rates, and computed the impulse responses to a technology shock. The mean
impulse responses appear as the thin line with circles in Figure 4. These correspond to the
prediction of the level specification for the impulse responses that one would obtain with the
(misspecified) diﬀerence specification. The lines with triangles are reproduced from Figure
3 and correspond to our point estimate of the relevant impulse response function generated
from the diﬀerence specification. The gray area represents the 95 percent confidence interval

12

of the simulated impulse response functions.23
From Figure 4 we see that, for both sample periods, the average of the impulse response
functions emerging from the ‘misspecified’ growth rate VAR are very close to the actual
estimated impulse response generated using the diﬀerence specification. Notice in particular
that hours worked are predicted to fall after a positive technology shock even though they
rise in the actual data-generating process. Evidently the specification error associated with
imposing a unit root in hours worked is large enough to account for the estimated response of
hours that emerges from the diﬀerence specification. That is, our level specification attributes
the decline in hours in the estimated VAR with diﬀerenced hours to over-diﬀerencing. Note
also that in all cases the estimated impulse response functions associated with the diﬀerence specification lie well within the 95 percent confidence interval of the simulated impulse
response functions. We conclude that the level specification convincingly encompasses the
diﬀerence specification.

4.4

Does the Diﬀerence Specification Encompass the Level Results?

To assess the ability of the diﬀerence specification to encompass the level specification, we
proceeded as above except now we take as the data-generating process the estimated VAR’s
in which hours appears in growth rates. Figure 5 reports the analogous results to those
displayed in Figure 4. The thick, solid lines, reproduced from Figure 2, are the impulse
responses associated with the estimated level specification. The thin lines with the triangles
are reproduced from Figure 3 and are the impulse responses associated with the diﬀerence
specification.
The thin lines with circles in Figure 5 are the mean impulse response functions that result
from estimating the level specification of the VAR using the artificial data. They represent
the diﬀerence specification’s prediction for the impulse responses that one would obtain
with the level specification. The gray area represents the 95 percent confidence interval of
the simulated impulse response functions. This area represents the diﬀerence specification’s
prediction for the degree of sampling uncertainty that an econometrician working with the
level specification would find.
Two results are worth noting. First, the thin line with triangles and the thin line with
circles are very close to each other. Evidently, the mean distortions associated with not
imposing a unit root in hours worked are not very large. In particular, the diﬀerence specification predicts - counterfactually - that an econometrician who adopts the level specification
will find that average hours fall for a substantial period of time after a positive technology
shock. Notice, however, the wide confidence interval about the thin line, which includes the
thick, solid line. So, the diﬀerence specification can account for the point estimates based
on the level specification, but only as an accident of sampling uncertainty.
At the same time, the prediction of large sampling uncertainty poses important challenges
to the diﬀerence specification. First, the prediction of large sampling uncertainty rests
fundamentally on the diﬀerence specification’s implication that the econometrician working
23

Confidence intervals were computed point wise as the average simulated response plus or minus 1.96
times the standard deviation of the simulated responses.

13

with the level specification encounters a weak instrument problem. As we show below, when
we apply a standard test for weak instruments to the data, we find little evidence of this
problem. Second, the estimated confidence intervals associated with impulse responses from
the estimated level specification are relatively narrow (see Figure 2). We suspect that this is
hard to reconcile with the diﬀerence specification’s implication of large sampling uncertainty.
To assess whether there is evidence of weak instruments in the data, we examined a
standard F test for weak instruments. We regressed ∆Xt on a constant, Xt−1 , and the
predetermined variables in the instrumental variables regression, (5). These are ∆Xt−s and
∆ft−s , s = 1, 2, 3. Our weak instruments F statistic is the square of the t statistic associated
with the coeﬃcient on Xt−1 . In eﬀect, our F statistic measures the incremental information
in Xt−1 about ∆Xt .24 If the diﬀerence specification is correct, the additional information is
zero.
For the sample periods, 1948-2001 and 1959-2001, the value of our test statistic is 10.94
and 10.59, respectively. To assess the significance of these F statistics, we proceeded using
the following bootstrap procedure. For each sample period, we simulated 2,500 artificial
data sets using the corresponding estimated diﬀerence specification as the data-generating
process. For the 1948-2001 sample, we found that 2.3 percent of the simulated F statistics
exceed 10.94. For the shorter sample, the corresponding result is 0.84 percent. So, in the
short sample, the weak instrument hypothesis is strongly rejected. The evidence is somewhat
more mixed in the longer sample.
The evidence against the diﬀerence specification reported here is stronger than we obtained using the ADF test in section 4.1. This is consistent with the analysis of Hansen
(1995) and Elliott and Jansson (2003), who show that incorporating additional variables
into unit root tests can dramatically raise their power. Monte Carlo studies presented in
Appendix C make, in our context, this power gain concrete.

4.5

Quantifying the Relative Plausibility of the Two Specifications

The results of the previous two subsections indicate that the level specification can easily account for the estimated impulse response functions obtained with the diﬀerence specification.
The diﬀerence specification has a harder time. While it can account for the level results, its
ability to do so rests fundamentally on its implication that the level specification is distorted
by a weak instrument problem. In this section we quantify the relative plausibility of the
two specifications. We do so using the type of posterior odds ratio considered in Christiano
and Ljungqvist (1988) for a similar situation where diﬀerences and levels of data lead to
very diﬀerent inferences.25 The basic idea is that the more plausible of the two VAR’s is
the one that has the easiest time explaining the facts: (i) the level specification implies that
hours worked rise after a technology shock, (ii) the diﬀerence specification implies that hours
24

Our F test is equivalent to a standard ADF test with additional regressors. In the unit root testing
literature, this test is referred to as the covariate ADF test (Hansen 1995).
25
Eichenbaum and Singleton (1988) found, in a VAR analysis, that when they worked with first diﬀerences
of variables, there was little evidence that monetary policy plays an important role in business cycles.
However, when they worked with a trend stationary specification, monetary policy seems to play an important
role in business cycles. Christiano and Ljungqvist argued that the preponderance of the evidence supported
the trend stationary specification.

14

worked falls, and (iii) the value of the weak instruments F statistic.
We use a scalar statistic - the average percentage change in hours in the first six periods
after a technology shock - to quantify our findings for hours worked. The level specification
estimates imply this change, µh ,is equal to 0.89 and 0.55 for the long and short sample
period, respectively. The analogous statistic, µ∆h , for the growth specification is −0.13 and
−0.17 in the long and short sample period, respectively.
To evaluate the relative ability of the level and diﬀerence specification to simultaneously
account for µh and µ∆h , we proceed as follows. We simulated 1, 000 artificial data sets using
each of our two estimated VARs as the data generating mechanism. In each data set, we
calculated (µh , µ∆h ) using the same method used to compute these statistics in the actual
data. To quantify the relative ability of the two specifications to account for the estimated
values of (µh , µ∆h ), we computed the frequency of the joint event, µh > 0 and µ∆h < 0. For
the long sample period, the level and diﬀerence specifications imply that this frequency is
65.2 and 34.2, respectively. That is,
P (Q|A) = 0.65
P (Q|B) = 0.34,
where Q denotes the event, µh > 0 and µ∆h < 0, A indicates the level specification, B
indicates the diﬀerence specification and P denotes the percent of the impulse response
functions in the artificial data sets in which µh > 0 and µ∆h < 0. Suppose that our priors
over A and B are equal: P (A) = P (B) = 1/2. The unconditional probability of Q, P (Q),
is 0.65 × 0.5 + 0.34 × 0.5 = 0.495. The probability of the two specifications, conditional on
having observed Q, is:
P (A, Q)
P (Q|A)P (A)
=
= 0.657
P (Q)
P (Q)
P (B, Q)
P (Q|B)P (B)
P (B|Q) =
=
= 0.343.
P (Q)
P (Q)
P (A|Q) =

So, we conclude that, given these observations, the odds in favor of the level specification
relative to the diﬀerence specification are 1.9 to 1.
Similar results emerge for the short sample period. Here the percent of impulse response
functions in the bottom right hand quadrant is 52.4 in the artificial data generated by the
level specification, while it is 25.6 for the diﬀerence specification. The implied values of
P (Q|A) and P (Q|B) are 0.672 and 0.328. So, the odds in favor of the level specification
relative to the diﬀerence specification are slightly larger than two to one.
We now incorporate into our analysis information about the relative ability of the two
specifications to account for the weak instruments F statistic. We do this by redefining Q
to be the event, µ∆h < 0, µh > 0, and F > 10.94, for the long sample. Recall that 10.94 is
the value of the F statistic obtained using the actual data from the long sample. We find
that P (Q|A) = 0.38 and P (Q|B) = 0.01. This implies that the odds in favor of the level
specification relative to the diﬀerence specification are 26.08 to one. The analogous odds
based on the short sample period are 67.67 to one.
Evidently, the odds ratio jumps enormously when the weak instruments F statistic is
incorporated into the analysis. Absent the F statistic, the diﬀerence specification has some
15

ability to account for the impulse response function emerging from the level specification.
But, this ability is predicated on the existence of a weak instrument problem associated with
hours worked. In fact, our F test indicates that there is not a weak instrument problem.
We conclude that, based on these purely statistical grounds, the level specification and
its implications are more plausible than those of the diﬀerence specification. Of course the
odds in favor of the level specification would be even higher if we assigned more prior weight
to the level specification. For reasons discussed in the introduction this seems quite natural
to us. Our own prior is that the diﬀerence specification simply cannot be true because per
capita hours worked are bounded.

5

Moving Beyond Bivariate Systems

In the previous two sections we analyzed the eﬀects of a permanent technology shock using a
bivariate system. In this section we extend our analysis to allow for a richer set of variables.
We do so for two reasons. First, the responses of these other variables are interesting in their
own right. Second, there is no a priori reason to expect that the answers generated from
small bivariate systems will survive in larger dimensional systems. If variables other than
hours worked belong in the basic relationship governing the growth rate of productivity, and
these are omitted from (1), then simple bivariate analysis will not generally yield consistent
estimates of innovations to technology.
Our extended system allows for four additional macroeconomic variables: the federal
funds rate, the rate of inflation, the log of the ratio of nominal consumption expenditures to
nominal GDP, and the log of the ratio of nominal investment expenditures to nominal GDP.26
The last two variables correspond to the ratio of real investment and consumption, measured
in units of output, to total real output. Standard models, including those that allow for
investment-specific technical change, imply these two variables are covariance stationary.27
Data on our six variables are displayed in Figure 1.

5.1

Level and Diﬀerence Specification Results

To conserve on space we focus on the 1959 - 2001 sample period.28 Figure 6 reports the
impulse response functions corresponding to the level specification, i.e., the system in which
the log of per capita hours worked enters in levels. As can be seen, the basic qualitative
26

Our measures of the growth rate of labor productivity and hours worked are the same as in the bivariate
system. We measured inflation using the growth rate of the GDP deflator, measured as the ratio of nominal
output to real output (GDP/GDPQ). Consumption is measured as consumption on nondurables and services
and government expenditures: (GCN+GCS+GGE). Investment is measured as expenditures on consumer
durables and private investment: (GCD+GPI). The federal funds series corresponds to FYFF. All mnemonics
refer to DRI’s BASIC economics database.
27
See for example Altig, Christiano, Eichenbaum and Linde (2002). This paper posits that investment
specific technical change is trend stationary. See also Fisher (2003), which assumes investment specific
technical change is diﬀerence stationary. Both frameworks imply that the consumption and investment
ratios discussed in the text are stationary.
28
Data on the federal funds rate is available starting only in 1954. We focus on the post 1959 results so
that we can compare results to the bivariate analysis. We found that our 6 variable results were not sensitive
to using data that starts in 1954.

16

results from the bivariate analysis regarding hours worked and output are unaﬀected: both
rise in hump-shaped patterns after a positive shock to technology.29 The rise in output is
statistically significant for roughly two years after the shock, while the rise in hours worked
is statistically significant at horizons roughly two to eight quarters after the shock.
Turning to the other variables in the system, we see that the technology shock leads to a
prolonged, statistically significant fall in inflation and a statistically insignificant rise in the
federal funds rate. Both consumption and investment rise, with a long run impact that is,
by construction, equal to the long run rise in output.30 The rise in consumption is estimated
with much more precision than the rise in investment.
Figure 7 reports the impulse response functions corresponding to the diﬀerence specification, i.e. the system in which the log of per capita hours enters in first diﬀerences. Here
a permanent shock to technology induces a long lived decline in hours worked, and a rise in
output.31 In the long run, the shock induces a 0.55 percent rise in output and a 0.25 percent
decline in hours worked. Turning to the other variables, we see that the shock induces a
rise in consumption and declines in the inflation rate and the federal funds rate. Investment
initially falls but then starts to rise. Perhaps the key thing to note is the great deal of
sampling uncertainty associated with the point estimates. For the horizons displayed, none
of the changes in hours worked, output, consumption, investment or the federal funds rate
are statistically significant. The only changes that are significant are the declines in the
inflation rate. Evidently, if one insists on the diﬀerence specification, the data are simply
uninformative about the eﬀect of a permanent technology shock on hours worked or anything
else except the inflation rate.

5.2

Encompassing Results

We now turn to the question of whether the level specification can encompass the diﬀerence
specification results. As with the bivariate systems, we proceeded as follows. First, we
generated one thousand artificial data sets from the estimated six-variable level specification
VAR. The number of observations in each artificial data set is equal to the number of data
points in the sample period, 1959 - 2001.
In each artificial data sample, we estimated a six-variable VAR in which hours worked
appears in growth rates and computed the impulse responses to a technology shock. The
mean impulse responses appear as the thin line with circles in Figure 8. These responses
correspond to the impulse responses that would result from the diﬀerence specification VAR
being estimated on data generated from the level specification VAR. The thin lines with
triangles are reproduced from Figure 7 and correspond to our point estimate of the relevant
impulse response function generated from the diﬀerence specification. The gray area repre29

The contemporaneous eﬀect of the shock is to drive output and hours worked up by 0.51 percent and 0.11
percent, respectively. The long run eﬀect of the shock is to raise output by 0.97 percent. By construction
the shock has no eﬀect on hours worked in the long run.
30
The contemporaneous eﬀect of the shock is to drive consumption and investment up by 0.42 and 0.90
percent, respectively. The long run eﬀect of the shock is to raise both consumption and investment by 0.97
percent.
31
The contemporaneous eﬀect of the shock is to drive output up by 0.12 percent and hours worked down
by −0.27 percent.

17

sents the 95 percent confidence interval of the simulated impulse response functions.32 The
thick black line corresponds to the impulse response function from the estimated six-variable
level specification VAR.
The average impulse response function emerging from the ‘misspecified’ diﬀerence specification is very close to the actual estimated impulse response generated using the diﬀerence
specification. As in the bivariate analysis, hours worked are predicted to fall after a positive
technology shock even though they rise in the actual data-generating process. Also, in all
cases the estimated impulse response functions associated with the diﬀerence specification lie
well within the 95 percent confidence interval of the simulated impulse response functions.
So, as before, we conclude that the specification error associated with imposing a unit root
in hours worked is large enough to account for the estimated response of hours that emerges
from the diﬀerence specification.
We now consider whether the diﬀerence specification can encompass the level specification
results. To do this we proceed as above except that we now take as the data-generating
process the estimated VARs in which hours appears in growth rates. Figure 9 reports the
analogous results to those displayed in Figure 8. The thick, solid lines, reproduced from
Figure 6, are the impulse response functions associated with the estimated level specification.
The thin line with the triangles are reproduced from Figure 7 and correspond to our point
estimate of the impulse response function generated from the diﬀerence specification. The
gray area represents the 95 percent confidence interval of the simulated impulse response
functions.
The thin line in Figure 9 with circles is the mean impulse response function associated
with estimating the level specification VAR on data simulated using, as the data-generating
process, the diﬀerence specification VAR. Notice that the lines with triangles and circles are
very similar. So, focusing on point estimates alone, the diﬀerence specification is not able to
account for the actual finding with our estimated level VAR that hours worked rise. Still, in
the end the diﬀerence specification is compatible with our level results only because it predicts
so much sampling uncertainty. As discussed earlier, this reflects the diﬀerence specification’s
implication that the level model has weak instruments. As in the bivariate case, there is little
empirical evidence for this. Since there are more predetermined variables in the instrumental
variables regression, the weak instrument F statistic now has a diﬀerent value, 21.68. This
rejects the null hypothesis of weak instruments at the one percent significance level.

5.3

The Relative Plausibility of the Two Specifications

As in the bivariate system, we first quantify the relative plausibility of the level and diﬀerence
specifications with a scalar statistic: the average percentage change in hours in the first six
periods after a technology shock. The estimated level specification implies this change,
µh , is equal to 0.31. The statistic for the diﬀerence specification, µ∆h , is −0.29. We then
incorporate the weak instrument F statistic into the analysis.
We simulated 1,000 artificial data sets using each of our two estimated VARs as data
generating mechanisms. In each data set, we calculated (µh , µ∆h ) using the same method
32

These confidence intervals are computed in the same manner as the intervals reported for the bivariate
encompassing tests. The interval is the average simulated impulse response plus or minus 1.96 times the
standard deviation of the simulated impulse responses.

18

used to compute these statistics in the actual data. Using each of our two time series
representations, we computed the frequency of the joint event, µh > 0 and µ∆h < 0. This
frequency is 66.7 across artificial data sets generated by the level specification, while it is 36.7
in the case of the diﬀerence specification. The implied odds in favor of the level specification
over the diﬀerence specification are 1.8 to one.
Next, we incorporate the fact that the weak instrument F statistic takes on a value of
21.68. Incorporating this information into our analysis implies that the odds in favor of
the level specification relative to the diﬀerence specification jumps dramatically to a value
of 333.0 to one. So as with our bivariate systems, we conclude on these purely statistical
grounds that the level specification and its implications are more ‘plausible’ than those of
the diﬀerence specification.

6

Sensitivity Analysis

In this section we investigate the sensitivity of our analysis along three dimensions: the
choice of variables to include in the analysis, allowing for deterministic trends and subsample
stability.

6.1

Sensitivity to Choice of Variables

While the qualitative eﬀects of a permanent shock to technology are robust across the bivariate and six-variable systems, the quantitative eﬀects are quite diﬀerent. One way to see
this is to compare the relevant impulse response functions (see Figures 2 and 6). A diﬀerent
way to do this is to assess the importance of technology shocks in accounting for aggregate
fluctuations using the bivariate and six-variables systems. In the next section, we show that
technology shocks are much less important in the larger system.
To help us analyze the sources of this sensitivity, we now briefly report results from two
four variable systems. In the first, the CI system, we add two variables to the benchmark
bivariate system: the ratio of consumption expenditures to nominal GDP and the ratio of
investment expenditures to nominal GDP. In the second, the Rπ system, we add the federal
funds rate and the inflation rate to the benchmark bivariate system.
Figure 10 reports the point estimates of the impulse response functions from the level
specification six-variable system (depicted by the thick line), the CI system (depicted by the
line with ‘*’) and the Rπ system (depicted by the line with ‘X’). Two results are worth noting.
First, the six-variable and the CI systems generate very similar results for the variables that
are included in both. Second, the six-variable and the Rπ systems generate qualitatively
diﬀerent responses of hours worked. In both the six-variable and the CI systems, the impact
eﬀect of a positive technology shock on hours worked is positive after which they continue
to rise in a hump shaped pattern. But in the Rπ system, hours worked falls for roughly 3
quarters after a positive technology shock.
The most natural interpretation of this result is specification error. Both the CI and
Rπ systems are misspecified relative to the six-variable system. But the quantitative eﬀect
of the specification error associated with omitting consumption and investment from the
analysis (the Rπ system) is suﬃciently large to aﬀect qualitative inference about the eﬀect
19

of a technology shock on hours worked. Of course, if the six-variable system is specified
correctly, it should be able to rationalize the response of hours worked in the Rπ system.
To see if this is the case, we proceeded as follows. First, we generated one thousand
artificial data sets from the estimated six-variable VAR. The number of observations in each
artificial data set is equal to the number of data points in the short sample period. In each
artificial data sample, we estimated a VAR for the four variable Rπ system and computed
the impulse responses to a technology shock. The mean impulse responses appear as the thin
line with circles in Figure 11. These correspond to the prediction of the six-variable VAR
for the impulse responses one obtains using the Rπ system VAR. The thin line with the ‘X’
are reproduced from Figure 10 and correspond to our point estimate of the relevant impulse
response function generated from the Rπ system. The gray area represents the 95 confidence
interval of the simulated impulse response functions. The thick black line corresponds to the
impulse response function from the estimated six-variable VAR.
Note that the average impulse response functions emerging from the ‘misspecified’ Rπ
system are very close to the estimated impulse responses generated using the actual Rπ system. So the specification error associated with omitting consumption and investment is large
enough to account for the estimated response of hours that emerges from the Rπ specification. In all cases the estimated impulse response functions associated with the misspecified
Rπ specification lie well within the 95 percent confidence interval of the simulated impulse
response functions.33
We conclude that it is important to include at least C and I in our analysis. While it
may be desirable to include R and π on a priori grounds, the results of central interest here
seem to be less sensitive to omitting them.

6.2

Quadratic Trends

From Figure 1 we see that per capita hours worked seem to follow a U shaped pattern. This
suggests the possibility that hours worked may be stationary around a quadratic trend. If
so, then the systems considered above are misspecified and may generate misleading results.
With this in mind, we investigate two issues. First, is the response of hours worked to a
technology shock sensitive to imposing a quadratic trend in hours worked? Second, to the
extent that the results are sensitive, which set of results is most plausible?
We begin by redoing our analysis of the six-variable system with two types of quadratic
trends. In case (i), we allow for a quadratic trend in all the variables of the VAR. This
seems natural since other variables like inflation and the interest rate also exhibit U shaped
behavior (see Figure 1). In case (ii), we allow for a quadratic trend only in per capita
hours worked. Except for these trends the other variables enter the system as in the level
specification. Figure 12 reports our results. The dark, thick lines correspond to the impulse
response functions implied by the six-variable level specification. The lines indicated with 0’s
and x’s correspond to the impulse response functions generated from this system modified as
33

For completeness, we repeated the analysis for the systems in which hours enter in growth rates. Again,
the six-variable and the CI systems are more similar to each other than the Rπ system. However, the
response of consumption is much smaller in the CI system than in the six-variable system. Finally, we
computed the analogous results to those in Figure 14 and again found that the six-variable system can
encompass the CI growth rate system.

20

described in (i) and (ii) above. The grey area is the 95 percent confidence interval associated
with the lines indicated with x’s. We report only this confidence interval, rather than all
three, in order to give some sense of sampling uncertainty while keeping the figure relatively
simple.
Three things are worth noting. First, if we allow for a quadratic trend in all of the
variables in the VAR, after a small initial fall, hours worked rise as in the level specification
in response to a positive technology shock. Second, if we allow for a quadratic trend only in
hours worked, then hours worked do in fact fall in a persistent way after a positive shock to
technology. Third, in either case, the impulse response function of hours worked is estimated
with very little precision. One cannot reject the views that hours worked rise, fall or do not
change. If one insists on allowing for quadratic trends, then there is simply very little
information in the data about the response of hours worked to a technology shock.
Still, focusing on the point estimates alone, the estimated response of hours worked to a
technology shock is sensitive to whether we include a quadratic trend in hours worked. We
now turn to the question of which results are more plausible: those based on our 6-variable
level specification, or those based on the quadratic trend specifications.
We begin by performing a classical test of the null hypothesis of no trend in per capita
hours worked. Specifically, we regress the log of per capita hours worked on a constant, time
and time-squared. We then compute the t statistic for the time-squared term allowing for
serial correlation in the error term of the regression using the standard Newey-West procedure.34 The resulting t statistic is equal to 8.13. Under standard asymptotic distribution
theory, this has probability value of essentially zero under the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcient on the time-square term is zero. So, on the basis of this test, we would reject our
level specification. But, it is well-known that the asymptotic theory for this t statistic is
quite poor in small samples, especially when the error terms exhibit high degrees of serial
correlation. This is exactly the situation we are in according to our level model, since its
eigenvalues are quite large.35 To address this concern, we adopt the following procedure. We
simulate 1, 000 synthetic time series on per capita hours worked using our estimated level
model. The disturbances used in these simulations were randomly drawn from the fitted
residuals of our estimated level model. The length of each synthetic time series is equal to
the length of our sample period. We found that 13.3 percent of these t statistics exceed 8.13.
So, from the perspective of the level model, a t statistic of 8.13 is not particularly unusual.
We conclude that our t test fails to reject the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcient on the
time-squared term is equal to zero.
This result may at first seem surprising in view of the U shape of the per capita hours
worked data in Figure 1. Actually, such shapes are at all not unusual in a time series system
with eigenvalues that are close to unity. This is why the apparent evidence of a U-shaped
trend in the hours data is not evidence against our level model.
Evidently classical methods cannot be used to convincingly discriminate between the
level model and the quadratic trend model. We now turn to the encompassing and posterior
odds approach.
34
35

We allow for serial correlation of order 12 in the Newey-West procedure.
The two largest eigenvalues of the determinant of [I − B(L)] in (4) are 0.9903 and 0.9126.

21

6.2.1

Encompassing Results

Appendix A discusses our encompassing results. In discussing our results we refer to the two
quadratic trend models as the Trend in All Equations and the Trend in Hours Only models.
Our main results can be summarized as follows. The Level model easily accounts for the
results obtained using the two quadratic trend models. This is true even if we focus on
point estimates alone. In particular, the Level model successfully accounts for the fact that
one quadratic trend model implies a fall in hours after a technology shock, while the other
implies a rise. The encompassing result is even stronger when we take sampling uncertainty
into account.
Focusing on the point estimates alone, the Trend in Hours Worked model is unable to
encompass the results of either of the other two models. Specifically, it cannot account for
the fact that hours worked rise in each of the other two models. However, once sampling
uncertainty is taken into account, this encompassing test also does not reject the Trend in
Hours Only model.
Two things are worth noting regarding the Trend in All Equations model. First, focusing
on the point estimates alone, this model can encompass the results based on the Trend
in Hours Only model. But, it does not encompass the results based on the Level model.
In particular, the Trend in All Equations model predicts, counterfactually, that the Level
model produces a fall in hours worked after a positive technology shock. Second, even when
sampling uncertainty is taken into account, the encompassing test rejects the Trend in All
Equations model vis a vis the Level model.
We conclude that the encompassing analysis allows us to exclude the Trend in All Equations model. However, it does not allow us to discriminate between the Level and the Trend
in Hours Only model. With this motivation, we turn to the posterior odds ratio.
6.2.2

The Relative Plausibility of the Two Specifications

We quantify the relative plausibility of the three models with a scalar statistic: the average
percentage change in hours in the first six periods after a technology shock. The estimated
Level, Trend in All Equations, and Trend in Hours Only models imply this change is equal
to µ1 = 0.31, µ2 = −0.12, and µ3 = 0.16, respectively.
We simulated 1,000 artificial data sets using each of our three estimated VARs as data
generating mechanisms. In each artificial data set, we calculated (µ1 , µ2 , µ3 ) using the same
method used to compute these statistics in the actual data. For each data generating mechanism, we computed the frequency of the joint event, µ1 , µ2 > 0, µ3 < 0. This frequency is
19.30, 3.50 and 5.60 for the Level, Trend in All Equations, and Trend in Hours Only models,
respectively. So the posterior odds in favor of the Level model relative to the Trend in All
Equations and Trend in Hours Only model is roughly 5.5 and 3.4, respectively. On this basis,
we conclude that the Level model and its implications are more ‘plausible’ than those of the
two quadratic trend models.

6.3

Subsample Stability

In this subsection we briefly discuss subsample stability, focusing on the six-variable level
specification. Authors such as Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2002), among others, have
22

argued that monetary policy may have changed after 1979, and that this resulted in a
structural change in VAR’s. Throughout our analysis, we have assumed implicitly that
there has been no structural change. This section assesses the robustness of our conclusions
to the possibility of subsample instability.
Figures 13 and 14 display the estimated impulse responses of the variables in our system
to a technology shock, for the pre-1979Q4 and post-1979Q3 sample periods, respectively. In
each case, the thick, solid line is the impulse response implied by the full-sample estimated
VAR. The thin lines with ‘*’ represent the estimated impulse response functions based on the
indicated sub-sample. The thin lines with bold stars represent the mean impulse responses for
the indicated subsample implied by the full-sample VAR. The gray areas are the associated
95 percent confidence intervals. Both the thin lines with bold stars and associated confidence
intervals were generated using the methods discussed above.
The key results are as follows. First, according to the point estimates, in the early period
hours worked fall for roughly three quarters before rising sharply in a hump-shaped pattern.
In the late period, the estimated response of hours worked is similar to the estimates based
on the full sample period. Second, the point estimates for each sample period lie well within
the 95 percent confidence intervals. This is consistent with the view that the responses in
the subperiods are the same as they are for the full sample.36 The evidence is also consistent
with the view that there is no break in the response of consumption and investment. Third,
there is some evidence of instability in the response of the interest rate and inflation. In
particular, in the first subsample the drop in inflation and in the interest rate are suﬃciently
large that portions of their impulse response functions lie outside their respective confidence
intervals. These drops are suﬃciently large that if one applies a conventional F test for the
null hypothesis of no sample break in the VAR, the hypothesis is rejected at the one percent
significance level. This rejection notwithstanding, the key result from our perspective is
that inference about the response of hours worked to a technology shock is not aﬀected by
subsample stability issues.37

7

How Important Are Permanent Technology Shocks
for Aggregate Fluctuations?

In Section 4 and Section 5, we argued that the weight of the evidence favors the level
specification relative to the diﬀerence specification. Here, we use the level specification
to assess the role of technology shocks in aggregate fluctuations. We conclude that (i)
technology shocks are not particularly important at business cycle frequencies but they do
play an important role at relatively low frequencies of the data, and (ii) inference based on
36

We also computed confidence intervals using the estimated VAR’s for the subsamples as the data generating processes. We found that the full sample estimated impulse response functions lie well within these
confidence intervals.
37
We also investigated subsample stability using our four variable Rπ system. Consistent with the results in
Gali, Lopez-Salido, and Valles (2002), hours worked falls sharply and persistently after a positive technology
shock. In addition, output also falls briefly. We found that our full sample, six variable VAR encompasses
these impulse response functions, as well as the response of the interest rate. But, there is marginal evidence
against its ability to encompass the response of inflation in the early period.

23

bivariate systems greatly overstates the cyclical importance of technology shocks.

7.1

Bivariate System Results

We begin by discussing the role of technology shocks in the variability of output and hours
worked based on our level specification bivariate VAR. Table 1 reports the percentage of
forecast error variance due to technology shocks, at horizons of 1, 4, 8, 12, 20 and 50 quarters.
By construction, permanent technology shocks account for all of the forecast error variance
of output at the infinite horizon. Notice that technology shocks account for an important
fraction of the variance of output at all reported horizons. For example, they account for
roughly 80 percent of the one step ahead forecast error variance in output. In contrast, they
account for only a small percentage of the one step forecast error variance in hours worked
(4.5 percent). But they account for a larger percentage of the forecast error variance in hours
worked at longer horizons, exceeding forty percent at horizons greater than two years.
The first row of Table 3 reports the percentage of the variance in output and hours
worked at business cycle frequencies due to technology shocks. This statistic was computed
as follows. First we simulated the estimated level specification bivariate VAR driven only
by the estimated technology shocks. Next we computed the variance of the simulated data
after applying the Hodrick-Prescott (HP) filter. Finally we computed the variance of the
actual HP filtered output and hours worked. For any given variable, the ratio of the two
variances is our estimate of the fraction of business cycle variation in that variable due to
technology shocks. The results in Table 3 indicate that technology shocks appear to play a
significant role for both output and hours worked, accounting for roughly 64 and 33 percent
of the cyclical variance in these two variables, respectively.
A diﬀerent way to assess the role of technology shocks is presented in Figure 15. The thick
line in this figure displays a simulation of the ‘detrended’ historical data. The detrending
is achieved using the following procedure. First, we simulated the estimated reduced form
representation (4) using the fitted disturbances, ût , but setting the constant term, α, and
the initial conditions of Yt to zero. In eﬀect, this gives us a version of the data, Yt , in which
any dynamic eﬀects from unusual initial conditions (relative to the VAR’s stochastic steady
state) have been removed, and in which the drift has been removed. Second, the resulting
‘detrended’ historical observations on Yt are then transformed appropriately to produce the
variables reported in the top panel of Figure 15. The high degree of persistence observed in
output reflects that our procedure for computing output makes it the realization of a random
walk with no drift.
The procedure used to compute the thick line in Figure 15 was then repeated, with one
change, to produce the thin line. Rather than using the historical reduced form shocks, ût ,
the simulations underlying the thin line use C êt , allowing only the first element of êt to be
non-zero. This first element of êt is the estimated technology shock εzt , obtained from (3).
The results in the top panel of Figure 15 give a visual representation of what is evident in
Table 1 and the first row of Table 3. Technology shocks appear to play a very important role
in accounting for fluctuations in output and a smaller, but still substantial role with respect
to hours worked.
We conclude this section by briefly noting the sensitivity of inference to whether we adopt
the level or diﬀerence specification. The bottom panels of Tables 1 and 3 and the bottom
24

panel of Figure 15 report the analogous results for the bivariate diﬀerence specification.
Comparing across the Tables or the Figures the same picture emerges: with the diﬀerence
specification, technology shocks play a much smaller role with respect to output and hours
worked than they do in the level specification. For example, the percentage of the cyclical
variance in output and hours worked accounted for by technology shocks drops from 64 and
33 percent in the level specification to 11 and 4 percent in the diﬀerence specification. So
imposing a unit root in hours worked, not only aﬀects qualitative inference about the eﬀect
of technology shocks, it also aﬀects inference about their overall importance.

7.2

Results Based on the Larger VAR

We now consider the importance of technology shocks when we incorporate additional variables into our analysis. Table 2 reports the variance decomposition results for the six-variable
level specification system. Comparing the first two rows of Table 1 and 2, we see that technology shocks account for a much smaller percent of the forecast error variance in both
hours and output in the six-variable system. For example, in the bivariate system, technology shocks account for roughly 78 and 24 percent of the 4 quarter ahead forecast error
variance in output and hours, respectively. In the six-variable system these percentages fall
to 40 and 15 percent respectively. Still technology shocks continue to play a major role in
the variability of output, accounting for over 40 percent of the forecast error variance at
horizons between four and twenty quarters. Technology shocks do play an important role
in accounting for the forecast error variance in hours worked at longer horizons, accounting
for nearly 30 percent of this variance at horizons greater than 4 quarters, and more than 40
percent of the unconditional variance.
The decline in the importance of technology shocks is much more pronounced when we
focus on cyclical frequencies. Recall from Table 3 that, based on the bivariate system,
technology shocks account for roughly 64 and 33 percent of the cyclical variation in output
and hours worked. In the six-variable systems, these percentages plummet to ten and four,
respectively. Interestingly, a similar result emerges from the four variable CI and Rπ systems.
For example, in the latter system, technology shocks account for roughly 64 and 33 percent
of the cyclical variation in output and hours worked.
Turning to the other variables, Table 2 indicates that technology shocks play a substantial
role in inflation, accounting for over 60 percent of the one step ahead forecast error variance
and almost 40 percent at even the 20 quarter horizon. Technology shocks also play a very
important role in the variance of consumption, accounting for over 60 percent of the one step
ahead forecast error variance and almost 90 percent of the unconditional variance. These
shocks also play a substantial, if smaller, role in accounting for variation in investment.
These shocks, however, do not play an important role in the forecast error variance for the
federal funds rate.
Turning to business cycle frequencies, two results stand out in Table 3. First, technology shocks account for a very small percentage of the cyclical variance in output, hours
worked, investment and the federal funds rate (10, 4, 1 and 7 percent respectively). Second,
technology shocks account for a moderately large percentage of the cyclical variation in consumption (16.7 percent) and a surprisingly large amount of the cyclical variation in inflation
(32 percent).
25

Figure 16 presents the historical decompositions for the six-variable level specification
VAR. Technology shocks do relatively well at accounting for the data on output, hours,
consumption, inflation and to some extent investment at the lower frequencies. While not
reported here, the results are similar for the six-variable diﬀerence specification VAR.

8

Conclusions

A theme of this paper is that the treatment of the low frequency component of per capita
hours worked has an important impact on inference about the response of hours worked to a
technology shock. We explored the impact on inference of treating per capita hours as diﬀerence stationary, stationary, or stationary about a deterministic trend. We also investigated
the impact of omitted variables on inference. We conclude that the evidence overwhelmingly favors specifications which imply that per capita hours worked rises in response to a
technology shock.
Throughout, we assume that only one shock aﬀects productivity in the long run and
we refer to it as a ‘technology shock’. We do this because it is the standard interpretation
in the literature. But, other interpretations are possible too. For example, the shock that
we identify could in principle be any permanent disturbance that aﬀects the rate of return
on capital, such as the capital tax rate, the depreciation rate, or agents’ discount rate.
If some or all of these shocks are operative and have permanent eﬀects on productivity,
then our inferences may be distorted. To explore this possibility requires making additional
identifying assumptions and incorporating new data into the analysis. Fisher (2002) does this
by considering two types of technology shocks. He argues that investment-specific shocks
play a relatively important role at cyclical frequencies in driving aggregate fluctuations.
Significantly, he finds that our key result is robust to the presence of a second shock: both
of the technology shocks that Fisher identifies lead to an increase in hours worked.

26

A

Encompassing Analysis for Level and Quadratic Trend
Models

This appendix provides additional details to the general discussion about encompassing that
appears in Section 6.2. We discuss the ability of each model in Section 6.2 to encompass the
response of hours from the other two models.
As in the text, the three models are the ‘Levels’ model, the ‘Trend in All Equations’
model, and the ‘Trend in Hours Only’ model. In Figure A, each of Panels A, B and C report
encompassing results for the particular model indicated in the associated panel header. Each
panel has two columns. Each column focuses on the ability of the model to encompass the
empirical results obtained using one of the other two models.
Panel A evaluates the Level model’s ability to account for the results based on the Trend
in All Equations model and the Trend in Hours Only model. To do this, we simulated
1,000 synthetic time series, each of length equal to our sample period. Using each of these
time series, we estimated the Trend in All Equations model and the Trend in Hours Only
model. We then computed the impulse response function of interest. The starred line in each
column indicates the mean response across the 1,000 time series. The grey area indicates
the associated 95 percent confidence interval. The dark, thick line indicates the estimated
impulse response function based on the Level model. The line with circles represents the
estimated impulse response function based on the Trend in All Equations model. The line
with x’s represents the estimated impulse response function of the Trend in Hours Only
model.
Note in Panel A how all the impulse responses lie well inside the grey area. This implies
that the level model encompasses the two quadratic trend models. Since these models are
not misspecified when the level model is true, this result reflects the eﬀects of small sample
uncertainty. We verified this by doing the calculations reported in Figure A on much longer
synthetic data sets. We found that the resulting average impulse response nearly coincided
with the Level model’s estimated impulse response.
Panel B evaluates the ability of the Trend in Hours Only model to account for the results
based on the Level and the Trend in All Equations models. The labeling convention on
the lines is the same as in Panel A. Focusing on the point estimates alone, the Trend in
Hours Worked model is unable to encompass the results of either of the other two models.
Specifically, it cannot account for the fact that hours worked rise in each of the other two
models. However, once sampling uncertainty is taken into account, this encompassing test
does not reject the Trend in Hours Only model.
Panel C evaluates the ability of the Trend in All Equations model to account for the results
based on the Level and the Trend in Hours Only models. Again, the labeling convention on
the lines is the same as in Panel A. Two things are worth noting here. First, focusing on the
point estimates alone, the Trend in all Equations model can encompass the results based on
the Trend in Hours Only model, but it does not encompass the results based on the Level
model. In particular, the Trend in All Equations model predicts, counterfactually, that the
Level model produces a fall in hours worked after a positive technology shock. Second, even
when sampling uncertainty is taken into account, the encompassing test rejects the Trend in
All Equations model vis a vis the Level model.
27

B

Asymptotic Distribution of Impulse Response Estimators When Diﬀerence Specification is True, But
Level Specification is Adopted

This appendix analyzes a special case of our environment to illustrate the results in Section
4.2.2. We derive a closed-form representations of the asymptotic distribution of the instrumental variables estimator and of the estimator of a technology shock’s contemporaneous
impact on hours worked. We discuss the bias in these estimators.
We consider the case, µ = 0, β(L) = 0 and q = 2, and ∆Xt = θ∆Xt−1 +ut , where |θ| < 1,
ut = ψεzt + εt and Eεzt εt = 0. Here, ψ is the contemporaneous impact of a one unit shock to
technology, εzt . The formulas in Hamilton (1994, Theorem 18.1) can be used to deduce:
#
"
ρ³+ σσuv ω ´
L
≡ δ∗ .
δIV − δ →
−θ ρ + σσuv ω
Here, δ ∗ = (δ ∗0 , δ ∗1 ) and δ∗0 , δ ∗1 correspond to the coeﬃcients on ∆Xt and ∆Xt−1 , respectively.
Also,
R1
W (r)dW̃ (r) 2
ψσ 2εz
ρ= 2 , ω=2 0
, σ v = σ 2εz − ρ2 σ 2u ,
2
σu
[W (1)] − 1
and W (r) and W̃ (r), 0 ≤ r ≤ 1, are independent Brownian motions.
Using graphical analysis, we found that the cumulative distribution function of ω resembles that of the zero-median Cauchy distribution, with cumulative density,
¡ ω ¢
arctan 0.835
P (ω) = 0.5 +
.
π
We simulated 100 artificial sets of observations, each of length 11,000, on ω. We computed
the median in each and found that the mean of the 100 medians was −0.0015. The standard
deviation across the 100 artificial data sets is 0.0138. So, under the null hypothesis that the
true median is zero, the mean
√ of −0.0015 is a realization from a normal distribution with
standard deviation, 0.0138/ 100 = 0.00138. The probability of a mean less than −0.0015
under the null hypothesis exceeds 10 percent. So, we fail to reject. This, taken together with
our graphical analysis, is consistent with the notion that the above zero-median Cauchy
distribution is a good approximation of the distribution of ω.
Regarding the large sample distribution of the estimator of the contemporaneous response
of hours to technology, Ψ0 , we find, after tedious algebra
ρ − δ ∗0
L
→
σ
×
ΨIV
u
h
i1/2 .
0
ρ
∗ 2
∗
(δ 0 ) − 2δ 0 ρ + ψ

This illustrates the observation in the text, that the asymptotic distribution of ΨIV
is a
0
IV
function of the asymptotic distribution of δ − δ.
∗
The median of the asymptotic distribution of ΨIV
0 is obtained by setting δ 0 to its median
value, which we argued above is ρ. Hence, the median of the asymptotic distribution of
28

ΨIV
is zero, regardless of the true value of Ψ0 . The intuition for this result is simple.
0
It is easily verified that the median of an instrumental variables regression’s estimators
corresponds to the probability limit of the corresponding OLS estimators. But in minimizing
residual variance, ordinary least squares chooses the residuals to be uncorrelated with the
right hand variables. These residuals are the OLS estimates of the technology shocks. The
disturbance in the VAR equation for ∆Xt is a linear function of the right hand variables in
the instrumental variables equation. As a result, it is not surprising that the OLS estimate
of the technology shock is uncorrelated with the disturbance in the VAR equation for ∆Xt .
This lack of correlation is what underlies ΨIV
0 being centered on zero.

C

Impact of Covariates on the Power of Unit Root
Tests

A key factor driving our finding that level specifications are more plausible than diﬀerence
specifications is the large value of our weak instruments F statistics. Though the level
specifications have little diﬃculty accounting for a large F , the diﬀerence specifications
have considerable diﬃculty doing this. Our finding is consistent with recent findings in the
literature on testing for unit roots. In particular, the weak instruments F statistic turns out
to be a variant of the multivariate extension to the ADF test proposed by Hansen (1995)
(see also and Elliott and Jansson, 2003). Because this test introduces additional variables,
i.e., ‘covariates’, into the analysis, Hansen refers to it as the covariates ADF (CADF) test.
An important finding in the literature is that the CADF test has considerably greater power
than the ADF test. This appendix reports the power gain from using the CADF rather than
the ADF test in our context.
We compute critical values for sizes 0.01, 0.05 and 0.10 using each of our three diﬀerence
specifications (the bivariate models based on the short and long sample, and the six-variable
model based on the short sample). Critical values are computed based on the type of
bootstrap simulations used throughout our analysis. The critical values are for t statistics
used to test the null hypothesis that the coeﬃcient on lagged, log per capita hours worked
is zero in a particular ordinary least squares regression. In the case of the ADF test, the
regression is of hours growth on the lagged level of log, per capita hours and three lags of
hours growth. Three sets of critical values are computed for the ADF t statistic, one for each
our three diﬀerence specifications. Corresponding to each critical value, we compute power
using bootstrap simulations of the relevant estimated level VAR. The results are reported in
Table A1.
To understand the table, note, for example, that the diﬀerence specification estimated
using the long sample has the property that the ADF t statistic is less than −3.8 in 1 percent
of the artificial samples. When we simulated the bivariate level specification estimated using
the long sample, we found that 4.8 percent of the time the simulated t statistics are smaller
than −3.8. Thus, the power of the 1 percent ADF t statistic is 4.8 percent based on the
long sample bivariate VAR. Interestingly, power is nearly twice as great in the short sample
as in the long sample. Conditional on the long sample, there is little diﬀerence between the
bivariate and six-variable results.

29

We turn now to an assessment of the impact on power of adding covariates. Our CADF t
statistic resembles the ADF t statistic, except that the underlying regression also includes all
the predetermined variables in the instrumental variables regression, (3). Since the number
of predetermined variables is diﬀerent in the bivariate and six-variable systems, we have two
CADF t statistics. The first corresponds to our bivariate analysis. It is based on a regression
like the one underlying the ADF test, except that it also includes three lags of productivity
growth. The second corresponds to our six-variable analysis. In particular, it adds three
lags of each of the federal funds rate, the rate of inflation, the log of the ratio of nominal
consumption expenditures to nominal GDP, and the log of the ratio of nominal investment
expenditures to nominal GDP.
We compute critical values for our two CADF t statistics in the same way as for the ADF
statistic. In particular, we compute two sets of critical values for our bivariate CADF statistic, one corresponding to each of the short and long sample estimated diﬀerence specifications.
The critical values for the six-variable CADF t statistic are based on bootstrap simulations of
the estimated six-variable diﬀerence VAR. Corresponding to each critical value, we compute
power using bootstrap simulations of the relevant estimated level diﬀerence VAR.
Corresponding to each critical value, we also computed the power of the statistic when
the level specification is true. This was done by bootstrap simulation of the relevant level
specification VAR. Results are reported in Table A2. Comparing Tables A1 and A2, power
increases substantially with the introduction of covariates. With a 1 percent size, power
jumps by an order of magnitude in the short sample.

30

References
[1] Altig, David, Lawrence J. Christiano, Martin Eichenbaum and Jesper Linde, 2002,
‘An Estimated Dynamic, General Equilibrium Model for Monetary Policy Analysis,’
Manuscript.
[2] Basu, Susanto, John G. Fernald, and Miles S. Kimball. 1999. ‘Are Technology Improvements Contractionary?’ Manuscript.
[3] Boldrin, Michele, Lawrence J. Christiano and Jonas Fisher, 2001, ‘Asset Pricing Lessons
for Modeling Business Cycles,’ American Economic Review. 91, 149-66.
[4] Blundell, Richard and Stephen Bond, 1998, ‘Initial Conditions and Moment Restrictions
in Dynamic Panel Data Models’, Journal of Econometrics 87, 115-143.
[5] Caner, Mehmet and Lutz Kilian. 1999. ‘Size Distortions of Tests of the Null Hypothesis
of Stationarity: Evidence and Implications for the PPP Debate,’ University of Michigan
Manuscript.
[6] Chang, Yongsung, and Jay H. Hong, 2003, ‘On the Employment Eﬀect of Technology:
Evidence from US Manufacturing for 1958-1996’, unpublished manuscript, Economics
Department, University of Pennsylvania, April 15.
[7] Christiano, Lawrence J., 1989, Comment on Campbell and Mankiw, NBER Macroeconomics Annual, edited by Blanchard and Fisher, MIT Press.
[8] Christiano, Lawrence J., and Lars Ljungqvist, 1988, ‘Money Does Granger Cause Output in the Bivariate Money-Output Relation,’ Journal of Monetary Economics. 22(2),
217-35.
[9] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum, 1990, ‘Unit Roots in GNP: Do We
Know and Do We Care?’, Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy.
[10] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Martin Eichenbaum, 1992, ‘Current Real Business Cycle Theories and Aggregate Labor Market Fluctuations,’ American Economic Review.
82(3), 430-50.
[11] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Richard M. Todd. 1996. ‘Time to Plan and Aggregate
Fluctuations’. Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis Quarterly Review Winter 14-27.
[12] Christiano, Lawrence J. and Terry Fitzgerald. 1999. The Band Pass Filter. National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7257, and forthcoming. International
Economic Review.
[13] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans, 1999, Monetary Policy
Shocks: What Have We Learned, and to What End?, in Taylor and Woodford, Handbook
of Macroeconomics.
[14] Christiano, Lawrence J., Martin Eichenbaum and Charles Evans, 2001, ‘Nominal Rigidities and the Dynamic Eﬀects of a Shock to Monetary Policy’, manuscript.
[15] DeJong, David N., John C. Nankervis, N. E. Savin, and Charles H. Whiteman, 1992,
‘Integration versus Trend Stationarity in Time Series,’ Econometrica, Vol. 60, no. 2,
March.
[16] Doan, Thomas 1992. Rats Manual Estima Evanston, IL.
31

[17] Eichenbaum, Martin, and Kenneth J. Singleton 1986. ‘Do Equilibrium Real Business
Cycle Theories Explain Postwar U.S Business Cycles?’ NBER Macroeconomics Annual
1986, pp. 91-135.
[18] Elliott, Graham, and Michael Jansson, 2003, ‘Testing for Unit Roots with Stationary
Covariates,’ Journal of Econometrics, vol. 115, pp. 75-89.
[19] Fisher, Jonas, 2003, ‘Technology Shocks Matter,’ manuscript.
[20] Francis, Neville, and Valerie A. Ramey, 2001, ‘Is the Technology-Driven Real Business
Cycle Hypothesis Dead? Shocks and Aggregate Fluctuations Revisited,’ manuscript,
UCSD.
[21] Gali, Jordi, 1999, ‘Technology, Employment, and the Business Cycle: Do Technology
Shocks Explain Aggregate Fluctuations?’ American Economic Review, 89(1), 249-271.
[22] Gali, Jordi, Mark Gertler and J. David Lopez-Salido, 2001, ‘Markups, Gaps and the
Welfare Costs of Business Fluctuations,’ May.
[23] Gali, Jordi, J. David Lopez-Salido, and Javier Valles, 2002, ‘Technology Shocks and
Monetary Policy: Assessing the Fed’s Performance’, National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 8768.
[24] Hahn, Jinyong, Jerry Hausman and Guido Kuersteiner, 2001, ‘Bias Corrected Instrumental Variables Estimation for Dynamic Panel Models with Fixed Eﬀects,’ manuscript,
MIT.
[25] Hansen, Bruce E., 1995, ‘Rethinking the Univariate Approach to Unit Root Testing:
Using Covariates to Increase Power,’ Econometric Theory, December, v. 11, iss. 5, pp.
1148-71
[26] Hamilton, James B., 1994, Time Series Analysis, Princeton University Press, Princeton
New Jersey.
[27] Kwiatkowski, D., Phillips, P.C.B., Schmidt, P., and Shin, Y. 1992, ‘Testing the Null
Hypothesis of Stationarity Against the Alternative of a Unit Root,’ Journal of Econometrics, 54, 159- 178.
[28] King, Robert, Charles Plosser, James Stock and Mark Watson, 1991, ‘Stochastic Trends
and Economic Fluctuations,’ American Economic Review, 81, 819-840.
[29] Leybourne, Stephen J. and B.P.M. McCabe, 1994, ‘A Consistent Test for a Unit Root’,
Journal of Business and Economic Statistics, 12(2) pp. 157-66
[30] Shapiro, Matthew, and Mark Watson, 1988, ‘Sources of Business Cycle Fluctuations,’
NBER,Macroeconomics Annual, pp. 111-148.
[31] Shea, John 1998. ‘What Do Technology Shocks Do?,’ National Bureau of Economic
Research Working Papers 6632
[32] Sims Christopher, James Stock and Mark Watson, 1990. ‘Inference in Linear Time Series
Models with Some Unit Roots,’ Econometrica 58(1), pp. 113-144.
[33] Staiger, Douglas, and James Stock, 1997, ‘Instrumental Variables Regression with Weak
Instruments,’ Econometrica, vol. 65, issue 3, May, pp. 557-586.

32

[34] Stock, James, and Motohiro Yogo, 2002, ‘Testing for Weak Instruments in Linear IV
Regression,’ manuscript, October.
[35] Vigfusson, Robert J. 2002 ‘Why Does Employment Fall After A Positive Technology
Shock,’ manuscript.

33

Figure 1: Data Used in VAR
Labor Productivity Growth
0.04

Average Hours
-7.4

0.02

-7.45

0

-7.5
-7.55

-0.02
-0.04
1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 2001

-7.6
1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 2001

Inflation
0.03

Consumption to Output Ratio
-0.25

0.02
-0.3

0.01
0

-0.35

-0.01
1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 2001

1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 2001

Investment to Output Ratio
-1.2

Federal Funds
15

-1.3
-1.4
-1.5
1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 2001

10
5
1949 1959 1969 1979 1989 2001

Figure 2: Response of Log-output and Log-hours to a Positive Technology Shock
Level Specification
Panel A: Sample Period 1948Q1-2001Q4
Output

Hours

1.5
2
1.8
1.6
1

1.4
1.2
1
0.8

0.5

0.6
0.4
0.2
0

0

5

10

15

0

0

5

Periods After Shock

10

15

Periods After Shock

Panel B: Sample Period 1959Q1-2001Q4
Output

Hours

2

1.2

1.8
1

1.6
1.4

0.8

1.2
1

0.6

0.8
0.4

0.6
0.4

0.2

0.2
0

0

5

10

15

0

0

5

Periods After Shock

Thick Line: Impulse Responses from Level Specification
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals

10
Periods After Shock

15

Figure 3: Response of Log-output and Log-hours to a Positive Technology Shock
Diﬀerence Specification
Panel A: Sample Period 1948Q1-2001Q4
Output

Hours

1.4

0.6

1.2

0.4

1

0.2

0.8

0

0.6
-0.2
0.4
-0.4
0.2
-0.6
0
0

5

10

15

0

5

Periods After Shock

10

15

Periods After Shock

Panel B: Sample Period 1959Q1-2001Q4
Output

Hours

1.4

0.6

1.2
0.4
1
0.2
0.8
0

0.6
0.4

-0.2

0.2

-0.4

0

-0.6
0

5

10
Periods After Shock

15

0

5

10
Periods After Shock

Line with Triangles: Impulse Responses from Diﬀerence Specification
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals

15

Figure 4: Encompassing with Level Specification as the DGP
Panel A: Sample Period, 1948Q1-2001Q4
Output

Average Hours

1.6

1

1.4

0.8

1.2

0.6

1

0.4

0.8

0.2

0.6

0

0.4

-0.2

0.2

-0.4

0

-0.6
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Panel B: Sample Period, 1959Q1-2001Q4
Output

Average Hours
0.8

1.4
0.6
1.2
0.4

1

0.2

0.8

0

0.6
0.4

-0.2

0.2

-0.4

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Impulse Responses from Level Specification
Line with Triangles: Impulse Responses from Diﬀerence Specification
Circles: Average Impulse Response for Simulations from given DGP
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals For Simulations for given DGP

Figure 5: Encompassing with Diﬀerence Specification as the DGP
Panel A: Sample Period,1948Q1-2001Q4
Output

Average Hours

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

0.5

0.5

0

-0.5

0

-1

-0.5

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Panel B: Sample Period, 1959Q1-2001Q4
Output

Average Hours

1

1.5

1

0.5

0.5

0

0

-0.5

-0.5

-1

0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Impulse Responses from Level Specification
Line with Triangles: Impulse Responses from Diﬀerence Specification
Circles: Average Impulse Response for Simulations from Diﬀerence Specification DGP
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals For Simulation Impulse Responses

Figure 6: Six-variable System, Level Specification,Sample Period 1959-2001
Output

Hours

1.5
0.6
1
0.4
0.5

0.2
0

0
0

5

10

15

0

5

Inflation

10

15

Fed Funds

0

60
40

-0.1

20
0

-0.2
-0.3

-20
-40
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment
3

1.5

2
1
1
0.5

0

0

-1
0

5

10

15

0

Thick Line: Impulse Responses from Level Specification
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals

5

10

15

Figure 7: Six-variable System, Diﬀerence Specification, Sample Period 1959-2001
Output

Hours

1.5
0.5
1
0

0.5
0

-0.5

-0.5
-1
0

5

10

15

0

5

Inflation

10

15

Fed Funds

0
0
-0.1
-50

-0.2

0

5

10

15

-100

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment

1.5

2
1

1

0
0.5

-1
-2

0

-3
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Line with Triangles: Impulse Responses from Diﬀerence Specification
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals For Simulation Impulse Responses

Figure 8: Encompassing Test with the Level Specification as the DGP, 1959-2001
Output

Hours
0.4

1

0.2
0.5

0
-0.2

0

-0.4
-0.6

-0.5

-0.8
0

5

10

15

0

5

Inflation

10

15

Fed Funds

0.05
20

0
-0.05

0

-0.1

-20

-0.15

-40
-60

-0.2
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment
2

1

1
0.5

0
-1

0
0

-2
5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Impulse Responses from Level Specification
Line with Triangles: Impulse Responses from Diﬀerence Specification
Circles: Average Impulse Response for Simulations from Diﬀerence Specification DGP
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals For Simulation Impulse Responses

Figure 9: Encompassing Test with the Diﬀerence Specification as the DGP, 1959-2001
Output

Hours

1
0.5
0.5
0
0
-0.5
-0.5
0

5

10

15

0

5

Inflation

10

15

Fed Funds
40

0

20

-0.05

0

-0.1

-20

-0.15

-40

-0.2

-60
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment

1

2
1

0.5

0
-1

0

-2
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Impulse Responses from Level Specification
Line with Triangles: Impulse Responses from Diﬀerence Specification
Circles: Average Impulse Response for Simulations from Level Specification DGP
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals For Simulation Impulse Responses

Figure 10: Comparing the Six-Variable Specification to 2 diﬀerent Four-Variable,
Level Specification
Output

Hours

1.5
0.6
1

0.4
0.2

0.5

0
0
0

5

10

15

-0.2

0

5

Inflation

10

15

Fed Funds

0

60
40

-0.1

20
0

-0.2
-0.3

-20
-40
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment
3

1.5

2
1
1
0.5
0
0

0
-1
5

10

15

0

5

10

Thick Line: has all six variables,
Gray Area: 90 percent Confidence Intervals For Six-variable System
‘X’: has hours, labor productivity, inflation and the federal funds rate.
‘*’: has hours, labor productivity, consumption and investment

15

Figure 11: Encompassing Four-variable systems with Six-variable systems
Level Specification

0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
-0.2
-0.4
-0.6
0

5

10

15

Thick Line: has all six variables,
Circles: Average Response from Simulations Using Six-variable System as DGP
Gray Area: 95percent Confidence Intervals For Simulations
‘X’ has hours, labor productivity, inflation and the federal funds rate.

Figure 12: The Eﬀect of Adding A Quadratic Trend
Output

Hours
0.4
0.2

1

0
0.5

-0.2
-0.4

0
0

5

10

15

0

5

Inflation

10

15

Fed Funds
50

0
-0.1

0

-0.2

-50
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment

1.4

2

1.2
1

1

0.8
0

0.6
0.4

-1

0.2
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Hours, ‘X’s Detrended Hours, Circles Quadratic Trend estimated in the VAR.
Gray Area: 95 percent Confidence Intervals For Detrended Hours

Figure 13: Encompassing pre-1979Q4 Period
Output

Hours
0.6

1

0.4
0.2

0.5

0
-0.2

0

-0.4
0

5

10

15

0

Inflation

5

10

15

Federal Funds

0.05

40

0

20

-0.05

0

-0.1

-20

-0.15

-40

-0.2

-60
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment
2

1

1
0.5

0
-1

0
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Full Sample Response, Thin Line: Subsample Response,
Stars Subsample Response Using Full Sample as DGP
Gray Area Confidence Interval for Subsample Response Using Full Sample as DGP

Figure 14: Encompassing post-1979Q3 Period
Output

Hours
0.6

1

0.4
0.2

0.5

0
-0.2

0

-0.4
0

5

10

15

0

Inflation

5

10

15

Federal Funds

0.05

40

0

20

-0.05

0

-0.1

-20

-0.15

-40

-0.2

-60
0

5

10

15

0

5

Consumption

10

15

Investment

1

2

0.8
1

0.6
0.4

0

0.2
-1

0
0

5

10

15

0

5

10

15

Thick Line: Full Sample Response, Thin Line: Subsample Response,
Stars Subsample Response Using Full Sample as DGP
Gray Area Confidence Interval for Subsample Response Using Full Sample as DGP

Figure 15: Historical Decomposition: Bivariate System,
Level Specification
Output
0.1

Hours
0.06

0.08

0.04

0.06
0.02

0.04
0.02

0

0

-0.02

-0.02

-0.04

-0.04
-0.06

-0.06

-0.08

-0.08
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Diﬀerence Specification
Output

Hours
0.04

0.1
0.02
0
0.05
-0.02
-0.04
0
-0.06
-0.08
-0.05
-0.1
-0.12
-0.1
-0.14
1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

1965 1970 1975 1980 1985 1990 1995 2000

Thick Line: Historical Decomposition Using All Shocks
Thin Line: Historical Decomposition Using Just Technology Shocks

Figure 16: Historical Decomposition: Six-Variable System , Level Specification
Output

Hours
0.04
0.02

0.05

0
0

-0.02
-0.04

-0.05

-0.06
-0.08

-0.1

1970
x 10

1980

1990

2000

1970

Inflation

-3

1980

1990

2000

Fed Funds
10

15
10

5
5
0

0

-5
1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

Consumption

1980

1990

2000

Investment

0.1

0.05

0

0

-0.1
-0.05
-0.2
1970

1980

1990

2000

1970

1980

1990

Thick Line: Historical Decomposition Using All Shocks
Thin Line: Historical Decomposition Using Just Technology Shocks

2000

Figure A: Encompassing Analysis for Level and Quadratic Trend Models
Panel A: DGP Levels
Trend in Hours Only
Trend in All Equations
0.5

0.5

0.4

0.4

0.3

0.3

0.2

0.2

0.1
0.1
0
0

-0.1

-0.1

-0.2

-0.2

-0.3

-0.3

-0.4

-0.4

-0.5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

12

14

16

18

Panel B: DGP Trend in Hours Only
Trend in All Equations

Levels
0.8

0.3
0.6

0.2

0.4

0.1
0

0.2

-0.1

0

-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
-0.4

-0.4

-0.6

-0.5
0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0

2

4

6

8

10

Panel C: DGP Trend in All Equations
Trend in Hours Only

Levels

0.4

0.4

0.3
0.2

0.2

0.1

0

0
-0.1

-0.2

-0.2
-0.3

-0.4
-0.4
-0.5

-0.6

-0.6

0

2

4

6

8

10

12

14

16

18

0

2

4

6

8

10

Thick Line: Estimated Levels Model Stars: Predicted Mean Response
X’s: Estimated Trend in Hours Only Circles: Estimated Trend in All Equations
Gray Area: 95% Confidence Interval Around Predicted Mean Response

Table 1: Contribution of Technology Shocks to Variance, Bivariate System
Level Specification
Forecast Variance at Indicated Horizon
Variable
1
4
8
12
20
50
Output 81.1 78.1 86.0 89.1 91.8
96
Hours
4.5 23.5 40.7 45.4 47.4
48.3
Diﬀerence Specification
Forecast Variance at Indicated Horizon
Variable
1
4
8
12
20
50
Output 16.5 11.7 17.9 20.7 22.3
23.8
Hours
21.3 6.4 2.3 1.6 1.0
0.5

Table 2: Contribution of Technology Shocks to Variance, Six-variable System
Level Specification
Forecast Variance at Indicated Horizon
Variable
1
4
8
12
20
50
Output
31.2 40.3 44.6 41.5 44.8 70
Hours
3.6 15.4 28.8 28.4 28.8 43.9
Inflation
60.2 47.0 43.2 41.1 39.5 47.7
Fed Funds
1.6 1.4 1.7 1.7 3.7 23.3
Consumption 61.6 64.2 67.3 66.8 71.8 88.4
Investment
10.3 20.1 24.1 20.9 20.4 25.3
Diﬀerence Specification
Forecast Variance at Indicated Horizon
Variable
1
4
8
12
20
50
Output
1.7 0.6 2.6 6.4 17.2 35.5
Hours
20.8 11.9 8.0 7.1 5.7 2.3
Inflation
58.5 54.7 55.6 52.4 47.4 33.8
Fed Funds
0.0 7.5 10.5 13.7 17.2 16.9
Consumption 7.9 4.1 8.7 14.3 25.3 34.3
Investment
1.1 2.0 1.1 1.3 3.7 13.8

Table 3: Contribution of Technology Shocks to Cyclical Variance (HP Filtered Results)
Level Specification
Variables in VAR Output
Hours
Inflation Federal Funds Consumption Investment
Y,H
63.8
33.4
Y,H,∆P, R
17.8
17.9
53.2
11.2
Y,H,C, I
19.9
18.5
20.1
20.7
Y,H,∆P, R, C, I
10.2
4.1
32.4
1.3
16.8
6.7
Diﬀerence Specification
Variables in VAR
Output
Hours Inflation Federal Funds Consumption Investment
Y,∆H
10.6
7.0
Y,∆H,∆P, R
6.8
8.5
48.4
8.1
Y,∆H,C, I
1.3
6.3
0.32
5.5
Y,∆H,∆P, R, C, I
1.6
6.1
35.2
4.9
3.7
2.6
Table A1: Power of Standard ADF t Test
Bivariate Specification
Six-Variable Specification
Long Sample
Short Sample
Short Sample
Size Critical Value Power Critical Value Power Critical Value
Power
0.01
-3.835
0.048
-3.705
0.108
-4.290
0.045
0.05
-3.253
0.184
-3.109
0.353
-3.410
0.223
0.10
-2.870
0.363
-2.780
0.548
-2.963
0.400
Table A2: Power of CADF t Test
Bivariate Specification
Six-Variable Specification
Long Sample
Short Sample
Short Sample
Size Critical Value Power Critical Value Power Critical Value
Power
0.01
-3.588
0.396
-3.266
0.589
-4.184
0.689
0.05
-2.908
0.784
-2.686
0.864
-3.350
0.888
0.10
-2.616
0.895
-2.403
0.938
-2.879
0.946

