NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

MEASURING POVERTY IN A GROWING WORLD
(OR MEASURING GROWTH IN A POOR WORLD)
Angus Deaton
Working Paper 9822
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9822
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

The Review of Economics and Statistics Lecture, presented at Harvard University, April 15th, 2003. I am
grateful to Daron Acemoglu, Barry Bosworth, François Bourguignon, Shaohua Chen, Russel Freeman, Ivo
Havinga, Jeronimo Zettelmeyer, Michael Kremer, Martin Ravallion, Dani Rodrik, and Nick Stern for help
in the preparation of this paper, as well as comments on an earlier draft. Anne Case made many invaluable
suggestions and corrected several errors. The views expressed here are those of the author alone. The views
expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research
©2003 by Angus Deaton. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be
quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to the source.

Measuring Poverty in a Growing World (or Measuring Growth in a Poor World)
Angus Deaton
NBER Working Paper No. 9822
July 2003
JEL No. O1
ABSTRACT
The extent to which growth reduces global poverty has been disputed for 30 years. Although there
is better data than ever before, controversies are not resolved. A major problem is that consumption
measured from household surveys, which is used to measure poverty, grows less rapidly than
consumption measured in national accounts, in the world as a whole, and in large countries,
particularly India, China, and the US. In consequence, measured poverty has fallen less rapidly than
appears warranted by measured growth in poor countries. One plausible cause is that richer
households are less likely to participate in surveys. But growth in the national accounts is also
upwardly biased, and consumption in the national accounts contains large and rapidly growing items
that are not consumed by the poor and not included in surveys. So it is possible for consumption of
the poor to grow less rapidly than national consumption, without any increase in measured
inequality. Current statistical procedures in poor countries understate the rate of global poverty
reduction, and overstate growth in the world.

Angus Deaton
Department of Economics
347 Wallace Hall
Princeton University
Princeton, NJ 08544
and NBER
deaton@princeton.edu

Introduction
A central issue in the debate about globalization is the extent to which economic growth reduces
poverty. When economic growth benefits everyone in equal proportion, the incomes of the poor
grow at the same rate as does mean income. The fraction of the population whose incomes are
below a fixed poverty line must then decline with growth, although the rate at which it does so
depends on the position of the poverty line in the income distribution, with growth in the mean
generating more rapid poverty reduction the greater the fraction of the population who are near
the poverty line. If economic growth is unequally distributed, the effects of growth on poverty
reduction will be less (or more) depending on whether the incomes of the poor grow by less
(more) than average. So much, but perhaps not much more, is common ground.
Early debates on growth and poverty, much influenced by Simon Kuznets (1955) dictum that
inequality would increase in the early stages of development, tended to argue that growth did
little to reduce poverty. Writing in the 1970s, Hollis Chenery, Montek Ahluwalia et al. (1974),
Irma Adelman and Cynthia Morris (1973), Albert Fishlow (1972), and Pranab Bardhan (1973) all
argued that economic development either left the poor behind or actually made them worse off,
see William Cline (1975) for a contemporary survey. Lance Taylor and Edmar Bacha (1976)
constructed a growth model of “Belindia,” a tiny rich Belgium in a huge poor India, as an
example of “the unequalizing spiral” that they saw as fitting the stylized facts of development.
When Gary Fields (1977) argued that in the Brazilian economic miracle of the 1960s, the poor
had actually done better than average, he was robustly challenged by Ahluwalia, John Duloy et
al. (1980), who showed that Fields’ conclusions were not warranted by his data, which were
consistent with an uninformatively wide range of differential growth rates of incomes of the poor
1

and non-poor. This was surely the truth of the matter; in 1980, the data were not available to
provide a clear answer to the question of whether or not the poor did better, the same, or worse
than average during the unprecedentedly high rates of growth in many poor countries in the
immediate post-war period. Researchers were forced to rely on a scattering of published
distributional measures, whose provenance and reliability were often unclear; and indeed
Kuznets famous article used distributional data for only three rich countries, with a smaller
amount of information for three poor ones.
The paper by Ahluwalia et al was an important impetus to the establishment of the Living
Standards Measurement Study (LSMS) at the World Bank. The original purpose of the LSMS
was to measure the living standards of the poor in a standardized way, to remedy the paucity of
distributional data in the Third World, and to set up a system of household surveys that would
replicate for living standards measurement what the UN’s System of National Accounts (SNA)
had done for National Income Accounts around the world.
Thirty years later, the data situation has been transformed. There are two key innovations.
First, internationally comparable national accounts, based on purchasing power parity exchange
rates, allow comparisons of average living standards across countries in a way that is not vitiated
by the gross inadequacies of conversions at market exchange rates. Making comparisons in
purchasing power parity units corrects, or at least diminishes, the gross understatement of living
standards in poor countries relative to rich, and removes the spurious component of growth
among poor countries that comes from the elimination of those differences with economic
development. Second, there has been an extraordinary growth in the number of household
surveys available to the research community, including several dozen LSMS surveys. For
2

example, the World Bank’s most recent set of poverty calculations use data from 297 surveys
from 88 developing countries, Shaohua Chen and Martin Ravallion (2001). Klaus Deininger and
Lyn Squire (1996) have collected and tabulated data on more than 2,600 gini coefficients as well
as many measures of quintile shares; the WIDER extension includes more than 5,000 gini
coefficients. The unit record data from many household surveys are now routinely available to
researchers, including such previously inaccessible troves as nearly twenty years of data from the
Indian National Sample Surveys back to the early 1980s. Notable by its exclusion is any similar
access to Chinese official surveys.
Yet the controversies are no more settled than they were 30 years ago, although there is
certainly more common ground among economists than there is in the world at large. The
professional consensus, based on the Deininger–Squire data, and on work by them and many
others, is that, contrary to the Kuznets hypothesis, and contrary to beliefs in the 1970s, there is no
general relationship between inequality and growth, and certainly not one in which growth
systematically widens inequality, as would be the case of growth left the poor behind. From this,
two important propositions follow. First, at least on average, (and much depends on whether we
are averaging over countries or people) growth is good for the poor, David Dollar and Aart Kraay
(2000), Ravallion (2001), as is the growth that is arguably generated by greater openness,
Andrew Berg and Anne Krueger (2003). Second, and again on average, the fraction of people in
poverty should decline as if growth were neutrally distributed. In particular, the relatively rapid
growth in the developing world from 1980 to 2000 must have brought about a rapid reduction in
the fraction of the world’s poverty that is poor. And indeed, calculations using the Penn World
Tables combined with inequality measures, by Surjit Bhalla (2002) by Xavier Sala-i-Martin
3

(2002) and by Francois Bourguignon and Christian Morrisson (2002) show rapid poverty
reduction in the 1980s and 1990s. According to this method of calculation, not only has the
proportion of poor in the world declined, but the decline has been rapid enough to offset
population growth, so that the actual numbers of poor people in the world has fallen. According
to Bhalla, the first of the United Nations’ Millennium Development Goals, halving the number of
people living on less than $1-a-day between 1990 and 2015, had already been met when the goal
was announced.
These optimistic calculations are starkly at odds with the World Bank’s numbers on global
poverty. The World Bank, which is endorsed by the UN as official score-keeper for the poverty
Millennium Development Goal, uses household survey data to measure directly the living
standards of the poor, and their calculations show relatively little poverty reduction in the 1990s.
Chen and Ravallion (2001), which provides the details of the Bank’s calculations, shows a
reduction in the proportion of the poor living on less than $1 a day from 1987 to 1998 from 28.3
to 23.5 percent; they argue that this modest reduction comes, not from any expansion in
inequality within countries, but from relatively slow growth in mean consumption. Across their
88 countries, the population weighted rate of growth in mean consumption was only 0.90 percent
from 1987 to 1998, compared with 3.3 percent growth in real per capita consumption in the Penn
World Tables over the same period. Although the next set of updates are likely to show more
growth in the surveys, there is still a large gap between, on the one hand, the direct assessment of
the growth of consumption of the poor through surveys, and on the other hand, the growth that is
implied by the growth in average accompanied by no general increase in inequality.
The plethora of new data has not resolved the controversy because the new sources are
4

mutually contradictory. According to direct measurement in household surveys, growth among
the poor of the world has been sluggish compared with average growth rates of the countries in
which they live. Yet there is no documented increase in inequality that would resolve the
discrepancy. If we are to accept the surveys, growth in the world is a good deal slower than we
are used to thinking from the national accounts data, and what growth these has been in the latest
two decades has made only a modest dent in the level of world poverty. If we accept the national
accounts, and do not challenge the conclusion that there is no general increase in inequality nor
any correlation between growth and changes in inequality, then official poverty numbers are
overstated, and we have already made rapid progress towards reducing poverty in the world. This
paper explores these contradictions empirically with an aim to providing a sharper
characterization and to advancing some first hypotheses about causes and possible remedies.
A note of caution at the outset. Because countries have vastly different populations,
statements about averages are often sharply different depending on whether or not they are
population weighted. A third of the world’s poor live in two countries, India and China, and the
global poverty counts are much affected by what happens there. When we are interested in the
well-being of the people of the world, and in the effects of statistical practice and statistical
discrepancies on global poverty measurements, we must weight by population. There is no reason
to down-weight the wellbeing of a Chinese peasant relative to a Ghanaian cocoa-farmer, nor to
believe that the world is a better place when an African moves out of poverty and an Indian
moves in. However, many of my concerns are about the relationship between measurement and
the level of development, in which case the appropriate procedure is to take each statistical
system as the unit, and to ignore population sizes. Beyond that, many of the political negotiations
5

about poverty, and about measurement, for example those in the councils of the United Nations
and the World Bank, are carried on at a nation by nation level. In consequence, I shall typically
present both weighted and unweighted results.

1. Surveys versus national accounts: all countries
In this section, I follow Ravallion (2003) and consider the relationship between survey and
national accounts estimates of consumption expenditure per capita. National accounts estimates
of consumption are available for most countries in most recent years, so the countries and dates
of the comparison are set by the availability of the surveys. The surveys used here come from a
convenience sample assembled from various sources. In most cases, I have survey estimates of
mean income or mean consumption from the estimates assembled by Chen and Ravallion, and
which appear on the World Bank’s poverty monitoring website. To these I have added my own
estimates for India, most of which appear in Deaton and Jean Drèze (2002), a number of OECD
surveys, particularly from the Consumers Expenditure Survey and Current Population Surveys in
the US, and the Family Expenditure Survey (now the Expenditure and Food Survey) in the UK,
as well as a number of additional survey estimates supplied by the Bank, but not used in their
poverty counts, for example estimates of mean consumption per head from the official Chinese
surveys. In all, I have 557 survey-based estimates of mean consumption per head or mean income
per head (occasionally both). Table 1 shows that these come from 127 countries; that the earliest
year is 1979 and the latest 2000. The number of surveys in the data set grows steadily larger over
time; I have only 3 in 1979 and 7 in 1980, but 57 in 1998 (the peak year). There are 22 surveys
for 1999 and 26 in 2000, but this diminution in numbers after 1998 reflects merely the delay in
6

processing and obtaining survey data, rather than any slackening in the growth of usable surveys
around the world. For a single country, consumption and income estimates may comes from the
same survey, for example, China, or from different surveys, for example the US.
Table 2 shows information on the ratios of survey estimates of consumption or income per
head to consumption or income per head from the national accounts. The ratios are calculated
using nominal values in local currency units (lcu) for both the numerator and denominator.
National accounts estimates of household final consumption are the obvious counterparts to
survey consumption. For income, most countries do not publish data on disposable household
income, so that possible counterparts are GDP or, once again, household consumption. The
argument for the latter is that much of saving may not be done by households, but by corporations, government, or foreigners, so that household income may be closer to household
consumption than to national income. The top panel shows summary statistics for ratios of
survey to national accounts’ consumption per head, the second panel is for the ratios of survey
income to national accounts’ consumption, and the third panel is for survey income to GDP.
Consumption estimated from the surveys is typically lower than consumption from the
national accounts; the average ratio is 0.860 with a standard error of 0.029, or 0.779 (0.072)
when weighted by population. (India has particularly low ratios.) The exception is sub-Saharan
Africa, where the average ratio of survey to national accounts consumption is unity in the
unweighted and greater than unity in the weighted calculations. For the OECD, where survey and
national accounts quality is presumably the highest, the surveys pick up only a little more than
three-quarters of consumption in the national accounts. These differences come in part from
differences in definition—for example, national accounts consumption includes such items as the
7

imputed value of owner-occupied housing, which is nearly always excluded from the
surveys—but they also reflect errors and omissions in both surveys and national accounts. In
consequence, that the ratios for MENA and SSA are close to unity says nothing about the quality
of the surveys in those two regions. Indeed, it is possible that the perfectly measured ratio is less
than unity, but is actually measured as greater than unity because there is understatement in the
national accounts. And it is entirely possible that the high ratios for SSA come from large scale
underestimation in the national accounts.
Income measured in the survey is on average larger than consumption measured in the
surveys, but is in most cases less than national accounts consumption, and much less than GDP.
Survey income is less than 60 percent of GDP on average.
The standard deviations of the ratios provide one crude indicator of combined survey and
national accounts accuracy, including both sampling and non-sampling errors. Without
prejudging the relative accuracy of national accounts and the surveys, the latter are more likely to
vary from year to year, for example because of sampling and changes in survey design, and from
country to country, because survey protocols are less internationally standardized than are
national accounts. By this measure, surveys in sub-Saharan Africa are the most problematic,
though surveys in Latin America and the Caribbean also show great variance, particularly the
income surveys. OECD surveys have the lowest variance, followed by South Asia, where high
quality household surveys have been in existence for many years. In spite of the difficulties of
collecting data in transition economies, the Eastern Europe and Central Asian region does not
show particularly high variance. In several countries in both EECA and LAC, high inflation
poses great problems for both survey and national accounts data.
8

Figures 1 (weighted by population) and 2 (unweighted) show how the same three ratios are
related to the level of GDP, here GDP per head at 1995 purchasing power parity dollars. (This is
the World Bank’s current PPP series, divided by the implicit price deflator of GDP in the United
States.) Cross-country and time-series data are pooled in these graphs.
There are two points to take away from this figure. First, the top left panels in both figures
show a negative relationship between the ratio of survey to national accounts consumption on the
one hand, and the level of GDP per capita on the other. This relationship is steepest among the
poorest countries, is flatter in middle income countries, but resumes its downward slope among
the rich countries. The continuous lines in the two top-left graphs are locally weighted nonparametric regression of the relationship using a bandwidth of 1.5 (units of real log GDP in PPP.)
Second, there is no similar relationship among the income surveys, either for the ratio of survey
income to national accounts consumption, or for the ratio of survey income to GDP.
For assessing trends in global poverty and growth, perhaps the most important aspect of these
data is the behavior of the ratios over time. This issue is explored in Figure 3 and Table 3.
Because the number of countries for which we have survey means is changing from year to year,
it is not useful to calculate rates of growth of the survey means on a country by country basis, and
then weight by population to obtain estimates of global growth from the surveys. Instead, I have
computed population-weighted averages for each year, over whatever subsets of countries have
survey data. First, the local currency consumption and income means are converted to PPP
dollars by deflation by the consumption PPP exchange rate from the Penn World Tables, Version
6.1, (PWT6.1) and then into real terms by deflation by the US CPI. They are then weighted by
population and averaged, excluding the wealthy countries of the OECD. The resulting series are
9

plotted as the bottom two lines in Figure 3. They differ in their treatment of country/years where
there is both a consumption and an income mean. For the broken, lower line, I have chosen the
consumption survey whenever both are available, and for the solid, upper, line, I have chosen the
income survey. (The results of choosing income means are almost identical if we take income
means for China, and consumption means elsewhere.) For comparison with these survey based
estimates, I have used the real consumption (chain-weighted) series from PWT6.1. The top solid
line in the figure shows the population weighted average of PWT6.1 consumption for all of the
countries that ever appear in the survey data set, excluding only the OECD. The broken line is
also a population weighted average of PWT6.1 consumption, but for each year is averaged only
over the countries for which there is survey data. This calculation allows a comparison with the
survey calculations in which both series are affected similarly by the variation that comes from
the fact that survey countries (and thus the composition of the sum across the world income
distribution) changes from year to year. And indeed, the year to year variation in the broken line
version of the PWT6.1 consumption series is highly correlated with both survey measures.
Figure 3 shows that national accounts consumption in non-OECD countries, here taken from
the PWT6.1 and shown in the top two lines, grows more rapidly over time than does
consumption from poor countries measured from the surveys, shown in the bottom line. Table 3
shows that growth of survey consumption is 2.3 percent a year if we simply take average growth
over the decade, or 1.9 percent a year if we regress its logarithm on a time trend, the difference in
the two estimates coming from the variability in the series. This difference is induced by
countries with different income levels, particularly India, moving in and out of the survey
averages, and is also seen in the comparison growth rates from national accounts consumption,
10

which are 3.8 and 4.5 percent a year. Whether we take the two low or two high estimates, the
growth rate of survey consumption is about a half of the growth rate of national accounts
consumption. If instead of using consumption estimates from the surveys, we take income
estimates when they are available, the situation is reversed, and we get a rate of growth from the
surveys that is larger that the corresponding growth rates in national accounts consumption. The
higher growth rate when we give preference to income surveys comes almost entirely from the
Chinese data. The World Bank’s global poverty estimates use income surveys for China, because
there are no distributional data for the Chinese consumption figures. However, in the Bank’s
calculation the Chinese income distribution is scaled down by the ratio of consumption to income
in the Chinese national accounts, a ratio that has been rising over time, so that the first column in
Table 3 and the bottom graph in Figure 3 are the relevant ones for thinking about trends in global
poverty as measured by the dollar a day counts.

2. Surveys versus National Accounts: India and China
Figure 4 shows the ratios of survey to national accounts estimates for China and for India. The
Chinese data, which have a discontinuity in 1990, for which there are two estimates, are from the
same survey data base discussed above, while the national accounts data are taken from the 2002
Edition of the World Development Indicators. In China the ratio of survey to national accounts
consumption has been declining since around 1990, from a peak of 95 percent in 1990 to 80
percent in 2000; the growth rates of the two series thus differ by about 1.7 percent a year in the
1990s. The ratio of survey income (from the same surveys as consumption) to national
consumption did not decline over the same period. However, there is a great deal of household
11

saving in China (which shows up in the surveys in that the top line is much higher than the
bottom line), national consumption is not the relevant comparison. Ideally, income should be
compared with GDP or, better still, some national accounts estimate of household income.
Although I do not have the data to calculate that ratio, there is little doubt that it would also be
declining over time. Given the population of China, its increasing discrepancies between survey
and national accounts is a major contributor to the global differences. However, it should be
noted that many commentators have argued that the growth rates in the Chinese national accounts
are too high. The discussions in Angus Maddison (1998), Harry Wu (2000) and Albert Keidel
(2001) are all consistent with an overestimation in the rate of GDP growth by between two and
four percentage points a year, and Thomas Rawski (2001) argues for much larger overestimation
in the last few years. Removing two percentage points a year from NAS consumption growth
would eliminate the difference in the growth rates between the NAS and the surveys.
Figure 4 also shows the data from India, in this case taken, for national consumption, directly
from the latest available edition of the National Accounts, Government of India (2003) and for
the survey estimates, from my own calculations from the unit record data. The Indian National
Sample Survey (NSS) conducted its latest full scale household expenditure survey in 1999/2000
but, because the questionnaire design was changed from earlier similar surveys, there has been
controversy about the interpretation of the results. The estimate of average consumption used
here was calculated according to the methods laid out in Deaton (2003) but differs relatively little
from the official calculations, much less than is the case for the poverty estimates. In India,
survey consumption is much lower relative to national accounts consumption than it was in
China. However, as in China, the ratio of the two estimates of consumption has been declining
12

over time. In 1983, the ratio was 0.68, which declined in 1999/2000 to 0.56, so that national
accounts consumption has been growing at 1.1 percent a year more rapidly than survey consumption. India, like China, accounts for a large share of the world’s population, and an even larger
share of those who live on less than $1 a day.
The Indian consumption ratio in Figure 4 calls for some additional comment, particularly the
erratic behavior from 1995 through 1998. The Indian NSS carries out large household expenditure surveys only once every six years or so, with the two most recent being in 1993/94 and
1999/2000. The estimates between those dates come from four smaller NSS surveys that also
collect expenditure data. Although the sample sizes of those surveys are sufficient to obtain
reliable estimates of the national headcount ratio, there have been questions about their design.
The 1998 survey, in particular, lasted only for a half year, and it is arguable that the penultimate
observation in the graph should be ignored. Unfortunately, circumstances have conspired to give
this and the immediately preceding observation a great deal of weight. Because the 1999/2000
survey was arguably contaminated by changes in the questionnaire, the 1997 and 1998 surveys
did not fade into history as quickly as they otherwise would have done. In addition, these were
the latest observations for India available to the World Bank for the most recent set of global
poverty counts, constructed for the 2000/20001 World Development Report on poverty. The use
of the new data in the next round of global poverty counts will give a more optimistic picture of
the rate of global poverty decline, though not as optimistic as would be the case if survey growth
had been as rapid as growth in national accounts.
The internal Indian debate on discrepancies between surveys and national accounts has flared
up sporadically for at least thirty years, see in particular the papers in T. N. Srinivasan and
13

Bardhan (1974) as well as B. Minhas (1988) and Minhas and S. Kansal (1989). The recent spate
of interest has generated a great deal of important detailed work, including collaborative efforts
between the NSS and the National Accounts Division of the Central Statistical Office. Much can
be learned from that work, not only for India, but also for other countries, and I postpone
discussion until Section 5 below.

4. Surveys versus National Accounts: the UK and the USA
Although my primary concern is with the measurement of global poverty, and thus with measurement in poor countries, the issue of statistical discrepancies between surveys and national
accounts is a general one, and there is a great deal to be learned by looking at the issue at the
other end of the global income distribution. Rich countries tend to have fuller data, so that it is
sometimes possible to test general hypotheses about surveys that cannot readily be tested in, for
example, India or China.
Figure 5 presents the results of survey and national accounts comparisons for the US and the
UK. The right hand panel shows results for the Family Expenditure Survey (FES), since 1995
subsumed into the Expenditure and Food Survey (EFS). Data on real consumption per head were
taken from the EFS reports, and were scaled up using population and retail price data from the
Annual Abstract of Statistics, Office for National Statistics (2003). The figure shows the ratios of
these numbers to final consumers’ expenditure from the National Accounts. The redesign of the
survey and the switch from the FES to the EFS results in a discontinuity before and after 1995,
for which year there are two estimates. The left hand panel shows corresponding data from the
United States using two different surveys, the Current Population Survey (CPS) and the
14

Consumer Expenditure Survey (CEX.) The CEX is the main consumption survey in the US,
although it also collects income data, and the two solid lines in the left-hand panel show (a) the
ratio of consumption from the CEX to consumption in the national accounts, the upper solid line,
and (b) the ratio of pre-tax income from the CEX to personal income from the national accounts,
the lower solid line. The CEX income and consumption estimates are calculated by the Bureau of
Labor Statistics from the CEX, and include estimates from both the diary and interview
components of the survey, as well as an estimate of the rental equivalence of owner-occupied
homes. The CPS, which is the main income survey in the US, and which is used by the Bureau of
the Census to calculate the official estimates of poverty, does not collect data on consumption.
The broken line in the figure is the ratio of income from the CPS to personal income in the
national accounts.
Both sets of consumption figures show the now familiar pattern of declining ratios of survey
to national accounts consumption. In the UK, the decline is far from uniform over time, and if the
break in the survey in 1995 had been in 1994, it could perhaps have been attributed to the change
in design. As it is, the ratio declines by about 10 percentage points over the 25 years from 1976
to 2001, so that survey consumption is growing about half a percent a year less rapidly than
consumption in the national accounts. The decline in the corresponding ratio in the US is a good
deal more dramatic, from 0.80 to 0.64 from 1984 to 2001, so that the difference in the two
growth rates is 1.3 percent a year, a little more than in India, and a little less than in China.
Income from the CEX is also a declining ratio of personal income in the national accounts,
although the rate of decline is much slower, less than 5 percentage points over 17 years. And
income in the CPS shows no trend relative to personal income in the national accounts. More
15

careful comparisons between the CEX and national accounts consumption data have been made
by Jack Triplett (1997) and by Thesia Garner, George Janini et al. (2003). After making a number
of corrections to try to put the two series on a comparable basis, Triplett estimates that from 1984
to 1994, personal consumption expenditures grew at 1.0 percent a year more rapidly than
consumers expenditure from the CEX. Garner et al, comparing only comparable items, calculate
that the CEX to National Accounts ratio was 89 percent in 1992. In 1997 and 2000, the
comparable ratio was only 80 percent, so that the differential growth rate was 2.4 percent a year
until 1997 and 1.5 percent a year to 2000. The differential behavior of income and consumption
ratios may have something to do with the fact that in the US, consumption is much harder to
collect than is income. The CEX costs a great deal more per interview as does the CPS and,
while for most people (those who are not self-employed) income can be collected with only a few
questions, consumption requires a long interview or extensive record keeping in diaries. The
non-response rate in the CEX has been rising over time, Robert Groves and Mick Couper (1998),
while that for the CPS has been constant. It is possible that people are less and less willing to
cooperate with the CEX over time, but those who do so are prepared to answer the income
questions more fully and more accurately than the consumption questions. The CPS, which does
not ask income questions, may suffer from fewer problems. Its sample size is also much larger,
60,000 households versus only 5,000 up to 1999, and 7,500 thereafter.

5. Why do surveys and national diverge?
The previous sections have documented the fact that consumption, measured from surveys,
frequently grows less rapidly than consumption, measured from the national accounts. Consistent
16

with this general relationship, the ratio of the two magnitudes is highest in the poorest countries,
and lowest in the richest. Within countries as diverse as China, India, the United Kingdom and
the United States, the ratio falls over time as real income increases. Taking non-OECD countries
as a whole, population weighted survey consumption at PPP constant dollars grew at only half
the rate of population weighted consumption in the Penn World Tables. With some exceptions
that I discuss below, and which apparently cannot account for all of the difference in growth
rates, the two concepts of consumption are broadly the same, so that one, other, or both of the
two growth rates are incorrect. If the surveys are wrong, and the national accounts right, either
inequality has been widening in ways that our data do not appear to show, or poverty has been
falling more rapidly than shown by the $1-a-day counts. If the surveys are right, there has been
less growth in the world in the 90s than we are used to thinking. Extreme positions apart, we
have some combination of underestimation of poverty decline, underestimation of a widening in
the distribution of consumption, and overestimation of growth. Quantifying the contribution of
each is an urgent task for anyone interested in growth, poverty and inequality. In this section, I
lay out some of the possible explanations.
It is important to note that there can be no general presumption in favor of one or other of the
surveys and the national accounts. In particular, that national accounts are familiar, widely used,
and in principle comparable (they typically conform to the UN’s System of National Accounts),
does not imply that the divergences between them and the surveys must be attributed to the latter.
While it is certainly the case that there exist “failed” surveys, whose execution is known to have
been faulty, where fieldwork was disrupted or inadequately supervised, where sampling
procedures were flawed, or where changes in survey design made it impossible to compare the
17

results with earlier surveys, national accounts estimates are also subject to many errors, some of
which will be discussed below.

5.1 Unit non-response
Not everyone who is asked to participate in a survey agrees to do so, and failure to respond (unit
non-response) is known to be different for households with different household characteristics,
Groves and Couper (1998). Of particular interest is the case where better-off households are less
likely to respond so that the observed distribution of consumption or income is a selectively
truncated version of the true distribution. If non-response increases monotonically with income,
then Johan Mistiaen and Ravallion (2003) have shown that the truncated distribution is firstorder stochastically dominated by the true distribution. This dominance implies that the mean of
the truncated distribution is no larger than the mean of the true distribution, and that the
headcount ratio measure of poverty will be overstated in the truncated distribution, no matter
what the poverty line. Unit non-response in the surveys is therefore a good candidate to explain
at least some of the facts that I documented in Sections 2 through 4. A non-response story would
also be consistent with the national accounts means being more accurate than the survey means,
although it is far from clear that it would justify a procedure in which poverty is calculated by
grossing up each household’s measured consumption by the ratio of the national accounts to the
survey mean. Such a procedure discards the survey mean, but accepts the survey Lorenz curve.
When non-response rises with income, so that more observations are lost from the top of the
income distribution, it might at first seem that the truncated distribution would show less
inequality. But, because the mean shifts, this is not necessarily the case. Indeed, Mistiaen and
18

Ravallion have examined the case where the probability of non-response rises with income, and
when the top and bottom incomes in the true distribution both appear in the truncated distribution, albeit with reduced density. They show that, in this case, the true and truncated Lorenz
curves must cross, so that it is impossible to make general inequality rankings of the two
distributions.
To sharpen intuition further, and to make a link with some of the applied literature, consider
the following illustrative but not unrealistic case in which a lognormal distribution of income is
combined with a probability of compliance that is non-increasing in income. Suppose that x is the
logarithm of income or consumption, and that the distribution prior to truncation is lognormal
with mean (of logs) : and variance (of logs)

Suppose too that the probability of responding
, for some number 2, but that above

to the survey is unity up to some income level

the logarithm of the compliance probability declines linearly with the logarithm of
income. Hence if

is the probability that a household with (log) income x agrees to

cooperate, we have

(1)

so that the probability of response is unity at the bottom of the distribution. The parameter " is
non-negative, and is (minus) the elasticity of compliance with respect to income.
In the Appendix, I show that, provided 2 is large enough, so that non-compliance begins far
enough below the mean, the observed (truncated) distribution of incomes is approximately
lognormal, that the variance of log income is unchanged, but the mean of logs is shifted
downward from : to

. Although this result is entirely driven by the assumptions, it
19

illustrates a number of important points. First, we have a case where non-response drives the
difference between the national accounts and the surveys, and where the mean is biased down,
but the Lorenz curve is correct. Second, the ratio of survey consumption to true consumption
depends on the variance of the true (and truncated) distribution. In particular, If

and

are the

truncated and true means of income, the ratio satisfies
(2)

so that the understatement of income will be greater in places and at times where inequality is
higher. In particular, increasing inequality of incomes will drive down the survey estimates in
relation to the truth, even though the ratio of survey to the true mean is independent of the level
of mean income. Third, the ratio of the truncated to the true mean is independent of mean
income, so that, although compliance is declining in income, and although average compliance is
declining as the economy expands, the fraction of total income captured by the survey does not
decrease with growth.
The simple formulation of the compliance probability in (1) can be extended to encompass
more general cases, for example by introducing a quadratic term in the second branch of (1),
which would then be written

(3)

The parameter ( can be positive or negative, in the latter case, (3) needs to be modified at high
levels of x to stop the probability exceeding 1. Although I do not deal with the complication here,
20

high values of x can be handled in the same way as low values of x in (3). Under the same
conditions as before, that 2 is large enough, (3) also implies that the truncated distribution will be
lognormal, but now both mean and variance of logs are changed. Similar algebra to the linear
case gives
(4)

for the variance of the observed distribution, which can be greater than or less than

depending

on the sign of (. For the mean, we have
(5)

Once again, the inequality of income affects the ratio of the observed to true mean. However, it is
no longer appropriate to replace the mean by its true value, because the variance is now also
affected by the non-compliance, something that we would generally expect to be the case. Note
that, in the quadratic, as in the original case, the ratio of true to measured income does not vary
with the true mean.
There are no ideal aggregate data for testing the extent to which mean income and income
inequality affect survey means through non-compliance. Although there is a great deal of
distributional information in the Deininger-Squire data set, the information for developing
countries is neither reliable in itself, nor well-matched to the surveys in the sample discussed
above. For the smaller subset of 111 consumption and 77 income surveys for which gini
coefficients are provided on the World Bank’s poverty monitoring web site, there is no
significant (unweighted, as is appropriate here) relationship between the log of the ratio of survey
21

to NAS mean and the gini coefficient, whether or not real GDP per capita is controlled for.
(Region by region, there is a marginally significant effect in South Asia where data quality is
probably highest; note that the OECD countries are not represented in the poverty monitor
countries.) This is also true when the gini is replaced by the log variance, calculated from the
formula for the log standard deviation

which holds when the distribution is

lognormal, J. Aitchison and Alan Brown (1969). Although the independence of the ratio of the
mean is a special property of the assumptions that generate (2), the dependence of the ratio on
inequality is something that we would expect to happen whenever non-compliance increases with
income, even though, in the general case, the measure of inequality from the truncated data will
not be correct. In consequence, the inequality story is worth following further.
Another place to look is across the states of India, where there exist state net domestic
product data which can be compared with the state means from the household surveys. Again,
this comparison is far from ideal; the state domestic product accounts are widely believed to be
measured with considerable error, and even without, the ideal comparison would not be with net
domestic product, but with consumption. An offsetting advantage, compared with the international data, is that the state survey means and inequality measures are derived from the same
surveys using identical questionnaires and procedures in each state. It should also be noted that
the Indian National Sample Survey Organization consistently maintains that non-compliance is
rare, and that numerators make repeated visits until people are available or it is convenient for
them. The data from the surveys also carry a notation for whether the household actually
surveyed was the one originally intended, or whether it is a substitute for the household targeted
for sampling. In the 1999–00 survey, only 1,200 out of more than 70,000 rural households are
22

listed as substitutes, with 1,900 out of 48,900 urban households. About two-thirds of the
substitutions are attributed to the informant being away, and less than a quarter to informants
being busy or uncooperative.
The state survey means are well correlated with the state estimates; across the 43rd (1987–88),
50th (1993–94) and 55th (1999–00) Rounds of the NSS, and using means for only the 17 largest
states, the correlations are 0.88 or higher if Delhi is included, and 0.70 or higher if is excluded. If
we use the log of the ratio of survey consumption per head to state net domestic product per head
as the left hand side of (2), and the variance of logs from the surveys as the right-hand side, the
regression coefficient on the variance of logs is –1.39 (t = –3.3) in a pooled regression of the 3
rounds (54 observations from 18 states in each of the rounds), including round dummies. Taking
each round separately, the corresponding coefficients (and t-values) are –0.69 (–0.8), –0.78
(–2.6), and –1.44 (–2.2) for the 43rd, 50th, and 55th Rounds respectively. Figure 6 shows the
corresponding plots, with each state identified. Taken literally, these estimates suggest that the
elasticity of non-compliance has almost doubled in the twelve years between 1987–88 and
1999–00, which is certainly consistent with a fall in fraction of aggregate consumption captured
by the surveys. Inequality, within urban areas, and between urban and rural areas, has also been
rising in India, Deaton and Drèze(2002) which would again depress the ratio of survey to NAS
means.
These data are not suitable for investigating the important question of whether the ratios are
lower when mean consumption is higher. This is because the state net domestic product is used
in the calculation of the log ratio, so that to include it in the regression is to guarantee a negative
correlation, whether or not one actually exists. Another variable that is plausibly important is the
23

degree of urbanization, if enumerators have greater difficulty contacting or obtaining compliance
from urban households. In fact, with the Indian state data, it is difficult to tell the urbanization
and inequality explanations apart. Urbanization (the fraction of population in the urban sector)
can be used to replace the variance of logs in the regression, with similar t-values, and when both
urbanization and the variance are entered together, neither is significantly different from zero.
Urbanization and inequality are highly correlated in these data, and we cannot tell whether it is
high income that poses the problem for the surveys. With only 18 states, I am almost certainly
pushing these data too far. Nevertheless, the question of compliance is central to the analysis of
survey versus national accounts, and the Indian experience provides some support for the idea
that income-related non-compliance explains some part of the shortfall between the surveys and
the national accounts, and perhaps even a part of why the shortfall is increasing.

5.2 Issues involving National Accounts
Although non-compliance almost certainly explains at least some of the discrepancies between
surveys and national accounts, and although there are other problems with the surveys beyond
non-compliance, there are serious quality issues with the national accounts estimates of
consumption and GDP. I discuss some of the most important in this subsection.
Discrepancies between survey and national accounts estimates of consumption can arise both
through differences in definition, and through differences in the relative success of meeting those
definitions. National Accounts statistics are compiled according to protocols laid down in the
1993 version of the Systems of National Accounts, SNA93. The SNA93 establishes what is
known as the “production boundary,” which defines what is and is not part of consumption and
24

GDP. The production boundary includes all goods and services that are exchanged, as well as
goods that are non-exchanged, such as food produced for home consumption, but excludes
services that are not exchanged, such as food preparation, home education of children, or minor
home repairs, with the important exception of housing services consumed by owner-occupiers.
Because the excluded services tend to be replaced by exchanged services as people become
better-off, and substitute market for home-production, the measured growth rate of consumption
and GDP will be too high, at least when the true rate of growth is positive. Yet this bias cannot
explain any of the growing discrepancy between surveys and national accounts, because the nonexchanged services are not included in the surveys either.
Yet the degree of effective coverage of the non-exchanged items will almost always differ
between the surveys and national accounts. Surveys almost never directly collect data on implicit
rents for owner-occupiers, though it is sometimes possible to use data from the surveys on
housing characteristics to estimate hedonic rental regressions, provided there is a local rental
market. But few of the surveys used for poverty analysis contain such estimates, which
undoubtedly contributes to the finding that survey to NAS consumption ratios are typically less
than one, and if the share of the NAS consumption attributable to rents to owner-occupiers is
increasing over time, it will also help explain the increasing divergence. I have not made any
general study of the latter, but in India, the share appears to be more or less constant over time. In
the US, the comparison of the CEX and the NAS in Figure 5 includes imputed rents in both
numbers, so that this cannot be the source of the increasing discrepancy between them. There are
also likely to be differences in coverage of non-exchanged goods. Consumption of ownproduction, gifts, and wages in kind, are an important part of the total in poor countries, and
25

many good survey offices devote a great deal of attention to collecting such information. For
example, the Indian NSS distinguishes purchases, own production, and gifts for several hundred
items. The coverage of non-exchanged goods in the NAS will depend on the methodology
employed. Some countries use the survey estimates, but in many and perhaps most cases,
consumption is calculated as a residual in a process that begins from production. In principle, this
is not a problem, but in many countries, it would be extremely optimistic to suppose that the
measurement of production accurately captures home production.
Consumption surveys, as opposed to income surveys, are likely to capture a good deal of
illegal or legal, but concealed (for example, to avoid taxes or regulation), activities. Purchasers
of such goods and services, unlike their producers, often have no incentives to conceal their
transactions, and individuals who have substantial income from sources that they are unlikely to
report, may nevertheless report the consumption that is financed by that income, see Derek
Blades and David Roberts (2002), OECD (2002). Because of this, and because many surveys
collect comprehensive data on non-exchanged production, it is not surprising that, in some of the
poorest countries, consumption measured in the surveys would sometimes much larger than
consumption estimated in the national accounts. As non-exchanged production becomes less
important with economic development, the effect will wear off, and could thus account for at
least some of the decline in the ratio of the two measures. However, as Blades and Roberts
emphasize, claims that the existence of various non-observed activities means that a large share
of GDP, as much as a quarter or a third, is missed in the national accounts are almost certainly
exaggerated. National income accountants understand the nature of the problems, and although
their estimates for the non-observed economy may not be very accurate, they do not omit it.
26

In addition to imputed rents of home owners, there are two other important items of
consumption that are included in the NAS, but not in the surveys. One is “financial services
indirectly imputed,” or FISIM, which is an estimate of the consumption value of financial
intermediation. FISIM is measured as the difference between interest paid to banks and other
intermediaries, less interest paid by them. The idea is that interest charged to borrowers contains,
in addition to the market rate of interest, a charge for intermediation services to lenders, in
addition to the market rate of interest, while interest paid to lenders is lower than market, with
the difference attributed to financial intermediation services to depositors. The difference
between interest paid and interest received is therefore a measure of the value of financial
intermediation, and since the 1993 revision of the SNA, has been added to national accounts
estimates of household consumption. A similar item is included for risk-bearing services,
measured from the profits of insurance companies. In India, the value of FISIM increased from
close to zero in 1983/84 to 2.5 percent of consumption in 1993/94, A. Kulshreshtha and A. Kar
(2002), so that this item alone accounts for a quarter of a percentage point per year of the
difference in annual growth rates between NAS and survey consumption in India. Note also that,
to the extent we are interested in measuring the living standards of the poor, it can reasonably be
doubted whether much of the value of financial intermediation accrues is relevant. In consequence, even if we accept the argument for the inclusion of FISIM in NAS consumption, neither
it nor its rate of growth contribute to the living standards of the poor.
The second potentially important item of consumption included in NAS but not in the
surveys is consumption by non-profit institutions serving households (NPISH) which, in most
countries, cannot be separated from household consumption. It is unclear how large these items
27

are, or whether such expenditures are growing relative to total consumption. In the U.K., NPISH
in 2001 was 3.9 percent of total consumption, almost double the 1970 share of 2.1 percent. It is
possible that NPISH are much more widespread in poorer countries (in India, it is sometimes
claimed that there is an NGO in every village), but I know of no data on the subject.
National Accounts consumption is typically estimated as a residual using the “commodity
flow” method. Starting from an estimate of domestic production of each commodity, net exports
and government consumption are deducted, as are the amounts used in investment and intermediate consumption, with the residual attributed to household (and NPISH) consumption. Many
of these calculations are done in physical volumes, so that estimation of consumption in currency
units, which is what can be compared with the surveys, requires the use of prices and price
indexes. There are many opportunities for error along this chain of calculation and, in general,
there is no means (other than surveys) of cross-checking the final answer. The measurement of
prices is a survey-based activity with its own sampling and non-sampling errors, and it is
sometimes difficult to be sure that prices are those actually paid by consumers. Not surprisingly,
the monetary value of NAS estimates of consumption are subject to errors and to occasional large
revision. K. Sundaram and Suresh Tendulkar (2003) report that the Indian NAS estimate of
consumption of fruits and vegetables in 1993–94 in nominal rupees more than doubled between
the 1998 and 1999 versions of the national accounts. The estimate for clothing fell by about a
half, and that for rent, fuel, and power rose by more than 40 percent. Even with some canceling
out of pluses and minuses, total consumption was revised upwards by 14 percent, an amount
which, if used to calculate poverty rates, would cut the Indian poverty rate by a little less than a
half.
28

For food, which is a large share of consumption in poor countries, domestic production is
typically estimated by multiplying the acreage of land under cultivation by an estimate of yields
per acre. The former comes from a land census or survey, which in many countries is done quite
infrequently, while the latter comes from crop-cutting surveys, themselves of mixed quality. Data
on government consumption are usually relatively accurate, as are imports and exports, which
typically are subject to direct monitoring by the government. The same cannot be said for
intermediate (business) consumption, which is often assessed by applying various ratios to
measured production. These ratios come from enterprise surveys, or from input output tables.
Once again, these measures are often outdated. For India, Kulshreshtha and Kar (2002) write that
their NAS consumption estimated “depend on an assortment of direct and indirect estimates
along with various rates and ratios, some of which are based on the results of studies carried out
in the distant past.”
The use of outdated ratios and correction factors is particularly problematic when the
economy is growing and its structure changing. Kulsheshtra and Kar, in their detailed commodity
by commodity comparison of food consumption in the NAS and the NSS in India, find that one
of the largest discrepancies is for vanaspati, a vegetable cooking oil, that is widely used in
restaurants. This intermediate use of cooking oil should be deducted in the commodity flow
calculations but, in fact, there is no such correction in the Indian national accounts. In consequence, and because consumers’ expenditure in restaurants is already included in NAS
consumption, restaurant use of vanaspati is double-counted in the national accounts. And
because consumers switch from domestic cooking to purchased meals as they get better-off, the
more rapid is the growth of the economy, the larger will the overstatement of consumption
29

become. The vanaspati example is an extreme case, in that there is no correction for intermediate
business consumption, but the same exaggeration of growth will be generated by the use of
outdated “rates and ratios” to assess intermediate consumption in an economy where growth is
reallocating economic activity from own-production to the market.
Overstatement of consumption and consumption growth through a failure to capture intermediate consumption will also lead to an overstatement of the level and growth rate of expenditure-based measures of GDP. This exaggeration is in addition to the exaggeration associated with
the general movement of activity, such as services, from a non-exchanged to an exchanged basis,
for example as a greater share of food preparation is done by food vendors, which is counted in
GDP, rather than by family members, which is not. Both come from the same fundamental trend,
which is the increasing marketization, complexity, and “roundaboutness” of production with
economic development. Note that not all of these errors in constructing consumption necessarily
find their way into GDP. For example, how a commodity flow is allocated between consumption
and capital formation will affect the estimation of both, but not of their sum.

5.3 Other survey issues
The two previous sections have documented what are perhaps the most likely candidates for
explaining the divergence between national accounts and survey-based estimates of consumption.
However, my discussion is far from exhausting the possibilities, and it should be emphasized that
there are many other problems that I have not discussed, some of which are on the survey side. It
is clear that details of survey design matter for the results, and that protocols are not the same
across countries, or sometimes within countries over time. Many of these are discussed in more
30

detail in Deaton and Margaret Grosh (2000).
Surveys often have less than complete coverage, excluding for example students, the
military, and institutionalized persons, expenditures by whom are included in NAS estimates of
consumption. In some cases, survey coverage excluded rural households, or parts of the country
that are expensive or dangerous to visit.
Survey questionnaires differ in the length of the recall period over which respondents are
asked to report their consumption. The choice of recall period is often thought to involve a tradeoff between accuracy of memory, which calls for a short period, and the match between
consumption and purchases, which is more accurate when averaged over a long period. But there
is little understanding of the effects of different recall periods, particularly in poor, agricultural
societies. In India between 1989 and 1998, the NSS experimented with different recall periods,
replacing the traditional 30-day recall period for all goods with a 7-day recall period for food and
tobacco, and with a 365 day period for durable goods and some other infrequently purchased
items. The sample was randomly divided, and half were given the old questionnaire, and half the
new, so that it is possible to make a clean evaluation of the effects of the change. The shorter
reporting period increased reported expenditures on food by around 30 percent, and total consumption by about 17 percent, very much in the right direction to help resolve the discrepancy
with the NAS. Because there are many Indians close to the poverty line, the 17 percent increase
was enough to reduce the measured headcount ratio by a half, removing almost 200 million
people from poverty. What might seem to be an obscure technical issue of survey design can
have a major effect on the measurement of poverty, not only in India, but in the world. It should
be noted, however, that the higher consumption totals associated with the shorter recall period,
31

although closer to the NAS estimates, are not necessarily more accurate. Indeed, the NSS has
carried out a series of controlled experiments with a plausible gold standard in which, for many
foods, the 30-day reference period appears to be more accurate then the 7-day period, see NSSO
Expert Group on Sampling Errors (2003).
Survey questionnaires also vary in the number of items that are separately distinguished, and
there is some evidence that the greater the degree of disaggregation, the greater is measured
consumption in total. There is also no consistency in the treatment of seasonality, with some
surveys visiting each household on several occasions throughout the year, while most simply rely
on spreading data collection throughout a calendar year, a procedure that should not bias the
mean, though there will be biases in higher-order statistics. In some surveys, respondents keep
diaries of their purchases over a period, in others, they make oral responses to interviewers based
on recall. Surveys vary on who is chosen as respondent, and whether one or more household
members are interviewed. However well-informed is the household member who reports purchases, “proxy” reports, on the purchases of other family members, are likely to be less accurate
than reports about the respondent’s own behavior. Indeed, proxy reporting can plausibly
contribute to a progressively large share of consumption being missed over time. In a poor, rural
community, where everyone eats from the same pot, and food is nearly all of the budget, the
housewife’s report will be quite accurate. This is much less so in more diverse and better-off
households, with some family members working outside of the home, and maintaining partial
budgetary independence.
In addition to the unit non-response discussed in Section 5.1, there is item non-response,
where household members fail to report at least some expenditures, or provide deliberately
32

misleading reports, for example on alcohol consumption, or on various illegal items. Finally, and
in parallel with the national accounts, there are difficulties in finding adequate prices for consumption items that are not purchased in the market.
It would be extremely desirable if the international statistical community could agree on a
common set of best-practice protocols for household income expenditure surveys, as a parallel to
the SNA for the National Accounts. Unfortunately, most of the issues discussed here are neither
sufficiently well-researched nor understood to admit of uncontroversial solutions, and many
statistical offices are stout defenders of their own particular practices. Yet, as I shall argue in the
next section, only household surveys allow us to measure poverty, so that the task of harmonization must be undertaken if we are to put global poverty measurement on a sound basis.

6. Conclusions and implications for the measurement of poverty
The standard measures of poverty are based on counting the number of people who live in
households whose measured per capita consumption is less than a poverty line. When rich
households are less likely to cooperate with the survey than poor people, survey-based estimates
of consumption will understate mean consumption, and overstate the fraction of people in
poverty. The fraction by which consumption is understated will typically be larger the greater is
the inequality of consumption. Unless consumption inequality is increasing over time, or the
fraction of non-cooperating households is increasing, income-based non-cooperation does not, in
and of itself, imply that ratio of measured to true consumption is increasing over time.
National Accounts estimates of consumption are typically, although not always, larger than
survey-based estimates, and there is a tendency, both across countries and over time within
33

important countries, for the NAS estimate of consumption to grow more rapidly than does the
survey based estimate. While survey based estimates are subject to numerous errors and
inaccuracies, there are also problems with national accounts estimates. These are likely to
understate consumption in the poorest countries, and to overstate the rate of growth of average
consumption, both over time in poor countries, and in comparisons between poor and rich
countries at a moment in time. In part, these systematic problems in measuring the rate of growth
of consumption carry through to GDP, whose growth rate is also systematically biased upwards. I
know of no plausible estimates of the size of the bias.
Given the conflict between survey and NAS estimates of consumption, it is tempting to allow
the NAS estimates to play at least some role in poverty measurement, instead of using only the
survey data. There are indeed good general arguments for some sort of averaging of multiple
estimates once everything has been done to reconcile them. However, there is need for much
caution, and mechanical use of NAS means, combined with survey-based estimates of
distribution around the mean, will certainly give the poor measures of poverty. There are three
important reasons why.
First, and most generally, the National Accounts are designed to generate estimates of macroeconomic aggregates, not estimates of poverty, and the SNA rules are designed with that in mind.
National Accounts track money, not people. To take an example, the SNA recognizes that
production for own consumption is difficult to measure, and recommends that the effort be made
only “when the amount produced is likely to be quantitatively important in relation to the total
supply of the good in the country,” OECD (2002 p179). Such a rule makes little sense when our
prime objective were to measure poverty. At the other end of the spectrum, items like FISIM and
34

the rental value of owner occupier homes are (properly) included, although in most cases they are
not consumed by the poor. In general, the NAS is more likely to capture larger transactions than
smaller ones, which is close to the opposite of what happens in the surveys, where large
transactors are the least likely to be included.
Second, the differences in coverage and definition between NAS and surveys means that,
even if everything were perfectly measured, it would be incorrect to apply inequality or distributional measures, which are derived from surveys which measure one thing, to means that are
derived from the national accounts, which measure another. When national accounts and surveys
are measuring different things, it is perfectly possible for the poor to do less well than the
average, without any increase in measured inequality.
To make the point clear, suppose that we are interested in measuring consumption growth
among the bottom 100p percent of the population. We have data on mean consumption, :, from
the National Accounts, and data on the share of the bottom 100p percent of households from
surveys,

. Mean consumption of the bottom p percent is then estimated to be
(6)

so that the growth rate of consumption for the bottom group is
(7)

In (7), the first term on the right hand side comes entirely from the surveys, and the second
entirely from the national accounts. The survey mean,

and the direct survey measure of

the average consumption of the bottom 100p percent, are discarded, even though the
poor very rarely refuse to respond, and provide accurate estimates of their consumption. More35

over, the validity of (6) and (7) depends on being able to apply the survey shares to the NAS
means, which not only assumes that the NAS means are perfectly measured, but that both are
measuring the same thing. But as we have seen, this is not the case. So even if we were to accept
that NAS consumption is the concept that we want, and even if we were to believe that it is
accurately measured, the shares from the survey are shares of consumption excluding consumption on rents of owner occupiers, excluding FISIM and the profits of insurance companies, and
excluding the expenditures of NPISH. Using the survey shares to allocate NAS consumption to
the poor and non-poor assumes that these items are distributed between poor and non-poor in the
same way as are the goods measured in the survey, an assumption that cannot possibly be true.
Third, we must recognize that neither mean consumption nor its distribution are accurately
measured, either in the surveys or the NAS. A particular difficulty here comes from the mechanical use of the distributional shares and gini coefficients that come from the Deininger-Squire
(DS) and WIDER compilations. (Shares can be calculated from gini coefficients if a particular
distribution is assumed, for example the lognormal.) For most poor countries, these measures are
of dubious quality, as indeed is recognized by DS. In consequence, researchers who are interested
in poverty in poor countries, which is where global poverty is, are forced to use numbers that are
noisy, to say the least. And neither DS nor the WIDER compilation provide the information that
would be required to make an informed judgment on the way their numbers were calculated. And
from equation (7), it is clear that if our measures of the shares

are noisy, a regression of the

estimated consumption growth among the bottom 100p percent on estimated mean consumption
growth from the national accounts will have a coefficient that is close to one, essentially by
construction. To claim that globalization has been good for the poor based on a calculation that
36

applies badly measured distributional shares to (upwardly biased) measures of growth from the
national accounts is to make a claim that has no credibility. The globalization debate is serious
enough that we must genuinely measure the living standards of the poor, not simply assume
them. We cannot argue that globalization has reduced poverty without measuring the living
standards of the poor!
So there is no choice but to use the surveys. Which is not to say that the surveys are correct,
or that current measures of global poverty are doing a good job of measuring the trends. They are
not. There is too much incompatibility in survey design across countries. The downward bias in
survey measures of consumption almost certainly biases upwards the World Bank’s estimates,
and since it is unlikely that all of the growth discrepancy between the surveys and the NAS is due
to faults in the latter, the rate of poverty decline is probably downward biased. Yet there is
essentially no choice but to use the surveys, because only the surveys provide direct measures of
the living standards of the poor. What we need is an initiative to provide a set of consistent
international protocols for survey design, as well as deeper study into the effects of non-sampling
errors, particularly non-compliance. That work program cannot be circumvented by using
national accounts statistics to measure poverty.

7. List of works cited:
Adelman, Irma and Cynthia Taft Morris, 1973, Economic growth and social equity in developing
countries. Stanford, Ca., Stanford University Press.
Ahluwalia, Montek S., John H. Duloy, Graham Pyatt, et al., 1980, "Who benefits from economic
development? Comment." American Economic Review, 70(1): 242-5.
Aitchison, J. and Alan Brown, 1969, The lognormal distribution. Cambridge, Cambridge
University Press.
Bardhan, Pranab K., 1973, "On the incidence of poverty in rural India in the sixties." Economic
37

and Political Weekly, 8(February special issue): 245-54.
Berg, Andrew and Anne Krueger, 2003, Trade, growth, and poverty: a selective survey.
Washington, DC. IMF Working Paper 03/30.
Bhalla, Surjit S., 2002, Imagine there is no country: poverty, inequality, and growth in the era of
globalization. Washington, DC, Institute for International Economics.
Blades, Derek and David Roberts, 2002, "Measuring the non-observed economy." Statistics
Brief(No 5., November): 1-8.
Bourguignon, Francois and Christian Morrisson, 2002, "Inequality among world citizens: 18201992." American Economic Review, 92(4): 727-44.
Chen, Shaohua and Martin Ravallion, 2001, "How well did the world's poorest fare in the
1990s?" Review of Income and Wealth, 47(3): 283-300.
Chenery, Hollis, Montek S. Ahluwalia, Clive L. G. Bell, et al., 1974, Redistribution with Growth.
Oxford, Oxford University Press for the World Bank.
Cline, William R., 1975, "Distribution and development: a survey of the literature." Journal of
Development Economics, 1(4): 359-400.
Deaton, Angus, 2003, "Adjusted Indian poverty estimates for 1999-2000." Economic and
Political Weekly(January 25): 322-6.
Deaton, Angus and Margaret Grosh, 2000, "Consumption," in M. Grosh and P. Glewwe,
Designing household questionnaires for developing countries: lessons from fifteen years of
the living standard measurement study. Washington, DC, World Bank. 1: 91-133.
Deaton, Angus and Jean Drèze, 2002, "Poverty and inequality in India, a reexamination."
Economic and Political Weekly(September 7th): 3729-48.
Deininger, Klaus and Lyn Squire, 1996, "A new data set measuring income inequality." World
Bank Economic Review, 10: 565–91.
Dollar, David and Aart Kraay, 2000, Growth is good for the poor. Washington, DC. The World
Bank, processed.
Fields, Gary S., 1977, "Who benefits from economic development? A reexamination of Brazilian
growth in the 1960s." American Economic Review, 67(4): 570-82.
Fishlow, Albert, 1972, "Brazilian size distribution of income." American Economic Review,
62(1/2): 391-402.
Garner, Thesia I., George Janini, William Passero, et al., 2003, The consumer expenditure survey
in comparison: focus on personal consumption expenditures. Washington, DC. Bureau of
Labor Statistics, processed.
Government of India, 2003, National Accounts Statistics, Ministry of Statistics and Programme
Implementation, http://mospi.nic.in/national_account_main.htm, accessed March 1, 2003.
Groves, Robert M. and Mick P. Couper, 1998, Nonresponse in household interview surveys. New
York, Wiley.
Keidel, Albert, 2001, "China's GDP expenditure accounts." China Economic Review, 12(4): 35567.
Kulshreshtha, A. C. and A. Kar, 2002, Estimates of food consumption expenditure from
household surveys and national accounts. Working Paper at
http://www.worldbank.org/indiapovertyworkshop.
Kuznets, Simon, 1955, "Economic growth and income inequality." American Economic Review,
38

45(1): 1-28.
Maddison, Angus, 1998, Chinese economic performance in the long run. Paris, OECD.
Minhas, B. S., 1988, "Validation of large-scale sample survey data: case of NSS household
consumption expenditure." Sankhya, Series B, 50(Supplement): 1-63.
Minhas, B. S. and S. M. Kansal, 1989, "Comparison of NSS and CSO estimates of private
consumption: some observations based on 1983 data." The Journal of Income and Wealth,
11: 7-24.
Mistiaen, Johan A. and Martin Ravallion, 2003, Survey compliance and the distribution of
income. Washington, DC. The World Bank, processed.
NSSO Expert Group on Sampling Errors, 2003, "Suitability of different reference periods for
measuring household consumption: results of a pilot study." Economic and Political
Weekly(January 25): 307-21.
OECD, 2002, Measuring the non-observed economy: a handbook. Paris, OECD.
Office for National Statistics, 2003, Annual Abstract of Statistics. London. HMSO.
Ravallion, Martin, 2001, "Growth, inequality, and poverty: looking beyond the averages." World
Development, 29(11): 1803-15.
Ravallion, Martin, 2003, "Measuring aggregate welfare in developing countries: how well do
national accounts and surveys agree." Review of Economics and Statistics: forthcoming.
Rawski, Thomas G., 2001, "What is happening to China's GDP statistics?" China Economic
Review, 12(4): 347-54.
Sala-i-Martin, Xavier, 2002, The disturbing `rise' of global income inequality. Cambridge, MA.
NBER Working Paper No. 8904.
Srinivasan, T. N. and Pranab Bardhan, 1974, Poverty and income distribution in India. Calcutta,
Statistical Publishing Society.
Sundaram, K and Suresh Tendulkar, 2003, "NAS-NSS estimates of private consumption for
poverty estimation: a further comparative estimation." Economic and Political
Weekly(January 25): 376-84.
Taylor, Lance and Edmar L. Bacha, 1976, "The unequalizing spiral: a first growth model for
Belindia." Quarterly Journal of Economics, 90(2): 197-218.
Triplett, Jack E., 1997, "Measuring consumption: the post-1973 slowdown and the research
issues." Federal Reserve Bank of St Louis Review(May/June): 9-42.
Wu, Harry X., 2000, "China's GDP level and growth performance: alternative estimates and the
implications." Review of Income and Wealth, 46(4): 475-99.

Appendix: Lognormally distributed income with selective compliance.
Suppose that x is the logarithm of income, and that x is normally distributed in the population
with mean : and variance

The compliance probability as a function of income is given by

equation (1) in the main text. In general, if the true density if

39

, the density function of the

truncated distribution is given by

(A1)

In this normal case with the response function given by equation (1) in the main text, the
truncated density is

(A2)

where

is the population average compliance probability. The second part of (A2) can be

rewritten

(A3)
If we integrate

over the full range of x, we can derive an expression for the mean

compliance probability
(A4)

where the first term comes from integrating the first part of (A2) and the second from integrating
(A3). These three equations completely characterize the truncated density

.

If we substitute (A4) into (A3), we get the density of a normal distribution with mean
and variance

scaled by the factor
40

(A5)

As 2 becomes large, the second term in the denominator on the right goes to unity, while the first
term goes to zero. Hence, for large 2, with little of the density is to the left of

the

truncated density is approximately (A3), which is approximately

(A6)
so that the truncated distribution of log income is also normal, with the same variance
true distribution, but with mean

instead of :.

41

as the

Table 1: Description of surveys used in the analysis
Year

No of surveys

No of countries

Population
covered (bn)

1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000

3
7
5
3
2
7
13
21
23
26
31
23
29
37
45
35
51
48
43
57
22
26

3
6
5
3
2
5
11
18
21
24
28
20
26
34
41
30
45
44
38
53
19
23

0.35
1.33
0.27
0.33
0.97
0.48
1.59
1.75
1.82
2.92
2.14
1.69
1.95
2.16
2.61
3.22
3.67
3.82
3.38
3.86
2.16
3.54

All

557

127

..

Fraction of world
population (%)
9.0
34.1
6.7
8.1
23.6
11.4
37.4
40.3
41.2
64.9
45.7
35.1
38.6
42.1
49.9
60.2
67.7
68.3
61.1
70.3
39.1
63.6
..

Notes: Surveys are a convenience sample where survey means were readily available. When the number of surveys
exceeds the number of countries, some countries have estimates of both mean income and mean consumption per
capita. China is included in 1980, 1985, and every year thereafter, India in 1983, 1988, 1994, 1995, 1996, 1997,
1998, and 2000, but not in 1999. (Indian surveys that run from mid-year to mid-year have been arbitrarily allocated
to the second year.) There are 278 estimates of mean consumption, and 281 estimates of mean income.

42

Table 2: Ratios of survey means to means from national income accounts
Unweighted

Population weighted

No of
surveys

Mean
ratio

Standard
error

Standard
deviation

Mean
ratio

Standard
error

Standard
deviation

All

277

0.860

(0.029)

0.306

0.779

(0.072)

0.191

EAP
EECA
LAC
MENA
OECD
SA
SSA

42
59
26
20
33
23
74

0.819
0.847
0.767
0.955
0.781
0.649
1.000

(0.069)
(0.038)
(0.094)
(0.104)
(0.052)
(0.063)
(0.061)

0.224
0.230
0.329
0.300
0.097
0.122
0.415

0.863
0.796
0.585
0.867
0.726
0.569
1.089

(0.031)
(0.040)
(0.078)
(0.111)
(0.032)
(0.036)
(0.089)

0.110
0.184
0.193
0.270
0.076
0.103
0.459

Income to
Consumption
All

266

0.904

(0.034)

0.290

1.008

(0.044)

0.174

EAP
EECA
LAC
OECD
SA
SSA

32
47
100
75
8
4

1.036
0.852
0.893
0.891
0.892
1.000

(0.065)
(0.038)
(0.084)
(0.020)
(0.028)
(0.136)

0.244
0.231
0.392
0.137
0.118
0.420

1.057
0.811
1.004
0.910
0.874
1.023

(0.019)
(0.030)
(0.143)
(0.011)
(0.009)
(0.204)

0.105
0.196
0.416
0.084
0.101
0.359

Income to
GDP
All

272

0.569

(0.023)

0.203

0.542

(0.023)

0.113

EAP
EECA
LAC
OECD
SA
SSA

32
49
103
76
8
4

0.515
0.530
0.616
0.527
0.685
0.837

(0.031)
(0.029)
(0.055)
(0.027)
(0.009)
(0.138)

0.124
0.157
0.264
0.092
0.100
0.512

0.512
0.481
0.661
0.586
0.659
0.672

(0.007)
(0.016)
(0.104)
(0.018)
(0.010)
(0.098)

0.051
0.119
0.288
0.059
0.071
0.228

Consumption
to cons.

Notes: EAP is East Asia and Pacific, EECA is Eastern Europe and Central Asia, LAC is Latin America and the
Caribbean, OECD comprises the countries of the OECD, SA is South Asia, and SSA is sub-Saharan Africa. There
are no income surveys for MENA in the sample. Numbers differ slightly from Table 1 because the relevant national
income magnitudes are not always available. Panel 1 shows the ratio of consumption from the survey to consumption
from the national accounts, Panel 2 the ratio of income from the surveys to consumption from the national accounts,
and Panel 3 the ratio of income from the surveys to GDP from the national accounts. Standard errors are calculated
so as to allow for correlations within countries.

43

Table 3: Population weighted growth rates, 1990–2000, real consumption or real income,
various measures, non-OECD countries
(percent per annum)
Surveys with
consumption
preference

Surveys with
income
preference

PWT6.1 matching
surveys by year &
country

PWT6.1 All
survey countries

Regression of log
on time

1.9

4.0

3.8

2.8

Average rate of
growth

2.3

5.0

4.5

2.8

Notes: Columns 1 and 2 show the growth rates of population weighted survey means. In column
1, whenever there is both an income and a consumption mean for a country/year pair,
consumption is used. In column 2, whenever there are two surveys, preference is given to
income. In both cases, survey means are converted to a constant price PPP basis by dividing by
the product of the US CPI and the consumption PPP exchange rate from the Penn World Tables,
Version 6.1 (PWT6.1). For each year from 1990 to 2000, a population weighted average of the
survey means is calculated; note that these averages involve different countries in different years,
see Table 1. The growth rates are then calculated in two ways, by regression of the logarithm on a
time trend (first row) or by calculating the average change in the logarithm over the period. These
can be quite different when the series is noisy, as is the case here, because countries come in and
out of the average. Columns 3 and 4 show comparable population weighted growth rates for real
PPP (chain weighted) consumption from PWT6.1. In Column 3, consumption from PWT6.1 is
used only for country/year pairs for which a survey mean exists; this column therefore shares the
variability in Columns 2 and 3 that comes from the varying selection of countries. Column 4
shows the population weighted growth rates for consumption from PWT6.1 using all countries
for which there ever exists a survey.

44

C o n s u m p tio n to c o n s u m p tio n ra tio

In c o m e to c o n s u m p tio n ra tio

2 .5

2

2
1 .5
1 .5
1
1
.5

.5
0

0
6

7

8

9

10

6

L o g o f re a l G D P P C 1 9 9 5 P P P

2

7

8

9

10

L o g o f rea l G D P P C 1 9 9 5 P P P

In c o m e to G D P ra tio
1 .5

1

.5

0
6

7

8

9

10

L o g o f re a l G D P P C 1 9 9 5 P P P

Figure 1: Ratio of survey estimates of mean income or consumption per capita to comparable national accounts estimates: 498
surveys, 124 countries, years from 1979 to 2000. The diameter of the circles is proportional to national population in the year of the
survey.
45

C o n s u m p tio n to c o n s u m p tio n ra tio

In c o m e to c o n s u m p tio n ra tio
2

2
1.5
1 .5
1

1

.5

.5

0

0
6

7

8

9

6

10

L o g o f real G D P P C 1 9 9 5 P P P

2

7

8

9

10

L o g o f real G D P P C 1 9 9 5 P P P

In c o m e to G D P ra tio
1 .5

1

.5

0
6

7

8

9

10

L o g o f real G D P P C 1 9 9 5 P P P

Figure 2: Ratio of survey estimates of mean income or consumption per capita to comparable national accounts estimates: 498
surveys, 124 countries, years from 1979 to 2000. Unweighted.
46

C onsum ption, P W T ,
m atche d to su rve ys

8

Log consumption or income

C on sum ption, P W T ,
all survey countries

7 .5

7

S u rvey m eans, consum ption
w here possible

S urvey m eans, incom e
whe re possible
6 .5
1990

199 2

1 994

199 6

19 98

20 00

Figure 3: Logarithms of population weighted averages of consumption or income, household surveys and Penn World Tables, v. 6.1.
47

U nited S tates

U nited K ing dom

.95

.8
C P S incom e
.75

.9

.7

.85

FE S consum ption

C E X consum ption
.65

.8
E FS consum ption

.6
C E X incom e
1985

1990

.75
1995

1975

2000

1980

1985

1990

1995

Figure 4: Ratios of survey means to corresponding national accounts statistics, consumption and income, US and UK
48

2000

IN D IA

C H IN A

0 .8

ratio of survey in com e to nas consum ption
ratio of su rvey consum ption
to nas consum ption

0 .7

1.1

1.0

old series

0 .6

new serie s

0.9

0 .5

0.8

0 .4
19 80

19 85

19 90

199 5

2000

19 80

ra tio of survey consum ption
to nas consum ption
198 5

1990

1 995

Figure 5: Ratios of survey means to national accounts means of consumption and/or income per head, India and China
49

200 0

43rd round, 1987-88

50th round, 1993-94

0

log of ratio of survey mean pce to state net domestic product per head

B I JK
HP
UP
OR

BI

RA
A PK E
MP

JK
TN

HA
KA

-.5
AS

GU

AS

PW
UB
MA

DE

UP
RA
KE
OR
HP
WB
M
APP
KA
HA
GPU
U

DE
TN

MA

-1

-1.5
.1
55th round, 1999-00

.2

.3

.4

.5

variance of log pce

0

A P A ndhra P rad esh, A S A ssam , B I B ihar, D E D elhi, G U G ujarat,
H A H aryana, JK Jam m u & K ashm ir, KA Karn ataka, K E K erala,
M P M adhya P ra desh , M A M aharashtra , O R O riss a, P U P unjab,
R A R ajasthan, T N Tam il N adu, U P U ttar P radesh, W B W es t B engal

BI

-.5

UP

JK

-1

AS

OR

RA
PU
GBU
W

DE

KE
MHPPH A
AP
KTN
A
MA

-1.5
.1

.2

.3
variance of log pce

.4

.5

Figure 6: Ratio of survey mean of consumption to state net domestic product and variance of log pce, India, three NSS survey rounds
50

