NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

TRADE, GROWTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Brian R. Copeland
M. Scott Taylor
Working Paper 9823
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9823
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of
Economic Research
©2003 by Brian R. Copeland and M. Scott Taylor. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed
two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is
given to the source.

Trade, Growth and the Environment
Brian R. Copeland and M. Scott Taylor
NBER Working Paper No. 9823
July 2003
JEL No. Q0, F1, O0
ABSTRACT
For the last ten years environmentalists and the trade policy community have engaged in a heated
debate over the environmental consequences of liberalized trade. The debate was originally fueled
by negotiations over the North American Free Trade Agreement and the Uruguay round of GATT
negotiations, both of which occurred at a time when concerns over global warming, species
extinction and industrial pollution were rising. Recently it has been intensified by the creation of the
World Trade Organization (WTO) and proposals for future rounds of trade negotiations. The debate
has often been unproductive. It has been hampered by the lack of a common language and also
suffered from little recourse to economic theory and empirical evidence. The purpose of this essay
is set out what we currently know about the environmental consequences of economic growth and
international trade. We critically review both theory and empirical work to answer three basic
questions. What do we know about the relationship between international trade, economic growth
and the environment? How can this evidence help us evaluate ongoing policy debates? Where do
we go from here?

Brian R. Copeland

M. Scott Taylor

Department of Economics

Department of Economics

University of British Columbia

Princeton University

Vancouver, BC V6T 1Z1

306 Fisher Hall

brianco@interchange.ubc.ca

Princeton, NJ 08544-1021
and NBER
staylor@ssc.wisc.edu

TRADE, GROWTH AND THE ENVIRONMENT
Brian R. Copeland (U.B.C)
M. Scott Taylor (University of Wisconsin)
Revised: May 2003

1. Introduction
For the last ten years environmentalists and the trade policy community have engaged in
a heated debate over the environmental consequences of liberalized trade. The debate was
originally fueled by negotiations over the North American Free Trade Agreement and the
Uruguay round of GATT negotiations, both of which occurred at a time when concerns over
global warming, species extinction and industrial pollution were rising. Recently it has been
intensified by the creation of the World Trade Organization (WTO) and proposals for future
rounds of trade negotiations.
The debate has often been unproductive because the parties differ greatly in their trust of
market forces and typically value the environment differently. It has been hampered by the lack
of a common language and also suffered from little recourse to economic theory and empirical
evidence. This is perhaps not surprising because much of the work in this area is still quite new.
The purpose of this essay is set out what we currently know about the environmental
consequences of economic growth and international trade. We critically review both theory and
empirical work to answer three basic questions. What do we know about the relationship between
international trade, economic growth and the environment? How can this evidence help us
evaluate ongoing policy debates in this area? Where do we go from here?
To answer these questions, we discuss both the empirical and theoretical literature with
the aid of a relatively simple general equilibrium model where government policy and private
sector behavior interact to determine the equilibrium level of pollution. The model is developed
in Section 2 of the paper and then employed in various guises throughout. Our use of a model to
organize our review reflects an over-arching theme of our essay: economic theory needs to play a
much larger role in guiding empirical investigation, suggesting alternative hypotheses, and
disciplining inferences. The vast majority of empirical work in this field has little connection to

1

explicit theory, and we argue that this has left important policy debates, which hinge on the
relative importance of various theoretical magnitudes, badly informed.
The economic literature on these issues came in two waves, with an initial surge of
activity in the 1970’s and a resurgence of interest stimulated by the policy debates of the past
decade. 1 Much of the earlier literature was normative, with a focus on issues such as gains from
trade and optimal trade or environmental policies.2 A large component of recent work also
focuses on policy analysis but its most significant feature is its concern with positive issues:
generating and attempting to test hypotheses about how trade or growth affects environmental
outcomes. We view these latter issues as fundamental to resolving current policy debates, and so
most of our essay will focus on this aspect of the literature.3
We begin our analysis in Section 2 by examining the link between incomes per capita and
environmental quality. Interest in this link arose from the pioneering work by Grossman and
Krueger (1993) on NAFTA, which subsequently led to a burgeoning literature on what has come
to be known as the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC). The Environmental Kuznets Curve
hypothesizes an inverse- U shaped relationship between a country’s per capita income and its
level of environmental quality: increased incomes are associated with an increase in pollution in
poor countries, but a decline in pollution in rich countries. This literature is important because
many in the trade policy community have argued that trade and growth may actually be good for
the environment. If environmental quality is a normal good, increases in income brought about by
trade or growth will both increase the demand for environmental quality and increase the ability
of governments to afford costly investments in environmental protection.
Our review of both the theoretical and empirical work on the EKC leads us to be
skeptical about the existence of a simple and predictable relationship between pollution and per
capita income. To investigate the EKC we employ a simple pollution demand and supply system
linking pollution levels to national characteristics (incomes, factor endowments and technologies)

1

See, for example, Baumol (1971), Walter (1973), Markusen (1975), Pethig (1976), and Siebert (1977).
Exceptions include Walter’s (1973) empirical paper and Pethig (1976) on the pattern of trade.
3
Other recent surveys that focus more on policy include Rauscher (2001) and Ulph (1997). Nordstrom and
Vaughan (1999) provide a good comprehensive review of the trade and environment literature.
2

2

and trading opportunities (comparative advantage and current trade restrictions). Much of the
work on the EKC reduces this set of possible explanatory factors to essentially just one - incomes
per capita - although it is not clear why we would want to impose these restrictions on empirical
estimation ex ante. This concern receives some support from empirical work that finds that the
shape of the estimated relationship between pollution and income is sometimes sensitive to
functional form, the sample of countries or cities used, and the time period chosen.
Despite these concerns, the EKC literature has made two lasting and significant
contributions. First, it raised important empirical questions about how trade and growth affect the
environment, and launched a significant research agenda. Second, it has provided quite
convincing evidence that there is an income effect that raises environmental quality. Moreover,
there are strong indications that this income effect works because increases in the stringency of
environmental regulation accompany higher per capita incomes. Therefore an analysis of the
effects of trade and growth on the environment cannot proceed without taking into account
endogenous policy responses.
Unfortunately because most of the literature has relied on simple reduced form
estimation, there is very little work that isolates this income effect from other factors, such as the
scale effects of growth and capital abundance. Consequently we still know very little about when
this income effect is strong enough to offset forces, such as capital accumulation or export-led
expansion of polluting industries, which are associated with increased demands on the
environment. Some evidence on this score exists, but it is limited and specific to certain
commonly measured pollutants (SO2 for example).
While the link between income growth and the environment is important, trade may alter
environmental outcomes through a variety of other channels. Trade may encourage a relocation of
polluting industries from countries with strict environmental policy to those with less stringent
policy. These shifts may in turn increase global pollution or they may have a chilling effect on
environmental policy, as countries will be reluctant to tighten environmental regulations because
of concerns over international competitiveness.
To examine these additional concerns we evaluate the environmental impact of trade
liberalization in Section 3 starting in a small open economy setting and then moving to a world

3

with many small economies and world price determination. Our analysis within the small open
economy setting links the environmental impact of trade liberalization to the choice of policy
instruments, the flexibility of policy and, most importantly, a nation’s comparative advantage. At
this point we find it crucial to distinguish between two different hypotheses linking pollution
regulation to comparative advantage. The first is that a tightening up of pollution regulation will,
at the margin, have an effect on plant location decisions and trade flows. We call this a pollution
haven effect. This hypothesis has strong theoretical support.
The second hypothesis is that a reduction in trade barriers will lead to a shifting of
pollution-intensive industry from countries with stringent regulations to countries with weaker
regulations. We call this the pollution haven hypothesis. The theoretical support for the pollution
haven hypothesis is, in contrast, quite weak because trade theory suggests that many other factors,
in addition to pollution regulation, affect trade flows. If these other factors are sufficiently strong,
then it is quite possible for there to exist a pollution haven effect, but have the pollution haven
hypothesis fail. This distinction has a large impact on our discussion of policy issues.
Until quite recently, there was a consensus in the empirical literature that differences in
the stringency of environmental regulation have little or no effect on trade and investment flows
(see Jaffe et al., 1995). Recent work suggests this conclusion was premature. Most of the
literature prior to 1997 that investigated the stringency of environmental regulation on trade and
investment flows used cross sectional data. These studies are unable to control for unobserved
heterogeneity across countries or regions and typically treat pollution regulations as exogenous.
If pollution policy is endogenous or there are important omitted factors, then the estimated results
will be misleading. Several recent studies have addressed these issues and found evidence for the
existence of a pollution haven effect: the stringency of pollution regulations does affect plant
location and trade flows. There remains however, little convincing evidence to support the
pollution haven hypothesis. Instead the available evidence suggests that other factors are more
important in determining trade patterns than are differences in pollution regulations.
This is an area that still needs much more work, in part because the literature has often
blurred the distinction between the pollution haven effect and the pollution haven hypothesis.
This distinction is also important to our answers to two key policy questions. In Section 4 we

4

first ask whether environmental policy should be constrained by international trade law to prevent
countries from using it as a substitute for trade policy. This issue lies behind much of the concern
that trade liberalization might lead to a "race to the bottom" in standards as countries weaken their
environmental policy in response to the competitive pressures of freer trade. The empirical
evidence on the pollution haven effect is relevant to this question because if pollution policy does
affect trade and investment flows, as recent evidence indicates, then it is possible that weak
pollution policy may be used as a loophole in trade agreements. The second key policy question
is whether trade policy should be used to achieve environmental objectives either at home or
abroad. The disputes at the WTO arising from the U.S. import bans on tuna from Mexico to
protect dolphins, and on shrimp from various countries to protect turtles are two prominent
examples of this type of issue. On this issue evidence concerning the pollution haven hypothesis
is relevant because much of the concern over trade’s environmental effect — either at home or
abroad — disappears if the hypothesis is false.
We do not provide unequivocal answers to the questions we posed. Instead we try to
report on the current state of affairs and identify the set of important but as yet unanswered
questions that we need to resolve to better understand the trade, growth and environment link.4

2. Growth and the Environment

We start with the relationship between income and the environment. This is a key aspect
of the debate. The main argument for free trade is that it will raise national incomes; but if this is
so, then it is important to understand how higher incomes affect environmental quality.

4

One large omission from our review is any explicit discussion of renewable or non-renewable resource

use and sustainability. For many in the developing world, the status of fish stocks, aquifers and forests are
key environmental indicators but an analysis of trade s impact on resource use would take us too far afield.
For recent work on these issues see the survey by Brown (2000), the series of case studies examining the
impact of trade liberalization on resource industries available from the United Nations Environment
Programme at http://www.unep.ch/etu/publications/index.htm, and the excellent book length treatment of
Coxhead and Jayasuriya (2003).

5

The empirical literature on the relationship between environmental quality and per capita
income has proliferated over the past decade, following the seminal work of Grossman and
Krueger (1993). Using a panel of data on air quality from 42 countries, Grossman and Krueger
found a hump-shaped relation between some measures of air quality (such as SO2 concentrations)
and per capita income: pollution at first rises and then falls with income per capita.5 Selden and
Song (1994) found a similar pattern using data on sulfur dioxide emissions. For some other
pollutants (such as contaminated drinking water), Grossman and Krueger (1995) and Shafik and
Banyopadhyay (1992) found pollution declines monotonically with income per capita; while for
others (such as carbon emissions) pollution tends to rise with income per capita. The humpshaped relation has captured most of the attention and for this reason, this line of work is known
as the Environmental Kuznets Curve (EKC) literature since it echoes Kuznets’ finding of a humpshaped relation between inequality and per capita income. There are now numerous papers that
estimate an EKC for various measures of environmental quality, time periods, countries, etc.6
What is perhaps most striking about the EKC literature is the limited role that theory has
played in its development. This has created difficulties in interpretation since the basic finding is
consistent with many possible explanations. For this reason, we begin by asking what theory has
to say about the relation between income and pollution before moving on to the empirical work.

2.1. A Model

We need a model with three key features to help interpret the literature. We need at least
two goods that differ in pollution intensity to allow for the possibility of differences in the
composition of economic activity over time or across countries. We need at least two primary
factors of production to provide a simple motive for international trade that is independent of
pollution regulation. And finally, we need endogenous pollution policy to examine how pollution
5

An earlier literature found some evidence to support a hump-shaped relationship between the intensity of
metal use (consumption of a given metal per unit of GDP) and per capita income. See Malenbaum (1978)
and Radestky (1992). Note, however, that this does not imply a fall in resource use per capita after the
hump is passed.
6
See Cavlovic et al. (2000) and Dasgupta et al. (2002) for recent reviews of this work.

6

may vary across countries with different levels of per capita income. In what follows, we opt for
simplicity rather than generality and do not attempt to be exhaustive in our coverage.7
We adopt a static model and focus on production-generated pollution.8 Pollution from a
given firm harms consumers but does not affect the productivity of other producers.9 There are
two goods, X and Y, each produced with a constant returns to scale technology using two primary
factors, capital (K) and labor (L). Denote the price of X by p, and treat Y as the numeraire. To
capture differences in pollution intensity across sectors, we assume X generates pollution during
production, but Y does not pollute at all.
The production function for good Y is simply:
Y = H(Ky,Ly).

(1)

where H is increasing, concave and linearly homogeneous.
Production of good X generates pollution emissions (Z). If firms do not undertake
abatement, we assume each unit of output generates one unit of pollution, and that output of X is
given by F(Kx,Lx), where F is increasing, concave and linearly homogeneous. We can think of F
as "potential output". If abatement does occur, then for z ≤ F, output of X is given by:
x = zα[F(Kx,Lx)]1-α,
where 0 < α < 1. Although pollution is a joint output, one can treat pollution (or environmental
services) as an input for analytical convenience.10 A firm can reduce pollution and maintain
output constant by using more primary factors and adopting less polluting techniques.11
If governments regulate pollution, we assume that firms face a price τ for each unit of

7

The model is based on Copeland and Taylor (2003), which has its roots in Copeland and Taylor (1994).
McGuire (1982) and Rauscher (1997) use similar models.
8
Models with consumption-generated pollution have been somewhat neglected in the trade literature. For
one example, see parts of Copeland and Taylor (1995b) and Rauscher (1997).
9
Production externalities are discussed in Copeland and Taylor (1999) and Bennaroch and Thille (2001).
10
One can alternatively start with a joint production technology and then (under some regularity
conditions) invert it to obtain a production function that treats pollution as an input. See Siebert et al.
(1980) and Copeland and Taylor (2003).
11
Our functional form implicitly assumes that abatement has the same factor intensity as production or
potential output. This assumption is made for simplicity.

7

(2)

emissions that they release. This price may be implemented with either an emissions tax τ or by a
tradable emissions permit system, in which the government sets the total level of pollution Z, and
the emissions price τ is determined in the market.
Firms choose the emissions intensity that minimizes their production costs. Let e = z/x
denote emissions per unit of output. The Cobb-Douglas form of the production function implies
that the share of emission charges in the value of output is α = τz/px, and hence at an interior
solution, we have:12

e≡

z αp
=
≤1
x τ

(3)

The emission intensity falls as pollution taxes rise; and it rises when the price of the polluting
good p rises because the opportunity cost of resources used in abatement is higher.
To close the production side of the model, we require non-positive profits in each
industry, and full employment. These conditions can be solved to obtain outputs as functions of
endowments, prices and policy:

x = x ( p, τ , K , L)
y = y( p, τ , K , L)

(4)

For a given pollution tax, it can be verified that this model behaves much like the
production side of the standard Heckscher-Ohlin model of international trade. In particular, an
increase in the supply of capital will increase the output of the capital-intensive industry X, and
reduce the output of Y. An increase in the supply of labor stimulates Y and contracts X.
We can summarize the production side of the model with a national income function.
Because markets are competitive, the private sector maximizes the value of national income for
any given pollution level z. This allows us to write national income G as the solution to an
optimization problem:

G( p, K , L, z ) = max{ px + y: ( x, y) ∈ T ( K , L, z )}

(5)

{x , y}

where T is the feasible technology set. As is well known, the national income function satisfies a

12

If the pollution tax is sufficiently low, firms will not abate at all, and a corner solution will result. At this
point z = x, and so e = 1. Referring to (3) this no-abatement solution occurs if τ ≤ αp.

8

number of useful properties.13 Most useful to us is the following:

τ=

∂G
.
∂z

(6)

The equilibrium price of a pollution permit is equal to the effect on national income of an
increase in allowable pollution; that is, if more pollution is allowed, national income rises by the
value of the marginal product of emissions. If we instead think of the effects of a reduction in
emissions z, then the cost to the economy is also ∂G/∂z. This is the general equilibrium marginal
abatement cost. Hence another interpretation of (6) is that the price of a unit of emissions is equal
to the marginal abatement cost, which is a standard result in environmental economics.
We assume there are N identical consumers in the economy. Each consumer maximizes
utility, treating pollution as given. For simplicity, we assume preferences over consumption
goods are homothetic and the utility function is strongly separable with respect to consumption
goods and environmental quality.14 The indirect utility function for a typical consumer is

V ( p, I , z ) = v( I / β ( p)) − h( z )

(7)

where h is increasing and convex, I is per capita income (so I = G/N), β is a price index, and v is
increasing and concave. Pollution is harmful to consumers and is treated as a pure public bad (all
consumers experience the same level of pollution).

The Demand for Pollution

In our approach, we treat pollution as an endogenously supplied factor of production.
This suggests a natural way to think about the determinants of pollution is in terms of its demand

13

It is concave in (K, L and Z) and convex in prices. Moreover, outputs and factor prices can be recovered
with simple differentiation: x = ∂G/∂p; r =∂G/K; w = ∂G/L. See Woodland (1982) and Dixit and Norman
(1980) for the standard treatment of national income functions, and Copeland (1994) for an application to
environmental problems.
14
Homotheticity allows us to write the indirect utility function as an increasing function of real income. It
also ensures that the relative demand for goods is unaffected by income levels. This is a standard
assumption in the international trade literature and it allows us to focus on the role of environmental policy
and factor supplies in explaining trade patterns.

9

and supply. Notice (6) can be interpreted as the inverse demand for pollution. We illustrate this
demand curve in Figure 1. It slopes down because G is concave in z. More intuitively, we can
exploit the structure we imposed on technology to write pollution demand as

z = e( p / τ ) x ( p, τ , K , L)

(8)

This is the same relation we would obtain by inverting (6) and using our assumptions on
technology. From (8), we can see that the demand for pollution slopes down for two reasons: as τ
falls, firms pollute more both because the emissions intensity e rises, and because the lower tax
on pollution makes production of the dirty good more attractive (so that output of X expands
while Y contracts).

The Supply of Pollution

Pollution supply depends on the policy regime. If there is no regulation, then pollution
supply is perfectly elastic at τ = 0. Pollution in this case is entirely demand driven. If there is an
exogenous pollution tax το, then supply is a horizontal line. Shifts up or down in pollution
demand raise or lower emissions. Alternatively, if there is a fixed overall pollution quota in place
(as in a tradable emission permit system), then the pollution supply curve is vertical. Shifts in
pollution demand raise or lower the price of emissions, but have no effect on overall pollution.
In general, we expect pollution policy to be endogenous; and in particular, we expect that
changes in per capita income will lead to an increase in the demand for environmental quality,
and (if governments are responsive) a tightening up of pollution regulations. The endogeneity of
pollution policy plays a key role in both the theory and empirical literature.
There are two approaches to modeling the policy process. One is to simply assume a
benevolent government chooses policy. Another is to adopt a political economy framework
where the interaction of competing interest groups determines policy.15 We follow the bulk of the

15

The use of political economy models in the trade and environment literature is still in the early stages.
Examples include Hillman and Ursprung (1994), Fredriksson (1997, 1999), Gulati (2001), Raucher (1997;
ch. 5) and Schleich (1999).

10

t
N•MD

τo
Gz

Zo

Figure 1
Pollution Demand and Supply

Z

literature on endogenous policy and adopt a representative agent framework in which the
government provides efficient policy.16
To determine the optimal pollution policy, the government chooses the pollution level to
maximize the utility of a representative consumer subject to production possibilities and private
sector behavior. The government’s problem is:

Max {V ( I / β ( p), z ) s.t. I = G( p, K , L, z ) / N }

(9)

z

Because we assume the economy is small in world markets, the government treats the goods price
p as given. Hence dp/dz = 0 and the first order condition from (9) becomes:

VI Gz
+ Vz = 0 .
N
To simplify, recall that Gz = τ, which is the private sector’s marginal valuation for a unit of
pollution. As well, define R = I/β(p) as real income of the representative consumer. We can then
rewrite the first order condition as:

τ = N • [ −Vz / VI ] = N • MD( p, R, z )

(10)

where MD(p,R,z) is a representative consumer’s marginal damage from pollution (the marginal
rate of substitution between pollution and income). The optimal tax simply implements the
standard Samuelson rule: the pollution tax is the sum of marginal damages across all individuals.
If pollution policy is implemented efficiently, then (10) can be interpreted as the supply
of pollution. As shown in Figure 1, the supply curve slopes upwards because increases in
pollution tend to make environmental quality scarce relative to consumption. That is, a
diminishing marginal rate of substitution between consumption and environmental quality yields
an upward sloping supply curve. As well, exogenous increases in endowments or technology that
increase real income will shift the supply curve in: because environmental quality is a normal
good, marginal damage is increasing in real income (MDR > 0).17

16
17

See however our discussion of political economy elements in section 3 on policy implications.
R also varies endogenously with z; this is taken into account when drawing the supply curve.

11

Market equilibrium with efficient policy

The equilibrium level of pollution is determined by the interaction between the derived
demand for pollution and the aggregate marginal damage as captured in pollution supply.
Combining (6) and (10) yields:

Gz ( p, K , L, z ) = N • MD( p, R( p, K , L, z ), z ) .

(11)

Equation (11) determines the efficient level of pollution zo, as illustrated in Figure 1. To
implement zo, the government can either introduce a pollution tax το, or issue zo marketable
permits which would yield the equilibrium permit price το.

Scale, Technique and Composition Effects

It is useful to have a simple way to link changes in the economy to environmental
outcomes. An understanding of these links is critical for empirical work because we have to
distinguish between the effects of growth, trade, and other factors if we are to measure their
importance. Grossman and Krueger (1993) used the concepts of scale, composition and
technique effects as the basis of their discussion, and we proposed formal model-based definitions
in Copeland and Taylor (1994). Here we employ these definitions to provide a simple
decomposition.
Trade and growth both increase real income, and therefore both increase the economy’s
scale. To be more precise, we need a measure of the scale of the economy; that is, we need an
index of output. There are many ways to create such a quantity index, but for simplicity, we will
use the value of output at a given level of world prices as our measure of the economy’s scale.
Our measure of scale, S, is defined as

S = pxo x + pyo y

(12)

where pxo and pyo denote the level of world prices prior to any shocks we analyze. If world
prices change, we continue to construct S using the old (base-period) world prices. This is so that
scale will not change simply because of a change in valuation.
12

Given this definition of scale, and setting base-period prices to unity, we now use (12) to
write pollution as

z = ex = eϕ x S

(13)

where ϕx = pxox/S = x/S is the value share of the dirty good X in total output evaluated at baseperiod prices. Hence pollution emissions, z, depend on the emissions intensity of production, e,
the importance of the dirty good industry in the economy, ϕ, and the scale of the economy, S.
Taking logs and totally differentiating yields our decomposition:
^

^

^

^

z = S+ ϕ + e

(14)

^

where z = dz/z, etc.
The first term is the scale effect. It measures the increase in pollution that would be
generated if the economy were simply scaled up, holding constant the mix of goods produced and
production techniques. As an example, if there were constant returns to scale and all of the
endowments of the economy grew by 10%, and if there were no change in relative prices or
emissions intensities, then we should expect to see a 10% increase in pollution.
The second term is the composition effect as captured by the change in the share of the
dirty good in national income. If we hold the scale of the economy and emissions intensities
constant, then an economy that devotes more of its resources to producing the polluting good will
pollute more.
Finally, we have the technique effect, captured by the last term in (14). Holding all else
constant, a reduction in the emissions intensity will reduce pollution.
Understanding the interaction between these effects will play an important role in
determining how trade and growth affect the environment.

2.2 The Environmental Kuznets curve

With our model and definitions in hand we now consider the literature on the
Environmental Kuznets Curve. From the vantage point of our demand and supply system, a key

13

difficulty immediately arises. The EKC literature seeks to estimate a simple relationship between
per capita income and pollution. But income and pollution are each endogenous variables that are
functions of more primitive determinants. Since different types of economic activity have
different pollution intensities, it would be surprising to find a simple relationship between all
possible realizations of income and pollution. Our simple theory predicts instead that the shape
of the relationship between income and pollution should vary with the source of income growth.
To illustrate, we demonstrate how physical and human capital accumulation yield
different income-pollution paths. For simplicity normalize the population so that N = 1, and
suppose there is no pollution regulation. In this case, the emission intensity is e = 1 and we can
specialize (8) to write pollution as
z = x(p,τ,K,L)

(15)

I = G(p,K,L,z)

(16)

where τ = 0. Income is given by

Suppose growth occurs via capital accumulation alone. Then differentiating (15) and
(16), holding τ = 0 and L constant, yields18

zˆ = ε xK Kˆ

(17)

Iˆ = sr Kˆ .

(18)

and

where εxK > 0 is the elasticity of X output with respect to the endowment of capital, sr > 0 is the
share of capital in national income, and zˆ = dz / z , etc. Equations (17) and (18) tell us that
capital accumulation raises both income and pollution.
Combining them we obtain a reduced form relationship between pollution and income:

zˆ =

ε xK ˆ
I
sr
(+)

18

Note that Gz = 0 since τ = 0.

14

(19)

With no pollution policy, there is a positive, monotonic relationship between pollution and
income if growth occurs via the factor used intensively in the dirty industry.
Alternatively, suppose growth occurs via human capital accumulation. Then we have:

zˆ =

ε xL ˆ
I
sw

(20)

(−)

where εxL < 0 is the elasticity of X output with respect to the endowment of human capital and sw
> 0 is the share of human capital in national income. Note εxL < 0, follows from the Rybczinski
theorem of international trade: human capital accumulation stimulates the clean industry Y, which
draws resources out of the dirty industry X and lowers pollution. Hence when growth occurs via
accumulation of the factor used intensively in the clean industry, there is a negative monotonic
relationship between pollution and income.
This simple example highlights how different sources of growth will in general trace out
different income and pollution paths.19 Theory suggests there may well be a stable relation
between pollution and various primitives such as technology and primary factors of production,
and between income and these same variables. But unless all countries grow in exactly the same
way, there is little reason to expect that there will be a simple relationship between pollution and
income.20 Accordingly, all theories that generate an inverse-U shaped Environmental Kuznets
Curve must proceed by imposing more structure than even our simple pollution demand and
supply model contains.
There are four main explanations for the EKC. Each explanation places restrictions on
preferences and technology to make equilibrium pollution a function of per capita income, and to
generate the desired shape of the income-pollution relation. We classify these explanations by
the key mechanism driving their results. These are: (1) sources of growth; (2) income effects; (2)

19

In an interesting paper, Bulte and van Soest (2001) make a related point in the context of renewable
resource exploitation. Using a model of optimal resource use, they consider the relation between the steady
state resource stock and income, and point out that the shape of the relation depends on whether income
rises via an increase in the resource price or an exogenous increase in non-resource-based income.
20
Some empirical support for this view can be found in Harbaugh et al. (2002) and other papers, as we
discuss later.

15

threshold effects; and (4) increasing returns to abatement. Although all of these explanations
describe forces that could interact, we will isolate the key features of each in our presentation.

Sources of Growth

To obtain the rising and then falling portions of an EKC, even in the absence of any
environmental policy, we could place restrictions on the growth process across all countries. This
yields one of the commonly mentioned explanations for the EKC, although it seems to lack a
formal development in the theoretical literature.21 Very simply, suppose policy is not very
responsive to income (i.e. a restriction on pollution supply), but countries grow primarily via
capital accumulation in the early stages of development and by human capital acquisition in later
stages (i.e. restrictions on the time profile of demand shifters). Then pollution will rise and then
fall with growth in per capita income as composition effects driven by the factor growth drive the
profile for pollution. Composition effects are key here, because we have assumed a zero policy
response eliminating technique effects, and the composition effects of factor accumulation
dominate scale effects in this model. Given these assumptions, changes in the sources of growth
are reflected in the pattern of pollution.22
The source of growth explanation for the EKC is important to our discussion for two
reasons. First, it demonstrates how the pollution consequences of growth depend on the source of
growth. Therefore, the analogy drawn by some in the environmental community between the
damaging effects of economic development and those of liberalized trade is, at best, incomplete.
Second, the sources of growth explanation demonstrates that a strong policy response to income

21

Grossman and Krueger (1995) and others cite Syrquin’s (1989) discussion of the structural
transformation in an economy during the development process (for example for agriculture to
manufacturing to services) as motivation for the view that predictable changes in the sources of growth
during the development process could affect the pollution-income relationship.
22
This approach has been relatively neglected in the empirical literature until recently. Gale and Mendez
(1998) include relative capital abundance in their estimation of an EKC for sulfur dioxide and Panayotou,
Peterson and Sachs (2000) use a measure of the capital stock in their study of CO2 emissions. Hettige,
Mani, and Wheeler (2000) decompose industrial water pollution into scale, composition and pollution
intensity effects, and find that the manufacturing’s share of output follows a hump-shaped pattern, but that
it is not strong enough to yield an EKC pattern for water pollution.

16

gains is not necessary for pollution to fall with growth. Hence the shape of the EKC need not be
driven by income gains making pollution policy more stringent.

Income Effects

An alternative widely cited explanation for the EKC is that its shape reflects changes in
the demand for environmental quality as income rises.23 To illustrate this theory, suppose
governments set policy efficiently, and consider the effects of neutral technical progress. Let λ
be a shift parameter representing technology, and again normalize the population so that N=1.
With neutral technical change, we can write our GNP function as λG(p,K,L,Z).
Pollution is determined by:

λGz ( p, K , L, z ) = MD( p, λG( p, K , L, z ) / β ( p), z )

(21)

and differentiating with respect to λ and rearranging yields:

dz 1 − ε MD, R
=
dλ
∆

(22)

where ∆ > 0, and ε MD , R is the income elasticity of marginal damage. Neutral technological
progress shifts both the demand and supply of pollution. Demand shifts because the marginal
product of pollution rises; supply shifts because real income has grown.
Whether pollution rises or falls with real income changes depends on the income
elasticity of marginal damage.24 If the elasticity is less than one, then the supply shift is swamped
by the demand shift and pollution rises; if it is greater than one, the opposite occurs.25

23

Lopez (1994) provides an early treatment of this approach, as he shows how non-homotheticity in
preferences between consumption and environmental quality can lead to an EKC. Gawande et al. (2001)
provide an interesting variation on the income effect approach — in their model, agents are freely mobile
and so income effects induce a sorting equilibrium in which higher income agents avoid polluted areas.
24
Similar results are obtained by considering the effects of neutral factor accumulation on pollution.
Lopez (1994) shows how the effects of factor accumulation on the environment depend on interaction
between the elasticity of substitution between pollution and non-pollution inputs and the income elasticity
of marginal damage. Copeland and Taylor (2003; ch.3) explore these issues in greater detail.
25
While the income effect theory is illustrated here in terms of a benevolent government in a representative
agent economy, it can be modified to allow for political economy motives. For example Lopez and Mitra

17

Because the EKC has both an increasing and decreasing segment, this pure incomedriven explanation requires a variable income elasticity of marginal damage to generate the
required shape. As an example, suppose indirect utility is given by:

V ( p, I , z ) = c1 – c2 exp( − R / ξ ) − h( z )

(23)

where ξ > 0 (and R is real income). The key characteristic of (23) is that the income elasticity of
marginal damage is simply R/ξ. Using (22), we obtain an inverse-U relation between real income
and pollution: pollution rises with neutral growth if R < ξ and falls with neutral growth if R > ξ.
Environmental quality is a normal good throughout, but at low incomes, pollution rises with
growth because increased consumption is valued highly relative to environmental quality. As
income rises, the willingness to pay for environmental quality rises and increasingly large
sacrifices in consumption are made to provide greater environmental benefits.
The income-effect explanation of the EKC follows from two assumptions: neutral growth
and a particular assumption on preferences. Neutral growth restricts the magnitude of shifts in
pollution demand as growth proceeds; while the rising income elasticity of marginal damage
ensures ever-stronger technique effects. Composition effects play little or no role.
This explanation suggests that the relationship between pollution and income should vary
across pollutants according to their perceived damage. For example, we might expect a very low
ξ for directly life-threatening pollutants such as contaminated drinking water. In this case, the
EKC would be (almost) monotonically declining throughout, as was found by Shafik (1994) and
Grossman and Krueger (1995). Alternatively ξ might be very high for pollutants whose harm is
uncertain or delayed. Carbon emissions may fit this category, and indeed most studies have
found that carbon emissions per capita tend to increase monotonically with per capita income.26

(2001) show how the presence of corruption will move the turning point of the EKC to the right. Some
empirical studies, such as Barrett and Graddy (2000) include measures of political freedom as an extra shift
variable in their EKC regressions; and find that all else equal, increased freedom is associated with a
cleaner environment. However, the theory outlined above would imply that the political freedom variables
should be interacted with income variables since one would expect political freedom to influence the
strength of the policy-induced technique effect.
26
See Shafik (1994) and Holz-Eakin and Selden (1995). However, Schmalensee, Stoker and Judson (1998)
do find a within-sample peak for carbon emissions per capita.

18

Threshold Effects

An alternative explanation for the EKC is based on threshold effects. Threshold effects
can arise in either the political process as in Jones and Manuelli (1995), or in abatement
opportunities as in John and Pecchino (1994), Selden and Song (1995), and Stokey (1998).
Threshold effects lead to a very different relationship between income and pollution in early
versus later stages of development. At low levels of economic activity, pollution may be
unregulated entirely or regulation may have little impact on the profitability of abatement.
Pollution therefore at first rises with growth. But after some threshold has been breached, and
policy is either implemented or starts to bind, these models predict pollution declines with income
- provided appropriate assumptions are imposed on tastes and technology.
There are at least two possible ways to ensure regulation is ineffective in checking
pollution at low levels of income. The first is to assume an abatement production function where
the marginal product of abatement is bounded. In this case, there will exist a set of relatively low
pollution taxes for which firms choose the zero abatement option; consequently even though
taxes may rise with growth over some range this has no affect on abatement and pollution rises
with economic activity. An abatement function of this type was used in Copeland and Taylor
(1994) and is implicit in Stokey (1998). The model we presented in Section 1 contains this
attribute because we note from (3) if τ < αp, no abatement occurs. This means that there is no
technique effect to offset the scale effect of growth when incomes are low. In models with only
one good, this ensures that pollution must rise with growth at low levels of income. In multigood models, the pollution tax can still play a role by altering the composition of output at low
levels of income, but it becomes much more effective once the abatement threshold is breached.
Alternatively we can assume a fixed cost to either abatement or policy. Suppose there is
a fixed cost CR of setting up a pollution regulation system. When national income is low, the
aggregate willingness to pay to reduce pollution to its first best level may be less than the fixed
regulatory cost CR, in which case it is not worth setting up a regulatory system. With no system
in place, pollution rises lock-step with output.

19

Both threshold theories need two further assumptions to generate an EKC. First we need
an assumption on the growth process to restrict composition effects. This is typically done by
adopting a one good framework or by limiting substitution possibilities by functional form
assumptions. We will consider neutral growth. Second, we need an assumption on preferences to
ensure that once abatement occurs, the response of pollution taxes is sufficiently income elastic.
In our framework, this requires an income elasticity of marginal damage in excess of one.
With these two assumptions in hand, consider the impact of growth via neutral
technological progress. In the policy threshold model, the demand for pollution shifts out as
technology improves and income rises. The net benefits of reducing pollution increase with
income because we have assumed the elasticity of marginal damage with respect to income is
greater than one, and hence there will be a critical income level at which it is worth setting up a
regulatory system. Further income gains then lower pollution. This simple model predicts a
discrete improvement in environmental quality at the critical point; however, by introducing
adjustment costs, we could obtain a smooth response.27
In the abatement threshold model, pollution taxes rise with growth and eventually firms
move off their corner solution. Abatement occurs and further increases in income drive pollution
downward. Hence we obtain an inverse-U relation between pollution and income that is kinked
at its peak.
Since threshold explanations also rely on income effects, they bear a close family
resemblance to the income-effects explanation. Both explanations rely on a strong policy
response to income gains as development proceeds, but they differ in their explanations for the
initial rising segment. Threshold effect explanations predict a period of inactivity in pollution
policy and/or private sector responses to policy whereas the income effect explanations predict
small but increasingly tougher policies and higher pollution abatement costs over time.

27

See Copeland and Taylor (2003) for an explicit development of this model.

20

Increasing Returns to Abatement

A final explanation for the EKC is increasing returns in abatement. The argument is
simply that as the scale of abatement rises its efficiency may increase. These efficiencies make
abatement more profitable and hence even if pollution policy is stagnant and unchanging
pollution can fall as more abatement is undertaken. Andreoni and Levinson (2000) develop this
idea within a one good, endowment model and demonstrate how this process can lead to an EKC.
This explanation carries with it an interesting twist on scale and technique effects because as the
scale of output rises, even with constant pollution taxes, firms switch to cleaner techniques of
production. The scale effect creates its own technique effect even with no pollution policy
response to higher incomes. As such, this theory shares a common feature with the sources of
growth explanation in that an EKC pollution profile is compatible with no change in pollution
policy over the development path.
In Andreoni and Levinson’s endowment model, issues of market structure arising from
the increasing returns technology do not arise, but one can relatively easily extend their
increasing returns to abatement explanation to allow for perfectly competitive firms by using
either industry-wide learning by abating28 or by employing the methods of Markusen (1989) and
introducing intermediate goods.

The Role of International Markets

Each of the theories we discussed above could generate an EKC with no international
trade, but without trade it becomes more difficult for higher income countries to shed dirty
production. Hence, it is useful to consider more explicitly how trade affects the EKC.
One key role for international trade is to offer an alternative abatement mechanism.
Access to world markets offers an easy abatement alternative − import the good from abroad
when higher pollution taxes make it more expensive at home. Consequently, trade makes

28

See Copeland and Taylor (2003) for such a model.

21

pollution demand more elastic and pollution becomes more responsive to changes in policy.
As well, international markets create links between country pollution levels, and this has
important implications for the interpretation of the EKC. In the income effects explanation for
the EKC, rich countries can reduce their pollution either by abating more or by using policy to
encourage dirty industry to migrate to poorer countries. If the former process is the main driving
force, then all countries could follow a similar path. But if it is the latter, then even if an EKC
exists for rich countries, the newly industrialized countries may not replicate the experience of the
current rich.29
A natural concern is whether country-specific explanations are consistent with the overall
cross-country evidence. One relatively uncharted branch of theoretical research is investigating
whether one-country (or small open economy) explanations given for the EKC add up. That is, is
there a fallacy of composition lurking in the background? At present, we know of no research
addressing these concerns head on, but existing results in the literature suggest further work may
be needed. For example, the Copeland and Taylor (1994) pollution haven model predicts a very
different relation between growth and pollution in autarky than in free trade. If the income
elasticity of marginal damage is one, the scale and technique effects of growth exactly offset each
other in autarky, so growth has no effect on pollution. In contrast, in free trade, with the same
preferences and technology, growth in the North raises both Northern and Southern pollution; and
growth in the South lowers both Northern and Southern pollution. These results follow from
composition effects created by differences in pollution regulations across countries. Further work
along these lines would be useful and indeed a multi-country perspective would seem to be a
necessity if the pollutant in question has strong transboundary or global effects.

The Empirical Evidence

As noted above, there has been a flurry of recent empirical work linking economic
growth to environmental outcomes. Much of this work has focused on either confirming or

29

See Arrow et al. (1995)

22

denying the existence of similar relationships across different pollutants, considering additional
explanatory variables, such as income inequality or political freedom, or investigating the
robustness of previous studies.30
A growing body of work has found that the estimated EKC is sensitive to the sample
used. Harbaugh et al. (2002) examine the robustness of estimates of the EKC for SO2. This was
the focus of the original work of Grossman and Krueger (1993) and is one of the most widely
cited examples of the existence of an environmental Kuznets curve. They find that the shape of
the curve is sensitive to changes in the time period chosen and the set of countries included in the
study. This is suggestive of a misspecification of the model, which is what the theory developed
above suggests - different sources of growth across countries should yield different reduced form
relations between pollution and income. Stern and Common (2001) use data on sulfur emissions
in 73 countries over 31 years and by comparing OECD and non-OECD sub-samples conclude
that the evidence does not support a common EKC across countries. Similarly, List and Gallet
(1999) study sulfur dioxide and nitrogen dioxide emissions in US states over 65 years and
conclude that there is not a common EKC across states.31
Despite the proliferation of papers in this area, very little work has gone into evaluating
the various hypotheses offered for the EKC, or more generally in examining how the interaction
between different sources of growth interact with income and other effects to determine the
relation between growth and pollution. Unless we can clarify the causal mechanisms involved,
the work will be of little use in helping us understand how growth or trade affect the environment.
A few recent studies are useful steps in this direction. Hilton and Levinson (1988)
examine the link between lead emissions and income per capita using a panel of 48 countries over
the twenty-year period 1972-1992. This study is important because it finds strong evidence of an
inverted U-shaped relationship between lead emissions and per capita income, and then factors
the changes in pollution into two different components. The first is a technique effect that

30

See the surveys cited previously, as well as Stern (1998).
See also Koop and Tole (1999) who find no evidence for any empirical relationship between
deforestation and per capita income. Recent work by Brock et al. (2003) shows that while all countries will
exhibit an EKC type relationship, countries will differ in their turning points and rates of environmental
improvement whenever they differ in initial conditions, their rate of natural regeneration, etc.

31

23

produces an almost monotonic negative relationship between lead content per gallon of gasoline
and income per capita. The second is a scale effect linking greater gasoline use to greater
income.32 This study is the first to provide direct evidence on two distinct processes (scale and
technique effects) that together result in an EKC.
To interpret the empirical evidence as reflecting scale and technique effects one needs to
rule out other possibilities. Although the authors do not couch their analysis in this context, their
analysis implicitly presents the necessary evidence. First, they document a significant negative
relationship between the lead content of gasoline and income per capita (post 1983). This
relationship shows up quite strongly in just a simple cross-country scatter plot of lead content
against income per capita. We have depicted this in Figure 2 below.
Since lead content is arguably pollution per unit output, it is difficult to attribute the
negative relationship in this figure to much other than income driven policy differences.33 Our
interpretation is simply that regulation is tighter in higher income countries and this is driving
down lead content (or e, emissions per unit output, in our framework).
Second, the authors find a hump-shaped EKC using data from the post-1983 period, but
in earlier periods they find a monotonically rising relationship between lead emissions and
income. The declining portion of the EKC only appears in the data once the negative health
effects of lead had become well known. The emergence of the declining portion in the income
pollution relationship is very suggestive of a strong policy response to the new information about
lead. The fact this only appears late in the sample makes it difficult to attribute the decline in lead
to other factors that could be shifting the demand for pollution. For example if the declining
portion of the EKC was due to increasing returns to scale in abatement, then it should appear in
both the pre and post-1983 data. If it was due to shifts in the composition of output arising
naturally along the development path, why would it only appear in the post-1983 data? While it

32

Lurking in the background of this study is a composition effect operating through changes in the fleet of
cars. This composition effect is not investigated in the paper, although it may be responsible for the jump
in lead per gallon of gasoline use at low income levels shown in Figure 2 of the paper.
33
To be precise we should note that since lead content per gallon is an average, and cars differ in their use
of leaded versus unleaded gas, the composition of the car fleet is likely to be changing as well. Therefore,
the fall in average lead content may reflect an income induced change in the average age of the fleet (which
would lower average lead content) plus a pure technique effect

24

Lead per gallon (grams)

3.5

0
0

10000
Real GDP per capita,1992

Figure 2

20000

is possible to think of examples where these other factors are at play, the scope for mistaking a
strong policy response for something else is drastically reduced in this study.

We are therefore

led to conclude that the declining portion of the EKC post-1983 reflects a strong induced policy
response that more than offsets the scale effect.
Another paper that attempts to determine whether an income effect is responsible for the
downward turn of an EKC is Gawande et al. (2000). They estimate an EKC for hazardous waste
sites in the US, and find that it is hump-shaped, although only a small percentage of counties are
on the downward sloping portion. Because it is very expensive to clean up hazardous waste
sites, they argue that the income effect would be reflected in net out-migration rates. They find
evidence that the number of hazardous waste sites in a region increases the net out-migration rate
but only after a threshold of income is reached, which is consistent with an income effect driving
the downward portion of the EKC. Moreover, the income threshold they estimate is
indistinguishable from the peak of their estimated EKC.
Gale and Mendez (1998) attempted to assess the importance of composition effects in
predicting cross-country differences in pollution levels. They re-examine one year of sulfur
dioxide data drawn from Grossman and Krueger’s (1993) study. They regress pollution
concentrations on factor endowment data from a cross-section of countries together with incomebased measures designed to capture scale and technique effects. Their results suggest a strong
link between capital abundance and pollution concentrations even after controlling for incomes
per capita. Their purely cross-sectional analysis cannot, however, differentiate between locationspecific attributes and scale effects. Nevertheless, their work is important because the strong link
between factor endowments and pollution suggests a role for factor composition to affect
pollution demand. That is, even after accounting for cross-country differences in income levels
that may determine pollution supply, other national characteristics matter to pollution outcomes.
Finally, two recent studies attempt to assess the relative importance of scale, technique
and composition effects in accounting for changes in pollution. Selden, Forest and Lockhart
(1999) compare emissions of 6 air pollutants in the US in 1970 and 1990 and decompose the
observed changes in pollution into changes in scale, composition of economic activity (due to

25

changes in sectoral output shares) and changes in emissions per unit of output.34 Although this is
simply a measurement exercise based on aggregate data for a single country at two points in time,
the study is nevertheless important because it takes seriously the need to investigate the relative
strength of the three effects. They find that technique effects were an important factor in
explaining the fall in emissions. Although composition effects were present, they were not strong
enough to account for the downturn in aggregate emissions during this period.
Hettige, Mani and Wheeler (2000) use panel data on industrial water pollution from 12
countries and try to isolate composition and technique effects, and explain how they vary with
income. They decompose pollution into the manufacturing pollution intensity, the share of
manufacturing in the economy, and total output, and then separately regress firm level pollution
intensities, the average pollution intensity in manufacturing, and the manufacturing share on per
capita income.35 They find a hump-shaped relation between the share of manufactures and per
capita income; however, they find this composition effect is small in magnitude relative to the
impact of scale effects. Conversely, they find a strong technique effect: the income elasticity of
the pollution intensity is about -1. Overall, they find that industrial water pollution tends to
initially rise with income and then flatten out, with the strong technique effect being responsible
for offsetting the scale effect of growth.

Summary

The EKC literature is important in several respects: it brought the empirical study of
aggregate pollution levels into the realm of economic analysis; it debunked the commonly held
view that environmental quality must necessarily decrease with economic growth; and it provided
highly suggestive evidence of a strong policy response to pollution at higher income levels. The

34

They actually consider more than one technique effect. They measure changes in energy intensity and a
compositional effect reflecting changes in sources of energy as well as an "other technique effect".
35
They also investigate compositional effects within the manufacturing sector by regressing per capita
income on the average pollution intensity in manufacturing, holding the pollution intensity in
manufacturing subsectors constant. They find that the average pollution intensity first falls with income,
and then levels out.

26

literature expanded rapidly because of the ease of estimation and the potential relevance of its
findings. Studies replicating or extending the methods of early contributors have played a useful
role in providing a check on the original work, but further work along these lines has limited
usefulness. Investigators must now move beyond the methods that sparked the literature to
develop methods useful in revealing the causal mechanisms underlying the relationship.
To proceed further more guidance from theory is surely needed. We would expect that
scale, technique and composition effects all play a role in determining the relationship between
growth and the environment. This suggests the focus on reduced forms linking only per capita
income to pollution is unlikely to be fruitful. If we are to ask more detailed questions of the
pollution data, we will need different methods. We suggest a step back from the EKC methods to
consider theories determining the equilibrium level of pollution as a function of a relatively few
factors. An approach that tries to disentangle the scale, technique and composition effects, and
which allows these to vary across countries has much more support from theory and is more
likely to generate an increased understanding of what drives the relationship between growth and
the environment.

3. Trade Liberalization and the environment

We now turn to the impact of international trade on the environment. We draw the usual
distinction between trade and growth: trade liberalization changes relative goods prices by
opening up the economy to increased foreign competition, while growth increases endowments or
improves technology at given external prices.
While this distinction is clear, it may not always be accurate. There is empirical evidence
that trade liberalization also stimulates economic growth and at a theoretical level, trade can alter
the rate of growth if it spurs innovation or factor accumulation.36 In addition, trade may also pave
the way for labor and capital mobility and technology transfer. Hence, trade can set in motion
forces that shift the production frontier as well. For clarity however we will maintain the

36

See for example, Grossman and Helpman s (1991) book.

27

distinction drawn above.
We first examine the effects of trade on the environment in a small open economy facing
fixed world prices to emphasize three major points. First, the effect of trade liberalization on the
environment depends on a country’s comparative advantage, which in turn depends on country
characteristics. There is no reason to expect trade to have the same effect on all countries.
Second, the effects of trade on the environment depend on whether environmental policy is rigid
or instead responsive to changes brought about by trade. When policy is rigid we will show that
outcomes depend on the type of environmental policy instruments used by regulators. Finally,
the welfare effects of trade liberalization are sensitive to both a country’s comparative advantage
and the flexibility of its policy regime.
We then examine a 2-region model to evaluate two of the major hypotheses in the
literature linking relative country characteristics to environmental outcomes: the pollution haven
hypothesis, and the factor endowments hypothesis. This then sets the stage for our review of the
empirical work.

Trade frictions

For modeling purposes, we need to be specific about the trade barriers that are being
reduced. Some trade barriers (such as tariffs) generate revenue; others, such as distance, generate
productive activities such as transportation to overcome them; and yet others, such as
bureaucratic delays and regulations simply create trading costs. We don’t want to focus on the
details of trade policy, but simply capture the effects of increased opportunities to trade. To do so
we assume there are some trade frictions between countries, which we capture by adopting an
"iceberg" model of trade costs.37
With iceberg costs an importer who wants to receive one unit of X from the foreign
country has to ship 1+δ units because δ is lost in transport. Trade therefore consumes real

37

This approach has been frequently used in the trade literature. See for example, Samuelson (1954), and
Dornbusch, Fischer and Samuelson (1977).

28

resources, and the magnitude of trade frictions increase as δ rises.38
Trading costs drive a wedge between the domestic and foreign price of a good. As before
let p denote the world price of X, then the domestic price of X for an importing country is:

pmd = p(1 + δ )

(24)

Conversely, if Home exports X, then to deliver a unit of X to a foreign market (where the
price is p), a home exporter must send 1+δ units, which are acquired locally at the domestic price

ped . Hence the domestic price is lower than the foreign price:

ped =

p
1+δ

(25)

It is convenient for us to use "pd" to refer to the domestic price, but the reader should
keep in mind that whether this price is above or below the world price depends on the country’s
comparative advantage.

3.1 Rigid policy

Fixed emission intensities

The effects of trade liberalization on the environment depend on the environmental policy
regime. We start with a simple case where government policy holds the emission intensity of
production fixed. This scenario is instructive because it simplifies the analysis by ruling out a
technique effect, and may be a realistic approximation of policy in many countries (at least in the
short run) because much pollution regulation tends to target emissions intensities, rather than
overall emissions. This approach also allows for the special case of no pollution regulation.
Consider a country importing the dirty good X. The domestic price is initially above the
world price, and as trade barriers fall, the domestic relative price of X falls. As with growth, we
can decompose the effects of trade liberalization into scale, composition and technique effects.

38

For simplicity, we assume there are no trade barriers for the numeraire good. This does not affect the
qualitative results.

29

This is illustrated in Figure 3. The production frontier (for a given emission intensity) is depicted
in the top half of the diagram,39 and pollution is measured as a function of X in the bottom half.
Starting with producer price qo at point A, a trade liberalization reduces the domestic
producer price of X to q1 . Production moves from point A to C, and pollution falls from zo to z2.
If we measure the scale of output at world prices p, then (hypothetical) movements along the
dashed line through AB (with slope p) keep the scale of the economy constant. This allows us to
decompose the change in pollution into a composition effect (A to B) which lowers pollution
from zo to z1 , and a scale effect (B to C) which raises pollution from z1 to z2. There is no
technique effect in this example by assumption.
The scale effect is positive and tends to increase pollution. Trade increases production
efficiency (measured at world prices), and this leads to more output, and hence more pollution.40
The composition effect is negative, because protection is being removed from the polluting good,
inducing producers to shift towards the clean good. In our simple model where only one good
pollutes, the composition effect always dominates the scale effect, because trade liberalization has
an unambiguous effect on the output of the polluting good.41 If the economy has a comparative
advantage in clean goods, as in this example, trade is good for the environment.
If instead home exports X, then trade liberalization raises pd. Producers shift along the
production frontier towards the dirty good. This both increases the scale of production and shifts
the composition of output towards the polluting good: both the scale and composition effects
reinforce each other and lead to an increase in pollution.
In summary, with fixed emission intensities, the composition effect is critical in
determining the effects of trade liberalization. Moreover, the sign of the composition effect is

39

More generally, we can distinguish between net and gross production frontiers, where the gross frontier
represents potential output, and the net frontier represents net output after resources are allocated to
abatement. This distinction is important if we want to capture technique effects in the diagram. Details can
be found in Copeland and Taylor (2003).
40
Note that trade liberalization generates a scale effect, even though it results in a movement along the
production frontier, and not a shift of the frontier. In order to compare pollution across countries, we need
to account for cross-country differences in the scale of production, which means that we have to choose a
quantity index to measure scale at common reference prices. As a result, any movement along a strictly
concave production frontier will yield both composition and scale effects.
41
When both goods pollute, it is possible for the scale effect to dominate.

30

Y
C
q1

B

A
p
q0
Z1
Z2

X

Z0

Z =e0 x

Figure 3
Fixed Emission Intensity

ultimately determined by a country’s comparative advantage. If a country has a comparative
advantage in clean industries, then clean industries expand with trade; and conversely, if it has a
comparative advantage in polluting industries, then dirty industries expand with trade.

Fixed emission permits

Now suppose the government uses a marketable emission permit system to regulate
pollution, and that it does not adjust the supply of permits in response to changes in the trade
regime. Earlier, we noted the equivalence of permit and tax systems as a method of
implementing the first best. But if we hold policy instruments fixed in the face of shocks to the
economy, this equivalence breaks down.42
If X is imported, then producers shift towards the clean industry when trade is liberalized,
as in the previous example. This reduces the derived demand for pollution. For given emission
intensities, this would reduce pollution. But with a fixed supply of pollution permits, pollution
will not change; instead the permit price falls. Producers switch to dirtier production techniques.
This negative technique effect completely offsets the beneficial impact of the shift towards
producing cleaner goods. Similarly, if X is instead exported, trade liberalization leads to an
(upward) adjustment in pollution permit prices, but has no effect on pollution.
An important implication of our analysis is that with rigid pollution taxes or emissions
intensities, the environmental effects of trade liberalization may be quite substantial. But if
pollution quotas are in place, the environmental effects of trade liberalization may be negligible.43

42

Falvey (1988) obtains a similar non-equivalence result when comparing import tariff reform with import
quota reform in models with multiple trade distortions.
43
Although full-blown marketable permit schemes are relatively rare in practice, similar results would be
obtained if the regulator enforces ambient air or water quality standards. If trade liberalization increased
the derived demand for pollution, a regulator enforcing a rigid air quality standard would respond by
tightening up regulations, which would raise the shadow price of pollution.

31

Welfare effects of trade liberalization

The welfare analysis of trade liberalization in the presence of environmental problems
draws heavily on the theory of the second best (Lipsey and Lancaster, 1956).44 Prior to trade
liberalization, there are two types of distortions: trade barriers and inefficient pollution policy.45
Reductions in trade barriers can either alleviate or exacerbate the problems caused by inefficient
pollution policy. Consequently, standard gains from trade theorems do not apply.
To determine the welfare effects of trade liberalization, consider the effects on the utility
of the representative consumer of a small fall in the trade friction δ. Replace p with pd in (7), and
differentiate to obtain:

dV
= − Mdp d + (τ − MD)dz
VI

(26)

Trade liberalization has two effects on welfare: the standard gains from increased trade and the
induced change in the environment.46
The standard gain from trade effect is positive for both importers and exporters. If Home
imports X, then M > 0 and the domestic price of X falls with trade liberalization. As a result Mdpd
< 0. If Home exports X, then M < 0 but the domestic price of X rises with trade liberalization.
Once again we find Mdpd < 0.
Changes in pollution can, however, undermine the benefits of trade liberalization. To see
why, suppose emission intensities are constant and regulation is lax (τ < MD). Then if home
exports X, pollution rises with trade. Because the pollution tax is less than marginal damage, this

44

The welfare effect of trade liberalization in the presence of environmental distortions has been a major
theme of the literature: see Baumol (1971), Pethig (1976), Siebert (1977), Asako, (1979), Copeland (1994).
45
If an inefficient instrument is used to control pollution then there are three distortions to worry about: the
inefficient choice of instrument; the inefficient level of pollution; and the inefficiently low level of trade.
We assume the government uses efficient instruments; extending our analysis to the inefficient instrument
case is left to the reader as an exercise.
46
If we instead model trade barriers as tariffs (t), the welfare effects of trade liberalization can be written as
dV/VI = tdM + (τ - MD)dz. A reduction in tariffs will raise imports, so the term tdM represents the gains
from trade. As well, there is the effect on pollution noted above. The magnitude of the gains from trade
term differs according to the type of trade barrier in place; but the basic point that the welfare effects of
trade liberalization depend on the interaction between the trade and environmental distortion is robust.

32

increase in pollution is welfare-reducing (τ − MD)dz < 0. The net welfare effect of liberalization
is now ambiguous: the costs of increased pollution have to be compared with the benefits of
increased goods consumption. If pollution is sufficiently damaging, pollution costs will dominate.
On the other hand, if home imports X, trade liberalization may yield a double dividend by
reducing pollution and generating increased consumption.47 With lax pollution regulation (τ <
MD), the economy gains from reduced pollution and the standard gains from trade.
The instruments used also play an important role in determining the welfare effects of
trade liberalization. If pollution regulation takes the form of a binding aggregate pollution quota,
then trade must always raise welfare, even when marginal damage is high and pollution
regulation is lax. Referring to (3.6) as long as the pollution quota is binding, pollution does not
change with trade liberalization, and hence we have (τ − MD)dz = 0. This leaves only the
standard gains from trade, which as we have already shown must be positive.48
In summary, if pollution regulations are unresponsive then the welfare effects of trade
liberalization depend on the pattern of trade, the type of policy instrument used, and the existing
stringency of pollution regulation. If the number of pollution permits is held fixed during trade
liberalization, then freer trade has to raise welfare and has no environmental consequences. But if
emission intensities are unchanged with trade, then trade increases pollution in countries with a
comparative advantage in dirty goods, and decreases it in countries with a comparative advantage
in clean goods. And when pollution policy does not fully internalize externalities, countries with
a comparative advantage in dirty goods may lose from trade.

47

The standard "double dividend" literature [see Bovenberg and de Mooij (1995) and Fullerton and Metcalf
(1997)] considers the effects of pollution regulation in the presence of distortionary taxes on labor supply.
That literature is also based on the interaction between two distortions.
48
The main point here is that if pollution is regulated with quotas, trade liberalization cannot exacerbate the
pollution distortion. A similar point was made earlier in the literature on piecemeal trade policy reform,
where Falvey (1988) showed that in an economy with multiple trade distortions, alleviating one trade
distortion will not exacerbate other trade distortions if import quotas are the instrument of protection. See
Copeland (1994) for further details on trade policy reform in a world with many goods and pollutants.
With pollution quotas in place, uniform tariff reductions will increase welfare, but with pollution taxes (or
fixed emission standards), then the welfare effects of trade liberalization depends on whether trade
protection is biased towards clean or dirty goods. Beghin et al.(1997) uses a similar approach to investigate
consumption-generated pollution and Turnen-Red and Woodland (1998) consider multilateral reforms.

33

3.2 Flexible policy

Now suppose government policy adjusts optimally in response to changes in the trade
regime. Pollution is determined by setting the marginal benefit of polluting equal to marginal
damage as in (11), where the goods price "p" is interpreted as the domestic price pd. When trade
is liberalized, pd changes. By differentiating (11) we obtain, after some manipulation:

dz =

 ε G , p − ε MD, p  d
dp d +  z
 dp ,


I  ∆ 
∆



p d M  ε MD, I 

(27)

where ∆ > 0, each of the elasticities is positive and the change in pd should be interpreted as
coming from a change in the trade friction δ. Trade liberalization yields both an income effect
(the first term), and substitution effects.49
First consider the income effect. Because trade liberalization raises real income
(dI = - Mdpd > 0 when trade is liberalized) and environmental quality is a normal good, the
income effect will always tend to reduce pollution. The pollution supply curve shifts back with
liberalization and the strength of this income effect depends on the income elasticity of marginal
damage, ε MD, I .
The substitution effects of trade liberalization, however, move in opposite directions for
dirty good importers and exporters. There are two substitution effects, one in production and the
other in consumption. On the production side, an increase in the price of the dirty good stimulates
production of the dirty good, and this tends to increase the demand for pollution. On the
consumption side, an increase in the price of the dirty good raises consumption prices relative to
the cost of environmental quality. Consumers would like to substitute towards more
environmental quality and the policymaker responds by raising the pollution tax (the pollution

49

The analysis of the effects of trade liberalization on environmental quality has received less attention
than the effects on welfare. Lopez (1994), Rauscher (1997) and Copeland and Taylor (2003) consider these
issues in more detail.

34

supply curve shifts back for a dirty exporter). Therefore the two substitution effects work against
each other. One can show that the substitution effect in production dominates: the net
substitution effect tends to increase pollution for a dirty good exporter and reduce pollution for a
dirty good importer.50
Putting the substitution and income effects together, we can determine the impact of trade
liberalization on pollution. For a dirty good importer, trade liberalization will reduce pollution.
The increase in income shifts back pollution supply, and the lower price of dirty goods leads to a
reduction in pollution demand. Both income and substitution effects combine to improve
environmental quality.
On the other hand, for a dirty good exporter, pollution tends to rise via the substitution
effect (the demand for pollution rises as the price of the dirty good rises), but fall via the income
effect (the supply of pollution shifts back as real income rises). If the income elasticity of
marginal damage is small,51 then pollution rises in a dirty good exporting country even though
pollution policy is fully optimal. Conversely, if the income elasticity of marginal damage is
large, then pollution falls.
If the income elasticity of marginal damage is increasing in real income, then we might
expect pollution to rise in a low-income dirty good exporter, but fall in a high-income dirty good
exporter (recall our example in (23)). As well, we would expect the policy response to differ
across pollutants, because both income and substitution effects will vary. In addition, the impact
of trade liberalization would also differ in settings where the policy process was subject to
threshold effects or if abatement exhibited increasing returns. We know however of no research
investigating any of these channels.

Welfare effects of trade liberalization with efficient policy

When policy is set optimally, then τ = MD and the effect of trade liberalization on

50

See Copeland and Taylor (2003). The sign of the net substitution effect depends on preferences and
technology and hence can vary with assumptions.
51
One can show that if ε MD, I ≤ 1, then pollution will rise in a dirty good exporter.

35

welfare in (26) reduces to

dV
= − Mdp d ≥ 0 .
VI
We are left with the standard gains from trade. If pollution externalities are fully
internalized, trade must always increase welfare. Trade may lead to an increase in pollution if the
economy has a comparative advantage in dirty goods, but this reflects an optimal tradeoff
between environmental quality and consumption.

3.3 The Determinants of Comparative advantage

It is apparent that composition effects play a key role in determining the effects of trade
on the environment. But composition effects depend on a country’s comparative advantage and
hence a major pre-occupation of the literature has been an investigation of which countries attract
dirty industries when trade is liberalized.
There are two major competing theories, although they are often not stated explicitly.
The pollution haven hypothesis predicts that countries with relatively weak environmental policy
will specialize in dirty industry production. In many versions of this hypothesis, countries with
weak environmental policy are also low-income countries. An alternative hypothesis is that
environmental policy has little or no effect on the trade pattern: instead standard forces, such as
differences in factor endowments or technology, determine trade. For example, under this view
capital abundant countries tend to export capital-intensive goods, regardless of differences in
environmental policy. We will call this the factor endowments hypothesis, although it can be
interpreted more broadly to encompass other motives for trade, such as technology differences.
We can illustrate these competing theories within our simple model by assuming there
are two regions in the world: "North" and "South". We use an asterisk ("*") to denote Southern
variables. North and South may have different factor endowments or pollution policy, but we
assume they are otherwise identical.52

52

We rule out other differences to highlight the interaction between the pollution haven and factor

36

The interaction between factor endowments and pollution policy in determining the
pattern of trade can be illustrated using a simple relative supply and demand analysis to determine
autarky prices in each country. To construct relative demand, note that given our assumption that
preferences over goods are homothetic and separable from environmental quality, the demand for
X relative to Y is independent of income and can be written as RD(p), where RD’(p) < 0.
Moreover, because preferences are identical across countries, the relative demand curve is the
same in each country. This is illustrated in Figure 4 as the curve labeled RD.
Next, we need to determine the relative supply curves for each country. Using (4) and
exploiting constant returns to scale, we can write relative supply as a function of K/L and prices:

RS( p, τ , K / L) =

x ( p, τ , K / L,1)
.
y( p, τ , K / L,1)

(28)

This yields a standard upward-sloping relative supply curve (increases in p increase the supply of
X relative to Y). Because North and South differ in factor endowments and pollution policy, their
relative supply curves will also differ. Figure 4 illustrates a couple of relative supply curves,
labeled RS and RS*.
The intersection of relative supply and demand curves determines autarky prices for each
country, and we can then use these differences in autarky prices to infer the pattern of trade. We
will use this model to consider the pollution haven and factor endowment hypotheses separately,
and then consider how they interact.

Pollution haven hypothesis

The simplest version of a pollution haven model can be obtained by assuming countries
are identical except for exogenous differences in pollution policy. Pethig (1976) used a Ricardian
model in which countries differ only in exogenous emission intensities and showed that the
country with weaker policy would export the polluting good. Chichilnisky (1994) assumed
exogenous differences in the property rights regime — poor countries are simply assumed to have

endowment motives for trade.

37

RS

P

P

R S*

A

A

PT

R Sw

T

C

T*
A*

PA *

RD

X/Y

X c/Y c

X * /Y *

Figure 4
Trade Liberalization

X /Y

no property rights assigned to environmental resources, while rich countries have perfect policy.
Referring to Figure 4, suppose North and South are initially identical. Then the two
countries would have the same relative supply curve, which we illustrate as RS. Autarky prices
would be the same, and there would be no trade. Now consider the effect of weaker pollution
policy in the South than North (τ* < τ). South’s lower pollution tax will stimulate its X industry
and contract Y (because resources move out of Y into X). This tells us that the country with the
weaker pollution policy produces relatively more X for any given p; that is, South’s relative
supply curve will shift out to the right, as illustrated by RS*.
We can therefore conclude that the autarky relative price of X is higher in the North than
in the South: pA > pA*. North has a comparative advantage in the clean good. The intuition is
straightforward. Because North taxes pollution more heavily, relatively less of the polluting good
is produced there, which pushes up its autarky price. This will generate trade. Once trade is
opened, Northerners will import X from the South, and Southerners will import Y from the North.
This contracts dirty good production X in the North and stimulates it in the South. Moreover,
because we have assumed that each country holds pollution taxes fixed, pollution moves in the
same direction as X. Pollution rises in the country with weak pollution policy (here the South),
and falls in the country with strict pollution policy (here the North). Trade induced by pollution
policy differences creates a pollution haven in the country with weaker policy.
The welfare effects of such trade depend on the stringency of pollution policy, as we
discussed in the previous section. If pollution policy is too weak, North must gain from trade,
both because of an increase in purchasing power and because of the fall in pollution. South,
however, may lose. Its income rises, but so does pollution. And if externalities are not fully
internalized, the increase in pollution is harmful to the South.
The predictions of this simple pollution haven model are consistent with some criticisms
of freer trade. North gains from trade by offloading some of its polluting production onto the
South. Moreover, because the dirtiest industry is shifted to the parts of the world with weaker
environmental policy this "global composition effect" tends to raise world pollution.

38

Endogenous pollution havens: Income-induced policy differences

A weakness of pollution haven models with exogenous policy is the exogenous policy.
Although authors often motivate the pollution policy differences by income differences — such as
a North-South income gap — pollution policies in these models do not respond when trade alters
income levels. At best we should think of these as short run models; at worst they contain a
logical contradiction. The lack of a policy response affects both the positive and normative
effects of trade even within a pollution haven-trading situation. To address this issue, we use our
model to illustrate a simple version of the Copeland/Taylor (1994) pollution haven model where
endogenous income-induced policy differences create, and, respond to, trade.
Consider two countries differing only in the scale of their endowment vector. That is, K
= λK* and L = λL*, where λ > 1. We also assume each country has the same number of
consumers (which we normalize to one), so increases in L should be thought of as an increase in
the supply of effective labor. Therefore, North’s workers are more highly skilled than South’s but
the ratio of capital to effective labor is the same in both. This means that North is richer than
South, but because the K/L ratios are the same across countries, there is no incentive to trade in
the absence of pollution policy.
We assume the regulator acts as a price taker in world goods markets when choosing
pollution policy.53 Because environmental quality is a normal good, the country with higher
income chooses a higher pollution tax for any given goods price and these differences in
environmental policy create an incentive to trade. To demonstrate, refer to the relative supply
curve given by (28). North and South have the same K/L ratio, but North’s higher income means
that its pollution tax is higher (τ > τ∗). Consequently, North’s relative supply of X is to the left of
South’s for any given p. Figure 4 can therefore be used to infer the trade pattern again. North’s
high income gives it a comparative advantage in the clean good. When trade is opened, North

53

That is, we assume that the regulator does not employ pollution policy to strategically manipulate the
terms of trade in the goods market. This assumption is reasonable if we think of our model as a proxy for a
world with many small Northern and Southern countries. We will, however, turn to the strategic trade
policy issues later in this essay.

39

will export the clean good (Y) and import the dirty good (X). The polluting industry will contract
in the North and expand in the South. The low-income country becomes a pollution haven.
The effects of trade on pollution can be inferred from our earlier results. Pollution falls
in the North, as both the substitution and income effects of trade liberalization induce the policy
maker to choose less pollution. Pollution will rise in the South as long the income effect is not
too strong.54 Moreover, if income effects are not too strong, world pollution can rise with trade as
well because the dirtiest industries shift to the country with weaker policy.55 But because both
North and South fully internalize pollution externalities, trade liberalization is welfare increasing
for both: income-induced policy differences are an efficient source of comparative advantage.
Overall, pollution haven models are consistent in their prediction that freer trade leads the
country with weaker pollution policy to export the dirty good. In a model with endogenous
policy, they predict that the low-income country has weaker policy and therefore the low-income
country will export the dirty good. The effects of such trade on pollution and welfare, however,
depend on the policy regime, as we have discussed above. A major weakness of the pollution
haven models, however, is that they assume that policy differences are the only motive for trade.

Factor endowments hypothesis

The main alternative to the pollution haven hypothesis is what we have called the factor
endowments hypothesis. We illustrate this in Figure 5. Relative demand (RD) is as before. To
isolate the pure factor endowment hypothesis, assume pollution taxes are identical and exogenous
across countries, but relative factor endowments differ. 56 Specifically, suppose North is
relatively capital abundant so that K/L > K*/L*.
Let RS* denote South’s relative supply curve. Because X is capital intensive and
emission intensities are held constant, then North’s capital abundance pushes its relative supply

54

In particular if the elasticity of marginal damage with respect to income is less than or equal to one, then
pollution rises with trade.
55
See Copeland and Taylor (1994, 2003)
56
That is, we assume that τ/p is identical across countries.

40

R S*

P

PA *
PT

R Sw

RS

A*
T*

C

T
A

PA

RD
X* /Y*

X c/Y c

X/Y

X /Y

Figure 5
The Factor Endowments Hypothesis

curve (RS) out to the right of South’s. Hence the autarky relative price of X is lower in the North
than in the South. With identical emission intensities across countries, the capital abundant
country (North) exports the capital-intensive (dirty) good. Trade expands the polluting, capitalintensive industry in the capital abundant country (the North), and pollution rises in the North.
Conversely, pollution falls in the capital scarce country (the South) as the polluting industry
contracts there.
Although we have illustrated the factor endowments hypothesis with a very simple
example based on capital abundance, the key insight is that the impact of trade on the
environment depends on a country’s underlying production capabilities. Countries relatively
abundant in factors used intensively in polluting industries will on average get dirtier as trade
liberalizes, while countries that are relatively abundant in factors used intensively in clean
industries will get cleaner with trade.
The predictions of this theory contrast sharply with those of the pollution haven
hypothesis. If the factor endowments hypothesis is correct, and if a poor country is abundant in
factors used intensively in clean industries, then its pollution will fall as trade is liberalized.

Factor endowments and endogenous policy differences

We have illustrated the pollution haven and factor endowment hypotheses in isolation,
but of course countries differ in both their pollution policy and in their factor endowments. Rich
Northern countries are likely to be both capital abundant and have stricter pollution policy than
poorer Southern countries. North’s strict pollution policy will tend to make it a dirty good
importer, but its capital abundance tends to make it a dirty good exporter. The pattern of trade
depends on which of these effects is stronger.57
If relative factor endowments are similar but North is richer than South, then pollution
haven effects dominate and North exports the dirty good. But if relative factor endowment

57

The interaction between income differences and relative factor endowments in determining the pattern of
trade is analyzed in Copeland and Taylor (1997, 2003), Richelle (1996), and Antweiler, Copeland and
Taylor (2001).

41

differences dominate relative income differences, then North will export the dirty good, despite
having more stringent environmental regulation than the poor South.
Since this result reverses the pattern of trade under the pollution haven hypothesis, it has
a number of important implications. When North is sufficiently capital abundant, trade will lead
to an expansion of the dirty industry in the North, despite North’s stricter pollution regulation and
higher income. Although North’s stricter environmental regulations do raise Northern production
costs in X, this is more than offset by the relative abundance of factors used intensively in X.
Trade need not induce dirty industry migration from rich to poor countries, and in fact can lead to
the opposite conclusion.
Moreover, this implies that if North is sufficiently capital abundant, and if the income
elasticity of marginal damage is not too high, then trade will raise pollution in the North and
lower it in the South. On the other hand, if the income elasticity of marginal damage is
sufficiently high in the North, trade may reduce pollution in both North and South. This will
occur if North’s pollution supply shifts back far enough to offset the increased pollution demand
induced by trade.
Finally, trade shifts dirty good production from the country with weak pollution
regulation (South) to the country where regulations are more stringent (North). This global
composition effect tends to reduce global pollution.58 This contrasts with the pure pollution
haven model where trade tended to increase global pollution by shifting dirty good production to
countries with weak regulations.

Comparative Advantage Summary

As we have shown, the effects of trade on both the local and global environment depend
on the distribution of comparative advantage across countries. Moreover, comparative advantage
is determined jointly by differences in pollution policy and other influences, such as differences
in factor endowments.

58

For a formal demonstration see Copeland and Taylor (1997, 2003).

42

Pollution havens need not emerge if rich countries tend to be relatively abundant in
factors used intensively in pollution-intensive industries. And if this is the case, then trade may
lead to both a cleaner environment in poor countries, as well as a reduction in global pollution. It
also means differences in pollution policy alone do not imply dirty industries will migrate to poor
countries as a result of trade. Therefore concerns about the loss of competitiveness in polluting
industries may be misplaced. We should however expect to find heterogeneity across industries
as well as countries in the roles played by policy and factor endowments differences. Polluting
industries that are intensive in unskilled labor or in natural resources may well be attracted to
low-income countries both by natural resource abundance and less stringent policy.
Even if rich countries do have a comparative advantage in dirty industries because of
their factor abundance, this does not mean pollution policy is irrelevant for trade patterns. As our
analysis indicates, for given levels of relative capital abundance, increases in the stringency of
pollution policy will tend erode a country’s comparative advantage in dirty goods reducing their
exports. Regulations are not irrelevant.

3.4 The Empirical Evidence

We now consider the empirical evidence. To limit the scope of our discussion, we focus
here mainly on the empirical evidence linking liberalized trade with industrial pollution, although
we also discuss some of the work on foreign investment and plant location.59
The literature has not always been clear about the hypotheses being tested. However,
much of the attention has been directed towards three hypotheses about the effect of pollution
regulation on trade flows. The first is simply that differences in pollution policy across countries
or regions affect trade flows or plant location decisions. This might be thought of as a test of the
existence of a pollution haven "effect" - all else equal, a weakening of environmental policy will

59

For earlier reviews, see Levinson (1996) for a survey of the literature on plant location, and Jaffe et al
(1995) for a survey that reviews the empirical literature on the effects of environmental policy on plant
location and trade in the US. See also Keller and Levinson (2002). We discuss some of the papers
reviewed by Jaffe et al., but our interpretation of their results differs in some cases.

43

increase a country’s net exports of dirty goods. This hypothesis is an implication of most
theoretical work in the area. In terms of the model we presented in the previous section,
regardless of a country’s pattern of trade, a weakening of environmental policy will shift its
relative supply curve outward, and thereby tend to increase its net exports of dirty goods.60
A much stronger version of the pollution haven effect is what the literature has referred to
as the pollution haven hypothesis. Under this hypothesis, free international trade leads to the
relocation of dirty good production from stringent regulation countries (the North) to lax
regulation countries (the South). That is, the pollution haven effect is so strong that it more than
offsets other motives for trade in dirty goods. An often-stated corollary is that pollution-havendriven trade raises pollution in the developing countries and lowers it in the developed world.
The major alternative to the pollution haven hypothesis is that the direction of trade in
dirty goods is primarily determined by conventional determinants of comparative advantage factor endowments and differences in technology. Under this hypothesis, the pollution haven
effect is swamped by other motives for trade. This view was behind Grossman and Krueger’s
(1993) evaluation of NAFTA and references to it appear in numerous other studies. In our theory
section, we presented one version of this view: under the factor endowments hypothesis,
international trade leads to the relocation of dirty good production from capital-scarce countries
to capital-abundant countries. A corollary is that pollution levels should fall in capital scarce
countries and may rise in capital abundant countries.
Although much of the empirical literature has focused on the above hypotheses, there
have also been a few papers that try to estimate the effect of trade on environmental quality
directly. These range from studies that simply add openness to trade as an additional explanatory
variable in an EKC regression, to those that attempt to estimate the scale, technique and
composition effects of trade.
One of the major difficulties facing researchers in this area is that pollution data are very
scarce. This scarcity has had a large impact on the evolution of the empirical literature. Many
studies focus on the U.S., simply for reasons of data availability. Some pollutants, such as SO2,

60

If the country imports dirty goods, then its net exports of dirty goods are negative, and an increase in net
exports means that its imports of dirty goods fall.

44

have been studied quite extensively, while others have been neglected, again because of data
issues. Compounding this difficulty is that any credible examination of the pollution haven
hypothesis needs data from some of the world’s poorest countries. These countries have the least
developed methods of accounting and monitoring.
In the following sections we describe and critique the methods and results from the
empirical literature. To do so, we employ the models discussed in the earlier parts of this essay.

Dirty Industry Migration or Development?

The first analyses in this area were relatively simple statistical exercises constructing and
evaluating trends in "dirty good" production, consumption, or trade. Given the lack of good
cross-country pollution data, this literature "solves" the data problem by first classifying
industries into the categories dirty or clean, and then constructing a broad cross-country panel of
data on dirty and clean imports, exports, output etc. for analysis. The categorization into dirty
and clean is typically based on U.S. data. Industries may be categorized on the basis of their
emission intensity (emissions per $ of output), toxic intensity (physical releases per $ of output),
or on the level of pollution abatement costs as a fraction of value-added.
While this method is clearly not ideal, it has its strengths. For example, the set of dirtiest
manufacturing industries appears to be fairly stable across both countries and pollutants.
Therefore, identifying a dirty industry may not be that difficult. For future reference, we present
the top ten dirty (manufacturing) industries ranked by air, water and metals discharges. The data
in Table 1 are drawn from Mani et al. (1997).
Given the similarities in the rankings across air, water, and metals discharges it appears
that identifying the dirtiest manufacturing industries is relatively simple. The five dirtiest sectors
often selected for intensive study are: Iron and Steel (371), Non-Ferrous Metals (372), Industrial
Chemicals (351), Pulp and Paper (341), and Non-Metallic Mineral Products (369). Using the
same methods to identify clean sectors, Mani et al. (1992) classifies textiles (321), non-electrical
machinery (382), electrical machinery (383), transport equipment (384), and instruments (385) as
the five cleanest sectors in U.S. manufacturing.

45

Table 1
Ranking of the Dirtiest Manufacturing Industries
Rank

Air

Water

Metals

Overall

1
2
3

Iron and Steel
Non-Fer. Metals
Non-Met. Min.

Iron and Steel
Non-Fer. Metals
Pulp and Paper

Non-Fer. Metals
Iron and Steel
Indust. Chemical

Iron and Steel
Non-Fer. Metal
Indust. Chemical

4
5
6
7
8

Petro. Coal prod.
Pulp and Paper
Petro. Refineries
Industrial Chemical
Other Chemicals

Mis. Man.
Industrial Chemical
Other Chemicals
Beverages
Food Products

Leather prod.
Pottery
Metal Products
Rubber Product
Electrical Products

Petro. Refineries
Non-Met. Min.
Pulp and Paper
Other Chemical
Rubber Products

9
10

Wood Products
Glass Products

Rubber Products
Petro. Products

Machinery
Non-Met. Min.

Leather Products
Metal Products

Source: Mani et al. (1997, p4)

Under the assumption that this categorization of manufacturing industries into dirty and
clean holds across both time and space, researchers construct the cross-country data needed for
their analysis. Taking these new data as their dependent variable, these studies proceed by
linking variation in dirty and clean good trends to country characteristics such as income, income
growth or openness. The analysis may employ simple summary statistics such as the Balassa
revealed comparative advantage measure, or employ regression analysis to explore the sensitivity
of the series to several potential determinants. In all of these studies, researchers are searching
for pollution havens and therefore income differences, income growth rates and measures of
openness are the prominent explanatory variables.
An immediate limitation of these studies is apparent: by measuring trends in dirty
industry output rather than pollution levels, they have necessarily assumed changes in the
composition of a country’s output correspond to changes in environmental quality. But if the
techniques of production change over time because of trade, income growth or technological
progress then a greater share of dirty good output is consistent with both greater and lesser
pollution levels. And as Section 3.1 showed changes in the composition of output tell us
relatively little about environmental outcomes except perhaps in the short run if emission
intensities are fixed. Since many of these studies cover quite significant stretches of time,
skepticism is in order.
A second concern is that since the composition of national output is affected by many
factors, researchers in search of pollution havens run the risk of attributing any change in the
composition of output to pollution haven driven trade rather than some altogether distinct
domestic process. This risk is magnified by the avoidance of theory - which would naturally
suggest alternative hypotheses - and an almost single-minded focus on income levels as a
determinant of changing trade patterns.
Despite these limitations, several authors have employed these methods to conclude,
sometimes tentatively, that the rise in environmental control costs in the developed world has led
to the creation of pollution havens in the South. For example, Low and Yeats (1992) find that
over the 1965-1988 period the share of dirty goods in exports from industrial countries fell from
20% to 16%, but over this same time period the share of dirty goods in exports from many poor

46

developing countries rose.61
Other researchers, employing slightly different country groups and methods, corroborate
these findings.62 Ratnayake (1998) in a study of New Zealand’s trade patterns notes that in 1980,
96% of its imports of dirty goods came from the OECD, but by 1993 this had dropped to 86%.
At the same time, the share of dirty goods imported from the developing countries increased from
3% to 11%; but their share in clean good imports only increased from 9% to 13% over this same
period. Similarly, New Zealand’s exports of dirty goods to developing countries fell from 59% of
exports to only 46%, while its exports of clean goods rose.63
Similar results are presented in Lucas et al. (1992). They examine the toxic intensity of
manufacturing output and GDP for over 80 countries during the 1960-1988 period. They note
that while toxic releases per unit of GDP fall as countries become richer, this only occurs because
the composition of output in richer countries becomes cleaner. Coupling this with a finding that
the greatest toxic intensity growth occurred in the poorest countries, leads the authors to conclude
that all of their results are consistent with the view that "stricter regulation of pollution-intensive
production in the OECD countries has led to significant locational displacement, with consequent
acceleration of industrial pollution intensity in developing countries".64
Birdsall et al. (1992) in a study of pollution havens in Latin America reaches similar
conclusions. They state "our evidence is strongly consistent with the displacement hypothesis:
Pollution intensity grew more rapidly in Latin America as a whole after OECD environmental
regulation became stricter" (p. 167). Finally, in one of the most carefully constructed of these
studies Mani et al. (1997) examine the production and consumption of dirty goods for several
developing country regions plus Europe, North America and Japan over the 1965-1995 period.

61

See Table 6-2, p94. Developing country reliance on dirty good exports varies by region. In Eastern
Europe the percent rises from 21% to 28%; in Latin America from 17% to 21%; in South-East Asia the
share of dirty goods exports in total exports is flat at 11%; and in West Asia it rose from 9.2% to 13%.
62
Xu (1999) finds little statistical evidence for a change in competitiveness based on a primarily OECD
sample. The raw data however indicate that for OECD countries, environmentally sensitive goods have
fallen from 24% of exports in 1965 to 18% in 1995; whereas for the other category these shares have
moved from 18% in 1965 to 22% in 1995. See Table 1, p. 1219.
63
See Ratnayake (1998), Tables 1 and 2, p82.
64
See Lucas et al. (1992, p80).

47

Their conclusions are more tentative than most, but they note:
"Our cross-country evidence has found a pattern of evidence which does seem
consistent with the pollution haven story. Pollution-intensive output as a
percentage of total manufacturing has fallen consistently in the OECD and risen
steadily in the developing world. Moreover, the periods of rapid increase in net
exports of pollution-intensive products from developing countries coincided with
periods of rapid increase in the cost of pollution abatement in the OECD
economies", p28.

The trends these authors identify are not really at issue, but the inferences drawn from
them are. To underscore this point, we make use of the models from section 3.1 to illustrate how
the findings are consistent with all of the first three hypotheses outlined at the beginning of this
section.
First suppose the pollution haven hypothesis is correct. Then as trade was liberalized
throughout the sample period, we would expect to find each country specializing more in the
goods in which it has a comparative advantage. The share of dirty goods in exports would fall in
richer countries and rise in poorer countries, which is consistent with what has been found in
these studies.
Next suppose that a pollution haven effect is present, but not necessarily strong enough to
make South a net dirty good exporter. Then consider the effects of a tightening of pollution
policy in the North, as it was throughout this time period. Referring to Figure 5, North’s relative
supply curve would shift to the left, as would world relative supply, pushing up the world price of
dirty goods. As a result, some dirty good production would shift from North to South, again
causing the share of dirty goods in exports to rise in the South and fall in the North, as is
consistent with the trends found by many authors in this branch of the literature.
Finally, suppose there is no pollution haven effect at all, and the factor endowments
hypothesis is correct. That is, suppose that pollution policy plays little or no role in influencing
trade flows. As well, suppose there is capital accumulation in the South during this time period.
This alternative scenario is presented in the two panels of Figure 6 below.
In the top panel we again depict North and South’s relative supply curves. We assume
that North is capital abundant and has a comparative advantage in the dirty industry. The initial

48

B

Figure 6
Southern Economic Development

world equilibrium is shown in the bottom panel at A with a price p0.
Now consider the impact of an increase in South’s capital stock.65 Since capital
accumulation favors the dirty industry, South’s relative supply curve shifts outwards from RS* to
RS*1. World relative supply shifts out as well from RSW to RSW1. The world price of dirty goods
falls from p0 to p1 with the new equilibrium at point B in the bottom panel. We note, using the
top panel, that the North specializes less in dirty goods since N1 < N while the South specializes
more in dirty goods since S1 > S. Therefore, capital accumulation in the South implies a
development path concentrating on capital-intensive dirty industries. Heightened competition in
world markets caused by Southern development leads the North to shift out of these sectors,
thereby concentrating on relatively clean manufactures. As a result, Figure 6 roughly mimics the
trends reported by many authors — although the reasons for these trends are entirely different.
Rather than finding dirty industry migration and pollution haven driven trade, these studies may
have instead found Southern economic development!
To disentangle these different possible explanations for the observed trends, researchers
could adapt the theoretical framework set out in Section 2 to sort out the competing effects
theoretically and proceed to empirical testing.66 Current work has however neglected the
possibility of differential rates of factor accumulation across North and South to focus almost
exclusively on the role of income.67
To see why the capital accumulation hypothesis is worthwhile pursuing, we offer three
pieces of evidence. First, Low et al. (1992) report that over 90% of all dirty good production in
1988 was in OECD countries. This fact alone should tell us that the location of dirty good
production across the globe reflects much more than weak environmental regulations.
Second, note that one major difference between the capital accumulation explanation and
the presence of a pollution haven effect is the prediction for the world price of dirty goods. The
65

We only need that Southern growth be biased towards the dirty sector, while Northern growth is either
slower or not biased in this direction.
66
Since the data exhibits two-way trade in both dirty and clean goods, our competitive dirty and clean
industries could be replaced by monopolistically competitive sectors with identical firms.
67
Mani et al. (1997) examine trends in domestic factor prices as a possible cause for changes in dirty good
output in the developed world, but our analysis here points to changes in factors of production in
developing countries as the primary cause.

49

price of dirty goods rises if a tightening of Northern regulation causes dirty industry migration,
but falls if Southern economic development is responsible (recall Figure 6). As evidence on this
score, we present in Figure 7 the relative price of the five dirty industry composites over the
period 1965-2000. For ease of reading, (real) producer prices are normalized to unity in 1965.68
The figure clearly shows no strong upward trend in dirty good prices over this period as
would be predicted if a tightening of Northern pollution regulations drove trade. In fact, with the
exception of Pulp and Paper, all of the real producer price indices are either flat (as is the case for
Industrial Chemicals and Non-metallic Minerals) or declining as illustrated by both Iron and Steel
and Non-ferrous metals. While other explanations can be found for these trends, on its face these
data are inconsistent with the view that tighter regulation in the North drove up costs of
production to such an extent that dirty industries had to migrate to less suitable pollution havens
in the South.69
The last piece of evidence for an alternative hypothesis is provided by the studies
themselves. Several authors report that while their empirical results show all developing
countries alter the mix of their production towards dirty goods, more open developing countries
have a cleaner mix of industries than their closed counterparts. For example, Birdsall et al.
(1992; p. 167) note "The econometric evidence, though at best exploratory, suggests that over the
last two decades the more open economies have ended up with a cleaner set of industries". And
Lucas et al. (1992; p. 80) qualify their results on the pollution havens by stating, "Pollution
intensity has grown most rapidly in developing countries which are relatively closed to world
market forces .The opposite seems to have been true, however, for more open economies".
If the pollution haven hypothesis were correct, we would expect to see the opposite. To
see why, note that under the pollution haven hypothesis South has a comparative advantage in
dirty goods. Therefore import substitution policies by Southern countries would lower the share
68

The producer price series for each 3-digit SIC industry are annual averages available from the Bureau of
Labor Statistics website http://stats.bls.gov. These are then deflated by the GDP price deflators from the
U.S. Department of Commerce, BEA at http://www.bea.doc.gov/ to render the price measured in terms of
real US 1982 dollars.
69
Technological progress is a possible explanation, but note since these are real prices we need to assume
the rate of technological progress in dirty industries was greater than that in all of manufacturing. This is a
harder case to sell. Changes in the demand for these products as income s rise is also a possibility.

50

Figure 7 Trends in Dirty Good Prices
1.6

1.4

1.2

1

0.8

0.6

0.4

0.2

19
65
19
66
19
67
19
68
19
69
19
70
19
71
19
72
19
73
19
74
19
75
19
76
19
77
19
78
19
79
19
80
19
81
19
82
19
83
19
84
19
85
19
86
19
87
19
88
19
89
19
90
19
91
19
92
19
93
19
94
19
95
19
96
19
97
19
98
19
99
20
00

0

Paper and Pulp (26)

Industrial Chemicals (28)

Iron and Steel (332)

Nonferrous Metals (336)

Nonmetallic Mineral Products (29)

of dirty goods in Southern production and not raise it. Under the pollution haven hypothesis,
relatively closed Southern countries should have a cleaner mix of industries; it is, after all, trade
that is making them dirtier!70
Alternatively, under the Southern economic development scenario the observations on
the mix of dirty industries have a natural explanation. In this view, North has a natural
comparative advantage in dirty goods. Import substitution policies by Southern countries raise
the share of dirty goods in Southern production. Therefore, under the factor endowment /
economic development explanation closed Southern economies should be relatively dirtier than
their open counterparts. This is consistent with the empirical findings.
While our analysis of the role of Southern capital accumulation in explaining the
evidence is only suggestive, our point is that there are reasonable alternatives to the simple
pollution haven explanations that need to be considered when interpreting the evidence. The
literature focusing on trends in dirty good production and trade has made a useful start in
generating some stylized facts, but is still only in the early stages of explaining them. 71 Future
analysis must rely more heavily on theory to suggest alternative hypotheses and discipline
inferences from the available data. In particular, we suggest an investigation of the role of factor
accumulation in determining the pollution intensity of national output. The search for pollution
havens in the data has obscured the role capital accumulation and natural resources must play in
determining dirty industry migration and trade.

70

If a pollution haven effect were operative, but North had a comparative advantage in dirty goods, then the
model’s predictions in this regard are more ambiguous. One the one hand, if South has a comparative
advantage in clean goods, then in the absence of any environmental policy in the North, more closed
Southern countries would have a dirtier mix of goods. But if North introduces and tightens environmental
policy, then dirty good production would shift to countries in the South that are both open and have
relatively weak environmental regulations. This could mean that if the pollution haven effect is operative,
more open Southern countries may have a dirtier mix of goods than more closed Southern countries.
71
However, future research must proceed carefully. For example, it would be useful to be more precise
concerning the types of measurement error introduced by the classification of industries into dirty and
clean. What assumptions are we making concerning this error? Is it correlated across time, countries,
industries?

51

Environmental Stringency and International Competitiveness

A second branch of the literature uses data on the stringency of environmental policy to
test whether or not environmental policy affects trade flows, foreign investment flows, or plant
location choices. In our terminology, these studies can be interpreted as a test for the existence of
a pollution haven effect.
These studies came in two waves. Virtually all of the early work (up to about 1997)
relied on cross-sectional data. These studies link the cross—sectional variation in trade or
investment flows to either industry, country, or region-specific measures of regulatory costs and
other variables that affect trade and investment, such as factor costs, etc. The almost universal
conclusion drawn by authors of these studies is that environmental policy differences across
countries or regions have little or no effect on trade or investment flows. A second wave of more
recent work explicitly accounts for the endogeneity of pollution policy and unobservable
industry- or country- specific variables that may affect trade or investment flows. In sharp
contrast to the earlier work, these studies have tended to find that differences in environmental
policy do affect trade and investment flows. We will start by briefly reviewing the crosssectional studies,72 discuss some of the problems with this approach and then review recent work.
The studies using trade data are all motivated by the Heckscher-Ohlin-Samuelson (HOS)
model of international trade. Tobey (1990) is a widely cited study of this type. He regressed
cross-country data on exports of 5 dirty commodity groups on country-specific measures of factor
endowments and environmental stringency for a group of 23 countries.73 In all the regressions
reported, Tobey found the environmental stringency variable to be an insignificant determinant of
net export flows. Moreover, in a follow-up omitted variable test conducted with a larger crosssection of countries, Tobey was not able to reject the hypothesis that environmental stringency
had no effect on net exports.

72

These were reviewed in more detail by Jaffe et. al. (1995) and Rauscher (1997).
This approach builds on the empirical trade literature, in particular Leamer (1984), who explains net
export flows as a function of factor endowments. Tobey adapts this approach by adding a qualitative
indicator of a country’s environmental policies

73

52

However, while Tobey’s analysis is perhaps the most cited study arguing against a link
between environmental stringency and trade flows, its conclusions rest on tenuous foundations.
His main results follow a series of 5 cross-country regressions, one for each commodity group.
Each of these regressions has only 10 degrees of freedom. Not surprisingly then, the vast
majority of the coefficients estimated are insignificant.74 While the stringency variables are
insignificant, so too are 55 of the 65 coefficients estimated. In fact, most of the factor
endowments are insignificant most of the time. Only 1 of the 12 included factor endowments is
significant in 3 commodity groups (capital); and only 1 other is significant in more than 1
commodity group (a specific variant of land). Insignificance is the norm in these regressions.75
Another approach is to link the cross-sectional variation in trade flows to industry
characteristics. Kalt (1988) and Grossman and Krueger (1993) are examples of this approach.76
A typical study of this type employs U.S. data on the cross-sectional pattern of trade in
manufactures together with data on factor shares and pollution abatement costs. The standard
study would estimate the following equation:

Tit = β 0 + β1Sit + X' β + µit

(29)

where Tit is a measure of trade flows in industry "i" in year t such as the value of net exports, Sit is
an industry specific measure of environmental stringency, and X is a matrix of other controls

74

Student s t for a two-sided test is 2.22 at the 5% level when there are 10 d.f. We will adopt this level as
representing statistically significant.
75
Further concern follows from an examination of the omitted variable test. Tobey expands his collection
of countries from 23 to 58, and excludes environmental stringency as a regressor in his cross-country
regressions. He then divides his sample of countries into three groups according to development level and
compares the proportion of positive and negative residuals from his net export regressions within each
development group. Tobey is unable to reject the null hypothesis of identical proportions of errors;
therefore, excluding environmental stringency does not lead us to over-predict or under-predict net exports
in a systematic way across country groupings. But this test relies on the assumption that the omitted
variable (environmental stringency) is orthogonal to the set of included regressors (Tobey (1990, p199,
assumption A1)). This requires that (unmeasured) pollution regulations be orthogonal to all of the country
characteristics described by its endowments of capital, land, minerals and oil. But these characteristics
determine both a country s production structure (i.e. its demand for pollution) and its national income (i.e.
the supply of pollution). If we really believed the maintained orthogonality assumption, why would we be
interested in grouping countries according to development level to conduct such a test?
76
See also Osang et al. (2000) and van Beers et al. (1997).

53

which differ across studies. These controls are typically the cost shares of labor (sometimes
disaggregated by skill class), the cost share of capital, and in some cases tariff rates. The set of
industries studied is often the entire US manufacturing sector, but sometimes the analysis is
limited to the set of manufacturing industries that are most pollution intensive.
The measure of trade flows, Tit, differs across studies. Since the underlying model
motivating the equation is the HOS model, net exports is the most comfortable choice. Since
industries differ in scale so dramatically, most authors scale the dependent variable by industry
shipments, value-added, or domestic consumption. The measure of environmental stringency is
pollution abatement costs divided by industry value-added. This series is available for both
capital and operating costs for all of US manufacturing going back to the early 1970s. Most
authors employ the operating cost series.
The almost universal finding in this literature is that pollution abatement costs do not
appear to explain the cross-sectional pattern of trade. In some studies, the sign of the coefficient
on abatement costs is found to be counterintuitive, suggesting a positive relationship between
tighter regulation and net (or gross) exports. This awkward sign on the pollution abatement cost
variable has not led to a wholesale re-examination of the estimation methodology, but instead is
often cited as evidence in favor of the Porter hypothesis (see Porter and van der Linde (1995)).
Porter et al. argue that tighter environmental regulation spurs technological innovation, and hence
tighter regulation could, in theory, raise exports or lower imports.77
Despite the sometimes-troubling sign on the pollution abatement cost variable, the
inference drawn from these studies was that there is little connection between the stringency of
environmental regulation and trade flows. The explanations for this finding by the authors of
these studies varied, but most often included the fact that pollution abatement costs are only a
small fraction of total costs.78
77

They state, "in this paper, we will argue that properly designed environmental standards can trigger
innovation that may partially or more than fully offset the costs of complying with them. Such ’innovation
offsets’ . will be common because reducing pollution is often coincident with improving the productivity
with which resources are used" p 98. An entirely different view of regulation s effect on productivity is
presented in Gray (1987).
78
Another potential problem is suggested by the factor price equalization theorem of international trade.
Suppose trade really is driven by differences in pollution policy. Then trade will reduce pressure on the

54

Recent work, however, suggests that there are some more fundamental problems with this
approach. Endogeneity of pollution abatement costs, and unmeasured industry characteristics
may well be responsible for the results found.
We illustrate the problem with the aid of Figure 8. The top panel depicts a pollution
demand and supply curve from our model of section 2. The bottom panel depicts import demand
for the dirty good. This is graphed as a function of world prices, and shifts in response to changes
in pollution taxes and another variable ξ which we assume is not observed by the researcher. We
suppose increases in ξ shift out import demand.
The existing literature links pollution abatement costs to imports, conditional on some
observable control variables, such as factor endowments or costs. To see the logic behind this
approach, first suppose pollution taxes are exogenous, and suppose the pollution tax rises from τ0
to τ1. Firms abate more intensively and abatement costs as a fraction of value-added rise.
Pollution falls to z1 along the given pollution demand curve D0. [The pollution supply curve is
not relevant at this point if we treat τ as exogenous].
In the lower panel, the import demand curve shifts outward as less of the dirty good is
produced. Imports rise to M1. This exercise predicts a positive relationship between the
stringency of regulation, pollution abatement costs, and imports. Alternatively, if the country
exported the dirty goods we would have found tighter regulation lowering net exports in this
industry. In either case, the model predicts that we would observe a pollution haven effect:
tighter pollution regulation reduces the competitiveness of domestic industry.
This logic can break down if pollution regulation is endogenous. Again, start at point A,
but now suppose that pollution taxes are determined by the intersection of pollution supply and
demand. Now consider an increase in industry size (created for example by factor accumulation
favoring the one industry shown). In our framework, this corresponds to an increase in ξ. In the
top panel, pollution demand shifts outward and the pollution tax rises as increased pressure in

environment in the North (which would tend to lower abatement costs there) and increase pressure on the
environment in the South (which would tend to increase abatement costs). That is, trade could lead to some
convergence in marginal abatement costs across countries, which would tend to make it more difficult to
identify the effects of pollution policy on trade flows.

55

placed on the environment. [The pollution supply curve may shift back as well due to higher
income, further increasing the pollution tax, but for simplicity, we have not drawn this effect.]
Pollution abatement costs rise as before.
In the lower panel, industry growth shifts the dirty good import demand inwards and
imports fall to M2. Imports fall because factor accumulation raises domestic output. The increase
in the pollution tax will dampen, but not reverse, the shift in the import demand curve. We now
find a negative correlation between imports of dirty goods and pollution abatement costs.
Therefore an unmeasured industry characteristic that shifts pollution demand rightwards
and lowers imports will confound typical estimates. We have illustrated this potential problem by
assuming that industry-specific growth creates co-movements in pollution abatement costs and
imports. But many other determinants could work as well.
For example, suppose pollution-intensive goods have higher than average transport costs
(the cement industry comes to mind). Then the domestic dirty good industry has natural
protection from imports. Transport costs shift pollution demand rightwards because the domestic
price now exceeds the world price for the imported good. As well, a higher domestic delivered
price lowers imports. If we fail to include transport costs in our estimation, then our crosssectional results will again be tainted. If transport costs are higher in pollution intensive
industries, we may find pollution abatement costs negatively related to imports.
Alternatively, suppose pollution intensive industries are natural resource intensive. This
is surely true for many of the dirtiest industries in manufacturing, as evidenced by Table 1.79 If
natural resource intensity is not accounted for, we are again missing a shift right in pollution
demand — because natural resources are a complementary factor - and a shift left in import
demand — because domestic production is higher than would be predicted on the basis of
conventional factor endowments. As a result, estimations may again reveal a negative
relationship between pollution abatement costs and imports.

79

Further evidence on this score is provided in Robison (1985) who calculates the direct plus indirect
pollution abatement costs embodied in 1$ of output for 20 2-digit sectors in the United States in 1977. On
this metric, the top six dirtiest sectors are Electric Utilities (5.4%), Agricultural Fertilizers (2.5%), Copper
(2.4%), Ferrous metals (2.2%), Paper (2.0%), and other Non-Ferrous metals (1.8%). See Table 1, p. 704.

56

A related problem arises if trade and environmental policy are linked via the
government’s policy process. In this case, import penetration and pollution abatement costs are
determined simultaneously. Antweiler et al. (2001) discuss two possible links between trade and
environmental policy. The first arises when a government is politically motivated. Suppose
factors specific to polluting industries are hurt by trade liberalization that reduces a tariff on dirty
good imports. Then a politically motivated government may be tempted to compensate these
factors by weakening environmental regulation after trade liberalization occurs. As a
consequence, imports rise by less than expected, pollution abatement costs are lower than
expected, and the correlation between pollution abatement costs and imports is weakened.80
The second arises when the economy is large and has the ability to manipulate world
markets by altering pollution policy. A dirty good importer has an incentive to impose an optimal
tariff to improve its terms of trade. If a negotiated tariff reduction takes place, the government
has an incentive to look for an alternative instrument to use in place of the tariff. Relaxing its
pollution regulations will provide an implicit subsidy to the polluting industry and therefore can
be a second best instrument to generate beneficial terms of trade effects. Again we find that a
policy linkage leads governments to lower pollution taxes when imports rise, and raise pollution
taxes when exports rise. Consequently, if these tariff-substitution effects are present in the data, it
will be difficult to identify any direct competitiveness effect arising from tighter regulation.
While the analysis above may be suggestive of potential problems, it is not proof of them.
The empirical literature, however, reveals ample evidence consistent with these concerns.
Kalt (1988) finds a positive relationship between net exports and pollution abatement
costs, which on its face is directly opposite to what is expected. The relationship however
becomes negative once natural resource industries are excluded. This negative effect is further
enhanced when one of the dirtiest industries - the chemicals industry - is removed. One
explanation for these results is unmeasured industry heterogeneity. If pollution abatement costs

80

Eliste et al. (1999) find increases in the stringency of regulation offset to some extent by an increased
value of government transfers (including tariffs). This evidence is consistent with the political economy
motivations discussed here. Van de Beers (1997) interpret their finding that tighter home country
regulation lowers imports as suggesting a political economy link between tariffs and environmental
regulation

57

are positively related to unmeasured natural resource intensity, and natural resources are a
productive factor, then these industries will have larger domestic production. Pooling across
industries that vary in their reliance on natural resource intensity could well produce the spurious
positive result. Removing these industries leads to the expected result.
As well, if the chemical industry is large and productive, its success may well have
created the tighter regulations it faces and enlarged its world market. In our framework, both
unmeasured natural resource intensity and industry productivity shift pollution demand
rightwards and import demand leftwards obscuring the simple higher pollution abatement cost
lower imports link. 81
Grossman and Krueger also report counter-intuitive signs for their pollution abatement
cost variable in four of the six cross-industry regressions explaining U.S. imports from Mexico.
In only two of these cases is the negative relationship statistically significant at the 5% level.
Nevertheless, the results are troubling and the authors themselves note the strange sign on this
cost variable may be arising from omitted variable bias.
Further support for our interpretation is evident in related literatures. For example,
consider Daniel Trefler’s well-known (1993) empirical paper on endogenous trade protection.
Trefler notes that empirical research had found only an embarrassingly small impact of tariff
reductions on trade flows. He suggests that it arises from the treatment of trade barriers as
exogenous. Trefler adopts a cross-sectional regression framework quite similar to that discussed
above and estimates a standard one-equation model treating import barriers as if they were
exogenous. He finds non-tariff barriers have a small negative effect on imports. When non-tariff
barriers are treated as endogenous, the results are striking: Trefler’s estimate for the impact of
trade restrictions on imports is 10 times higher.82
More direct evidence is presented in Levinson (1999) who examines the relationship
between state-to-state hazardous waste shipments and import taxes on hazardous waste.

81

Osand and Nandy (2000) employ both industry and time fixed effects which makes it more difficult to
attribute their results to unobserved (constant) industry attributes. The endogeneity of regulation could
however still be responsible for the results.
82
See Table 5, page 150 column 1.

58

Levinson regresses state-to-state waste shipments on state characteristics, distances and waste tax
rates. With no correction for endogeneity or unobserved heterogeneity, he finds a positive and
statistically significant relationship between import taxes and imports of disposal waste. Once he
accounts for the potential endogeneity, he finds a strongly negative and significant relationship.
Higher waste taxes deter imports of hazardous waste.
These two studies show how endogeneity and unobserved characteristics can lead entire
literatures astray. Given the wide variance in results reviewed here, it is likely that similar
problems abound in the literature on the effects of pollution policy on international trade flows.
Two recent studies have made some progress on this front. Levinson and Taylor (2001) present a
simple model with endogenous pollution policy to suggest an empirical strategy testing for the
impact of regulations on trade flows. They identify industry size, natural resource intensity,
political economy concerns, and tariff substitution as likely candidates creating a link between
regulation and imports. They then estimate a two-equation model adopting a methodology
similar to Trefler (1993). The results are similarly striking. In the cross-section regressions with
no correction for endogeneity there is little relationship between net exports and pollution
abatement control expenditures; however once they instrument for pollution abatement costs the
results change dramatically. Tighter pollution regulations lower net exports significantly.
Similarly, Ederington and Minier (2003) examine the link between pollution abatement
costs and imports in a setting where imports and control costs are determined simultaneously.
They motivate their work on the basis of tariff-substitution as outlined above. In their fixedeffects implementation they find a small, but statistically significant relationship between
pollution control costs and imports. A 1% point change in costs, raises import penetration by
0.53% points. In contrast, their 3SLS estimates which account for the possibility that pollution
policy responds to import flows endogenously yields an unbelievably large impact, with a 1%
increase in pollution abatement costs raising import penetration by 30%. Further work along
these lines is certainly required.
Similar results have been found in the literature on plant location. The main conclusion
from studies using cross sectional data from US states was that differences in pollution policy
across states do not affect plant location decisions (see Levinson 1996 for a review). These

59

studies are subject to the same types of endogeneity problems discussed above [see Henderson
(1996)]. In response to this problem, several recent studies have used panel data and found
negative and statistically significant effects of environmental policy on plant location or
manufacturing activity.
Becker and Henderson (2000) used a panel of U.S. county-level data. The measure of the
stringency of environmental regulations was whether or not a county had attained the Clean Air
Act’s national air quality standards. Since states are required to enforce strict environmental
regulations in counties not in compliance with the national standards, non-attainment status is
taken as an indicator of relatively more stringent environmental policy after the Act was passed.
This study addresses three problems in the earlier plant location literature. First, many studies
had used a state-level indicator of the stringency of environmental regulation. This use of
aggregate state-level data meant that regulatory differences within states could not be accounted
for, and so much potential variation in the data was lost. Second, since the air quality standard
was set at the national level, and not in accordance with conditions within individual counties, the
endogeneity problem we discussed about is mitigated. Finally, the use of panel data allowed
them to control for unobserved heterogeniety across locations. The results are striking, as plant
births for polluting industries in non-attainment counties were 26-45 percent below those in
attainment counties. This suggests that air quality regulations had a significant negative effect on
plant location.
Other researchers have confirmed these results. Kahn (1997) found that the growth of
manufacturing activity was reduced in non-attainment counties. Greenstone (2002) found a
negative effect on plant-level growth and employment in polluting industries in non-attainment
counties. List et al. (2002) control for additional endogeneity issues and also find strong evidence
that the Clean Air Act affected plant location in the US.
Keller and Levinson (2002) use different data to provide further evidence that
environmental policy affects investment decisions, and that endogeneity problems were at least
partly responsible for the failure of the earlier literature to find a significant effect. They use U.S.
state-level data on foreign direct investment inflows from 1977-94. Their measure of the
stringency of environmental regulations is an index of pollutant abatement costs per unit of output

60

in the state (which they adjust to take into account industrial composition effects within the
state).83 They first replicate the results of earlier studies by using a pooled OLS regression of
direct foreign investment on the index of abatement costs, without including state effects. The
results indicate that DFI appears to be positively correlated with abatement costs, although in
some cases the coefficient is insignificant. This is the same type of result the earlier crosssectional studies found. Once they include state fixed effects, however, they find that the
coefficient on abatement costs is negative and significant, as theory would predict.84 This
strongly suggests that unobserved state-level variables correlated with abatement costs and
investments were driving the earlier results.

Summary

There is still much more work to be done on this issue. The investment and plant
location studies have all used U.S. data, and most have relied on the Clean Air Act. Nevertheless,
this growing body of work represents a significant reversal of the earlier findings that pollution
policy did not affect trade or investment. There are however very few studies that explicitly
account for endogeneity of pollution policy when examining the impact of tighter pollution
regulations on trade flows. But even if this work stands up to further testing and scrutiny, it is
important to emphasize the evidence found supports the existence of a pollution haven effect
only. The evidence indicates that after controlling for other factors affecting trade and investment
flows more stringent environmental policy acts as a deterrent to dirty good production. None of
this work presents evidence that this deterrent effect is strong enough to be the primary
determinant of the direction of trade or investment flows.
It seems likely however that differences in pollution policy may have a larger effect on
trade and investment flows in the future. Some elements of pollution abatement costs have been

83

The issue here is that states that attract polluting industries will have higher average abatement costs even
if they face the same regulations as other states, because of the composition effect. Levinson (2001)
proposes an index to correct for this.
84
Although the effect is significant, it is not large - a doubling of abatement costs reduces direct foreign
investment by about 10%.

61

rising quite rapidly over time. For example, in 1984 pollution abatement capital expenditures
represented only 2.8% of new capital expenditures in all U.S. manufacturing industries, but by
1993 this share had risen to 7.0%. The increase in pollution abatement operating costs is much
smaller from .63% of total costs in 1984 to only .79% in 1993. 85 Unless we are willing to assume
that these costly investments are somehow undone by Porter’s "innovation offsets", or merely
reflect problems in survey methods, rising pollution abatement costs must have some effect on
trade flows and perhaps world prices.

Scale, Composition and Technique Effects

Finally we turn to a group of studies attempting to estimate and then add up the scale,
composition and technique effects arising from trade liberalization. Although the notion of scale,
composition and technique effects predates Grossman and Krueger (1993), economists did not
pay much attention to this conceptual breakdown until they employed it to assess the
environmental impact of NAFTA.86 As such the Grossman and Krueger study was the first to
fashion a logical argument along these lines.
On the basis of their estimated EKC for sulfur dioxide, Grossman and Krueger concluded
that any income gains created by NAFTA would tend to lower pollution in Mexico. This
followed since Mexico’s then current per capita income placed them on the declining portion of
their estimated hump-shaped EKC. Since the shape of the EKC was taken to reflect the relative
strength of scale versus technique effects, Mexico was literally now over the hump. Future
income gains would call forth tighter regulation and lower pollution.
To evaluate the composition effect of trade, Grossman and Krueger relied on both the
evidence presented in their cross-sectional regressions and the results from CGE work by Brown,
Deardorff and Stern (1991). The cross-sectional regressions discussed earlier indicated that U.S.

85

These figures are drawn from Osand and Nandy (2000). As well, see the discussion of potential errors in
reporting capital expenditures on pollution abatement in Jaffe et al. (1995; p142)
86
Grossman and Krueger (1993) credit a 1990 government report for the introduction of the scale,
composition and technique effect terminology.

62

comparative advantage was in human and physical capital-intensive industries, which suggested
that NAFTA would shift Mexican production towards low-skilled, and presumably less pollution
intensive, manufactures. While it is difficult to isolate the pollution consequences of this
composition effect, Grossman and Krueger note that CGE estimates from Brown et al. (1991)
indicate a fall in the demand for electric utilities output in Mexico. This occurs via the industrial
restructuring created by the trade liberalization. Since utilities are major polluters — especially
with regard to sulfur dioxide - it appears that the composition effect for Mexico was likely to be
slightly beneficial to the environment. In contrast, utility output was forecast to rise slightly in
both the U.S. and Canada.
These conclusions are altered somewhat if we assume NAFTA spurs capital
accumulation in Mexico. For example, Brown et al. present CGE results assuming a NAFTAinspired 10% increase in Mexico’s capital stock. In this case, while the trade liberalization per se
appears to be beneficial to Mexico’s environment, a 10% increase in the capital stock drives up
electric utility output by 9%, which would end to increase emissions from utilities.
Similar results obtain when Grossman and Krueger calculate the change in toxic releases
implied by the industry reallocations predicted for NAFTA. Again using the CGE output from
Brown et al. (1991), trade liberalization alone appears to lower toxic releases in Mexico while it
raises them in the U.S. and Canada. If we again assume a NAFTA- induced change in Mexico’s
capital stock, then toxic releases rise in Mexico.
Combining the evidence on scale, technique, and composition effects, Grossman and
Krueger concluded that trade liberalization alone via NAFTA should be good for the Mexican
environment, but if NAFTA led to increased capital accumulation, then the picture is less clear.
Despite the limitations mentioned previously, the Grossman-Krueger study was far ahead
of existing work in this area. They employed a theoretically based methodology for thinking
about the environmental impacts of trade, and presented empirical evidence on these scores.
Future research was left to improve on their start and to deal with some unanswered questions.87

87

Cole and Raynor (2000) attempts to measure the environmental impact of the Uruguay round trade
liberalization by calculating their implied scale, composition and technique effects. Their methods follow
Grossman and Krueger’s work closely.

63

Dean (2002) estimates the impact of trade and growth on water quality in several Chinese
provinces and interprets her results in the context of scale, composition and technique effects.
Dean adopts a reduced form model that is a special case of the continuum pollution-haven model
presented in Copeland and Taylor (1994). There are two productive factors: emissions and an
aggregate of all other factors; two industries, which differ only in their pollution intensity;
emissions are in variable supply; and China is treated as a small open economy with existing
trade restrictions. Since industries differ only in their use of emissions, this is a two-sector
pollution haven model very similar to that discussed earlier.
Since sectors do not differ in their conventional factor use, Dean is unable to weigh
pollution haven motives against more conventional factor endowment determinants. She finds a
fall in trade restrictions (proxied by a reduction in the black market premium) raises pollution
directly; that is, pollution demand shifts right with trade liberalization. In the context of the
model, this suggests China’s low income makes it a pollution haven. But since the fall in trade
restrictions also raises income, (and hence would shift pollution supply left) the overall impact on
emissions in China is unclear.88
Antweiler, Copeland and Taylor (2001) develop a theoretical model to divide the impact
of trade on pollution into scale, technique and composition effects and then estimate and add up
these effects using data on sulfur dioxide concentrations from the Global Environment
Monitoring Project. Both factor endowment and pollution haven motives for trade are allowed
for. This research differs from the existing literature in the prominence given to the role of theory
in developing and examining the hypotheses, and in the use of a consistent data set to estimate all
three effects of trade. Grossman and Krueger did not separately identify the scale and technique
effects in their empirical work, and their examination of the composition effect of trade was based

88

The innovation in Dean s paper is the direct link she draws between income growth and trade
restrictions. But little is said about this link and no formal modeling of the process is given. For example,
if the link is the typical efficiency gains small open economies achieve from trade liberalization then it
would be necessary in the empirical work to treat these gains as proportional to net trade flows as they
represent terms of trade effects. If they occur via other means such as technology transfer or direct
productivity effects, then it would be necessary to incorporate them into the model s implicit abatement
production functions. Neither are attempted, nor is there any discussion of the controversial empirical
literature linking more open trade policies with economic growth

64

on data distinct from that used in estimating their scale and technique effects. Moreover the
evidence they presented on composition effects was specific to Mexico. In contrast, Antweiler et
al. estimate the composition effect jointly with the scale and technique effects on a dataset
including over 40 developed and developing countries.
Antweiler et al. estimate a reduced form equation for sulfur dioxide concentrations based
on a model much like that developed in the early part of this essay. Among other things, they
control for relative factor endowments, scale of production activity, determinants of policy (such
as per capita income), and openness to international trade.
Previous studies had looked for the effects of openness by simply adding it as an extra
explanatory variable.89 But both the pollution haven hypothesis and the factor endowment
hypothesis predict that openness to trade will alter the composition of national output in a way
that depends on a nation’s comparative advantage. Therefore, Antweiler et al. capture the
composition effect of trade by interacting a measure of openness with country characteristics
determining comparative advantage. Under the pollution haven hypothesis, a country’s income
relative to the world average is relevant; under the factor endowments hypothesis, capital
abundance relative to world averages is relevant.
This approach receives some support in the data. After accounting for variables
capturing scale and technique effects, simple measures of openness per se, measured in a variety
of ways, have very little impact on pollution concentrations.90 This is not surprising since the
theory predicts openness per se is not relevant. In contrast, when openness is conditioned on
country characteristics, they find a highly significant, but relatively small, impact on pollution
concentrations. In theory, this impact represents the composition effect created by further trade
liberalization.
To weigh the relative strength of pollution haven and factor endowment motives, they
calculate country-specific elasticities of pollution concentrations with respect to an increase in

89

See for example, Gale and Mendez (1998).
See Table 2, p.30 from our 1998, NBER Working paper No. 6707 that shows that none of our five
different measures of openness had a significant effect on pollution concentrations.

90

65

openness.91 These elasticities should reflect a country’s comparative advantage in dirty goods. A
positive value for a country implies trade liberalization shifts its pollution demand to the right
(reflecting a comparative advantage in dirty goods); a negative value implies trade liberalization
shifts its pollution demand to the left (reflecting a comparative advantage in clean goods).
These elasticity estimates are plotted against per capita income in Figure 9 below. If the
pollution haven hypothesis were an accurate description of world trade in dirty goods, we would
expect to see a strong negative relationship in Figure 9. Rich countries would have a comparative
advantage in clean goods. The opposite should be true for poor countries. Nothing like this
pattern emerges from the figure. In fact, the relationship is positive, suggesting that the
composition effect of trade is more likely to be pollution increasing for high-income countries.
Moreover, since capital-to-labor ratios are higher in richer economies, the figure suggests that
factor endowment determinants of trade appear to be dominating pollution haven motives, and
richer countries appear to have a comparative advantage in emission-intensive goods.
To some extent this result should not be surprising. Although the methods here are
different, the conclusions were foreshadowed in earlier work. Xu (1999) reports that in 1995,
almost 80% of the world’s exports of environmentally sensitive goods come from the OECD
countries. Walter (1973) calculates the direct and indirect environmental control costs in both
U.S. exports and imports to find that U.S. exports are actually very dirty by this measure, more
than 15% more than its imports92. Figure 9 is also consistent with the CGE evidence of Brown et
al. (1991) predicting a reallocation of energy intensive manufactures towards the U.S. and Canada
as a result of NAFTA.
Although the evidence in Figure 9 suggests that there is a composition effect of trade that
varies across countries, the estimated effect is quite small. One possible explanation for this,
which is worth further investigation, is that the factor endowment effects and pollution haven
effects tend to roughly offset each other. High-income countries are capital abundant, which leads

91

The magnitude of the elasticity is the percent change in SO2 concentrations associated with a 1% change
in trade intensity (X+M)/GDP (via the composition effect).
92
See Walter (1973), p67. 1.75% of the value of U.S. exports consisted of pollution-related costs, which is
about 15% higher than the 1.51% estimated for U.S. imports.

66

to a comparative advantage in dirty goods, but the also have stricter environmental policy which
works in the opposite direction and would tend to lead to a comparative advantage in clean goods.
Therefore a small net effect is consistent with strongly offsetting motives.
A second novel aspect of this paper is its method for separately estimating scale and
technique effects. Previous work had been unable to separately identify these effects. The
problem arises because both scale and technique effects are closely related to income levels. As a
result, any increase in income is likely to shift both pollution supply and demand, making
identification difficult. Antweiler et al. address this problem by exploiting the within-country
variation in their dataset. Under the assumption that pollution policy is set at the national level,
pollution supply is common for all cities within a given country. But cities differ in the scale of
their output. Therefore, differences within countries across cities in their scale can be used to
distinguish between scale and technique effects.93
The estimates indicate that a 1% increase in the scale of economic activity raises
pollution concentrations by approximately .25-.5%, but the accompanying increase in income
drives concentrations down by approximately 1-1.5% via a technique effect. As a result, income
gains created by freer trade lead to a net reduction in pollution concentrations from scale and
technique effects.
The estimated gap between the scale and technique effect seems large, and should be
investigated further.94 It is however consistent with the work of Pargal et al. (1996) who study
the link between informal pollution regulation and community characteristics in India. Using
plant level data, they find a 1% increase in community income drives pollution down by 2.8 - 4%;
while a 1% increase in output raises pollution by between .6 -.7 %. 95 The strong policy response
is also consistent with the results of Hilton et al. (1998) on lead.
The full effect of trade liberalization on pollution z requires that estimates of scale,
composition, and technique effects be added up. Differentiating their reduced form for pollution

93

This is not the only means for separating these effects. The authors also exploit variation across time,
and cross-country variation in the relationship between GDP and GNP.
94
Country specific estimates differ with some point estimates of the net effect being positive. The
hypothesis that scale dominates technique is however rejected by every individual country in the sample.
95
See Pargal et al. (1996, Table 2, p. 1324.)

67

concentrations with respect to a change in trade frictions β yields:

dz β
dS β
dI β
= π1
− π3
+ π4
dβ z
dβ S
dβ I

(30)

where the πi are estimated elasticities. The first term on the right hand side is the scale effect, the
second the technique effect, and the last the trade-created composition effect. If output and
income change proportionately, (30) can be simplified to:

dz β
dI β
= [π 1 − π 3 ]
+ π4
dβ z
dβ I

(31)

Equation (31) is very useful, but since Antweiler et al. do not estimate how a fall in trade frictions
affects income levels (i.e. dI/dβ) further information is required.
One approach is simply to restrict conclusions to the sample-average country. Taking the
average value across countries yields π1 = 0.26 and π3 = 1.57 and π4 = -0.38. If trade raises
incomes, then dI/dβ > 0 and this implies that for the average country in their sample, free trade
leads to reduced SO2 pollution in cities. That is, for this pollutant, free trade is good for the
environment. However, the effects are likely to be quite small. Most CGE models predict that
even large trade liberalizations have only relatively small impacts on income and output.
Combining this with small estimated composition effects of trade on the environment, the net
effect of trade on the environment is likely to be quite small.
Finally, although this work tends to confirm earlier work that suggested that the effect of
trade on the environment is small, the explanation for this result is different. Earlier work tended
to suggest that policy had no effect on trade patterns. In Antweiler et al., policy plays an
important role in dampening the factor endowment effect.
One final interesting aspect of the Antweiler et al. analysis is its implications for the
literature on the Environmental Kuznets Curve. To isolate the role of international trade in the
data, they attempt to distinguish between the pollution consequences of income changes brought
about by changes in openness from those created by factor accumulation. This means their
results can be used to investigate the hypothesis discussed in Section 3 that the pollution
consequences of economic growth are dependent on the underlying source of growth.
As noted above, income gains created by freer international trade are, for an average

68

country, beneficial to the environment. Neutral factor accumulation (an increase in income
holding the capital labor ratio constant creates only scale and technique effects, and using the
estimates mentioned earlier, one can conclude that it, too, is good for the environment in an
average country.
However, growth via capital accumulation turns out to worsen the environment. To
provide some idea of the magnitudes involved, Antweiler et al. conduct a back-of-the-envelope
calculation assuming a constant capital share in GDP of 1/3. Using the same method as above,
the full impact of capital accumulation is given by:

dz k
dS k
dI k
= π1
+ π2 − π3
dk z
dk S
dk I

(32)

where π2 is the elasticity of pollution with respect to a change in a nation’s capital-to-labor ratio.
This was estimated to be approximately π2 = 1. The scale and technique elasticities π1 and π3 are
as given before. If capital’s share in income is 1/3, and population growth is zero over the time
period considered, then (32) can be simplified. And employing the estimates given, we obtain:

dz k
1
1
= π 2 + [π 1 − π 3 ] = 1 + [.26 − 1.57] = .56 > 0
dk z
3
3

(33)

Growth via capital accumulation alone raises pollution concentrations for our average country,
even after taking into account the income effect on environmental policy.
This is an interesting result, despite its back-of-the-envelope flavor. It suggests that
researchers investigating the environmental Kuznets curve need to pay more attention to the
sources of economic growth. As well, it suggests that trade liberalization plus capital
accumulation is far less environmentally friendly than trade liberalization alone.96 We would
stress, however, that once we depart from the standard analysis of trade liberalization to include
its potential effects on capital accumulation, we should also include its potential role in
facilitating technology transfer and accelerating technological change. Unless these are biased
towards polluting sectors, these induced effects would tend to work in the opposite direction from
that of capital accumulation.
A couple of other recent studies seek to identify the effect of trade on environmental
96

This confirms a point made by Grossman and Krueger (1993).

69

quality. Cole and Elliot (forthcoming) use national emission data to investigate several
pollutants. They are not able to distinguish between scale and technique effects, but use Antweiler
et al.’s approach to attempt to isolate the composition effect of trade. They confirm the Antweiler
et al results for SO2, and obtain similar results on composition effects for CO2. But they find that
BOD and NOx appear to respond differently, suggesting that it is indeed important to expand the
scope of work to include other pollutants. In a model with many pollutants and goods, there is no
reason to expect that the relative importance of pollution haven versus factor endowment motives
will be the same across all pollutants.
Frankel and Rose (2002) use an EKC framework in which openness to trade is added as
an additional explanatory variable. They test whether the endogeneity of trade could account for
the results in Grossman and Krueger (1993) and Antweiler et al. (2001) that free trade appears to
be associated in an improvement in environmental quality. To do so, they use a single year of the
GEMS SO2 data and instrument for openness using geographical variables. Their main finding is
that controlling for the endogeneity of openness does not significantly affect these earlier results.

Summary

The studies reviewed in this section share the goal of explaining variation in pollution
levels by reference to scale, composition and technique effects. While there has been some
success in this regard, much more work needs to be done.
Along empirical lines, several avenues are open. For example, since the authors have not
estimated the impact of trade liberalization on income levels, factor accumulation, or
technological progress, it should be clear that other methods to "add up" the estimated scale,
composition and technique effects are possible. One such exercise was illustrated above, but
clearly more analysis along these lines is warranted.
Similarly, the results are, at this point, specific to sulfur dioxide and it is difficult to know
how or whether they may generalize to other important pollutants. It is known that sulfur dioxide
emissions are highly correlated with other airborne pollutants, but again it would be worthwhile
to examine the implications of trade for other major pollutants. Relatively large cross-country

70

datasets exist for other pollutants, although the specific modeling strategy will need to be
amended somewhat.
As well, Antweiler et al. estimated a relatively simple supply and demand model linking
real income gains to changes in policy, but left under-explored the relationship between political
economy elements and pollution outcomes. A sketch of a political economy theory is presented
but the extension of empirical methods to capture and account for these influences is left
untouched. Finally, their method of conditioning on country characteristics to weigh the relative
strength of pollution haven versus factor endowment motives is admittedly coarse and inelegant.
Further refinement along these lines should be possible.

4. Policy Implications
We now consider some of the policy issues that motivated much of this literature.97 The
policy literature is ultimately concerned with two issues - the use of environmental policy as a
substitute for trade policy, or more generally, the effects of environmental policy on
competitiveness; and the use of trade policy to achieve environmental objectives.
The "race to the bottom" debate, for example, arises from concerns that trade
liberalization will put pressure on governments to weaken environmental policy to shield firms
from increased foreign competition. The debate over whether countries should be allowed to ban
imports of, or require labeling of genetically modified organisms is fueled by a concern that such
policies may be disguised protectionism. At root, both of these issues are driven by the possibility
that environmental policy will be used to distort trade flows.
The U.S. bans on tuna imports from Mexico to protect porpoises, and on shrimp to
protect turtles were both examples of attempts by the US to achieve environmental objectives in
other countries by restricting trade. Another example can be found in suggestions that trade

97

Our review of the policy literature is highly selective. Some other surveys of the recent policy literature
include Rauscher (2001) and Ulph (1997). Esty (1994) is a good non-technical introduction to the major
policy issues and Bhagwati and Srinivasan (1996) is a good introduction to the distortions and targeting
approach to these issues.

71

liberalization should be curtailed because it may shift polluting industries to poor countries and
create pollution havens.
In some cases, these concerns reinforce each other. Proposals to circumvent "green
dumping" by tying trade agreements to harmonization of environmental standards, or by treating
weak environmental policy as a subsidy subject to countervail can be seen as attempts to modify
trade agreements to respond to both competitiveness and environmental concerns.

4.1 Environmental policy as a substitute for trade policy

One of the most contentious issues in the debate over trade and the environment is the
possibility that environmental policy may be used as a substitute for trade policy. A major
concern is that once trade agreements reduce trade barriers, governments will weaken
environmental policy to help domestic firms compete with their foreign rivals. Consequently,
freer trade may harm the environment because of an endogenous weakening of environmental
policy. We refer to this motive as tariff substitution, as environmental policy is substituting for
the lack of available trade policy instruments, typically because tariffs and quotas are constrained
by trade agreements.
To investigate this issue we must first identify why governments have an incentive to
protect local firms, (so there is a need for a trade agreement). The literature has focused on three
motives for protection: (1) the terms of trade motive arises in standard competitive trade models
when a country is large enough so that its trade policy can affect world prices; (2) a strategic
motive for protection arises in models where there is market power at the firm level — in these
models, governments can intervene to try to give their firms a strategic advantage over foreign
firms; and (3) a political economy motive for protection arises even in small competitive
economies when governments respond to interest group pressure.
Although the details of government behavior vary across the motives for protection, the
same key insight emerges from each: signing a free trade agreement limits the instruments of
protection available, but does not eliminate the pressure on the government to protect. If the
government has access to instruments that can substitute for trade policy, then they can be used to

72

undermine a trade agreement. This has important implications for the linkage of trade and
environmental policy. To discuss these issues in more detail, we review some of the theory and
evidence below.

Tariff Substitution

Consider a competitive world economy with two countries and suppose governments
have only two policy instruments available: trade taxes and pollution taxes. Both instruments
affect a country’s import demand and export supply and, we assume, can affect its terms of trade.
As well, both policies affect environmental quality.
First suppose governments choose both trade and environmental taxes non-cooperatively.
Each government uses its two instruments to maximize the utility of its representative consumer.
Let t be Home’s ad valorem import tariff and let τ be its pollution tax; and let M denote imports
and E denote exports. The corresponding Foreign variables are denoted with an asterisk (*). Any
tax revenue is rebated in lump sum to the consumer.
Consider Home’s problem. Suppose Home imports the pollution intensive good and
exports the clean good. With these policy instruments, the consumer’s budget constraint is:

I = G( p(1 + t ), K , L, z ) + tMp

(34)

The government chooses tariffs and pollution policy to maximize consumer’s utility subject to the
budget constraint (34) for given levels of Foreign’s policy instruments. The first order conditions
for the choice of t and τ are:

−M

dp
dM
dZ
+ tp
+ (τ − MD)
=0
dt
dt
dt

(35)

−M

dp
dM
dZ
+ tp
+ (τ − MD)
=0
dτ
dτ
dτ

(36)

where recall that MD denotes marginal damage. Noting home imports must equal foreign exports
(E*), we have

dM
dp
= E p*
dt
dt
73

and by substituting this into (35) and (36), we can find the optimal policy pair:

τ = MD

(37)

1
ε*

(38)

t=

where ε* ≡ pE*p/E* > 0 is the elasticity of the foreign export supply function.
The solution reflects the policy targeting literature: externalities are fully internalized
with environmental policy, and tariffs target the terms of trade [see for example, Dixit (1985)].
When governments are unconstrained in their choice of policies, there is no incentive to weaken
environmental policy to give local firms a competitive edge over foreign firms — this can be more
effectively accomplished by using tariffs alone.
Similar results apply to an exporter of pollution intensive goods (the Foreign country in
our example). The foreign government’s optimal policy is to fully internalize externalities and
either protect its import-competing industry (Y) or equivalently to tax exports of the polluting
good.
When both countries use trade policy to improve their terms of trade, the world ends up
in a standard non-cooperative tariff game. This pushes them inside the global Pareto frontier
because trade barriers drive a wedge between prices in the two countries. Both countries can
therefore gain from a trade agreement that moves them back to the frontier. This is the motive for
entering into a free trade agreement in our model.
Suppose the two countries reach a binding agreement to eliminate tariffs.98
What happens to environmental policy? Setting the tariff equal to zero in (36) yields:

τ = MD + M

dp / dτ
< MD .
dz / dτ

(39)

In response to the free trade agreement, Home’s optimal pollution tax diverges from marginal

98

As is well known, a large country can win a trade war in the sense that it is better off in the tariffridden equilibrium than in free trade. But because such an equilibrium lies inside the Pareto frontier, even
a winner of the trade war has an incentive to negotiate. As Mayer (1981) notes, any point on the Pareto
frontier can be implemented with free trade combined with a lump sum transfer. A large country would
demand a lump sum transfer (or some other concession) in return for free trade.

74

damage. Home still has an incentive to protect its import-competing firms, but with trade barriers
eliminated, it has to fall back on second best instruments. If environmental policy is the only
other instrument available, Home provides an implicit subsidy to its import-competing industry
by setting the pollution tax below marginal damage.
The discussion above has focused on the incentives facing the importer of polluting
goods. The exporter of polluting goods also has an incentive to look for an alternative to trade
policy. In this case, as mentioned previously, Foreign has an incentive to reduce the world supply
of the polluting good, and hence elimination of tariffs will cause it to tighten up environmental
policy:

τ * = MD * − E *

dp / dτ *
> MD * .
dz * / dτ *

(40)

In this model, importers of pollution intensive goods have an incentive to relax environmental
policy to subsidize local production, while exporters have an incentive to tighten policy to tax
production.99
The result here is a special case of a more general result, which is that when there are
multiple policy instruments available to governments, a free trade agreement that restricts only a
subset of instruments is an incomplete contract that can be undermined as governments substitute
towards unconstrained instruments.100 In this context, the option of manipulating environmental
policy to improve the terms of trade creates a loophole in the trade agreement.
The result that governments can use environmental policy as a substitute for trade policy
also appears in both the strategic trade and political economy literatures. In strategic trade
papers, there is typically a two stage game: government policy is set in the first stage, and
imperfectly competitive firms move in the second stage. As Brander and Spencer (1984, 1985)
showed, if governments can make binding policy commitments in the first stage, they can give
their firms a strategic advantage in the latter stage. In these models, once trade taxes and
subsidies are eliminated, governments have an incentive to switch to other instruments, including

99

On this point see Baumol and Oates (1988), Markusen (1975) and others.
See Copeland (1990) for an early model of this process and Bagwell and Staiger (2001) and Ederington
(2001, 2002) for recent examination and suggested solutions.

100

75

environmental policy if available (see Barrett, 1994; Conrad 1993, Kennedy, 1994).
To identify this motive, consider a partial equilibrium model with three countries, East,
West and South. East and West each have one firm producing a dirty good that is sold only to the
South − that is, all production is exported. 101 And, for clarity, assume only one country, say
West, is policy-active. The game proceeds in two stages. In the first stage, West chooses its
pollution tax τ, and in the second stage, the two firms choose output simultaneously.
Because the model is partial equilibrium, and there is no domestic consumption of the
dirty good, we can write West’s welfare function as:

W = π ( x, x*, z ) − D( z )
where π is profits of West’s firm, x and x* are West and East output of the dirty good, z is West’s
pollution (πz > 0), and D is the pollution damage function.
If there were no Eastern firm, the West’s government would simply choose the pollution
tax so that the marginal benefit of polluting equals marginal damage:

π z = MD

(41)

where MD≡ dD/dz. Moreover, in response to the pollution tax, the firm would choose its
emissions level such that

τ = πz

(42)

And hence the solution would be implemented with a pollution tax set equal to marginal damage
(τ = MD).102
However, when the Western firm competes with its Eastern rival, the Western
government has an incentive to use environmental policy to help its firm gain a strategic
advantage over its rival. In this case, West’s optimal pollution policy is determined by:103

101

Home and foreign goods may be either homogeneous or imperfect substitutes — we need home s demand
to fall when foreign output rises.
102
Note however the role played by no domestic consumption in West.
103
Because the Western government moves first, it uses the first order conditions from the second stage
Cournot game to predict how its policy affects the final outcome. Because the Western firm maximizes
profits treating eastern output as given, we have ∂π/∂x = 0, which we have used to get (43).

76

dx * / dτ
= MD
dz / dτ
(−) (−)

π z + π x*

(43)

Reducing the pollution tax (and therefore raising emissions) yields two benefits now — there is the
direct reduction in the domestic firm’s costs (hence the increase in profits given by πz); but as
well, there is a strategic effect — a reduction in Home’s pollution tax lowers the home firm’s costs.
This shift out the home firm’s reaction function in the output game, and causes the foreign firm to
reduce its output (as long as reaction functions slope downward) 104. That is, a weakening of
Home’s environmental policy allows the Home firm to credibly commit to produce more output,
which leads to higher profits for Home. The home firm always has an incentive to commit to
more output, but such a commitment is not credible. A weakening of Home’s environmental
policy helps the local firm out by making such a commitment credible.
The optimal pollution policy for the Home country can now be written as:

τ = MD – π x *

dx * / dτ
< MD
dz / dτ

(44)

where Home provides an implicit subsidy to the domestic firm by setting the pollution tax below
Marginal Damage. Again we find environmental policy distorted.
And finally in the political economy literature, governments respond to political pressure
and use policies to redistribute income from one interest group to another. If trade policy and
environmental policy are the available instruments, then once tariffs are eliminated, governments
will manipulate environmental policy to help favored groups. Pollution taxes will be above or
below marginal damage depending on the political strength of competing interest groups. To
illustrate the implications of this approach for environmental policy, consider a simple political
support model. Suppose there are two agents: Labor and Capital, and suppose their utility
functions take the form:105

104

Typically, this literature makes assumptions on demand and cost conditions to ensure that reaction
functions slope down and a stability condition is satisfied.
105
This linear form ensures the marginal utility of income is unaffected by redistributions across the two
groups in society and is a common assumption in the political economy literature. This simplifies the

77

U=

I
− D( z )
β ( p)

where I is income, β is a price index, and D the pollution damage function which is increasing
and convex. The production side of the model is the basic competitive model we used earlier in
the essay. Assume a small open economy (with goods prices fixed) to eliminate the terms of
trade motive for intervention.
Suppose that the government places a higher weight on capitalists than workers, and
suppose that the only instrument available is the pollution tax. The government chooses pollution
to maximize:

W = U L + (1 + λ )U K
where UL is the utility of Labor, and UK is the utility of Capital. Then solving as before for the
optimal pollution tax now yields:

τ = 2β

dD
∂U K
∂U K
− λβ
= MD − λβ
dz
∂z
∂z

(45)

An increase in allowable pollution raises the return to capital and lowers the return to labor in the
model of section 3. Consequently, capitalists prefer more pollution than at the socially efficient
point (where τ = MD); that is, in the relevant range, we have ∂UK/∂z > 0. If the government gives
preferential treatment to capitalists so that λ > 0, then it will subsidize the pollution intensive
industry by setting a pollution tax below social marginal damage. If the government gives
preferential treatment to labor, then λ < 0 and the pollution tax is below social marginal damage.
Our analysis of tariff substitution has focused on production-generated pollution. Similar
issues arise when pollution is generated by consumption (such as with automobile emissions),
although there are some important differences as well.
For production-generated pollution, environmental policy tends to be directed at local
firms, and so most of the scope for manipulating policy for protective purposes lies in either
loosening or tightening policy to raise or lower local firms’ production costs as we have illustrated

calculations tremendously but is not necessary for our main point here.

78

above.106 On the other hand, when pollution is generated during consumption (such as with
automobile emissions), environmental policy targets the characteristics of products, and so
applies to both local and imported products. Consequently policy aimed at consumptiongenerated pollution can be used to restrict market access for non-conforming foreign products, as
well as to affect production costs of both local and foreign firms.
Although the details will differ across model types, the terms-of-trade, strategic trade,
and political economy models all predict that governments have an incentive to take advantage of
product standards to protect local firms. To avoid the use of product standards as a protectionist
device, trade agreements typically require a national treatment rule. Under a pure national
treatment regime, countries are allowed to impose any environmental standards they choose, but
the standards applied to foreign products should be no less stringent than that applied to local
products. That is, a national treatment regime attempts to circumvent protectionist tendencies by
enforcing a non-discrimination rule. Unfortunately, a national standard does not eliminate the
potential for governments to manipulate environmental policy for protective purposes.
This follows quite straightforwardly from the logic behind "Raising Rivals’ Costs" in
Salop and Sheffman (1983). For example, if it is easier for local firms to comply with an
environmental regulation than foreign firms, then the imposition of the regulation can favor local
firms at the expense of foreign firms, which creates an incentive for a strategically motivated
government to over-use the policy. These issues have been at the root of several trade disputes
such as bans on beef hormones and genetically modified organisms.

Discussion

While the terms-of-trade, strategic trade, and political economy models all can generate

106

Countries have sometimes attempted to make access to local markets contingent on the process by
which goods were produced in the source country. That is, countries may wish to block access to local
markets unless foreign producers meet certain environmental standards. This method of protection is for
the most part not legal under WTO rules, and has been a considerable source of controversy. The US ban
on imports of tuna from Mexico because Mexican fishing practices led to porpoise deaths is perhaps the
most prominent example. For a discussion of this and other cases, see Esty (1994).

79

the prediction that freer trade will increase the incentive for governments to manipulate
environmental policy, they are subject to several criticisms. Criticisms fall into three categories:
(1) exogenous restrictions on instrument choice; (2) fragility of results; and (3) lack of empirical
evidence. We discuss these in turn.
All of the models suffer from a common weakness, which is that they typically assume
that environmental policy is the only available substitute for trade policy. In the political
economy models, the government wants to increase the income of some interest groups at the
expense of other groups. Environmental policy can accomplish this indirectly by affecting cost
conditions and thereby affecting factor returns via market effects. However, a more direct way of
raising income is simply to use direct transfers. If these are ruled out, taxation rules can be
manipulated. Or direct production subsidies can be used. That is, there are many other
instruments typically available to governments that will do a better job of transferring income,
and likely at lower cost per dollar transferred.
Similarly, in the terms of trade or strategic trade models, if a tariff is eliminated,
governments could take advantage of the well-known result that a tariff is equivalent to a
consumption tax combined with a production subsidy. That is, if the government signs a treaty to
eliminate tariffs, it can exactly replicate the effect of the tariff by using domestic tax and subsidy
policies − there is no need to manipulate environmental policy.107
Moreover, environmental policy is less effective and more costly than these other
instruments. For the most part, the literature has dealt with this problem by restricting the policy
space. Most models simply assume that environmental policy and tariffs are the only available
instruments. But once we open up the possibility that governments have other instruments
available, the likelihood that these models will predict trade agreements will lead to strategic
manipulation of environmental policy is substantially diminished.
This weakness in these models has been recognized for quite some time − Rodrik (1995)
identified it as one of the key challenges for the political economy literature, and Wilson (1996)

107

If production subsidies are disallowed by trade rules, then we can resort to R&D subsidies that lower
marginal costs. If R&D subsidies are not available, there are many other ways of subsidizing firms that
may be more palatable than weakening environmental policy.

80

pointed out its implications for the environmental "race to the bottom" literature. However, it
remains a fruitful area for further research.
A second critique of this literature takes the restrictions on the policy space as given, but
argues that the results are either extremely fragile, or rely on an incredible degree of coordination
across levels of government. For example, it is well known that results in the strategic trade
policy literature are sensitive to assumptions about both market conduct and market structure.
The same is true here. If we alter the partial equilibrium model above by assuming the domestic
and foreign firm sell differentiated products and choose prices rather than quantities, then the
relationship between the optimal pollution tax and marginal damage is reversed. In this case, we
write domestic welfare in terms of prices:

W = π ( p, p*, z ) − D( z )

(46)

and solving for the optimal pollution tax, we find:

dp * / dτ
> MD
dz / dτ
(+) (−)

τ = MD – π p*

(47)

the pollution tax is above marginal damage. The reason for this is well known (Eaton and
Grossman, 1986; Barrett, 1994): with price competition, domestic and foreign prices are strategic
complements. Consequently, the home firm has an incentive to commit to a higher price, because
the foreign firm would respond by raising its price as well and both firms would benefit from the
higher prices. The home government can help its firm make this commitment credible by taxing
it; that is, by tightening environmental policy. In doing so, Home’s reaction function shifts out
and home gets a strategic benefit from the increase in foreign price.
The key point here is that once we alter our assumptions on market conduct to allow for
price competition, the Home government’s incentive to give its firm a strategic advantage leads to
an argument for an export tax and not an export subsidy. If we remove the ability of
government’s to use export taxes, then exporting countries have an incentive to tighten, not loosen
environmental policy.
Even if we retain our homogenous product, Cournot model, the policy implications are

81

also sensitive to assumptions about entry and market structure. As Barrett (1994) noted
[following earlier work by Dixit (1984)], when there are two or more domestic firms, part of the
potential rents from exporting are dissipated as the two domestic firms compete with each other.
The optimal policy to counter this competition is an export tax (or quota), which in our case is a
tightening of environmental policy. Therefore, the government has an incentive to subsidize the
domestic firms to give them a strategic advantage in their competition with the foreign firm, but
on the other hand, there is an incentive to tax the domestic firms to encourage cartelization by
domestic firms. In simple linear models, the taxation motive tends to dominate once there are
more than a small number of domestic firms. This implies that once we move to a model with
several imperfectly competitive domestic firms, we find the standard result that emerges from
competitive models, which is that the government has an incentive to raise the pollution tax above
marginal damage to tax domestic firms to improve the terms of trade.
Criticism also comes from environmental economists who note while trade policy is
almost exclusively determined by central governments, much of environmental policy is set at the
local, regional, or state level. Therefore, in order to put into place the terms of trade motivation
for altering environmental policy we need a great deal of coordination between different levels of
government. Moreover, since states, regions and even cities differ greatly it is not clear this
cooperation would be forthcoming since their constituents may well be hurt by a price change
that at the national level, would be welfare improving.
Political economy models fare better in this regard since local authorities have it in their
power to relax environmental standards to help local firms. However, these models are not
immune from all of the problems mentioned above. For example, several authors have
considered political economy models with both trade and environmental policy, using a
Grossman-Helpman (1994) framework. Schleich (1999) pointed out that the usual targeting
results hold in this model, so that if tariffs are available, there is no incentive to distort
environmental policy (because in these models, the government wants to minimize the social cost
of raising the income of favored groups). And as we demonstrated above, the political economy
approach does not always imply that environmental policy will be too weak. If a polluting sector
has relatively weak political influence, then environmental policy may be tightened in that sector

82

to free up resources for other favored sectors. As Conconi (2001) points out, if environmental
groups are sufficiently strong relative to industry groups, then pollution policy may be more
stringent than the Samuelson rule requires.
Overall, the theoretical literature on tariff substitution does predict that governments may
have incentives to manipulate environmental policy to help domestic firms in response to trade
liberalization. There is no uniform prediction as to whether policy will be too tight or too weak,
since predictions are sensitive to assumptions on the set of available instruments and market
conduct. This is an area where empirical evidence is badly needed to examine where and when
tariff substitution may operate.
As long as the bulk of the evidence suggested that pollution policy had no measurable
effects on competitiveness, as was the case at the time of the review by Jaffe et al. (1995), then it
was easy to dismiss tariff-substitution as having little practical relevance. The recent findings by
Levinson (1999), Becker and Henderson (2000), Greenstone (2002), Ederington and Minier
(2003), and others demonstrate that pollution policy can indeed be used as an instrument of
protection. If this work holds up to further scrutiny, it is important evidence that concerns over
tariff substitution need to be taken seriously. It is important to note though that these studies
contain evidence that pollution regulations matter; they don’t provide evidence that government’s
alter pollution regulations in order to influence trade outcomes. The empirical evidence on this
score is very limited with only a couple of studies attempting to test for policy substitution.
Gawande (1999) finds evidence that governments do substitute non-tariff barriers for
other instruments of protection, suggesting that the concern about loopholes in trade agreements
is well founded. Eliste and Fredriksson (forthcoming) argue that governments weaken
environmental policy to shelter industries newly exposed to freer trade and provide some
evidence from the farm sector to support this. Ederington and Minier (2003) use 4-digit US
manufacturing data from 1978-92 and find that their measure of the stringency of environmental
regulation (abatement costs) has a negative and statistically significant relation with net import
flows. This is consistent with the prediction that environmental policy is responsive to pressures
from foreign competition. This is an area where much more empirical work is required to help
clarify the policy debates.

83

If governments do engage in tariff substitution, then it is still not clear how trade
agreements should be modified to deal with the issue. There is a trade off between two different
objectives: closing loopholes in trade agreements by constraining the use of domestic policy
instruments in an effort to prevent tariff substitution; and allowing governments flexibility to
respond to local changes in local conditions and preferences.
In the case of product standards, there has been a gradual shift away from a pure national
treatment regime to one that requires increased use of scientific evidence to justify environmental
policies that impede trade. This may inhibit tariff substitution, but it reduces the flexibility of
governments to implement their own environmental policy. A movement towards increased
harmonization of product standards, as in the EU goes even further in this direction.
In the case of production-generated pollution, governments have retained more flexibility
to adjust their environmental policy, but at the possible cost of increased tariff substitution. This
is because explicit export subsidies are subject to countervail laws under the WTO, but the use of
implicit subsidies by weakening environmental policy are not. One of the main reasons for this
seeming inconsistency in the treatment of subsidies is that the informational requirements of
determining the "correct" environmental policy are high. Even in our simple framework, the
optimal pollution tax varies across pollutants, locations, and depends on preferences and its
interaction with other pollutants. Consequently, a regime that attempts to forestall tariff
substitution by allowing "green countervail" would likely be unworkable.
Bagwell and Staiger (2001) have addressed this issue in their work on self-enforcing
trade agreements. If trade agreements are negotiations to allow market access to trading partners,
and if these obligations bind, then they show that even if the trade agreement does not constrain
domestic policy, it nevertheless removes tariff substitution motives. If each government
maximizes its objective function subject to its market access commitments, then the solution is to
minimize the cost of achieving those objectives. This eliminates the temptation to use
environmental policy to reduce imports, since some other policy would have to be altered to
counteract the negative effects on foreign market access. Although this is an elegant solution to
the problem, it requires that we monitor country’s market access commitments very closely to
eliminate possible abuses. Since any measure of market access will involve trade flows and

84

prices, shifts in comparative advantage or demand shocks would likely alter measured "market
access." As a result, evaluating whether a country has met its market access commitments may
be no less difficult that determining its "correct" environmental policy.

4.2 Trade policy as a substitute for environmental policy

The other major policy issue we want to discuss is whether trade policy should be used to
achieve environmental objectives. This issue arises most frequently in two contexts. First there
is simply a concern that trade may increase pollution, and therefore restrictions on trade can
reduce pollution. Second, there are many issues where people in one country want to achieve an
environmental objective in another country. Examples include proposals to ban tropical timber
imports to protect rain forests and the banning of tuna imports into the US from Mexico to protect
dolphins. We examine each of these cases in turn.
On theoretical grounds the question of whether we should use trade restrictions to deal
with the general issue of trade-induced increases in pollution is quite clear-cut. Trade restrictions
are not a first-best instrument to deal with local environmental problems. Return to our small
open economy model, replace trade frictions with a tax on trade, and assume environmental
policy is not optimal. Assume Home exports dirty goods. For concreteness, assume Home levies
a specific export tax of t on exports. Then pd in our previous analysis is simply p-τ. 108 Home’s
representative consumer has utility:

U = V ( p − t, I , z )

where

I = G( p − t, K , L, z ) + tE

(48)

and E is exports of X. Home’s pollution level is determined endogenously for any given pollution
tax τ by109

An export tax on X is analytically equivalent to an import tariff on Y − we could do the whole analysis in
terms of a tariff on Y and get exactly the same result.
109
The pollution tax revenue is included in the national income function G. If we had alternatively written
G as a function of the pollution tax τ, (instead of as a function of z), then we would have to add the
pollution tax revenue to the G function to get total national income).
108

85

τ = Gz ( p − t, K , L, z ) .

(49)

Now consider trade liberalization. The effect on welfare of a change in the export tax for
given τ is:

1 dU
dE
dz
=t
+ (τ − MD)
VI dt
dt
dt .

(−)

(50)

(−)

An increase in trade barriers has two effects on welfare. It reduces exports, which is harmful as
standard gains from trade are lost. And it reduces pollution because the export sector pollutes.
Solving for the optimal tax on exports we find:

t = −(τ − MD)

dz / dt
dE / dt
(+)

(51)

If pollution policy fully internalizes externalities (τ = MD), the optimal tax on trade is
zero. Rather than using trade barriers, countries can more effectively control environmental
problems with instruments that are finely tuned to deal with the source of the problem, such as
pollution taxes or quotas. This well-known result follows from the policy targeting literature (see
Dixit, (1985)).
If environmental policy does not fully internalize externalities, then trade policy can be
used as a second-best instrument to control pollution. Suppose, for example, the pollution tax is
exogenously set to zero. Then if the only other available instrument is a tax on trade, its optimal
level is:

t = MD

dz / dt
> 0.
dE / dt

(52)

By restricting trade, the pollution-intensive export sector is prevented from expanding to take
advantage of trading opportunities, and this reduces pollution and raises welfare.
While the use of trade policy for environmental ends seems simple and attractive, there
are several problems with the analysis above. The first is simply that because of the complicated
general equilibrium effects of trade liberalization determining the optimal second best trade

86

policy to avoid environmental damage can be quite complicated [see Copeland (1994)].
Second, even if environmental policy is imperfect, trade may still be beneficial. As we
demonstrated in section 3, the welfare results of trade liberalization depend on both a country’s
comparative advantage and the instruments it uses for environmental protection. If a country has
a comparative advantage in dirty goods, then the welfare impact of freer trade depends on
whether imperfect regulation targets emission intensities or overall pollution. If it is the former,
losses can occur; if it is the latter, gains are assured. Alternatively, if a country has lax regulation
but a comparative advantage in clean goods, then trade is necessarily welfare improving because
it takes pressure off the environment.
Finally, there is very little evidence in favor of pollution-haven-driven trade. The earliest
evidence on pollution havens fails to control for other determinants of comparative advantage; the
evidence from the cross-sectional HOS studies is ambiguous and not quite to the point;110 and the
evidence presented in Antweiler et al. (2001) favors a factor endowments view of world trade in
dirty goods. Overall, the composition effects that are needed to drive the pollution haven
hypothesis are hard to find in the data. As well, there is evidence provided by many authors that
income gains have a large positive effect on environmental quality. The current empirical
evidence therefore supports a view where the technique effects arising from trade liberalization
may be significant, and composition effects may in fact move dirty good production away from
low-income developing countries to high-income developed countries. Moreover, the few studies
that have attempted to estimate the aggregate effect of increased trade on environmental quality
have found the effects to be small, and possibly positive.
We should note, however, several caveats. The first is that the evidence is incomplete.
The available studies deal with only a subset of possible pollutants, and there is very little
empirical work examining how trade affects natural resource degradation. Natural resource
degradation may be a key environmental impact of trade in resource-rich less developed

110

Even if researchers find a negative relationship between pollution regulations and competitiveness this
does not imply that income-induced differences in pollution regulations are the only or even the most
important determinant of trade. Regulations can of course matter to costs, while the pollution haven
hypothesis remains a poor description of trade in dirty goods.

87

countries.111 As well, we know of no empirical work specifically linking international trade to
global pollutants. Since the studies define environmental outcomes quite narrowly, we should be
wary of claiming too much. The evidence is also subject to further scrutiny. Given the existing
problems in the literature and the embryonic nature of some of the research, future work with
different pollutants, datasets, or countries may alter the results considerably.
There is also evidence that in some situations trade liberalization has caused great
environmental problems, be it in the Maquiladora region of Mexico or elsewhere. And
environmental groups in the U.S. and elsewhere have presented a series of case studies or
examples of environmental debacles linked to international trade. At present there is a tension
between this evidence and the results of empirical work in the academic community. The
difference may arise from to sample selection if these agencies are not looking for the "good
news" stories, or they may reflect a real gap between the impact trade has on widely measurable
environmental outcomes used by academic researchers, and the more narrowly defined outcomes
reported by these agencies. More careful work is needed to investigate the effects of trade on a
much broader spectrum of environmental indicators.
Perhaps the major weakness in the theoretical argument that trade restrictions are a useful
second-best instrument to deal with environmental problems is that theory is usually silent on
why environmental policy is not available. While there are surely countless stories as to why this
may be true — asymmetric information, bureaucratic red tape, political economy factors,
indivisibilities etc — the literature does not explain why tariff-setting is immune from these
problems while environmental policy is hobbled by them. Instead we are asked to believe that
whatever is responsible for constraining environmental policy has no effect whatsoever on our
ability to target trade policy perfectly. This is a rather strong assumption. This is an issue that
needs more study in a political economy framework where the choice of instrument is itself an
endogenous outcome.

111

For theoretical work on this point, see Chichilnisky (1994) and Brander and Taylor (1997).

88

Intervening in Foreign Environmental Policy

The other major argument for using trade policy to achieve environmental outcomes arises
when citizens in one country want to influence environmental policy in another. This can occur
very naturally if pollution is global. It can also arise when citizens of one country "care" about
environmental outcomes in other countries because of humanitarian or purely selfish reasons.112
While there is in principle nothing wrong with the desire to affect foreign policy, the method of
altering policy is rarely what economic theory would suggest is efficient. The first best policy in
these situations calls for a negotiated agreement in which the foreign country uses environmental
policy instruments to target pollution in return for a possible transfer from Home. These transfers
could be implicit in the size of cutbacks nations have to make to join a global pollution
agreement, or they could be explicitly tied to pollution reductions.113 There is a large literature on
international agreements that deal with transboundary or global environmental problems (see
Barrett, 2003) and the solutions typically involve negotiation plus some mechanism for transfers.
Trade policy may still be useful as part of an enforcement mechanism in these agreements,
because it can help to implement a more severe penalty for deviations from agreements, but it
does not substitute for environmental policy.
Alternatives to negotiation are unilateral attempts to punish, cajole or influence foreign
environmental policy with trade policy instruments. For example, if a country is large enough to
influence the world price of the dirty good, then it can try to use trade policy to lower the price of
the dirty good so that foreign countries generate less pollution (see Markusen, 1975).
Such a policy, however, suffers from a number of problems. It is unlikely to be effective
unless all countries coordinate their trade policy and therefore concerns of leakage arise. For
example, consider a three-country model. Suppose both East and West produce X; and West’s
production of X is dirty while East’s is clean. If Home unilaterally tries to reduce West’s pollution
with a tariff, then West can instead export to East, and East can export to Home. Home’s tariff on

112

For example, I might be in favor of conservation efforts in foreign countries so that I can visit a nature
park, benefit from the biodiversity, or ski in their pristine wilderness.
113
See Copeland and Taylor (1995, 2000) for a discussion of transfers and global pollution.

89

West’s dirty production may have almost no effect on pollution in a multi-country world.
As well, a trade restriction can have perverse effects if there are alternative uses for a
fixed factor used by the environmentally intensive industry. Suppose North uses a tariff to
restrict lumber imports from South in an effort to protect forest habitat in the South (which
Northern residents value). Then with the economic viability of the lumber industry diminished,
Southern producers may burn the forest and convert the land to agricultural use.114

5. Conclusions

With the increased integration of the global economy, it has become difficult to ignore
the international consequences of domestic environmental policy regulation. And with rising
concern over environmental quality both at home and abroad, an assessment of how trade policy
affects the environment has become unavoidable.
Despite the novelty of these developments, research on trade and the environment is not
new. Work in the 1970’s raised many of the key issues of second best policy analysis: free trade
need not be welfare improving if environmental costs are not internalized, trade policy can be
used as a substitute for environmental policy, and a commitment to free trade may create
incentives to distort environmental policy. In many ways, however, this early work provided
more questions than answers. Optimal second best policy is very sensitive to the market
structure, assumptions on technology, and empirical magnitudes. Consequently, one can draw on
this early literature to support a wide spectrum of policy proposals.
The major contribution of the recent wave of research (which began in the early 1990’s)
has been to shift the literature towards a focus on empirically motivated questions that are
important to the resolution of policy debates. While this work is still new, we can identify three
conclusions that are emerging. These conclusions should be the subject of further investigation,
and some are them rest on more evidence than others, but if correct, they yield important
implications for ongoing policy debates.

114

See Barbier and Schultz (1997)

90

The first conclusion is simply that there is now a great deal of evidence supporting the
view that rising incomes affect environment quality in a positive way. This suggests that when
we assess the effects of growth and trade on the environment, we cannot simply associate
increased economic activity with increased environmental damage. Beneficial changes in
environmental policy will likely follow and this leaves the net impact on the environment unclear.
This is an important piece of evidence, but it has led the literature to focus almost
exclusively on the impact of income effects. While incomes per capita are likely to be an
important determinant of pollution policy (or pollution supply), actual pollution outcomes reflect
the impact of other national characteristics as well (since they determine pollution demand).
Theory suggests that linking environmental outcomes to income per capita alone is unlikely to be
successful, just as predicting the pattern of trade in dirty goods by relative income levels alone is
unlikely to be successful. Recent research finding a sensitivity of the Environmental Kuznets
Curve to time periods or data may reflect the workings of important excluded national
characteristics. If so, this would echo our concerns with an empirical literature that focuses too
heavily on the role of income levels play in explaining the location of dirty good production and
international trade. Future research should move away from estimating highly restricted models
of pollution determination to consider alternatives giving a larger role to natural resources, capital
abundance and other more conventional factors. Moreover, at a theoretical level it is still not well
understood how the income effect interacts with the policy process, particularly in the context of
political economy influences.
A second major finding from the research of the last 5 years is that the previous
consensus that environmental policy does not affect trade and investment flows was premature. A
number of recent studies find that both trade and investment are influenced by pollution
regulations. This work illustrates the benefits of combining theory and empirical work. Once we
interpret pollution levels and the stringency of regulation as equilibrium outcomes, then pollution
abatement costs are no longer independent of industry attributes. Consequently, measures of trade
performance (such as import penetration) and pollution abatement costs are both endogenous
variables. Therefore, the common finding of a weak or non-existent relationship between
pollution abatement costs and import penetration is likely to be a symptom of econometric

91

problems and not evidence that environmental regulations are irrelevant. And the occasional
finding of a positive relationship between pollution abatement costs and measures of
competitiveness is surely not prima facie evidence of the "Porter Hypothesis". Examining this
endogeneity problem further should be a major focus of future empirical work.
A third, and more tentative, conclusion is that there is little convincing evidence to
support the pollution haven hypothesis. While there is evidence of a pollution haven effect, it is
only one of many factors that determine trade patterns, and there is no evidence that it is the
dominant factor.
Although the policy debate is often characterized as a conflict between those for and
against globalization, it is really a struggle over how the rules governing trade should evolve.
The fundamental issues involve the trade-off between allowing governments flexibility to pursue
independent environmental policies (which sometimes may involve implicit or explicit
restrictions on trade), and constraining the ability of governments in order to close loopholes in
trade agreements. At present there is little evidence that environmental policy has been used to
substitute for tariff protection. While tightening environmental standards does have cost and
competitiveness consequences so too do almost all domestic policies. In the absence of strong
evidence of abuse, we come down on the side of flexibility. Environmental policy should not be
overly constrained by trade agreements.
We also find little reason for trade policy to be used to achieve environmental ends either
at home or in foreign countries. While restricting imports from countries with objectionable
policies may indeed have environmental effects, these can easily be negative. Lowering the
access of developing countries to developed country markets is likely to lower their incomes and
reduce their desire to adopt tighter environmental standards. It may also introduce perverse
incentives by reducing the value of natural resources and therefore exacerbate environmental
problems arising from the lack of property rights enforcement. And while the empirical evidence
to date is not conclusive, trade restrictions on imports of developing countries may well lead them
to adopt an even dirtier slate of production. This is not to say that concerned citizens in
developed countries should sit idly by while the environment in developing countries worsens;
rather it suggests these advocates adopt more efficient policies to enact positive change by

92

supporting the use of direct financial incentives, tied aid and capacity-building exercises in
developing countries.
And what about the bottom line? Is free trade good or bad for the environment? Most
available studies suggest that they effect is small, but an answer to this question requires more
careful empirical work guided by theory. Trade affects the environment via scale, composition,
and technique effects, and these effects can all be expected to vary across countries. Some recent
work has demonstrated how these effects can be isolated and estimated. Future work in this area
should be attempting to refine, extend, and improve on these methods. Moreover, current work
has looked at only a very few pollutants, and there is very little empirical work assessing the
effects of trade on renewable resources. Finally, while Antweiler et. al (2001) find that only
small effects of trade on pollution concentrations, they also find relatively large impacts from
changes in a nation’s factor composition. This suggests that the effects of capital mobility on
environmental outcomes will be different than the effects of trade. More work is needed here, but
until then it would be unwise for countries to use trade protection as a means to improve their
environment.

93

6. References
Aidt, T.S., "Political internalization of economic externalities and environmental policy", Journal
of Public Economics, 69, 1998, p1-16.
Andreoni, James and Arik Levinson, "The Simple Analytics of the Environmental Kuznets
Curve," Journal of Public Economics 80: 269-286.
Antweiler, W., Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, "Is Free Trade Good for the Environment?"
American Economic Review 91 (2001): 877-908.
Arrow, K. et al. "Economic growth, carrying capacity and the environment," Science 268 (1995):
520-21.
Arrow, K.; B. Bolin; R. Costanza; P. Dasgupta; C. Folke; C.S. Holling; B.O. Jansson; S. Levin;
K.G. Maler; C. Perrings and D. Pimentel. 1995. "Economic Growth, Carrying Capacity, and
the Environment," Science 268: 520-521.
Asako, K., 1979. "Environmental Pollution in an Open Economy," Economic Record 55: 359-67.
Bagwell and Staiger, "Domestic Policies, National Sovereignty and International Economic
Institutions," Quarterly Journal of Economics 116 ( 2001): 519-562.
Barbier, E.B. and C.-E. Schulz, "Wildlife, biodiversity and trade," Environment and Development
Economics, 2 (1997): 145-172.
Barrett, S., "Strategic environmental policy and international trade," Journal of Public
Economics 54(1994): 325-38.
Barrett, S., Environment & Statecraft: The Strategy of Environmental Treaty-Making, Oxford:
Oxford University Press, 2003.
Barrett, S. and K. Graddy, "Freedom, Growth, and the Environment," Environment and
Development Economics 5 (2000): 433-56.
Baumol, W.J., Environmental Protection, International Spillovers and Trade, (Stockholm,
Almqvist and Wiksell) 1971.
Baumol, W. J. and W.E. Oates. The theory of environmental policy, Cambridge University Press,
1988.
Becker and Henderson, "Effects of Air Quality Regulations on Polluting Industries," Journal of
Political Economy; 108(2), April 2000: 379-421.
Beckerman, W, "Economic growth and the environment: Whose growth? Whose environment?"
World Development 20 (1992): 481-496.
Beghin J., D. Roland-Holst, and D. van der Mensbrugghe. "Trade and Environment Linkages.

94

Piecemeal Reform and Optimal Intervention," Canadian Journal of Economics XXX (1997):
442-55.
Bennaroch, M. and and H. Thille "Transboundary Pollution and the Gains from Trade," Journal
of International Economics 2001.
Bhagwati, J.N. and T.N. Srinivasan, "Trade and the environment: Does environmental diversity
detract from the case for free trade?" in Fair Trade and Harmonization: prerequisites for free
trade, J.N. Bhagwati and R.E. Hudec ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996)
Birdsall N. and D. Wheeler, "Trade Policy and Industrial Pollution in Latin America:Where Are
the Pollution Havens?" in Low, Patrick ed. International trade and the environment, World
Bank Discussion Papers, no. 159. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1992, pages 159-67.
Bovenberg and de Mooij, "Environmental Levies and distortionary taxation," American
Economic Review, 86 (1995): 985-1000.
Brander, J.A. and B.J. Spencer, "Export subsidies and international market share rivalry," Journal
of International Economics 18 (1985), 83-100.
Brander, J.A. and M. S. Taylor, "International Trade between Consumer and Conservationist
Countries," Resource and Energy Economics, 18 (1997): 267-298.
Brock, W. and M. S. Taylor, "The Kindergarten Rule of Sustainable Growth", National Bureau of
Economic Research Working Paper 9597, April 2003.
Brown, D. K., A. V. Deardorff, and R.M. Stern, 1992. "A North American Free Trade
Agreement: Analytical Issues and a Computational Assessment" World Economy, 15: 11-29.
Brown, M.G. Jr. "Renewable Resource Management and Use without Markets", Journal of
Economic Literature, Dec. 2000.
Buchanan, J.M. and G. Tullock, "Polluters’ profits and Political response: direct controls versus
taxes", American Economic Review, Vol. 65, Issue 1, March 139-147.
Bulte, E.H. and D.P. van Soest, "Environmental degradation in developing countries: households
and the (reverse) Environmental Kuznets Curve," Journal of Development Economics 65
(2001): 225-235.
Cavlovic, T., K. Baker, R. Berrens, K. Gawande, "A meta-analysis of the environmental Kuznets
curve studies," Agriculture and Resource Economics Review 29 (2000): 32-42.
Chay, K.Y. and M. Greenstone, "The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: evidence from
geographic variation in Pollution shocks induced by a Recession", NBER working paper No.
7442, December (1999).
Chichilnisky, G., "Global Environment and North-South Trade," American Economic Review, 84
(1994): 851-74.
Cole, M.A. and Rayner, A.J. "The Uruguay Round and Air Pollution: Estimating the

95

Composition, Scale and Technique Effects of Trade Liberalisation." Journal of International
Trade and Economic Development, 9 (2000): 343-358.
Cole, M.A. and R.J.R. Elliot, "Factor Endowments or environmental regulations? Determining
the trade-environment composition effect", Journal of Environmental Economics and
Management, forthcoming.
Cole, M.A. and Rayner, A.J., "The Uruguay Round and Air Pollution: Estimating the
Composition, Scale and Technique Effects of Trade Liberalisation." Journal of International
Trade and Economic Development, 9,(2000):. 343-358.
Conconi, P. "Green Lobbies and Transboundary Pollution in Open Economies", mimeo,
University of Warwick, 2001.
Conrad, K., "Taxes and subsidies for pollution-intensive industries," Journal of Environmental
Economics and Management 25 (1993): 121-35.
Copeland, B.R. "Strategic Interaction Among Nations: Negotiable and Non-negotiable Trade
Barriers," Canadian Journal of Economics, 23 (1990): 84-108.
Copeland, B.R., "International Trade and the Environment: Policy Reform in a Polluted Small
Open Economy," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 26 (1994): 44-65.
Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, "North-South Trade and the Environment," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 109 (1994): 755-87.
Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, "Trade and Transboundary Pollution," American Economic
Review, 85 (1995a): 716-737.
Copeland, B. R. and M. S. Taylor, "Trade and the environment: a partial synthesis," American
Journal of Agricultural Economics, 77 (August 1995b): 765-771.
Copeland, B.R. and M.S. Taylor, "A simple model of trade, capital mobility and the
environment," NBER Working Paper 5898, January 1997.
Copeland, B. R. and M.S. Taylor, "Trade, spatial separation, and the environment," Journal of
International Economics 47 (1999): 137-168.
Copeland, B. R. and M.S. Taylor, "Free Trade and Global Warming: A Trade Theory View of
the Kyoto Protocol", National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 7657, April
2000.
Copeland, B. R. and M.S. Taylor, Trade and the Environment: Theory and Evidence, Princetion
University Press, 2003
Coxhead, I. and S. Jayasuriya, The Open Economy and the Environment: Development, Trade
and Resources in Asia, Edward Elgar Press, 2003.
Dasgupta, S., B. Laplante, H. Wang, and D. Wheeler, "Confronting the Environmental Kuznets
Curve," Journal of Economic Perspectives, 16 (2002): 147-168.
Dean, J.M "Testing the Impact of Trade Liberalization on the Environment: Theory and
Evidence", Canadian Journal of Economics 35 (2002).

96

Dixit, A.K., "Tax policy in open economies," in Handbook of Public Economics, Vol.1, A.J.
Auerbach and M Feldstein, eds., (North-Holland, Amsterdam),1985.
Dixit, A.K. and V. Norman, Theory of International Trade, Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1980).
Dornbusch, Rudiger, Stanley Fischer, and Paul A. Samuelson, "Comparative Advantage, Trade
and Payments in a Ricardian Model with a Continuum of Goods,"American Economic
Review LXVII (1977), 823-839.
Eaton and Grossman, "Optimal Trade and Industrial Policy under Oligopoly," Quarterly Journal
of Economics, 101 (1986), 383-406.
Ederington, W.J., "International Coordination of Trade and Domestic Policies," forthcoming,
American Economic Review 91 (2001): 1580-93
Ederington, W.J. , "Trade and Domestic Policy Linkage in International Agreements,"
forthcoming, International Economic Review,43 (2002): 1347-1368.
Ederington, W.J and J. Minier, "Is environmental policy a secondary trade barrier? An empirical
analysis," Canadian Journal of Economics 36 (2003): 137-154.
Ekins, P. "The Kuznets curve for environment and economic growth: examining the evidence,"
Environment and Planning 29 (1997): 805-30.
El-Ashry, M.T. 1993. "Balancing Economic Development with Environmental Protection in
Developing and Lesser Developed Countries," Air & Waste 43:18-24.
Eliste, P. and Fredrikksson, P.G. "Environmental Regulations, Transfers and Trade: Theory and
Evidence, forthcoming Journal of Environmental Economics and Management.
Esty, Dan, Greening the GATT 1994.
Falvey, R.E. 1988. "Tariffs, Quotas, and Piecemeal Policy Reform," Journal of International
Economics 25: 177-183
Ferrantino, M. and L. Linkins. (1996) Global Trade Liberalization and Toxic Releases, US
International Trade Commission discussion paper.
Frankel, J. A. and A. K. Rose, 2002. "Is Trade Good or Bad for the Environment?˚ Sorting out the
Causality" mimeo, Harvard University.
Fredriksson, P., "The political economy of pollution taxes in a small open economy," Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 33 (1997): 44-58.
Fredriksson, P., "The political economy of trade liberalization and environmental policy,"
Southern Economic Journal 65 (1999): 513-25.
Fullerton, Don and Gilbert E. Metcalf, "Environmental Taxes and the Double-Dividend
Hypothesis: Did You Really Expect Something for Nothing?" NBER Working Paper No.
W6199, September 1997
Gale, L.R. and J.A. Mendez, "A note on the relationship between trade, growth, and the

97

environment," International Review of Economics and Finance, 7 (1998): 53-61.
Gawande, K. "Trade barriers as outcomes from two-stage games: evidence", Canadian Journal of
Economics, August 1999, Vol. 32, No. 4, 1028-1056.
Gawande, K., A.K. Bohara, R.P. Berrens, and P. Wang, "Internal migration and the nvironmental
Kuznets curve for US hazardous waste", Ecological Economics, 33 (2000): 151-66.
Gawande, K., R.P. Berrens, and A.K. Bohara, "A consumption based theory of environmental
Kuznets curve", Ecological Economics, 37 (2001): 101-112
Gray, W. B. "The Cost of Regulation: OSHA, EPA and the Productivity Slowdown", American
Economic Review, 77(1987): 998-1006.
Greenstone, M., "The impacts of Environmental Regulations on Industrial Activity: Evidence
from the 1970 and the 1977 Clean Air Act Ammendments and the Census of Manufactures"
Journal of Political Economy, 110 (2002): 1175-1219.
Grossman, Gene M, and Alan B. Krueger. 1993. "Environmental Impacts of a North American
Free Trade Agreement, " in The U.S.-Mexico Free Trade Agreement, P. Garber, ed.
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1993)
Grossman, Gene M, and Alan B. Krueger. "Economic Growth and the Environment, Quarterly
Journal of Economics, (1995): 353-377.
Grossman, Gene, and Elhanan Helpman, Innovation and Growth in the Global Economy,
Cambridge, MA, MIT Press, 1991.
Grossman G. M, and E. Helpman, "Protection for Sale," American Economic Review, September
(1994): 833-850.
Gulati, S. "The Relationship Between International Trade And Environmental Regulation Under
Special Interest Politics" mimeo, University of Maryland, 2001.
Harbaugh, W., A. Levinson, and D. Wilson, " Re-examining Empirical Evidence for an
Environmental Kuznets Curve," Review of Economics and Statistics, 84(2002).
Harrigan, J. "Factor Endowments and the international location of production: Econometric
Evidence for the OECD, 1970-1985", Journal of International Economics, 39, (1995): 123141.
Harrigan, J. "Technology, Factor supplies, and International Specialization: Estimating the
Neoclassical model", American Economic Review, 87, (1997): 475-494.
Henderson, V., "Effects of Air Quality Regulation," American Economic Review, 86 (1996): 789813.
Hettige, H., R.E.B. Lucas, and D. Wheler, "The toxic intensity of industrial production: Global
patterns, trends and trade policy," American Economic Review, 82(2), 478-481, (1992).

98

Hettige, H., M. Mani, and D. Wheeler, "Industrial Pollution in Economic Development: Kuznets
Revisited," Journal of Development Economics 62 (2000): 445-476.
Hillman A.L. and H.W. Ursprung (1994) "The influence of environmental concerns on the
political determination of trade policy," in K. Anderson and R. Blackhurst, eds., The
Greening of World Trade Issues, New York: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1994.
Hilton, H., and A. Levinson, "Factoring the Environmental Kuznets Curve: Evidence from
Automotive Lead Emissions," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 35
(1998): 126-141.
Holtz-Eakin, D. and T. Selden, "Stoking the fires? CO2 emissions and economic growth,"
Journal of Public Economics, 57 (1995): 85-101.
Jaffe, A., S. Peterson, P. Portney and R. Stavins, "Environmental Regulation and the
Competitiveness of U.S. Manufacturing: What Does the Evidence Tell Us?" The Journal of
Economic Literature, 33 (1995): 132-63.
John, A. and R. Pecchenino, "An overlapping generations model of growth and the environment,"
The Economic Journal, 104 (1994):1393-1410.
Jones, L.E. and R.E. Manuelli, "A positive model of growth and pollution controls", NBER
Working Paper #5205, 1995.
Kahn, M., "Particulate pollution trends in the United States," Regional Science and Urban
Economics 27 (1997): 87-107.
Kalt, J. P. "The Impact of Domestic Environmental Regulatory Policies on U.S. International
Competitiveness" in Spence, A. M. and Hazard, Heather A., ed. International
competitiveness. Cambridge, Mass.: Harper and Row, Ballinger, 1988, p.221-62.
Keller, W. and Levinson, A., "Pollution abatement costs and foreign direct investment inflows to
US states," Review of Economics and Statistics 84 (2002): 691-703.
Kennedy, P.W., 1994, Equilibrium pollution taxes in open economies with imperfect competition,
Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 27, 49-63.
Koop, G. and L. Tole, "Is there an Environmental Kuznets Curve for deforestation?," Journal of
Development Economics, 58 (1999): 231-244.
Kraushaar, Jack J. and Robert A. Ristinen. 1988. Energy and Problems of a Technical Society.
New York: John Wiley & Sons.
Kuznets, Simon, "Economic growth and income inequality," American Economic Review 45(1),
(1955): 1-28.
Leamer, E. E., Sources of International Comparative Advantage,Cambridge:MIT Press 1984.
Leamer, Edward E. and James Levinsohn, "International Trade Theory: The Evidence." in Gene
M. Grossman and Kenneth Rogoff, eds. Handbook of International Economics vol. 3. New
99

York : North Holland, 1996.
Levinson, A. 1996. "Environmental Regulations and Industry Location: International and
Domestic Evidence", in Fair Trade and Harmonization: prerequisites for free trade, J.N.
Bhagwati and R.E. Hudec ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996)
Levinson, A., "State Taxes and Interstate Hazardous Waste Shipments," American Economic
Review, 89 (1999): 666-77.
Levinson, A., "An Industry-Adjusted Index of State Environmental Compliance Costs," ˚ in
Metcalf, G. and Carrero, C., eds., Behavioral and Distributional Effects of Environmental
Policy. University of Chicago Press, 2001.
Levinson, A. and. M.S. Taylor, "Trade and the Environment: Unmasking the Pollution Haven
Effect" mimeo, Georgetown University, 2002.
Limao, N. "Trade policy, cross-border externalities and lobbies: do linked agreements enforce
more cooperative outcomes?" mimeo, University of Maryland, 2001.
List, J.A., W.W. McHone, D.L. Millimet, and P.G. Fredriksson, "Effects of Environmental
Regulations on Manufacturing plant births: evidence from a propensity score matching
estimator", Review of Economics and Statistics, forthcoming.
Lipsey, R.G. and K. Lancaster. "The General Theory of Second Best", The Review of Economic
Studies, Vol. 24, Issue 1, 11-32.
Lopez, R., "The environment as a factor of production: The effects of economic growth and trade
liberalization," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 27 (1994): 163-184.
Lopez, R., and S. Mitra, "Corruption, pollution and the environmental Kuznets curve," Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management, 40 (2000): 137-150.
Lucas, D. Wheeler, and H. Hettige. "Economic Development, Environmental regulation and the
International Migration of Toxic Industrial Pollution: 1960-1988, in Low P (ed) International
Trade and the Environment, World Bank discussion paper, No. 159.
Low, P. and A. Yeates. (1992). "Do ’dirty’ Industries Migrate", in Low P (ed) International
Trade and the Environment, World Bank discussion paper, No. 159: 89-104.
Malenbaum, W., World Demand for Raw Materials in 1985 and 2000. New YorK: McGrawHill, 1978.
Mani, M. and D. Wheeler. "In search of pollution havens?: dirty industry migration in the world
economy," World Bank Working paper No. 16, April (1997).
Markusen, J.R., 1975, International externalities and optimal tax structures, Journal of
International Economics, 5, 15-29
Markusen, J.R., 1989. "Trade in Producer services and in Other Specialized Intermediate Inputs,"
American Economic Review 79: 85-95.
Mayer, W., "Theoretical Considerations on Negotiated Tariff Adjustments,"Oxford Economic

100

Papers, 1981, 135-153.
McAusland, C., "Trade and Pollution policy when Domestic Income Distribution matters,"
mimeo University of Michigan, 1998.
McGuire, M. C. "Regulation, Factor Rewards, and International Trade", Journal of Public
Economics, 17 (1982):335-354.
McMillan, J. "The Economics of Section 301: A game theoretic guide", Economics and Politics,
Vol. 2, 1990, No. 1. 45-57.
Nordstrom, H. and Vaughan, S. "Trade and Environment," WTO, 1999
Osang, Thomas and Arundhati Nandy. "Impact of U.S. Environmental Regulation on the
Competitiveness of Manufacturing Industries," SMU economics department, mimeo, 2000.
Pargal, S. and D. Wheeler, "Informal Regulation of Industrial Pollution in Developing Countries:
Evidence from Indonesia", Journal of Political Economy, 104(1996): 1314-27.
Panayotou, T., A. Peterson and J. Sachs, "Is the environmental Kuznets curve driven by structural
change?" Center for International Development, Harvard University, 2000.
Pethig, R. "Pollution, Welfare, and Environmental Policy in the Theory of Comparative
Advantage", Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, Vol. 2, Feb.
(1976):160-169.
Porter, Michael E. and van de Linde, "Toward a New Conception of the EnvironmentCompetitiveness Relationship." Journal of Economic Perspectives 9(1995): 97-118.
Radestsky, M. "Economic growth and environment," in Low P (ed) International Trade and the
Environment, World Bank discussion paper, No. 159, 1992.
Ratnayake , R. "Do Stringent Environmental Regulations Reduce International Competitiveness?
Evidence from an Inter-Industry Analysis", International Journal of the Economics of
Business, 5(1998): 77-96.
Rauscher, M., "National environmental policies and the effects of economic integration,"
European Journal of Political Economy 7 (1991), 313-329.
Rauscher, M., International Trade, Factor Movements, and the Environment (Oxford: Clarendon
Press), 1997.
Rauscher, M. "International Trade, Foreign Investment and the Environment," mimeo,
Universitat Rostock, 2001
Richelle, Y., "Trade incidence on transboundary pollution: Free trade can benefit the global
environmental quality" University Of Laval Discussion Paper No. 9616 (1996).
Robison, H. D. "Industrial Pollution Abatement: The Impact on Balance of Trade," Canadian
Journal of Economics,21(1988): 187-99.
101

Rodrik, D., "Political economy of trade policy" in: Grossman, G.M. andRogoff, K (Eds.)
Handbook of International Economics, Vol. 3, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1995.
Salop, Steven and David Scheffman, "Raising Rivals’ Costs," American Economic Review, Papers
and Proceedings , 1983, 267-71.
Samuelson, P.A., "The transfer problem and transport costs II: Analysis of the effects of trade
impediments," Economic Journal 64 (1954): 264-89.
Schleich, J. "Environmental Quality with endogenous domestic and trade policies", European
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 15, 1999, 53-71.
Schmalensee R., T.M. Stoker and R.A. Judson, "World carbon emissions," Review of Economics
and Statistics (1998): 15-27.
Selden, T.M. and D. Song, "Environmental Quality and Development: Is there a Kuznets Curve
for Air Pollution Emissions?" Journal of Environmental Economics and Management, 27,
(1994):147-162.
Selden T. and D. Song, "Neoclassical Growth, the J Curve for Abatement, and the Inverted U
Curve for Pollution," Journal of Environmental Economics and Management 29 (1995): 16268.
Selden, T.M., A.S. Forest, and J.E. Lockhart, "Analyzing the reductions in US air pollution
emissions: 1970 to 1990," Land Economics 75 (1999): 1-21.
Shafik, N., "Economic Development and Environmental Quality: An econometric analysis",
Oxford Economic Papers 46 (1994):757-773.
Shafik, N., and S. Banyopadhyay "Economic growth and environmental quality Time series and
cross-sectional evidence," Background paper for World Development Report,1992.
Siebert, H., "Environmental quality and the gains from trade," Kyklos, 30 (1977): 657-673.
Siebert, H., J. Eichberger, R. Gronych, and R. Pethig, Trade and the Environment: A Theoretical
Enquiry (Amsterdam: Elsevier/North Holland, 1980).
Stern, D.I., "Progress on the environmental Kuznets curve?" Environment and Development
Economics 3 (1998): 173-196.
Stern, D.I. and M.S. Common, "Is there an Environmental Kuznets curve for sulfur?", Journal of
Environmental Economics and Management 41 (2001):162-178.
Stern, David I., Michael S. Common, and Edward B. Barbier, "Economic growth and
environmental degradation: The environmental Kuznets curve and sustainable development,"
World Development 24(7), (1996): 1151-60.
Stokey, N., "Are there limits to Growth?" International Economic Review, 39(1), (1998):1-31.
Syrquin, M. "Patterns of structural change," in Handbook of Development Economics, Vol. 1, H.

102

Chenery and T.N. Srinivasan, eds., Amsterdam: North Holland, 1989.
Tobey, J.A., "The effects of domestic environmental policies on patterns of world trade: An
empirical test," Kyklos, 43: 191-209.
Torras, M. and J.K. Boyce, "Income, inequality, and pollution: A reassessment of the
environmental Kuznets curve," Ecological Economics, 25(2), (1998): 147-160.
Trefler, D., "Trade Liberalization and the Theory of Endogenous Protection: An Econometric
Study of U.S. Import Policy," Journal of Political Economy 101(1993): 138-160.
Turunen-Red, Arja H. and Alan Woodland, "Multilateral reforms of trade and environmental
policy", mimeo, December 1998.
Ulph, A., "Environmental Policy and International Trade: A Survey of Recent Economic
Analysis," in H. Folmer and T. Tietenberg, eds., International Handbook of Environmental
and Resource Economics 1997/98, (Cheltenham, Edward Elgar), 1997.
United Nations Environment Programme. 1991. Urban Air Pollution. Nairobi: UNEP
Van Beers, Cees and Jeroen C.J.M. van den Bergh. 1997. "An Empirical Multi-Country Analysis
of the Impact of Environmental Regulations on Foreign Trade Flows," Kyklos 50: 29-46.
Walter, I., "The pollution content of American Trade," Western Economic Journal 11 (1973): 6170
Wilson, J.D. 1996. "Capital Mobility and Environmental Standards: Is there a Theoretical Basis
for a Race to the Bottom", in Fair Trade and Harmonization: prerequisites for free trade,
J.N. Bhagwati and R.E. Hudec ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1996)
Woodland, A.D. International Trade and Resource Allocation, North-Holland, Amsterdam
(1982).
World Bank. World Development Report 1992. New York: Oxford University Press, 1992.
Woodland, A.D. International Trade and Resource Allocation, North-Holland, Amsterdam
(1982).
World Health Organization (1984). Urban Air Pollution: 1973-1980. Published under the joint
sponorship of United Nations Environment Programme and the World Health Organization.
Geneva, 1984.
Xu, X., 1999. "Do Stringent Environmental Regulations Reduce the International
Competitiveness of Environmentally Sensitive Goods? A Global Perspective", World
Development, 27: 1215-26.

103

