NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES

GUNS, DRUGS AND JUVENILE CRIME:
EVIDENCE FROM A PANEL OF SIBLINGS AND TWINS
H. Naci Mocan
Erdal Tekin
Working Paper 9824
http://www.nber.org/papers/w9824
NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
1050 Massachusetts Avenue
Cambridge, MA 02138
July 2003

We thank Kaj Gittings and Norovsambuu Tumennasan for excellent research assistance, and Donna Stubbs,
Robert Kaestner, Mike Grossman, Phil Cook, Steve Levitt, John Donohue and especially Karen Kafadar for
helpful suggestions. The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the
National Bureau of Economic Research
©2003 by Naci Mocan and Erdal Tekin. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given
to the source.

Guns, Drugs and Juvenile Crime: Evidence from a Panel of Siblings and Twins
Naci Mocan and Erdal Tekin
NBER Working Paper No. 9824
July 2003
JEL No. H0, K4, I12
ABSTRACT
Using a nationally-representative panel data set of U.S. high school students (AddHealth data) that
contains a relatively large sample of siblings and twins, the paper investigates the impacts of gun
availability at home and individual drug use on robbery, burglary, theft and damaging property for
juveniles. Using a variety of fixed-effects models that exploit variations over time, the results show
that gun availability at home increases the propensity to committing robbery, burglary and theft by
about two percentage points for juveniles but has no impact on damaging property. It is unlikely that
gun availability is merely a measure of the unobserved home environment because gun availability
does not influence other risky or bad behaviors of juveniles. The results show that having access to
guns increases the probability of being cut or stabbed by someone and of someone pulling a knife
or gun on the juvenile. Estimates obtained from models that exploit variations over time and
between siblings and twins indicate that the median impact of cocaine use on the propensity to
commit various types of crimes is 23 percentage points. The impact of using inhalants or other drugs
is an increase in the propensity to commit crime by 14 and 18 percentage points, respectively.

H. Naci Mocan
University of Colorado at Denver
Department of Economics
Campus Box 181, P.O. Box 173364
Denver, CO 80217-3364
and NBER
nmocan@carbon.cudenver.edu

Erdal Tekin
Georgia State University
Department of Economics
Andrew Young School of Policy
Studies; University Plaza
Atlanta, GA 30303-3083
and NBER
tekin@gsu.edu

Guns, Drugs and Juvenile Crime: Evidence from a Panel of Siblings and Twins

I. Introduction
Despite the decline in juvenile crime since the early 1990s, opinion polls indicate that
the public overwhelmingly believes that juvenile crime is a serious problem facing the
country (Soler 2001). Investigation of the determinants of juvenile crime is important for a
number of reasons. First, the social cost of youth crime is estimated to be $60 to $300 billion
per year, and the overwhelming majority of this cost is an externality to the society (Levitt
and Lochner 2001).1 Second, participating in illegal activities early in life has implications
for the future well-being of the individual. For example, Mocan, Billups and Overland
(2000) show that current criminal activity makes future criminal activity more likely by
increasing criminal human capital and depreciating legal human capital. Thus, engaging in
crime when young would make one less likely to be successful in the legal labor market later
in life. Along the same lines, Allgood, Mustard and Warren (1999) show that youth criminal
behavior has a negative impact on earnings as an adult, and Bound and Freeman (1992) and
Freeman and Rodgers (2000) document a negative relationship between youth criminal
record and labor market outcomes.
Levitt and Lochner (2001) present a four-part classification scheme to explain
criminal activity, which involves biological, social, criminal-justice system and economic
factors. For example, social factors include the extent of parental supervision and behaviors
of neighborhood peers (Glaeser, Sacerdote and Scheinkman 1996; Mocan and Rees 1999,

2

Case and Katz 1991). The influence of increased punitiveness of the criminal justice system
is documented by Levitt (1999), Levitt (1998), Snyder and Sickmund (1999) and Corman and
Mocan (2000); and examples of the research on the relationship between economic
conditions and crime include Gould, Mustard and Weinberg (2002), Corman and Mocan
(2002), Raphael and Winter-Ebmer (2001).2

Drugs, Guns and Crime
Drug use and access to firearms are two other potentially important determinants of
criminal activity, although the extent of the relationships between guns and crime, and drugs
and crime have not been identified clearly. Despite the strong evidence that drug use and
criminal activity are positively correlated, the causal impact of drug use on crime has not
been conclusively established (see the literature reviews of Chaiken and Chaiken 1990,
Harrison 1992). Even though some recent studies using aggregate data provided evidence on
the potential causal impact of drug use on crime (Corman and Mocan 2000, Grogger and
Willis 2000), convincing cause-and-effect evidence from micro data is missing.3 The
difficulty in identifying the causal impact of drug use on crime stems from the possibility that
the observed positive correlation between drug use and crime may be due to the influence of
an unobserved variable which has an impact on both drug use and criminal activity. For
example, if the degree of risk aversion of the individual has an impact on both his drug use

1

Levitt and Lochner (2001) report the upper limit of the social cost of youth crime as $300 billion,
but they indicate that this may be an overestimate because the typical youth crime is less serious in
comparison to an adult crime.
2
For a more detailed discussion of various factors ranging from schools to gangs, see Wilson and
Petersilia (1995).
3
A few papers analyzed micro data in related context. Markowitz (2000) investigated the impact of
alcohol and drug prices on violent crime using the National Crime Victimization Survey, Jofre-Bonet
and Sindelar (2002) analyzed the impact of drug treatment on criminal behavior.

3

and criminal behavior, then biased estimates of the impact of drug use on crime would be
obtained in analyses that do not take into account the confounding due to risk aversion.
Another contested issue is the link between gun ownership and criminal activity.
Blumstein (1995) suggests that the rise in juvenile homicide rate between mid-1980s and
early 1990s is associated with an increased tendency to carry guns among juveniles.
Wintemute (2000) argues that the increase in violence in mid-1980s is attributable to gun
manufacturers’ move to produce cheap medium- and high-caliber pistols, and that the decline
in youth violence in the 1990s is attributable to stricter gun control policies adopted during
the same period. However, empirical evidence on the impact of gun ownership on crime is
mixed. In an analysis of the impact of right-to-carry laws, Lott and Mustard (1997) report
that counties with concealed weapons laws have lower crime rates, while Duggan (2001)
shows that changes in gun ownership are positively related to changes in homicide rates, and
that this relationship is driven almost entirely by an impact of gun ownership on homicides
with firearms. Cook and Ludwig (2002) find that local gun ownership prevalence has a
positive impact on residential burglary rates. They interpret this finding as an indication that
the existence of guns at homes may be a motivation for burglars because guns are valuable
loot. Ayres and Donohue III (2002) show that the finding of “more guns-less crime” by
Lott and Mustard (1997) is not robust to estimation with updated data. On the other hand,
Marvell (2001) finds no evidence that juvenile handgun bans adopted by states had any
impact on crime. Ludwig and Cook (2000) find no evidence that implementation of the
Brady Act was associated with a reduction in homicide rates; and Lott and Whitley (2001)
find no evidence that safe-storage gun laws reduce the number of juvenile accidental gun
deaths or suicides, and that the passage of the law is associated with increased violent crime

4

and more crimes occurring in people’s homes. Mustard (2001) finds that enactment of rightto-carry laws does not increase police deaths, and may actually help reduce their risk of being
killed.
Based on these conflicting findings, some analysts suggest that gun control laws
reduce social welfare, and that they should be scrapped. They claim that this is because
research reveals no impact of gun control on crime, while gun control is costly as it interferes
with individual choice and imposes monetary costs on police, prosecutors, courts, and prisons
(Parker 2001).
The research on gun-crime relationship cited above relies on aggregate (state or
county level) data on crime rates. More specifically, analysts investigated the impact of the
enactment of concealed weapon laws, or a measure of gun ownership on aggregate crime
rates. The main shortcoming of this research is the measurement of gun ownership or gun
availability. Gun ownership is approximated by various proxies, such as sales of Guns &
Ammo magazine at the state or county level (Duggan 2001), the proportion of suicides that
involve firearms (Cook and Ludwig 2002), and voter-exit surveys (Lott 2000). In this paper
we use nationally-representative individual-level data, where information on the availability
of guns at home as well as delinquent behavior are provided directly by each respondent.
Analyses of aggregate crime data reveal the net impact of gun ownership on crime
rates. For example, assume that gun availability increases criminal tendencies, and gun
availability also allows opportunities for self-defense, which deters potential perpetrators.
The net effect of these factors on crime may be zero. On the other hand, the net effect would
again be zero if there was no impact of gun availability on crime either from aggression or
protection points of view. It is difficult to isolate these factors using aggregate data. The

5

individual-level data set we use allows us to directly test whether gun availability induces
juveniles to commit more crime. In addition, using victimization information provided by the
same individuals in the data set, we test whether gun availability has an impact on juveniles’
crime victimization. Thus, our analysis provides a clearer picture regarding the pathways
through which gun ownership impacts crime.

A Panel of Siblings and Twins
This is the first paper to investigate the link between guns, drug use and juvenile
crime using nationally-representative individual-level data. To eliminate confounding due to
unobservable variables, we exploit the longitudinal aspect of the data which include siblings
and twins who live in the same household. The use of longitudinal data to eliminate timeinvariant individual heterogeneity is a standard tool in micro-econometrics. As explained
below in detail, the longitudinal nature of our data, and an unusually large number of
personal and family background variables allow us to examine the impact of the availability
of guns at home on an individual’s criminal activity.
Data on twins have been employed by previous research to estimate returns to
education, schooling and marriage decisions, and the impact of birth weight on infant health
(Ashenfelter and Krueger 1994; Miller, Mulvey and Martin 1995; Behrman, Rosenzweig and
Taubman 1994; Behrman, Rosenzweig and Taubman 1996; Almond, Chay and Lee 2002).
All of these twin studies employed cross-sectional data on twins, and to the best of our
knowledge, this is the first study that uses a panel of siblings and twins to control for both the
impacts of time-invariant and time-varying unobservables.

6

We analyze four different crimes: robbery, burglary, damaging property, and theft.
The four drug use indicators we employ are the use of cocaine, the use of inhalants, injecting
illegal drugs, and the use of other drugs. The information on gun availability is obtained by
asking juveniles whether guns are easily available to them at home. We address potential
measurement error in drug use and gun availability. The identification of the impact of gun
availability on crime is obtained from the change in gun availability between the survey
years. Between-sibling variation cannot be exploited to investigate guns-and-crime
relationship because all sibling pairs answered the question on gun availability in the same
manner. We find that gun availability increases the propensity to commit robbery, burglary
and theft for juveniles, but it has no impact on damaging property. Gun availability does not
reduce the probability of being victimized, and it makes it more likely for a juvenile to be
stabbed or having a knife or gun pulled on him. We show that gun availability is unlikely to
be a measure of undesirable home environment, because gun availability has no impact on
other bad behavior such as lying, smoking, being expelled from school, drinking and fighting,
and having sex.
Drug use is found to increase the propensity to commit crime. Using cocaine,
inhalants, and other drugs increases the propensity to commit crime from 14 to 23 percentage
points; injecting drugs increases the probability of committing crime by 50 percentage points.
Section II presents the analytical framework, section III discusses the measurement
error in drug use. Section IV describes the data, Section V displays the results and Section
VI is the conclusion.

7

II. Analytical Framework
The crime supply equation, with the addition of drug use and guns can be
presented as:4
(1) CR = f (X, A, F, DR, G),
where CR stands for a measure of the extent of the criminal activity of the individual, X
represents the characteristics of the person such as age, race and ethnicity and religious
beliefs. A stands for location-specific deterrence and economic variables that impact criminal
involvement, such as crime-specific arrest rates, police presence, and the unemployment rate,
F is a vector of parent and family characteristics, DR represents drug use of the individual,
and G stands for the availability of guns to the individual.5
Drug consumption in Equation (1) is a function of the price of drugs, buyers’ income,
and tastes for drug use and specific penalties targeted at drug users. Using Goldstein’s
(1985) conceptual framework, drug use can affect criminal activity through three channels.
First, the “pharmacological” effect is the direct impact of drug use on criminal activity
because drug use may increase aggression. The second is the “economic” effect—that higher
expenditures on drugs cause some users to finance these expenditures by committing crime.
The third is the “systemic” effect—the violence due to the illegality of the drug market,
because the participants cannot rely on contracts and courts to resolve disputes. If the
“economic” effect is the dominant factor to influence criminal activity, the impact of drug use
on crime could be ambiguous. For example, if the demand for drugs is price inelastic, then an

4

Theoretical justification of the inclusion of drug use in the crime equation can be found, among
others, in Ehrlich (1973).
5
Empirical evidence from aggregate data on the impact on crime of deterrence, economic conditions
and drug use can be found, among others, in Corman and Mocan (2002), Corman and Mocan (2000),
Levitt (1998), Levitt (1999), and Raphael and Winter-Ebmer (2001).

8

increase in drug use, say due to a rightward shift of the supply of drugs, would be associated
with an increase in drug consumption which is coupled with a decrease in drug spending. If
the economic effect is more important than the pharmacological one, increased drug use
would be associated with a reduction in crime.6
Ownership of guns can impact crime in two different ways. First, gun ownership may
make committing crime, especially violent crime, easier. Second, gun ownership may
prevent crime victimization if potential perpetrators consider the probability that their victim
may carry a gun. In our particular case, we analyze these two effects separately. That is, we
investigate both the tendency to commit crime and the likelihood of being a victim of a crime
of the same individuals as a function of gun availability at their home.
Empirical specification of the crime supply equation as a function of observable and
unobservable personal characteristics (including biological attributes), deterrence measures,
economic conditions, as well as the attributes of the family, the extent of the drug use of the
individual and the availability of guns is presented by Equation (2) below.

(2)

CRjit= α+δXjit+γFjit+βDRjit+ϕGjit+HAst+µji+λjit+ΩjiF+ΨjitF +εjit

where CRjit is the criminal activity measure of the ith individual of the jth sibling (or twin)
pair at time t. Xjit represents observable individual characteristics such as age, race, gender
and religiosity of the person, weekly allowance of the child, and measures of risk aversion
such as whether the child wears seatbelt while driving. Fjit stands for observable family

6

For a more detailed discussion, see Mocan and Corman (1998).

9

attributes, including parent characteristics and measures of the extent of supervision at home.7
DRjit represents consumption of drugs, and Gjit is the availability of guns at home. Ast stands
for the deterrence measures faced by the individual, such as the arrest rates and the size of the
police force, as well as local economic conditions in location s at time t where the child
resides, and µji captures individual-specific time-invariant unobservables which include
intellect. λjit represents person-specific time-varying unobservables, ΩjiF captures
unobservable time-invariant family attributes, ΨjitF is unobservable time-varying family
attributes, and εjit is a standard error term.
Taking the first-difference of Equation (2) across time periods gives

(3) ∆CRjit= δ∆Xjit+γ∆Fjit +β∆DRjit+ϕ∆Gjit +H∆Ast+∆λjit+∆ΨjitF +∆εjit

where ∆ stands for time-differencing. Equation (3) is a standard fixed-effects model, where
time-invariant family and individual characteristics drop out, but time-varying heterogeneity
remains.
We estimate different formulations of Equation (3) to investigate the link between gun
availability at home (G) and juvenile’s criminal activity. Note that in Equation (3), the
change in individual’s criminal activity between the two years depends, among other factors,
on the change in local deterrence and economics variables (Ast). The values of these
variables are not collected beyond the first year of our data; therefore ∆Ast cannot be
calculated. However, following Currie and Moretti (2002) and Cook and Ludwig (2002), we
include state or county dummies to control for such factors. That is, we estimate
7

The complete list of these variables is given in the data section below.

10

(3A) ∆CRjit= δ∆Xjit+γ∆Fjit +β∆DRjit+ϕ∆Gjit+κKs +ejit,
where Ks stands for a set of state or county dummies that control for state-specific or countyspecific time-varying local deterrence and economic factors, and e is the error term.
As summarized in Duggan (2001), it is conceivable that a positive relationship
between gun ownership and crime may indicate purchase of guns in response to expected
future increases in crime. Although this argument has merit, especially in aggregate data,
Duggan (2001) finds no support of such reverse causality from expected crime to gun
ownership. In our case reverse causality is even less likely. This is because, our dependent
variable is criminal activity of the youth, while our gun measure is the availability of guns at
home. To the extent that this measure captures guns owned by parents, it is exogenous to
future criminal involvement of the child. On the other hand, if parents’ gun ownership is a
proxy of their criminal propensity, and if this attribute is transmitted to the child, then gun
availability at home is a proxy of bad home environment, which may be correlated with
juvenile’s delinquent behavior. We show in the results section that this hypothesis has no
empirical support.
Unlike gun availability at home, consumption of illicit drugs varies between siblings.
This allows us to eliminate time-varying family effects by taking within-sibling differences of
Equation (3), which gives:8

(4) ∇∆CRjit= δ∇∆Xjit+β∇∆DRjit+∇∆λjit+∇∆εjit
8

Note that this procedure also eliminates time-varying economic and deterrence measures as they do
not exhibit variation between the individuals in the same household. Subjective probabilities of

11

where ∇ stands for between-sibling differencing. This specification eliminates all
heterogeneity with the exception of time-varying individual-specific unobservables (λjit).
Note that the family environment and location-specific economic and deterrence variables
drop out in Equation (4) as they are the same for all siblings of the same household.
The analog of Equation (4) for twins is:

(5) ∇∆CRjit= δ∇∆Xjit+β∇∆DRjit+∇∆εjit

In Equation (5) time-varying individual-specific heterogeneity is eliminated under the
assumption that it is biologically the same between twins. This may be particularly the case
for monozygotic (identical, or MZ) twins. Therefore, Equation (5) is estimated for all twins
(monozygotic and fraternal), as well as for MZ twins.

III. Measurement Error
As described in Section IV below, data collection procedures were designed to
minimize concern about confidentiality. For example, respondents were not provided with
written questionnaires; rather they listened to sensitive questions on delinquent behavior,
drug use and gun availability through earphones, and entered their answers directly on laptop
computers. Nevertheless, it is still conceivable that drug use and gun availability is reported
with error. Furthermore, it is plausible that the reporting error is not symmetric in the
classical sense, but it is one-sided.

apprehension and conviction may differ between siblings. However, to the extent that they are
approximated by such measures as arrest and conviction rates in the locality, they do not vary.

12

To demonstrate the impact of non-random measurement error in drug use in firstdifferenced data, consider equation (6) below where i stands for the ith individual and t is the
time period.
(6) ∆CR it = β∆DR * it + ∆ε it
The subscript j and Xit are dropped for ease of exposition. Let DRit* be the actual
drug use, DRit stand for the reported drug use and <it represent the measurement error. The
reported drug use is equal to the actual drug use plus the measurement error; that is
DRit=DR*it+vit.
Note that DR=1 if the individual reports using drugs, and DR=0 if he/she reports no drug use.
Similarly, DR* =1 if the actual drug use is positive and DR* =0 if actual drug use is zero. Let
the probability distribution of vit be
Prob(DRit= 1, DR*it= 1) = p1, Prob(DRit= 1, DR*it= 0) = 0, Prob(DRit= 0, DR*it= 0) = p2,
Prob(DRit= 0, DR*it= 1) = q.
That is,
DRit
1
1
0
0

DR*it
1
0
0
1

vit
0
1
0
-1

Prob(vit)
P1
0
P2
q

The first row in the table indicates that the probability of using drugs and reporting as
such is p1. The second row indicates that the probability of reporting positive drug use when
the person in fact did not use drugs is zero. The probability of telling the truth when actual
drug use is zero is p2; and q stands for the probability of lying when the actual drug use is
positive.

13

The estimated $ in Equation (6) is equal to
Σ i ∆DRit ∆CRit Σ(∆DRit* + ∆vit )(∆DRit* β + ∆ε it )
ˆ
β∆ =
=
.
2
Σ i ∆DRit2
Σ∆DRit
Simplifying and taking the probability limit gives

var[∆DR*] + cov[∆v, ∆DR*]
p lim βˆ = β
var[∆DR]
It can be shown that (see Appendix-A)
(7)

é
ù
p1 p 2
ú
p lim βˆ = β ê
2
êë ( p1 − p1 )(1 − ρ ) úû

where D is the autocorrelation coefficient of reported drug use between the time periods.
(i.e., D=Cov(DRit, DRit-1)/Var(DRit) assuming a covariance-stationary process for DR)
Following Ashenfelter and Zimmerman (1997), the probability limit of $ in equation (7) can
be substituted into Equation (6) to obtain

(8)

é
ù
p1 p 2
∆CRit = β ê
ú ∆DRit + ∆ε it
2
ë ( p1 − p1 )(1 − ρ ) û

Note that p1 is readily available in the data, which is the mean reported drug use. The
medical literature contains detailed information regarding the reliability of self-reported
substance use. For example, in an analysis the drinking patterns of college students, it has
been found that the reliability of reporting in the quantity and frequency of drinking beer,

14

wine and spirits was high, with a reliability ratio of 0.84.9 Reliability ratios range from 0.89
to 0.92 for items such as “driven a car while drinking,” “missed a class because of hangover,”
and “damaged property because of drinking.” (Weiss et al., 1998). An analysis of out-oftreatment drug users indicated a reliability ratio of 0.72 for self-reported cocaine use, 0.77 for
heroin, and 0.82 for crack. The ratio was 0.88 for the number of times the person injected
drugs. For both cocaine and opiate use, total agreement between self-reports and urinalysis
was over 84 percent (Johnson et al. 2000). Utilizing this literature, we postulate that 80% of
drug users reported their drug use correctly. This suggests that p2=1-(p1/0.8), q=p1/4, and D is
calculated from the data, separately for gun availability and each drug use measure.
Variations in the reporting rate did not change the results in a meaningful way.
The analysis of guns-crime relationship is performed by estimating versions of
Equation (3A). In case of the variable that measures gun availability, measurement error
seems negligible. This is because, in the sample of siblings and twins, there is nearly perfect
agreement between siblings to the question on gun availability at home. For example, in the
first wave among 2,117 sibling pairs, 440 pairs indicated that guns were available to them at
home and 1,677 pairs said guns were not available. There was perfect agreement between
siblings in these answers. In wave two, 326 individuals indicated that guns were available at
home; and 323 of these siblings indicated the same. Thus, the agreement rate was 99%. Onethousand-eighthundred-one juveniles indicated that guns were not available, and the
responses of their siblings were almost identical (1,798 of them also said that guns were not

9

The reliability ratio is the proportion of individuals who are confirmed to have provided correct
information about their drug use. Confirmation is typically based on drug tests.

15

available at home).10 Therefore, we first report the results with no adjustment for
measurement error in gun availability. However, we also report estimates with adjustment
for non-random measurement error in gun availability as described above (Equation 8). It is
well-known that classical measurement error in the explanatory variable attenuates its
estimated coefficient, and the bias is exacerbated in first-differenced data (Levitt 1998a,
Griliches and Hausman 1986).11 In our case, where we entertain the possibility of one-sided
measurement error due to differential propensity of telling the truth about gun availability at
home, the bias depends on p1, p2 and D.
In models that employ time and sibling (or twin) differencing, we estimate models
(suppressing X) such as

∇∆CR jit = β∇∆DR * jit + ∇∆ε jit
The probability limit of the estimated coefficient is equal to (the details are in Appendix-A)
é
ù
4 p1 p 2
p lim βˆ = β ê
ú
2
ë ( p1 − p1 )(4 + Φ) û

where Φ = 2(− ρ DR

j 22 DR j 21

− ρ DR j 22 DR j12 + ρ DR j 22 DR j11 + ρ DR j 21DR j12 − ρ DR j 21DR j11 − ρ DR j12 DR j11 ) .

10

This cannot be attributable to siblings lying in concert, because although in some cases the siblings
took the survey in different days, in most cases they took it simultaneously.

11

This can be seen by calculating the probability limit of ϕ in equation (3A) when gun availability is
measured with error. In case of classical measurement error one obtains

é
plim ϕˆ ∆ = ϕ ê1 − 2
ëê (σ G*

ù
é
ú
ê
ù
é
ù
σ
σ
1
ú,
ê
ú = ϕ ê1 − 2
ú = ϕ ê1 − 2
ú
σ
ρ
σ
(
1
)
+ σ )(1 − ρ ) úû
−
G
G
ë
û
ê ( 2 )(1 − ρ ) ú
σv
û
ë
2
v
2
v

2
v

where , is the observed correlation of reported gun availability at home between time periods one and
two.

16

M is calculated from reported drug use as it depends on observed correlations in reported

drug use over time and between siblings or twins. Thus, in models with time-and-sibling (or
twin differencing) we estimate
(9) ∇ ∆ CR

jit

ù
é
4 p1 p 2
= βê
ú ∇ ∆ DR
2
p
p
(
−
)(
4
+
Φ
)
1
û
ë 1

jit

+ ∇∆X

jit

δ + ∇ ∆ε

jit

IV. Data
The data used in the analyses are drawn from the two waves of the National
Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (Add Health).12 Add Health is a nationally
representative study of adolescents in grades 7 through 12. An in-school questionnaire was
administered to every student who attended one of the sampled 132 U.S. schools on a
particular day during the period between September 1994 and April 1995. A random sample
of approximately 200 adolescents from each high school/feeder school pair was selected for
in-home interviews which are conducted from April 1995 to December 1995.13 The in-home

12

The Add Health project is a program project designed by J. Richard Udry (PI) and Peter Bearman,
and funded by grant P01-HD31921 from the National Institute of Child Health and Human
Development to the Carolina Population Center, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, with
cooperative funding participation by the National Cancer Institute; the National Institute of Alcohol
Abuse and Alcoholism; the National Institute on Deafness and Other Communication Disorders; the
National Institute on Drug Abuse; the National Institute of General Medical Sciences; the National
Institute of Mental Health; the National Institute of Nursing Research; the Office of AIDS Research,
NIH; the Office of Behavior and Social Science Research, NIH; the Office of the Director, NIH; the
Office of Research on Women's Health, NIH; the Office of Population Affairs, DHHS; the National
Center for Health Statistics, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS; the Office of
Minority Health, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, DHHS; the Office of Minority Health,
Office of Public Health and Science, DHHS; the Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and
Evaluation, DHHS; and the National Science Foundation. Persons interested in obtaining data files
from The National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health should contact Add Health Project,
Carolina Population Center, 123 West Franklin Street, Chapel Hill, NC 27516-2524 (email:
addhealth@unc.edu).
13
Participating high schools were asked to identify junior high or middle schools that were expected
to provide at least five students to the entering class of the high school. These schools are called

17

interviews constituted the core sample and contained about 12,000 adolescents. In addition
to the core sample, several special samples (e.g. ethnic and genetic) were also drawn on the
basis of in-school interviews. The core and the special samples provide a total number
20,745 adolescents for Wave I. The adolescents are interviewed for the second time from
April to August 1996 for Wave II. In Wave II, 14,738 adolescents were interviewed.14 Data
are gathered from adolescents, from their parents, siblings, friends, romantic partners and
fellow students, and from school administrators. The survey was designed to provide
detailed information on teen behavior, including their criminal and substance use/abuse.
One feature of Add Health that we utilize in this paper is the genetic oversample. The
genetic sample consists of pairs of siblings (full, half and stepsiblings), identical twins and
fraternal twins. Eligibility for the genetic sample was determined based on the responses
provided by adolescents in the in-school questionnaire. All mixed sex twin pairs were
classified as fraternal, or dizygotic (DZ). In addition to asking each twin if they were MZ or
DZ, each twin was also given a set of questions on confusability of appearance (if they
looked like two peas in a pod as young children, and three questions on whether they are
confused by strangers, teachers or family members). A zygosity scale is created, which is an
average of the confusability item scores over the reports of both twins. When self-report
data on appearance was missing, mother’s report of confusability of appearance was used. If
there was conflict between the twins’ self-reports of zygosity and the classification based on

feeder schools. Their probability of selection was proportional to the percentage of the high school’s
entering class that came from that feeder.
14

The sample for the Wave II In-home Interview was composed of the respondents of the Wave I Inhome Interview, with the following exceptions: A respondent who was in the 12th grade in Wave I
and who was not part of the genetic sample was not interviewed in Wave II. Respondents who were
only in Wave I’s disabled sample were not re-interviewed.

18

confusability of appearance, the twins are classified as “uncertain zygosity”. Using the
responses from Wave I questionnaire, those classified as uncertain zygosity were asked in
Wave II for cheek samples for DNA analysis. There are 43 twin pairs that refused to provide
a sample for testing, and they are deleted from our sample. After deleting twins with
undetermined zygosity, the raw sample of siblings (including twins) consists of 4,030
individuals. Of these, 1,986 are full siblings, 700 are half siblings, 821 are DZ twins and 523
are MZ twins. The sample of twins contains the DZ and MZ twins; and the sample of
identical twins consists of the 523 MZ twins. Twins constitute 7 percent of the sample.15
There is one set of triplets and no quadruplets. The triplets are coded as three sets of twins.
The survey includes a number of detailed questions about delinquent behavior of
adolescents. Specifically, respondents were asked whether they had committed any of the
following acts in the 12 months prior to the interview date: robbery, burglary, damaging
property, and theft. Adolescents were also asked about whether they had used different types
of illicit drugs such as cocaine, other drugs (heroin, LCD, etc.), inhalants, or ever injected any
illegal drugs with a needle. In wave I, the juveniles were asked if they ever used these drugs.
In wave II they were asked if they used these drugs since the last interview. Survey
administrators took several steps to maintain data security and to minimize the potential for
interviewer or parental influence. First, respondents were not provided with any printed
questionnaires. Rather, all data were recorded on laptop computers. Second, for sensitive
topics, such as delinquent behavior, substance use/abuse, and gun availability, the adolescents

15

The proportion of twins in total births has been rising steadily over the last two decades. When
most of the adolescents of the sample were born around 1980, twin births were about 2 percent of
total births (National Vital Statistics Report 1999).

19

listened to pre-recorded questions through earphones and entered their answers directly on
the laptops.16
Definitions of the variables used in empirical analyses based on the siblings and twins
samples and their descriptive statistics are reported in Table 1.17 The first two columns of
Table 1 report the weighted means and standard deviations of the sibling sample of Wave I.
The next column displays the standard deviations of the first-differenced variables, and the
last column presents the standard deviations for the first-and-sibling-differenced variables.
Some personal and household characteristics, such as race, ethnicity, gender, and whether
parents were born in the U.S. do not change between the waves. Therefore, these variables
are not reported in Table 1. The deterrence variables in Wave I, such as arrest rates, pertain
to 1992, and they were not collected in the second Wave. This is not a drawback because
sibling or twin differencing eliminates all variables that are the same across twins or siblings.
Put differently, siblings of the same household are exposed to the same time-series variation
in contextual variables, such as local economic and social conditions, and deterrence
measures. For the analysis of guns-crime relationship, the change in these contextual
variables between the two survey years is controlled by state or county dummies.
Table 1 shows that about 24 percent of the 3,394 siblings and twins indicate that guns
were available to them at home, and about 22 % of the households in wave I have guns
accessible by juveniles. Cook and Ludwig (1996) and Smith (2000) report that in the 1990s
35 to 40 percent of households had firearms. Given that the question posed to the juveniles
pertains to “guns available to them,” 22% availability rate appears reasonable. Our data set
16

For less sensitive questions, the interviewer read the questions aloud, and entered the respondent’s
answers.

20

also matches well in other dimensions with similar surveys. For example, in our data set,
about 10% of the juveniles responded in the affirmative to the question “have you ever
carried a weapon at school?” This response rate is consistent with other youth surveys. In
1993, 8 percent of high school students had carried a gun in the prior 30 days (Kann et al.
1995).

V. Results
Guns and Crime
In Table 2 we report the estimated coefficients of gun availability at home in four
crime regressions using first-differenced data (Equation 3A) on siblings and twins.
Regressions include 21 control variables, including Seatbelt, Height, Weight, GPA, Perceived
IQ-Below Average, Perceived IQ-Average, Welfare, Alcohol at Home, Drugs at Home,
Allowance, Tattoo, Piercing, No Chance to Live until 35, Good Chance to Live Until 35,
Decides Own Curfew on Weekends, Decides Own Curfew on Weeknights, Decides TV
Time, Chooses Own Friends, Gut Feeling-Yes, Gut Feeling-Neutral. Regressions also
include measures of drug use. Table 2 reports gun coefficients from the models that also
include cocaine as a drug use measure. Regressions that included other measures of drug use
provided very similar coefficients.
The left-hand-side panel of the table (columns 1-3) reports coefficients unadjusted for
measurement error; the right-hand panel (columns 4-6) reports the results with measurement
error adjustment (Equation 8). In the second and fifth columns of Table 2 the change in local
deterrence and economic conditions between the two years is controlled for by a set of state
17

Questions in Wave II are worded as “Since the last interview … ”. Therefore the change in

21

dummies. The third and sixth columns present the results of the models that include county
dummies, under the assumption that time-variation in deterrence and economic conditions
where the juvenile resides has an impact on his/her behavior.
The coefficient of gun availability is always significant in robbery, burglary and theft.
The magnitudes indicate that having guns available at home increases the probability of
robbery, burglary and theft by 1.5 to 2 percentage points after adjusting for the measurement
error. If current criminal activity of the juvenile depends positively on his past criminal
behavior, and if current gun availability at home is negatively correlated with juvenile’s past
criminal behavior, the results may be biased downwards.18 In that case, the results reported
in Table 2 are underestimates of the true impact of gun availability. It is interesting to note
that gun availability at home has no impact on the propensity to damage property. To the
extent that no gun is needed to damage property, this result is meaningful.19
It should be noted that the models include four parental supervision variables
(Decides TV time, Decides Own Curfew on Weekends, Decides Own Curfew on
Weeknights, and Chooses Own Friends) as well as a variable that measures whether alcohol
is available to the juvenile at home, and another variable that measures whether drugs are
available at home. Thus, controlling for these family environment and supervision effects,
gun availability has a separate, positive impact on delinquent behavior. We also estimated
behavior between the two waves is easily identifiable.
18

Specifically, if an increase in criminal behavior between time periods t-2 and t-1 (∆CRt-1) motivates
parents to eliminate guns at home (∆Gt<0), and if (∆CRt-1) is positively correlated with the dependent
variable ∆CRt, the estimated impact of guns will be biased down. We thank John Donohue for this
insight.
19

The point estimate is similar to the ones estimated in burglary, robbery and theft equations. The
explanatory variable is same (the change in access to guns) in all regressions, and the change in
damaging property exhibits more variation than other crime categories (see Table 1).

22

the same models using first-differenced data on all juveniles (n=11,456). Neither the
magnitudes nor the statistical significance of the results changed.
If availability of guns at home is interpreted as a sign of undesirable home
environment, and if such an environment impacts the juvenile’s criminal behavior, then the
relationship between guns and crime is not causal, but it is a reflection of the influence of
harmful home environment. For example, if most parents who allow their children to have
access to guns at home have criminal tendencies themselves, and if such criminal human
capital is transmitted to the child, then having access to guns is a proxy for a tendency for
criminal behavior. We have no information on the criminal records of the parents, but it
should be emphasized that taking first-differences of the data eliminates parent-specific as
well as child-specific heterogeneity, such as unobserved tendency for criminal delinquency.
Nevertheless, to test whether gun availability at home is merely a measure of
unobserved time-varying parent characteristics that also impact child behavior, we
investigated if the change in gun availability has an impact on the change in other ill-behavior
of the child such as lying, being expelled from school, drinking and fighting, smoking, and
having sex.20
If having guns available at home is a proxy of the home environment, then it should
have an impact on these behaviors as well. The results, reported in Table 3, demonstrate that
availability of guns at home has no impact on lying, being expelled from school, smoking,
drinking & fighting, and having sex. The point estimates are small, negative in half of the

20

In Wave I the questions for these behaviors are: “Have you ever lied to your parents or guardians
about where you have been or whom you were with?,” “Have you ever being expelled from school?,”
“Have you ever tried cigarette smoking?,” “Did you get into a physical fight because you had been
drinking in the last 12 months?,” and “Have you ever had sexual intercourse?” In Wave II, the same
questions were asked as “Since the last interview, have you …”.

23

cases, and never statistically significant. This indicates that having guns available at home is
positively related to criminal activity, but it has no significant impact on other types of bad
behavior.
One main argument in favor of concealed weapons laws is that they allow lawabiding citizens to protect themselves from potential perpetrators. As a result, carrying a
firearm is expected to decrease criminal victimization. We provide a test of this hypothesis.
The data set contains four questions that measure criminal victimization of the juvenile.
They are “whether during the past 12 months someone pulled a knife or gun on you,”
“whether during the past 12 months someone shot you,” “whether during the past 12 months
someone cut you or stabbed you,” and “whether during the past 12 months you were
jumped.” Using the same set of explanatory variables, we estimated the probability of
victimization based on these questions. The results, which are reported in Table 4 reveal that
having access to guns does not decrease the probability of victimization for juveniles. In fact,
gun availability increases the probability of being cut or stabbed, and the probability of
someone pulling a knife or gun on the juvenile by about 2 percentage points. The increase in
the probability of victimization can be because juveniles may become overconfident because
of guns being available to them. As a result, they may engage in situations with less certain
outcomes. This point has been demonstrated theoretically by Donohue III and Levitt (1998).
The upshot is that, the results show that gun availability has a positive impact on juvenile
crime, and it also increases the risk of being victimized.

24

Drugs and Crime
In Table 5 we report the estimated coefficients of drug use indicators using the sample
of siblings (including twins). The top panel presents results pertaining to Equation (3A),
which is the fixed-effects model. As in Table 2, in addition to drug use measures, the
regressions include the following explanatory variables: Seatbelt, Height, Weight, GPA,
Perceived IQ-Below Average, Perceived IQ-Average, Welfare, Alcohol at Home, Drugs at
Home, Guns at Home, Allowance, Tattoo, Piercing, No Chance to Live until 35, Good
Chance to Live Until 35, Decides Own Curfew on Weekends, Decides Own Curfew on
Weeknights, Decides TV Time, Chooses Own Friends, Gut Feeling-Yes, Gut FeelingNeutral.
The bottom panel of Table 5 displays the results obtained from Equation (4), which
involves time-differencing as well as sibling-differencing. In this specification variables
pertaining to family attributes drop out as they do not vary between siblings. Both panels of
Table 5 display two sets of results. The left-hand-side presents the results unadjusted for
measurement error in drug use, where the right-hand-side displays the results with
measurement error adjustment. For each drug variable we used specific values of Φ obtained
from the data.
As Table 5 demonstrates, drug use coefficients are positive and significantly
different from zero in almost all cases in the top panel, and a similar picture emerges in the
bottom panel, with the exception of the impact of Other Drugs.21

21

Note that the relative sample size of the first-differenced and first-and-sibling differenced data
depends on the number of siblings in households. For example, if a household consists of two
siblings, the first differenced (time-differenced) data will contain two observations, and the first-andsibling differenced data will contain one observation. On the other hand, if the household consists of
three siblings A, B and C, the first-differenced data will contain three observations, and the first-and-

25

Table 6 presents the results for twins. As in Table 5, the upper panel displays the
results of the fixed-effects model (Equation 3A), while the lower panel contains the results
obtained from time- and within-twin differencing.22 To the extent that individual unobserved
time-varying heterogeneity is the same between twins, this specification is represented by
Equation (5). Although the sample size goes down to about 450 in case of twins, drug use
coefficients remain significant in many cases, even in models with time and twindifferencing. For example, in the lower panel cocaine consumption impacts theft and
damage. Other drugs influence burglary, theft, and damage. Injection is associated with an
increase in the propensity to commit burglary and theft.
Table 7 displays the results for identical twins. Although there are only 400
observations in the fixed-effects model (top panel), with the exception of theft, each crime is
influenced by two different drug measures. For example, robberies are influenced by using
cocaine and inhalants, burglaries are influenced by inhalants and injection, and damage is
influenced by using inhalants and other drugs. In the lower panel where the results of fixedeffects and within twin differences are reported, the sample size goes down to 176, and
therefore, the coefficients are not estimated with precision. Nevertheless, injection is
statistically significant in burglary and theft equations, and other drugs is significant in the
damage regression.
The results in Tables 5-7 demonstrate the positive impact of drug use on crime.
Although the precision of the estimated coefficients goes down as the sample gets smaller,
sibling differenced data will also contain three observations (it will consist of ∆A-∆B, ∆A-∆C and
∆B-∆C, where ∆A is a first-differenced variable of sibling A). In case of a household with four
siblings, the first-differenced data have four observations and first-and-sibling differenced data have
six observations.

26

the point estimates of individual drug variables are stable across specifications. We
calculated the median point estimate for each drug category across crime types. In models
with first-differences the median impact on crime of using cocaine is 11 percentage points.
The impact of using inhalants is 14 percentage points. The median impacts on crime of other
drugs and injecting drugs are 5 and 27 percentage points, respectively. In double-differenced
models the median impacts are 14 percentage points for inhalants, 18 percentage points for
other drugs, 23 percentage points for cocaine, and 50 percentage points for injection. The
results for injection should be taken with caution because of the small number of users in this
case.

Reverse causality
Although taking first and sibling (or twin) differences eliminates unobserved
heterogeneity that would otherwise have been included in the error terms, it can still be
argued that drug use may be influenced by reverse causality from property crimes if
committing these crimes is associated with increased income. To account for this potential
reverse causality, we considered a reduced-form drug use equation, where the instruments
that impact the drug use of the juvenile include the following variables: whether at least one
of the three best friends smokes at least one cigarette a day, whether at least one of the three
best friends drinks alcohol at least once a month, and whether at least one of the three best
friends uses marijuana at least once a month. While it can plausibly be argued that friends’
consumption of cigarette, alcohol and marijuana may be correlated with own drug use, it is
less obvious that these instruments are uncorrelated with own criminal activity.
22

The sample size of the first-and-twin differenced data is not half of the first-differenced twin sample

27

Unfortunately no better instruments are available. State or county level alcohol and drug
prices are not viable candidates to identify the effect of drug use as they do not vary between
siblings and twins. School based policy variables are not useful either, because all twins and
most siblings attend the same school.23 Estimation of the double-differenced crime and
double-differenced reduced-form drug use equations with full-information maximum
likelihood revealed that although the magnitudes of the estimated drug use coefficients are
similar to those reported in tables 5-7, most coefficients are not estimated with precision.
The imprecision of the estimated coefficients is most likely due to weak instruments, but the
data set does not include better instrument candidates. (The explicit specification is reported
in Appendix B).
In Table A-1 in Appendix B we report the coefficients for inhale and inject for
siblings, twins and identical twins. These are the drugs that created most precise estimates.
For siblings, the use of inhalants has a positive impact on burglary, theft, and damage.
Injection has an impact on robbery and burglary. In case of all twins, injection has an impact
on theft, and in the sample of identical twins injection influences burglary and theft.

VI. Conclusion
The analysis of the determinants of juvenile risky behavior in general, and juvenile
crime in particular has become an important research question (Gruber 2001, Levitt 1998b,
Mocan and Rees 1999). In addition to sanctions, economic variables and social factors, guns
and drug use are potentially important determinants of criminal activity. The causal effect of

because of missing values in some variables.
23
Grossman, Kaestner and Markowitz (2002) highlight the same point in their analysis of drug use on
teenage sexual activity.

28

drug use on crime has not yet been established due to statistical difficulties. The propensity
to use drugs may be correlated with unobserved attributes and characteristics of the
individual. If these attributes, such as risk aversion or intelligence, have an influence on
criminal activity, then estimates of drug use on crime are biased because of this confounding.
The same difficulty exists in research on guns-crime relationship, which used aggregate (state
or county-level) data. In addition, it has been difficult to find data sets with measures of gun
availability. Therefore, researchers explained crime rates with some proxies of gun
ownership, such as sales of gun magazines, or suicides involving firearms. Alternatively,
they analyzed the impact of gun laws on state or county crime rates.
In this paper we employ the AddHealth data, which is a nationally-representative
panel data set of high school students that contains an oversample of siblings and twins. In
addition to an unusually large number of interesting variables that aim to gauge personal
characteristics, family background and family supervision, the data set includes a direct
question on the availability of guns to the juvenile at home. The data set also contains
detailed information about drug use and criminal activity of the juveniles. In particular,
consumption of cocaine, injecting drugs, using inhalants, and using other drugs are measured.
The crimes we analyze are robberies, burglaries and thefts committed by juveniles and
whether they damaged property.
We adjust for measurement error in gun availability and drug use with an algorithm
that allows for non-symmetric measurement error. The impact of gun availability on crime is
analyzed using first-differenced data, where time-invariant individual-specific and familyspecific heterogeneity is eliminated.

29

The results reveal that gun availability at home increases the propensity to commit
robbery, burglary and theft by two percentage points for juveniles, but it has no impact on
damaging property.

It is unlikely that gun availability is merely a measure of the

unobserved home environment. This is because other measures of home environment, such
as various parent supervision variables and variables that indicate the availability of alcohol
and the availability of drugs at home, have no similar systematic impacts on crime. More
important, gun availability at home has no impact on other bad behavior, such as lying, being
expelled from school, drinking and fighting, smoking and having sex.
We also investigate whether gun availability decreases the probability of being a
crime victim. We find no support for this hypothesis; in fact the results show that having
access to guns increases the probability of being cut or stabbed by someone and someone
pulling a knife or gun on the juvenile.
The variation of drug use between siblings and twins allows us to exploit withinsibling differences of the first-differenced data. This enables us to filter out time-varying
unobservables that are common to each household (therefore to each sibling). In addition,
taking the twin differences of the first-differenced data enables us to eliminate the genetic
component of criminal activity common to both twins.
The results indicate that drug use increases the propensity to commit crime. The
median impact of injecting drugs on the probability of committing robbery, burglary and theft
and creating property damage is 50 percentage points, although this result should be taken
with caution because it is based on small number of individuals who inject drugs. The
median impact of cocaine is an increased criminal propensity of 23 percentage points. The
use of inhalants generates a (median) 14 percentage point increase in the propensity to

30

commit crime; and other drugs increase the propensity to commit crime by 18 percentage
points.
Given the impact of juvenile criminal activity on human capital accumulation and
future earnings, and given the magnitude of the externalities generated by juvenile crime
cited in the introduction, these results suggest that the current debates on gun control and
drug policies have dimensions in addition to individual liberties and constitutional rights.

31

Gun
Allowance
Welfare
Seatbelt
Tattoo
Piercing
No chance to
live until 35a
Good chance to
live until 35

Inject

Inhale
Other Drugs

Cocaine

Robbery

Theft

Burglary

Damage

32

Dummy variable (=1) if deliberately damaged someone else’s property that did not
belong to you in the past 12 months, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if went into a house or building to steal something in the past
12 months, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if took something from a store without paying for it, or took
something worth more than 50 dollars in the last 12 months
Dummy variable (=1) if used or threatened to use a weapon to get something from
someone in the past 12 months, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if ever used any kind of cocaine (including powder, freebase,
or crack cocaine) in life, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if ever used inhalants, such as glue or solvents in your lifetime
Dummy variable (=1) if ever used any other type of illegal drug, such as LSD, PCP,
ecstasy, mushrooms, speed, ice, heroin, or pills without a doctor's prescription in your
lifetime in life, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if ever injected (shot up with a needle) any illegal drug, such as
heroine or cocaine in your life time, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if a gun is easily available at home, 0 otherwise
Allowance per week
Dummy variable (=1) if any parent is on welfare, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if wears seatbelt every time in a car, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if had a permanent tattoo, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if has both ears pierced, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if the perceived chance of living until age 35 is less than 50
percent, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if the perceived chance of living until age 35 is more than 50
percent, 0 otherwise

Definition

Table 1
Descriptive Statistics

0.426
7.872
0.337
0.344
0.193
0.498
0.187
0.336

0.871

0.047
0.239
4.730
0.131
0.863
0.039
0.541
0.036

0.002

0.251
0.260

0.161

0.027
0.068
0.073

0.211

0.434

0.251
0.047

0.226

St. dev.
0.406

0.054

Mean
0.208

Wave I
Cross Section
Siblings & Twins

0.404

0.377
10.934
0.312
0.357
0.203
0.254
0.246

0.075

0.230
0.248

0.177

0.240

0.462

0.254

St. dev.
0.422

0.565

0.487
0.402
0.668
0.341

13.882

0.107

0.303
0.337

0.222

0.322

0.656

0.359

St. dev.
0.582

First
First and
Difference
Sibling
Siblings & Difference
Twins

0.488
0.865
0.354
0.387
0.465

0.393
2.772
0.853
0.817
0.317

0.024

Dummy variable (=1) if illegal drugs are easily available at home, 0 otherwise

n=3,394

168.378
64.083
0.264

0.154

10.600
16.379
0.441

0.483

0.248

0.066

0.629

0.409

0.491

0.212

0.403

Height in centimeters
Weight in kilograms
Dummy variable (=1) if alcohol is available at home, 0 otherwise

Dummy variable (=1) if parents allow the respondent to decide about the time to be at
home on week nights, 0 otherwise

Table I concluded
Dummy variable (=1) if agrees with the statement "I usually go with "gut feeling"
when making decisions without thinking too much about the consequences", 0
otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if neither agrees nor disagrees with the statement "I usually go
with "gut feeling" when making decisions without thinking too much about the
consequences", 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if in comparison to other people of the same age, the perceived
intelligence is below average, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if in comparison to other people of the same age, the perceived
intelligence is about average, 0 otherwise
Average GPA from math, science, history, and English classes
Dummy variable (=1) if parents allow the respondent to decide with whom to hang
around, 0 otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if parents allow respondent to decide how much TV to watch, 0
otherwise
Dummy variable (=1) if parents allow the respondent to decide about the time to be at
home on weekend nights, 0 otherwise

n=3,039

0.209

4.715
5.488
0.590

0.554

0.546

0.475

0.808
0.447

0.523

0.296

0.539

0.600

n=1,294

6.177
7.180

0.980

0.985

0.840

1.092
0.758

0.717

0.405

0.755

0.823

33

a: The omitted category is "Dummy variable (=1) if the perceived chance of living until age 35 is 50 percent; 0 otherwise"
b: The omitted category is "Dummy variable (=1) if disagrees with the statement "I usually go with "gut feeling" when making decisions without thinking too much about the
consequences", 0 otherwise
c: The omitted category is "Dummy variable (=1) if in comparison to other people of the same age, the perceived intelligence is above average, 0 otherwise"

Perceived IQ –
Below average c
Perceived IQ –
Average
GPA
Chooses own
friends
Decides TV
time
Decides own
curfew on
weekends
Decides own
curfew on
weeknights
Height
Weight
Alcohol
available
Drugs available

Gut feeling –
Neutral

Gut feeling –
Yesb

Damage
Burglary
Robbery
Theft

Table 2
The Impact of Gun Availability at Home on Crime
All Siblings (Including Twins)
First Differenced Data
Coefficient of Gun Availability
w/o Measurement Error Correction w/ Measurement Error Correction
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
0.034
0.038
0.038
0.016
0.018
0.018
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.024)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.012)
0.031**
(0.013)

0.030**
(0.013)

0.030**
(0.013)

0.015**
(0.006)

0.015**
(0.006)

0.015**
(0.006)

0.028**
(0.012)

0.025**
(0.012)

0.022*
(0.013)

0.014**
(0.006)

0.012**
(0.006)

0.011*
(0.006)

0.039*
(0.022)

0.045**
(0.023)

0.042*
(0.024)

0.019*
(0.011)

0.022**
(0.011)

0.020*
(0.012)

State Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
County Dummies
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
The entries are the coefficients of gun availability at home. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses.
Table 3
The Impact of Gun Availability on Other Behavior
All Siblings (Including Twins)
First Differenced Data

Smoking

Coefficient of Gun Availability
w/o Measurement Error Correction w/ Measurement Error Correction
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
-0.027
-0.021
-0.008
-0.013
-0.010
-0.004
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.023)
(0.011)
(0.011)
(0.011)

Drinking &
Fighting

0.003
(0.015)

-0.002
(0.015)

-0.001
(0.015)

0.001
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.007)

-0.0005
(0.0073

Lying

0.040
(0.029)

0.038
(0.030)

0.041
(0.030)

0.019
(0.014)

0.018
(0.015)

0.020
(0.015)

Being Expelled
From School

0.000
(0.010)

-0.001
(0.010)

-0.002
(0.010)

0.000
(0.005)

-0.0005
(0.0048)

-0.001
(0.005)

Having Sex

-0.001
0.003
0.004
0.0005
0.001
0.002
(0.021)
(0.021)
(0.022)
(0.0102)
(0.010)
(0.011)
State Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
County Dummies
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
The entries are the coefficients of gun availability at home. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses.

34

Table 4
The Impact of Gun Availability on Victimization
All Siblings (Including Twins)
First Differenced Data
Coefficient of Gun Availability
w/o Measurement Error Correction w/ Measurement Error Correction
(1)
(2)
(3)
(4)
(5)
(6)
Someone pulled a
0.048***
knife or gun on you
(0.018)
Someone shot you

0.003
(0.008)

Someone cut you or
0.046***
stubbed you
(0.014)
You were
jumped

-0.001
(0.001)

0.048**
(0.019)

0.045**
(0.019)

0.023***
(0.009)

0.023**
(0.009)

0.022**
(0.009)

0.004
(0.008)

0.003
(0.009)

0.001
(0.004)

0.002
(0.004)

0.001
(0.004)

0.043***
(0.014)

0.044***
(0.014)

0.022***
(0.007)

0.021***
(0.007)

0.021***
(0.007)

-0.001
(0.015)

0.001
(0.016)

-0.0005
(0.0005)

-0.0005
(0.0073)

0.0005
(0.0077)

State Dummies
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
No
County Dummies
No
No
Yes
No
No
Yes
The entries are the coefficients of gun availability at home. Robust standard errors are in
parentheses.

35

Table 5
The Impact of Drug Use on Crime
All Siblings (Including Twins)
First-Differenced Data
w/o Measurement Error Correction
w/ Measurement Error Correction
Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage
Cocaine

0.145*** 0.136*** 0.137*** 0.158*** 0.115*** 0.108*** 0.109*** 0.125***
(0.047)
(0.04)
(0.053)
(0.053)
(0.037)
(0.032)
(0.042)
(0.042)

Inhale

0.165*** 0.156***
(0.035)
(0.033)

Other Drugs

0.033
(0.031)

Inject

0.193
(0.158)

0.052*
(0.029)

0.19***
(0.043)

0.177*** 0.131*** 0.124*** 0.151***
(0.041)
(0.028)
(0.026)
(0.034)

0.14***
(0.033)

0.08**
(0.04)

0.123***
(0.041)

0.021
(0.02)

0.033*
(0.019)

0.051**
(0.026)

0.079**
(0.026)

0.295*
(0.159)

0.17
(0.139)

0.29***
(0.099)

0.417***
(0.097)

0.26*
(0.14)

0.328*** 0.472***
(0.112)
(0.11)

First- and – Sibling Differenced Data
w/o Measurement Error Correction
w/ Measurement Error Correction
Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage
Cocaine

0.142**
(0.062)

0.155***
(0.058)

0.154*
(0.086)

0.118
(0.086)

0.098**
(0.043)

Inhale

0.128*** 0.168***
(0.041)
(0.043)

0.21***
(0.065)

0.155**
(0.063)

0.094*** 0.124*** 0.155***
(0.03)
(0.032)
(0.048)

0.065
(0.062)

0.093
(0.059)

Other Drugs

0.004
(0.039)

0.066
(0.042)

Inject

0.002
(0.024)

0.107***
(0.04)

0.04
(0.026)

0.107*
(0.06)

0.039
(0.038)

0.082
(0.06)
0.114**
(0.046)
0.056
(0.036)

0.403** 0.511*** 0.754*** 0.404** 0.357** 0.453*** 0.669*** 0.358**
(0.159)
(0.151)
(0.135)
(0.163)
(0.141)
(0.134)
(0.12)
(0.145)
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at <10%, <5%, and <1% levels, respectively.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
In the upper panel of the table, sample sizes range from 3,049 to 3,055 for robbery, from 3,048 to
3,054 for burglary, from 3,046 to 3,052 for theft, and from 3,050 to 3.056 for damage. In the lower
panel, sample sizes range from 1,304 to 1,307 for robbery, from 1,300 to 1,303 for burglary, from
1,304 to 1,307 for theft, and from 1,303 to 1,306 for damage.

36

Table 6
The Impact of Drug Use on Crime
All Twins
First-Differenced Data
w/o Measurement Error Correction
w/ Measurement Error Correction
Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage
Cocaine

0.165*
(0.096)

0.116*
(0.062)

0.116
(0.095)

0.153*
(0.081)

0.125*
(0.073)

0.088*
(0.047)

0.088
(0.072)

0.116*
(0.061)

Inhale

0.216*** 0.156***
(0.068)
(0.054)

0.175**
(0.087)

0.22***
(0.07)

0.168*** 0.121***
(0.053)
(0.042)

0.136**
(0.067)

0.171***
(-0.054)

Other Drugs

0.112**
(0.055)

0.054
(0.043)

0.088
(0.066)

0.154**
(0.068)

0.067**
(0.033)

0.032
(0.026)

0.052
(0.039)

0.092**
(0.041)

Inject

-0.297
(0.307)

0.325
(0.199)

0.249
(0.198)

0.195
(0.335)

-0.298
(0.308)

0.326
(0.2)

0.25
(0.199)

0.196
(0.336)

First-and-Twin Differenced Data
w/o Measurement Error Correction
w/ Measurement Error Correction
Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage
Cocaine

0.183
(0.111)

0.088
(0.109)

0.268**
(0.128)

0.278*
(0.149)

0.119
(0.072)

0.057
(0.071)

0.175**
(0.084)

0.181*
(0.097)

Inhale

0.078
(0.079)

0.118
(0.086)

0.168
(0.124)

0.081
(0.097)

0.058
(0.058)

0.087
(0.064)

0.124
(0.092)

0.06
(0.072)

Other Drugs

0.082
(0.068)

0.121*
(0.063)

0.174*
(0.098)

0.258***
(0.09)

0.049
(0.041)

0.073*
(0.038)

0.105*
(0.059)

0.155***
(0.054)

Inject

-0.105
0.67*
0.964***
0.097
-0.105
0.669* 0.962***
0.097
(0.295)
(0.363)
(0.365)
(0.204)
(0.294)
(0.362)
(0.364)
(0.204)
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at <10%, <5%, and <1% levels, respectively.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
In the upper panel of the table, sample sizes range from 1,040 to 1,041 for robbery and burglary,
from 1,039 to 1,040 for theft, and from 1,041 to 1,042 for damage. In the lower panel, sample sizes
range from 452 to 453 for robbery and burglary, from 453 to 454 for theft and damage.

37

Table 7
The Impact of Drug Use on Crime
Identical Twins
First-Differenced Data
w/o Measurement Error Correction
w/ Measurement Error Correction
Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage
Cocaine

0.366***
(0.13)

0.12
(0.092)

0.028
(0.167)

0.046
(0.122)

0.289***
(0.103)

0.095
(0.073)

0.022
(0.132)

0.036
(0.096)

Inhale

0.345***
(0.105)

0.193**
(0.082)

0.083
(0.131)

0.25*
(0.128)

0.234***
(0.071)

0.131**
(0.056)

0.056
(0.089)

0.17*
(0.087)

Other Drugs

0.092
(0.098)

0.067
(0.066)

0.014
(0.122)

0.18*
(0.101)

0.057
(0.061)

0.041
(0.041)

0.009
(0.076)

0.111*
(0.063)

Inject

-0.227
(0.376)

0.574**
(0.274)

0.272
(0.32)

0.343
(0.462)

-0.228
(0.377)

0.576**
(0.275)

0.273
(0.321)

0.344
(0.463)

First-and-Twin Differenced Data
w/o Measurement Error Correction
w/ Measurement Error Correction
Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage Robbery Burglary Theft
Damage
Cocaine

0.219
(0.149)

0
(0.23)

0.219
(0.144)

-0.195
(0.149)

0.16
(0.109)

0
(0.168)

0.16
(0.105)

-0.143
(0.109)

Inhale

0.043
(0.113)

0.08
(0.183)

-0.105
(0.172)

-0.251
(0.177)

0.027
(0.07)

0.05
(0.113)

-0.065
(0.107)

-0.156
(0.11)

Other Drugs

0.043
(0.088)

0.138
(0.1)

0.173
(0.155)

0.249***
(0.088)

0.025
(0.051)

0.08
(0.058)

0.1
(0.09)

0.144***
(0.051)

Inject

0.278
1.541*** 1.283***
0.33
0.277
1.537*** 1.28***
(0.199)
(0.214)
(0.345)
(0.391)
(0.199)
(0.214)
(0.344)
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at <10%, <5%, and <1% levels, respectively.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses.
Sample size is 400 in the upper panel models and 176 in the lower panel models.

38

0.329
(0.39)

References

Ayres, Ian, and Donohue, John J.III, 2000, “Shooting Down the More Guns, Less Crime
Hypothesis,” NBER Working Paper No. W9336.
Allgood, Sam, Mustard, David B., and Warren, Ronald S. Jr., 1999, “The Impact of Youth
Criminal Behavior on Adult Earnings,”
Almond, Douglas, Chay, Kenneth Y., and Lee, David S., 2002, “Does Low Birth Weight
Matter? Evidence from the U.S. Population of Twin Births,” University of California,
Berkeley, Center for Labor Economics Working Paper No. 53.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Krueger, Alan, 1994, “Estimates of the Economic Returns to
Schooling from a New Sample of Twins,” American Economic Review, 84(5): 11571173.
Ashenfelter, Orley, and Zimmerman, David J., 1997, “Estimates of the Returns to Schooling
From Sibling Data: Fathers, Sons, and Brothers,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 79(1):1-9.
Behrman, Jere R, Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Taubman, Paul, 1994, “Endowments and the
Allocation of Schooling in the Family and in the Marriage Market: The Twins
Experiment,” The Journal of Political Economy, 102(6):1131-1174.
Behrman, Jere R, Rosenzweig, Mark R., and Taubman, Paul, 1996, “ College Choice and
Wages: Estimates Using Data on Female Twins,” The Review of Economics and
Statistics, 78(1):672-685.
Blau, David, and Hagu, Alison, 1998, “The Demand for Quality in Child Care,” Journal of
Political Economy, 106(1): 107-146.
Blumstein, Alfred, 1995, “Youth Violence, Guns, and the Illicit-Drug Industry,” Journal of
Criminal Law and Criminology, 86(1): 10-36.
Bound, John, and Freeman, Richard B., 1992, “What Went Wrong? The Erosion of Relative
Earnings and Employment Among Young Black Men in the 1980s,” Quarterly
Journal of Economics, 107(1): 201-232.
Case, Anne C., and Katz, Lawrence F., 1991, “The Company You Keep: The Effects of
Family and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” NBER Working Paper No.
3705
Chaiken, J. M. and M. R. Chaiken, 1990, “Drugs and Predatory Crime” in Drug and Crime
M. Tonry and J. Q. Wilson (eds.), Chicago, University of Chicago Press.
Cook, Philip and Ludwig, Jens, 2002, “The Effects of Gun Prevalence on Burglary:
Deterrence vs. Inducement,” NBER Working Paper No. 8926.
Cook, Philip and Ludwig, Jens, 1996, Guns in America: Results of a Comprehensive
National Survey on Firearms Ownership and Use, Washington, The Policy
Foundation.
39

Corman, Hope and H. Naci Mocan, 2000, “A Time-Series Analysis of Crime, Deterrence,
and Drug Abuse in New York City,” American Economic Review, 90(3): 584-604.
Corman, Hope and H. Naci Mocan, 2002, “Carrots, Sticks and Broken Windows,” NBER
Working Paper No. W9061.
Currie, Janet and Moretti, Enrico,2002, “Mother’s Education and the Intergenerational
Transmission of Human Capital: Evidence from College Openings and Longitudinal
Data,” NBER Working Paper No. W9330
Donohue, John III., and Levitt, Steven, 1998, “Guns, Violence, and the Efficiency of Illegal
Markets,” American Economic Review, 88(2): 463-67.
Duggan, Mark, 2001, “More Guns, More Crime,” Journal of Political Economy, 109(5):
1086-1114.
Ehrlich, Isaac, 1973, “Participation in Illegitimate Activities: A Theoretical and Empirical
Investigation,” Journal of Political Economy, 81(3): 521-565.
Freeman, Richard B. and William M. Rodgers III, 2000, "Area Economic Conditions and the
Labor Market Outcomes of Young Men in the 1990s Expansion," in Prosperity for
All? The Economic Boom and African Americans; Robert Cherry and William M.
Rodgers (eds.), NY: Russell Sage Foundation.
Glaeser, Edward L., Sacerdote, Bruce, and Jose A, Scheinkman, 1996, “Crime and Social
Interactions,” Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2): 507-548.
Gould, Eric D., David B. Mustard and Bruce A. Weinberg, 2002, “Burglary Rates and Local
Labor Market Opportunities in the United States: 1977-1997,” The Review of
Economics and Statistics, 84 (1).
Griliches, Zvi and Jerry Hausman, 1990, “Errors in Variables in Panel Data,” Journal of
Econometrics, 31: 93-118.
Grogger, Jeff, and Willis, Michael, 2000, “The Emergence of Crack Cocaine and the Rise in
Urban Crime Rates,” The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(4): 519-529.
Grossman, Michael, Kaestner, Robert, and Markowitz, Sara, 2002, “Get High and Get
Stupid: The Effect of Alcohol and Marijuana Use on Teen Sexual Behavior,” NBER Working
Paper No. 9216.
Goldstein, P. 1985, “The Drugs/Violence Nexus: A Tripartite Conceptual Framework,”
Journal of Drug Issues, 15(4): 493-506
Gruber, Jonathan (ed.) 2001, “Risky Behavior Among Youths,” Chicago and London,
University of Chicago Press.
Jofre-Bonet, Mereia and Sindelar, Jody L., 2002, “Drug Treatment as a Crime Fighting
Tool,” NBER Working Paper No. W 9038.
40

Johnson, Mark E., Fisher, Dennis G., et, al, 2000, “ Reliability an Validity of Not-inTreatment Drug Users’ Follow-Up Self-Reports” Aids and Behavior, 4(4): 373-80
Harrison, L. D., 1992, “The Drug-Crime Nexus in the USA,” Contemporary Drug Problems,
19(2): 203-246
Hu, Wei Yin, 1999, “Child Support, Welfare Delinquency, and Woman’s Labor Supply,”
Journal of Human Resources, 34(1): 71-103.
Kann, Laura, Charles W. Warren, William A. Harris et, al, 1995, “Youth Risk Behavior
Surveillance – United States, 1993,” Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report 44: 155.
Levitt, Steven D., Lochner, Lance J., 2001 "The Determinants of Juvenile Crime," in
Risky Behavior Among Youths: An Economic Analysis, J. Gruber (ed.), University of
Chicago Press: Chicago, 2001.
Levitt, Steven D., 1999, “The Effect of Prison Population Size on Crime Rates: Evidence
from Prison Overcrowding Litigation.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 111(2),
p319-351, May.
Levitt, Steven D., 1998a,"Why Do Increased Crime Arrest Rates Appear to Reduce Crime:
Deterrence, Incapacitation, or Measurement Error?" Economic Inquiry, Vol.
36(3):353-372.
Levitt, Steven D., 1998b, “Juvenile Crime and Punishment.” Journal of Political Economy,
Vol 106(6):1156-1185
Lott, John R. Jr. and David B. Mustard, 1997, “Crime, Deterrence, and Right-to-Carry
Concealed Handguns”, The Journal of Legal Studies, 26(1): 1-68.
Lott, John, 2000, “More Guns, Less Crime” 2nd ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Lott, John R, and Whitley, John E., 2001, “Safe-Storage Guns Laws: Accidental Deaths,
Suicides and Crime,” Journal of Law and Economics, 44: 659-689.
Ludwig, Jens, and Cook Philip, 2000, “Homicide and Suicide Rate Associated With
Implementation of the Brady Handgun Violence Prevention Act,” Journal of
American Medical Association, 284(5): 585-91.
Markowitz, Sara, 2000, “ An Economic Analysis of Alcohol, Drugs, and Violent Crime in the
National Crime Victimization Survey,” NBER Working Paper No. W7982.
Marvell, Thomas B., 2001, “The Impact of Banning Juvenile Gun Possession” Journal of
Law and Economics, 44: 691-713.
Miller, Paul, and Mulvey, Charles, and Martin Nick, 1995, “What Do Twins Studies Reveal
About the Economic Returns to Education? A Comparison of Australian U.S
Findings,” American Economic Review, 85(3): 586-599.
41

Mocan, Naci H., Billups, Stephen, and Overland, Jody, 2000, “ A Dynamic Model of
Differential Human Capital and Criminal Activity”, NBER Working Paper No.
W7584.
Mocan, Naci H., and Corman, Hope, 1998, "An Economic Analysis of Drug Use and Crime,"
Journal of Drug Issues, 28(3):613-29.
Mocan, Naci H., and Rees, Daniel, 1999, “Economic Conditions, Deterrence, and Juvenile
Crime: Evidence from Micro Data” NBER Working Paper No. W7505.
Mocan, Naci H., Tekin, Erdal, and Zax, Jeffrey S., 2000, “The Demand for Medical Care in
Urban China,” NBER Working Paper No. 7673.
Mocan, Naci H., and Tekin, Erdal, 2003, “Nonprofit Sector and Part-Time Work: An
Analysis of Employer-Employee Matched Data of Child Care Workers,” Review of
Economics and Statistics, 85:1, pp. 38-50.
Mustard, David B., 2001, “The Impact of Gun Laws on police Deaths,” Journal of Law and
Economics, 44: 635-657.
National Vital Statistics Report, 1999; Vol 47, No: 24; National Center for Health Statistics,
Hyattsville, Maryland.
Parker, Jeffrey S., 2001, “ Guns, Crime, and Academics: Some Reflections on the Gun
Control Debate,” Journal of Law and Economics, 44: 715-723.
Raphael, Steven and Rudolf Winter-Ebmer, 2001,” Identifying the Effect of Unemployment
on Crime,” The Journal of Law and Economics, 44: 259-83.
Smith, Tom W., 2000, 1999 National Gun Policy Survey of the National Opinion
Research Center: Research Finding, NORC, University of Chicago
Soler, Mark, 2001, “Public Opinion on Youth, Crime and Race: A Guide for Advocates.”
Ventura, Stephanie, Martin, Joyce, etc., 2001, “Births Final Data for 1999” in National Vital
Statistics Reports, 49(1).
Weiss, Roger D., Najavits, Lisa M., et. al., 1998, “Validity of Substance Use Self-Reforts in
Dually Diagnosed Outpatients,” American Journal of Psychiatry, 155(1): 127-128.
Wintemute, Garen, 2000, “Guns and Gun Violence” in The Crime Drop in America, Alfred
Blumshtein, and Joel Wallman (eds.), NY, Cambridge University Press.
Wilson, James Q., and Petersilia Joan (eds.), 1995, Crime; San Francisco, California: ICS
Press, Institute for Contemporary Studies.

42

APPENDIX-A
General Framework

DRit= DR*it + vit , where DR*it is the actual drug use (0=No, 1=Yes) and DRit is the reported
drug use (0=No, 1=Yes)
Let probability distribution of vit be
Prob(DRit= 1, DR*it=1)=p1
Prob(DRit= 1, DR*it=0)=0
Prob(DRit= 0, DR*it=0)=p2
Prob(DRit= 0, DR*it=1)=q
In other words,
DR*it
1
0
0
1

DRit
1
1
0
0

vit
0
1
0
-1

p1+p2+q=1;

E[ v ] = − q
E[ DR*] = 1 − p 2
var[v] = q − q 2
var[ DR*] = p 2 − p 22
cov[v, DR*] = − p 2 q
var[ DR] = p1 − p12
Probability Limit of the Coefficient of Drug Use in First-differenced Data

The probability limit is
^

p lim β = β

var[∆DRt *] + cov[∆v t , ∆DRt *]
var[∆DRt ]

Note that by definition
var[∆DRt *] = var[∆DRt ] − var[∆v t ] − 2 cov[∆DRt *, ∆vt ]
Thus,
cov[∆DRt *, ∆v t ] =

1
1
1
var[∆DRt ] − var[∆v t ] − var(∆DRt *)
2
2
2
43

Prob(vit)
P1
0
P2
q

Substitution for cov(∆DR*,∆v) provides
^

p lim β = β

[

0.5 var(∆DRt ) + var(∆DR * t ) − var(∆v t )
var(∆DRt )

]

Note that
var(∆DRt ) = var(DRt − DRt −1 ) = var(DRt ) + var(DRt −1 ) − 2 cov(DRt , DRt −1 )

Assuming that DR is covariance stationary; i.e. Var(DRt)=Var(DRt-1),
2
var(∆DRt ) = 2σ DR
(1 − ρ DRt , DRt −1 ) , where σ2DR=var(DRt).
Similarly
2
var(∆DR *t ) = 2σ DR
* (1 − ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 )

and

var(∆v t ) = 2σ V2 (1 − ρ vt vt −1 )

where σ2ν =var(νt) and σ2DR*=var(DRt*)
Substituting the variances of DR, DR* and v into the probability limit formula, one obtains
(A1)

^

p lim β = β

[

2
2
2
0.5 2σ DR
(1 − ρ DRt , DRt −1 ) + 2σ DR
* (1 − ρ DR *t , DR*t −1 ) − 2σ v (1 − ρ vt , vt −1 )

2σ

2
DR

]

(1 − ρ DRt , DRt −1 )

Note that
A2 = cov( DRt , DRt −1 ) = cov( DR *t + v t , DR *t −1 + v t −1 )
= cov( DRt , DRt −1 ) = cov( DR *t , DR *t −1 ) + cov( DR *t −1 , v t ) + cov( DR *t , v t −1 ) + cov(v t , vt −1 )
Also,
2
cov( DRt , DRt −1 ) = ρ DRt , DRt −1 σ DR
2
cov( DR *t , DR *t −1 ) = ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR
*

cov(v t , vt −1 ) = ρ vt ,vt −1 σ v2
Therefore, one can rewrite (A2) as
2
2
2
ρ DRt , DRt −1 σ DR
= ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR
* + ρ vt ,vt −1 σ v + cov( DR * t −1 , v t ) + cov( DR * t , v t −1 )
Because,
cov( DR *t −1 , vt ) = cov( DR *t −1 , DRt − DR *t ) = cov( DR *t −1 , DRt ) − cov( DR *t −1 , DR *t ).
Assuming
cov( DR *t −1 , DRt ) = 0, one obtains
2
cov( DR *t −1 , v t ) = − ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR
*

44

Similarly.
cov( DR *t , vt −1 ) = cov( DR *t , DRt −1 − DR *t −1 ) = cov( DR *t , DRt −1 ) − cov( DR *t , DR *t −1 )
Assuming
cov( DR *t , DRt −1 ) = 0,
one gets
2
cov( DR *t , v t −1 ) = − ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR
*
Therefore, (A2) is equivalent to:
2
2
2
2
2
ρ DRt , DRt −1 σ DR
= ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR
* + ρ vt ,vt −1 σ v − ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR* − ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR*
2
2
ρ DR , DR σ DR
= ρ v ,v σ v2 − ρ DR* , DR* σ DR
*
t −1

t

t

t −1

t −1

t

Solving for ρνt,νt-1 yields
(A3)

ρ v ,v
t

t −1

=

2
2
+ ρ DR* , DR* σ DR
ρ DR , DR σ DR
*
t

t −1

t

t −1

σ v2

Substitution of (A3) into (A1) gives

^

p lim β = β

2
2
é 2
ù
ρ DRt , DRt −1 σ DR
+ ρ DR*t , DR*t −1 σ DR
*
2
2
−
ρ
−
σ
−
0.5ê2σ DR
(1 − ρ DRt , DRt −1 ) + 2σ DR
(
1
)
2
(
1
)
ú
*
DR *t , DR *t −1
v
σ v2
ëê
ûú
2
2σ DR
(1 − ρ DRt , DRt −1 )

Simplification yields
2
2
2
σ DR
+ σ DR
p1 p 2
* −σv
p lim β = β
=
2
2
2σ DR (1 − ρ DR , DR ) ( p1 − p1 )(1 − ρ DR , DR )
^

t

t −1

t

t −1

Therefore
^

p lim β = β

p1 p2
( p1 − p1 )(1 − ρ DRt , DRt −1 )
2

Probability Limit of the Coefficient of Drug Use in Double-differenced Data

The probability limit is
^

p lim β = β

var(∇∆DR jit *) + cov(∇∆v jit , ∇∆DR jit *)
var(∇∆DR jit )
45

By definition, var(∇∆DR jit *) = var(∇∆DR jit ) − var(∇∆v jit ) − 2 cov(∇∆DR jit *, ∇∆v jit )
Therefore,
cov(∇∆DR jit *, ∇∆v jit ) =

1
1
1
var(∇∆DR jit ) − var(∇∆v jit ) − var(∇∆DR jit *)
2
2
2

and
(A4)

^

p lim β = β

[

0.5 var(∇∆DR jit ) + var(∇∆DR * jit ) − var(∇∆v jit )

]

var(∇∆DR jit )

Note that
var(∇∆DR jit ) = var(DR j 2t − DR j 2t −1 − DR j1t + DR j1t −1 ) = var( DR j 2t ) + var( DR j 2t −1 ) + var(DR j1t ) + var( DR j1t −1 )
− 2 cov( DR j 2t , DR j 2t −1 ) − 2 cov( DR j 2t , DR j1t ) + 2 cov( DR j 2t , DR j1t −1 ) + 2 cov(DR j 2t −1 , DR j1t ) − 2 cov( DR j 2t −1 , DR j1t −1 )
− 2 cov( DR j1t , DR j1t −1 )

where the subscripts 1 and 2 represent the first and the second individuals in sibling (twin)
pair j, and t-1 and t represent the first and the second time periods. Suppressing j for ease of
notation, we can rewrite the above equation as
2
2
2
2
2
var(∇∆DRit ) = 4σ DR
− 2 ρ DR2 t DR2 t −1 σ DR
− 2 ρ DR2 t DR1t σ DR
+ 2 ρ DR2 t DR1t −1 σ DR
+ 2 ρ DR2 t −1DR1t σ DR
−
2
2
− 2 ρ DR2 t −1DR1t −1 σ DR
− 2 ρ DR1t DR1t −1 σ DR

Assuming constant variances of drug use between siblings and over time, one obtains
2
var(∇∆DRit ) = σ DR
( Φ + 4)

where (A5)= Φ = −2 ρ DR

2 t DR2 t −1

− 2 ρ DR2 t DR1t + 2 ρ DR2 t DR1t −1 + 2 ρ DR2 t −1DR1t − 2 ρ DR2 t −1 DR1t −1 − 2 ρ DR1t DR1t −1

2
Similarly, var(∇∆DR *it ) = σ DR
* ( Ψ + 4)

where
Ψ = −2 ρ DR*2 t DR*2 t −1 − 2 ρ DR*2 t DR*1t + 2 ρ DR*2 t DR*1t −1 + 2 ρ DR*2 t −1 DR*1t − 2 ρ DR*2 t −1 DR*1t −1 − 2 ρ DR*1t DR*1t −1

and, var(∇∆v it ) = σ V2 (Ω + 4)
where
Ω = −2 ρ v2 t v2 t −1 − 2 ρ v2 t v1t + 2 ρ v2 t v1t −1 + 2 ρ v2 t −1v1t − 2 ρ v2 t −1v1t −1 − 2 ρ v1t v1t −1

46

Substituting the expressions for the variances in (A4) gives

^

p lim β = β

^

var(DRit *)(4 + Ψ ) +

p lim β = β

1
(var(DRit )(4 + Φ) − var(vit )(4 + Ω) − var(DRit *)(4 + Ψ )
2
(4 + Φ) var(DRit )

1 (var( DRit )(4 + Φ ) − var(vit )(4 + Ω) + var( DRit *)(4 + Ψ )
2
var( DRit )( 4 + Φ )

Note that
cov( DR1t , DR2t −1 ) = cov( DR *1 t + v1t , DR * 2t −1 + v 2t −1 )
cov( DR 1t , DR 2 t −1 ) = cov( DR *1 t , DR *1 t ) + cov( DR *1 t , v1 t ) + cov(v 2t −1 , DR * 2t −1 ) + cov(v 2t −1 , v 2t −1 )
Because
2
cov( DR1t , DR2t −1 ) = ρ DR1t , DR2 t −1 σ DR
2
cov( DR *1t , DR * 2t −1 ) = ρ DR*1t , DR*2 t −1 σ DR
*

cov(v1t , v 2t −1 ) = ρ 1t ,v2 t −1s σ v2

We obtain
(A6)=Cov(DR1t,DR2t-1) =
2
2
2
ρ DR1t , DR2 t −1 σ DR
= ρ DR*1t , DR*2 t −1 σ DR
* + ρ v1t , v2 t −1 σ v + cov( DR *1t , v 2 t −1 ) + cov(v1t , DR * 2 t −1 )
The third term in Equation (A6) is:
cov( DR *1t , v 2t −1 ) = cov( DR *1t , DR2t −1 − DR * 2t −1 ) = cov( DR *1t , DR2t −1 ) − cov( DR *1t , DR * 2t −1 )
Assuming cov( DR *1t , DR2t −1 ) = 0 we obtain
2
(A7)= cov( DR *1t , v2t −1 ) = − cov( DR *1t , DR *2t −1 ) = − ρ DR*1t , DR*2 t −1σ DR
*

The fourth term in Equation (A6) is:
cov(v1t , DR * 2t −1 ) = cov( DR1t − DR *1t , DR * 2t −1 ) = cov( DR1t , DR * 2t −1 ) − cov( DR *1t , DR * 2t −1 )
Again, assuming cov( DR1t , DR * 2t −1 ) = 0 we obtain
2
(A8)= cov(v1t , DR * 2t −1 ) = − cov( DR *1t , DR * 2t −1 ) = − ρ DR*1t , DR*2 t −1 σ DR
*

Substituting (A7) and (A8) into (A6) one obtains

ρ DR

1t

, DR2 t −1

2
σ DR
= − ρ DR*

1t

, DR *2 t −1

2
σ DR
* + ρv

1t

, v 2 t −1

σ v2

47

or

ρ DR

1t

, DR2 t −1

=

2
2
− ρ DR*1t , DR*2 t −1 σ DR
* + ρ v1t , v 2 t −1 σ v
2
σ DR

One can obtain similar expressions for
ρ DR2 t DR1t , ρ DR2 t DR1t −1 ρ DR2 t −1DR1t , ρ DR2 t −1 DR1t −1 , ρ DR1t DR1t −1 .
Substituting each of these correlation coefficients into (A5) one obtains
2
σ v2 Ω − σ DR
*Ψ
2
σ DR
2
2
σ Φ + σ DR
*Ψ
Ω = DR
2
σv

Φ=

Substitution of Ω into (A4) gives

1
p lim β = β
2
^

[σ

2
DR

2
2
Φ + σ DR
σ DR
2
*Ψ
(4 + Φ ) − σ (4 +
) + σ DR
* ( 4 + Ψ )]
2
σv
2
σ DR
(4 + Φ )
2
v

which simplifies to
^

p lim β = β

2
2
2[σ DR
− σ v2 + σ DR
*]
2
σ DR
(4 + Φ )

Substituting the expressions for variances one obtains
^

p lim β = β

4 p1 p 2
( p1 − p12 )(4 + Φ )

48

APPENDIX-B

To address potential reverse-causality, we specify Equations (A7) and (A8) below.
(A7)

∇∆CRjit= δ∇∆Xjit+β∇∆DRjit+:jit.

(A8) ∇∆DRjit= B∇∆Xjit+.∇∆Zjit+0jit.
In Equation (A8) Z represents the instruments that impact the drug use of the juvenile which
include the following variables: whether at least one of the three best friends smokes at least
one cigarette a day, whether at least one of the three best friends drinks alcohol at least once a
month, and whether at least one of the three best friends uses marijuana at least once a month.
While it can plausibly be argued that friends’ consumption of cigarette, alcohol and
marijuana may be correlated with own drug use, it is less obvious that these instruments are
uncorrelated with own criminal activity. Unfortunately no better instruments are available.
State or county level alcohol and drug prices are not viable candidates to identify the effect of
drug use as they do not vary between siblings and twins. School based policy variables are
not useful either, because all twins and most siblings attend the same school.24
Equations (A7) and (A8) are estimated jointly using full information maximum likelihood.
We allow for a correlation between the error terms in equations (A7) and (A8) using the
discrete factor method (DFM). The DFM assumes that the correlation between these two
equations is governed by a common factor, the distribution of which can be approximated by
a step function. The common discrete factor is then integrated out of the model as in the
standard random effects approach. This method is less restrictive than the specifying
functional form, such as joint normality. See Blau and Hagy (1998), Hu (1999), Mocan,
Tekin, and Zax (2000), and Mocan and Tekin (2003) for applications of the DFM.

49

All Siblings

All Twins

Identical Twins

Table A-1
The Impact of Drug Use on Crime with Reverse Causality
Full Information Maximum Likelihood Estimates of Drug Use
Without Measurement Error Correction
Robbery
Burglary
Theft
Inhale
0.136
0.179*
0.196*
(0.095)
(0.095)
(0.095)
Inject
0.401*
0.515*
0.768
(0.264)
(0.264)
(0.264)
Inhale
0.064
0.137
0.128
(0.179)
(0.179)
(0.18)
Inject
-0.124
0.648
0.963*
(0.523)
(0.523)
(0.523)
Inhale
-0.003
0.071
-0.133
(0.338)
(0.336)
(0.335)
Inject
0.36
1.552*
1.399*
(0.885)
(0.885)
(0.885)

Damage
0.176*
(0.095)
0.424*
(0.264)
0.096
(0.18)
0.091
(0.523)
-0.206
(0.335)
0.314
(0.885)

With Measurement Error Correction
Robbery
Burglary
Theft
Damage
Inhale
0.100
0.132*
0.144*
0.130*
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
(0.07)
All Siblings
Inject
0.356*
0.457*
0.681
0.376*
(0.234)
(0.234)
(0.234)
(0.234)
Inhale
0.047
0.101
0.095
0.071
(0.132)
(0.132)
(0.133)
(0.133)
All Twins
Inject
-0.124
0.647
0.961*
0.091
(0.522)
(0.522)
(0.522)
(0.522)
Inhale
-0.002
0.044
-0.082
-0.128
(0.21)
(0.208)
(0.208)
(0.208)
Identical Twins
Inject
0.359
1.548*
1.396*
0.313
(0.883)
(0.883)
(0.883)
(0.883)
*, **, and *** indicate statistical significance at <10%, <5%, and <1% levels, respectively.
Robust standard errors are in parentheses.

24

Grossman, Kaestner and Markowitz (2002) highlight the same point in their analysis of drug use on
teenage sexual activity.
50

