                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                            WHAT DO PEOPLE BUY
                  WHEN THEY DON’T BUY HEALTH INSURANCE
           AND WHAT DOES THAT SAY ABOUT WHY THEY ARE UNINSURED?

                                                 Helen Levy
                                               Thomas DeLeire

                                            Working Paper 9826
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9826


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2003




We thank Vanessa Coca for excellent research assistance. For helpful comments and discussions, we thank Eric
Engen, Louise Sheiner and Larry Levitt, as well as seminar participants at Georgetown, Rutgers, the University
of Maryland, the University of Chicago, RAND, and the National Bureau of Economic Research. DeLeire thanks
the Center for Human Potential at the Irving B. Harris Graduate School of Public Policy Studies and Levy thanks
the California HealthCare Foundation for financial support of this project. The California HealthCare Foundation,
based in Oakland, California, is a non-profit philanthropic organization whose mission is to expand access to
affordable, quality health care for underserved individuals and communities, and to promote fundamental
improvements in the health status of the people of California. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research

©2003 by Helen Levy and Thomas DeLeire. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not to exceed two
paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice, is given to
the source.
What Do People Buy When They Don’t Buy Health Insurance And
What Does that Say about Why They Are Uninsured?
Helen Levy and Thomas DeLeire
NBER Working Paper No. 9826
July 2003
JEL No. Z1

                                            ABSTRACT

Using data from the 1994 through 1998 Consumer Expenditure Surveys, we compare household
spending on 16 different goods (food at home, food away from home, housing, transportation,
alcohol and tobacco, interest, furniture and appliances, home maintenance, clothing, utilities,
medical care, health insurance, entertainment, personal care, education, and other) for insured versus
uninsured households, controlling for total expenditures and demographic characteristics. The
analysis shows that the uninsured in the lowest quartile of the distribution of total expenditures
spend more on housing, food at home, alcohol and tobacco, and education than do the insured. In
contrast, households in the top quartile of the distribution of total expenditures spend more on
transportation and furniture and appliances than do comparable insured households. These results
are consistent with the idea that poor uninsured households face higher housing prices than do poor
insured households. Further research is necessary to determine whether high housing prices can
help explain why some households do not have insurance.




 Helen Levy                                           Thomas DeLeire
 Harris School of Public Policy Studies               Kennedy School of Government
 University of Chicago                                 Harvard University
 1155 E 60th Street                                    79 John F. Kennedy Street
 Chicago, IL 60637                                     Cambridge, MA 02138
 and NBER                                             t-deleire@uchicago.edu
 hlevy@uchicago.edu
1. Introduction

       Surprisingly little research has used an economic framework to analyze why some

households do not have health insurance. Most of the literature on the uninsured emphasizes the

demographic characteristics of the uninsured, rather than the economic constraints and choices

that determine coverage. Since the purchase of health insurance is voluntary, coverage represents

a tradeoff for households between insurance and other goods. The economics of this tradeoff are

governed by income, prices and preferences. In this framework, understanding why people are

uninsured means knowing to what extent each of these factors is responsible for the failure to

purchase insurance.

        The design of appropriate public policy toward the uninsured depends critically on

understanding the relative importance of these three factors. Suppose, for example, that the main

reason some households do not have health insurance is that their incomes are low and they place

basic needs like food and shelter ahead of health insurance. The debate about covering the

uninsured in this situation is fundamentally one about equity and redistribution; there is no

market failure. If government intervention is called for, the appropriate policy response is to

redistribute resources to the poor through either cash or in-kind transfers.

       Alternatively, suppose that most of the uninsured do not buy insurance because

information asymmetries in the insurance market mean that they face actuarially unfair prices.

Government intervention that corrects this market failure will increase social welfare. This

inefficiency can be addressed using the same regulatory tools that are applied to the market for

automobile insurance: mandates to purchase coverage combined with government-sponsored

pools to insure high-risk individuals. Proposals to mandate coverage also typically include




                                                 1
subsidies to low-income households, suggesting that policymakers believe some combination of

prices and incomes to be responsible for the lack of health insurance coverage.

       Another way in which price differences may help explain lack of insurance coverage is if

the uninsured face higher prices than the insured for other goods. For example, suppose that

some households face higher housing prices than do others. If housing is inelastically demanded

with respect to its own price, spending on housing will increase in response to higher housing

prices. This price increase will also reduce spending on health insurance if the compensated

cross-price elasticity is either negative or positive but smaller than the income effect associated

with the price increase: that is, the two goods may be gross complements. To put it even more

simply, the high cost of housing may squeeze health insurance out of the household’s budget. If

this is the reason why some households are uninsured, it is not obvious what policy response is

most appropriate. Clearly, regulation of health insurance markets misses the point. Income

redistribution or policies directed at the housing market would be more likely to affect the

number of uninsured in this case.

       If prices and income cannot explain why some households do not have insurance, the

only remaining explanation that economists have to offer is that preferences must differ. For

example, one explanation for the fact that some households buy health insurance and some do

not is differences in risk aversion. Households may also differ in their preferences for other

goods; some households may choose private schools for their children, annual family vacations,

or nicer homes over having health insurance. If differences in preferences are responsible for

variations in insurance coverage, it is not clear that any policy intervention is justified.1

Moreover, it can be difficult to distinguish differences in preferences from differences in prices.




                                                2
For example, is living in a city and facing high housing prices as a result a reflection of

preferences, or an exogenous difference in prices? Stigler and Becker (1977) have argued that it

is, in general, impossible to distinguish analytically between these two possibilities; any

hypothesized difference in preferences can be modeled as a difference in prices. Therefore we

should consider carefully any reasonable explanation that relies on income or prices to explain

variation in insurance coverage, relying on differences in preferences only as the explanation of

last resort.

        Our goal in this paper is to provide preliminary evidence on the relative importance of

income, prices, and preferences in explaining the fact that some households are uninsured. We

begin by showing that even within quite narrow income categories, the fraction of households

purchasing insurance is seldom close to either one or zero. We conclude that income cannot be

the whole story for why some households are uninsured.

        To shed light on whether prices or preferences can explain the remaining variation in

insurance coverage, we compare the consumption patterns of uninsured households to those of

insured households with similar total expenditures and other characteristics. The logic behind

this exercise is that we can infer from these patterns how prices facing the insured and uninsured

would have to differ if they were to explain the observed differences in spending between the

two groups and assess whether the hypothesized price differences seem plausible. Moreover,

while the prices individual households face are difficult to observe directly, we have very good

data on household spending patterns.

        Our comparison of spending patterns reveals that uninsured households, on average,

spend more than comparable insured households on transportation, furniture and appliances,

1
 An exception is when we believe there are significant externalities associated with the lack of insurance. In this
case, as above, some combination of mandates and subsidies would address the externality without imposing unfair


                                                         3
education, and alcohol and tobacco. Since most uninsured households are low income, more

interesting results emerge when we compare insured versus uninsured households in the bottom

quartile of the expenditure distribution.2 Uninsured households in this group devote significantly

more of their budgets than do the insured to housing, food at home, education, and alcohol and

tobacco. As we will explain in more detail later, these results are consistent with the idea that the

uninsured face higher prices for these goods, in particular housing. Moreoever, controlling for

homeownership – which is likely to be a proxy for housing prices – cuts the uninsured

differential in housing spending in half, lending further support to the idea that the uninsured

may face higher housing prices than the insured.

        Returning to the question we posed at the outset: do income, prices or preferences explain

the fact that some households do not have health insurance? Clearly, income matters: health

insurance is a normal good. But it is not the only thing that matters. Our analysis of spending

patterns suggests that the prices of other goods – most notably housing – may be additional

important factors causing some households not to purchase health insurance. In future work, we

plan to use data on housing prices to quantify more precisely the magnitude of this effect relative

to the effect of income or preferences, in order to help inform public policy. Our results in this

paper suggest that policies focusing only on the market for health insurance may be insufficient

to address the problem of the uninsured.




costs on low-income households.
2
  We use total expenditures, rather than income, to describe households’ economic status because expenditures are
likely to be a better measure of permanent income than is annual income (for further discussion of this issue, see
Rogers and Gray [1994]).


                                                         4
2. Background

       There is a considerable literature on the demographic correlates of health insurance. A

recent report by the Institute of Medicine (2001) reviews this literature and also presents new

analyses confirming what earlier studies have shown: the probability of being uninsured is higher

for individuals who are poor, less well-educated, nonwhite, and/or in families without a worker.

In addition to studies that take a demographic approach to analyzing the determinants of

coverage, a number of recent studies also suggest that private coverage responds at the margin to

economic incentives. For example, Cooper and Schone (1997) and Farber and Levy (2000) both

document that the decline in employer-sponsored coverage during the late 1980s and early 1990s

was due to declines in enrollment among eligible employees. Cutler and Gruber (1996) show

that the Medicaid expansions during the same period caused a decline in private coverage. Rask

and Rask (2000) and Herring (2001) both show that private coverage rates respond to the

availability of charity care in a community.   All of these studies suggest that – as we might

expect in a voluntary system – having coverage or not is the result of a sequence of rational

economic decisions.

       As we have already mentioned, in a simple economic model the amount of a good

purchased is determined by income, prices (of all goods), and preferences. Several papers

address either explicitly or implicitly the importance of income in determining whether or not a

household has insurance coverage.      In addition to the Institute of Medicine (IOM) report

discussed above, Thomas (1994/95) estimates the marginal increase in the probability of having

insurance as income rises; she concludes that the income threshold above which families are

likely to purchase health insurance is 125% of poverty. Her estimates show that about half of

families just below this threshold purchase insurance. Bundorf and Pauly (2000) also estimate




                                               5
the marginal impact of income on the probability of coverage, using more narrowly defined

income categories than does Thomas. Their results show the probability of coverage increasing

more or less continuously with family income. This is prima facie evidence that income is not

the sole determinant of coverage; if it were, we would expect a sharp discontinuity in the

probability of having health insurance at some threshold level of income. Yegian et al. (2000)

note that about 40 percent of the uninsured are above twice the poverty level and report results

from a survey of California’s nonpoor uninsured population. Interestingly, although 60 percent

of respondents agree with the statement “I worry a lot about not having health insurance for

others in my family,” only 41 percent agree that “health insurance ranks very high on my list of

priorities for where to spend my money.” Since these families are all above twice the poverty

level, the implication again is that being above poverty is insufficient to ensure the purchase of

health insurance.

       A number of other studies explore how prices affect health insurance coverage. Before

considering the results of these studies, it is worth noting a few important distinctions. The first

is between the price of health insurance and the price of other goods. Without exception,

existing studies of the relationship between prices and health insurance coverage focus on the

price of health insurance. The second distinction, which applies to discussions of the price of

health insurance, is between prices that are actuarially unfair and prices that are actuarially fair

but high relative to income. With one exception which we discuss below, existing studies of

prices and health insurance discuss prices in the second sense. That is, they consider whether the

overall increase in the level of health insurance prices helps explain the overall decline in

coverage, rather than whether information asymmetries in the insurance market cause some

consumers to drop out of the market. The third and final set of distinctions concerns how to




                                                 6
measure the overall ‘price’ of health insurance. Is the correct measure of price the expected

benefit or the administrative load on that benefit? Is it the employee’s share of the premium or

the total premium? This issue is discussed at length by Chernew, Cutler and Keenan (2002); we

do not discuss this issue here except to note that it is a point of debate in this area of the

literature.

        Several studies examine the relationship between the price of health insurance and

coverage. Most of these estimate the own-price elasticity of takeup of coverage offered by an

employer, rather than the relationship between health insurance prices and the overall rate of

insurance coverage. An exception is the study by Chernew, Cutler and Keenan (2002), who find

only a weak negative relationship between changes in the overall cost of health insurance and

rates of health insurance coverage at the MSA level. The estimates of takeup elasticities are

generally also quite low; Chernew, Frick and McLaughlin (1997) and Gruber and Washington

(2003) conclude that because of these low elasticities, premium subsidies to workers have only

limited potential to increase coverage rates. Cutler (2002) also finds a low elasticity of takeup but

points out that combined with large increases in employee premium contributions, this effect can

explain the entire decline in take-up of employer-sponsored insurance during the 1990s.

        Only the paper by Cardon and Hendel (2001) addresses the question of whether prices in

the market for health insurance are actuarially unfair and therefore potentially responsible for the

fact that some people do not buy insurance. Cardon and Hendel conclude that there is no

evidence of adverse selection. Evidence on the role of price of health insurance – in either sense

– in determining insurance coverage is therefore mixed.

        There are to our knowledge no studies that have looked at how the price of other goods

affects the probability of insurance coverage. As a review of why this is relevant, consider how




                                                 7
the demand for good Y2 is in theory affected by the price of another good Y1. The cross-price

version of the Slutsky equation summarizing this relationship, with income denoted by m, is:

                                       ∂Y2        ∂Y  ∂Y
                                           = −Y1 ⋅ 2 + 2
                                       ∂p1        ∂m ∂p1 U =U

This cross-price effect has two components. The first term – the income effect associated with

the change in the price of Y1 – reduces the consumption of Y2 as long as Y2 is a normal good (by

definition). The second term – the compensated substitution effect – may be either positive (the

goods are net substitutes) or negative (the goods are net complements).             Provided the

compensated substitution effect is negative or, if positive, is at least smaller in absolute value

than the income effect, demand for Y2 will decrease in response to an increase in the price of Y1.

That is, the goods may be gross substitutes even if they are not net substitutes. Put even more

simply, an increase in the price of one good may “squeeze out” some spending on another. We

are interested in exploring whether this phenomenon may help explain why some households do

not have insurance.

       To summarize, our reading of the existing literature suggests three things: first, that

income alone cannot explain the fact that some households have health insurance and some do

not. Second, that the evidence on the role of the price of health insurance in explaining lack of

health insurance coverage is mixed. Third, although there has been no work attempting to

determine how the prices of other goods affect health insurance coverage, simple economic

theory predicts that they should matter. One of our goals in looking at the consumption patterns

of insured and uninsured households is to try to understand whether higher prices of other goods

may help explain why some households do not have health insurance.




                                                8
3. Methods

       Our main analysis relies on a comparison of the spending patterns of uninsured

households with insured households that are comparable in terms of demographics and total

spending.     Specifically, we estimate multivariate regressions controlling for household

composition and demographics. For each of the sixteen expenditure categories, we estimate a

separate linear regression with the household’s spending in that category as the dependent

variable:

   Y j = Xβ j + γ ⋅ (uninsured ) + δ ⋅ (total spending ) + STATE + ( y1994 + ... + y1998 ) + ε j   (1)

       where j indexes the 16 expenditure categories, X is a vector of demographic controls,

uninsured is a dummy variable equal to one if the household has no health insurance, STATE is a

vector of state dummy variables, and y1994…y1998 is a set of year dummies. The demographic

controls we use are race (white, non-white) of the head, educational attainment of the head

(indicator variables for being a high school dropout, being a high school graduate, having some

college, or being a college graduate), age of the head, the number of male adults in the family,

the number of female adults in the family, the number of boys (ages 2 to 17) in the family, the

number of girls (ages 2 to 17) in the family, and the number of infants. The coefficient γ on the

uninsured dummy measures the average difference in spending on good j for an uninsured

compared to an insured household. To focus on households that must choose between paying for

private insurance and being uninsured, we drop households where anyone has public insurance

from the sample. We also drop households in which some members have private insurance and

some are uninsured. We describe exactly how the sample is drawn in section four.

       These regressions allow us to identify which goods take up more of an uninsured

household’s budget than an insured household’s. In order to see how this may help shed light on



                                                    9
whether prices or preferences explain why one household has health insurance and another with

the same total budget does not, we review the relationship between prices and spending.

Consider a consumer with income m who allocates this income to n goods X1,…,Xn and faces a

vector of prices p1,…pn. Expenditures on good j are given by X j p j . If the price of good 1

increases, the expenditure on good 1 may increase or decrease depending on the own-price

elasticity of demand for good 1:

                                     ∂ ( X1 p1 )
                                         ∂p1
                                                 = X1 + p1 ⋅
                                                             ∂dX1
                                                              ∂p1
                                                                           (           )
                                                                  = X1 ⋅ 1 + η x1 , p1 .


        So if X1 is inelastically demanded (that is, η x1 , p1 < 1 ), the amount spent on X1 increases

with the price of X1. Suppose we observe uninsured households spending more than insured

households on good X1 (holding total spending and other household characteristics constant). If

we are to conclude that this spending differential occurs because the insured and the uninsured

face different prices, it must be that X1 is inelastically demanded with respect to its own price and

the uninsured face higher prices than the insured.3



4. Data

    The data we analyze are from the 1994 through 1998 panels of the Consumer Expenditure

Survey (CEX). The CEX, which is collected by the Census Bureau under contract from the

Bureau of Labor Statistics, is a nationally representative survey of about 7,000 households per

year. It contains information on the demographic characteristics of each household member and



3
  Alternatively, this could happen if demand for X1 were elastic and the uninsured faced lower prices than the
insured. We do not focus on this possibility since the uninsured facing lower prices than the insured for other goods
ought to increase their health insurance spending (unless there are very strong patterns of net substitution between
health insurance and other goods).



                                                        10
detailed household-level information on income, expenditures and health insurance. In the CEX,

a “consumer unit” or family is the basic unit of observation. A consumer unit is smaller than a

“household” and is meant to include only those household members who depend upon one

another and who share expenditures. For details of the distinction between a consumer unit and

a household in the CEX, please see BLS (2002).4 In this paper, we use the terms family and

household interchangeably. Each household is interviewed up to four times at three-month

intervals. Three months of expenditure data are collected retrospectively at each quarterly

interview for a total of twelve months of expenditure data.



Preliminary sample restrictions

    We begin with 39,617 households interviewed in the 1994 through 1998 panels of the CEX.

For each household, we have between one and four observations on quarterly expenditures in

each of these categories. We average quarterly expenditures over however many observations are

available so that there is one observation per household for each expenditure category. Medical

care and housing expenditures in a given quarter may be negative (because of reimbursements or

refunds).    We drop from the sample 345 households that have negative average quarterly

expenditures in one or both of these categories, 471 households with missing income data and 47

households without adults, resulting in a sample of 38,754 households.




4
  According to the BLS, a consumer unit consists of any of the following: (1) All members of a particular household
who are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or other legal arrangements; (2) a person living alone or sharing a
household with others or living as a roomer in a private home or lodging house or in permanent living quarters in a
hotel or motel, but who is financially independent; or (3) two or more persons living together who use their incomes
to make joint expenditure decisions. Financial independence is determined by the three major expense categories:
Housing, food, and other living expenses. To be considered financially independent, at least two of the three major
expenditure categories have to be provided entirely or in part by the respondent. In regard to the CEX, the BLS uses
the terms consumer unit, family, and household interchangeably for convenience. However, the proper technical
term in the CEX is consumer unit (BLS 2002).



                                                        11
Defining the uninsured

   Each household in the CEX reports the total number of health insurance policies held by

anyone in the household in each quarter, and the number of household members covered by each

policy. It is not possible to identify which individuals in a household are covered (either as

dependents or as the policyholder) by a particular private policy. Each household also reports

which individuals were covered by Medicare and/or Medicaid. We categorize households as

uninsured, partially insured, fully insured, covered by Medicaid or covered by Medicare

according to the insurance status of all members of the household at the first quarter in which the

household is observed, as follows:

       •   Households that do not report holding any private insurance policies and have zero

           expenditure on health insurance are considered to be uninsured.

       •   Households that report holding a private insurance policy or policies that cover some

           but not all household members and report zero expenditure on health insurance are

           considered partially insured.

       •   Households that report holding one or more private insurance policies that cover at

           least as many people as there are in the household or who report any positive

           expenditures on health insurance are considered fully insured.

       •   Households with at least one member covered by Medicaid and no one covered by

           Medicare are considered covered by Medicaid (even if some or all members of the

           household also have private insurance).




                                                12
       •   Households with anyone covered by Medicare, or in which the reference person is

           age 65 or older, are considered covered by Medicare (even if some or all members of

           the household also have private insurance).

   Households may change insurance status across waves. We discard the 2,623 households that

do so, leaving us with a sample of 36,131 households; our results are very similar if instead we

categorize household on the basis of their insurance status at the first interview.



Expenditure categories

       The CEX gathers data on expenditures in hundreds of detailed categories. We aggregate

these detailed expenditures into 16 broad expenditure categories: (1) food to be consumed in the

home, (2) food to be consumed outside of the home (at restaurants etc.), (3) alcohol and tobacco,

(4) housing expenses (rent and renting-related expenses, mortgage and mortgage related

expenses, and home improvements), (5) non-mortgage interest, (6) furniture, appliances and

related expenses, (7) home maintenance, (8) clothing (adult clothing and shoes, children’s

clothing and shoes, and clothing services), (9) transportation (car purchases, car leases, other

private transportation expenses, fuel, car repairs, car insurance, public transportation expenses),

(10) utilities, (11) medical care, (12) health insurance, (13) entertainment expenses, (14) personal

care, (15) education, and (16) other. Note that each of these categories includes expenditures

made by the household members only – in particular, expenses made on behalf of households

members by insurance companies or employers are not reflected in these data. This means that

medical care and health insurance reflect out-of-pocket payments only.

       The CEX measures expenditures and not consumption. Expenditures may be a noisy

measure of consumption – for example, where a family occupies public housing. In addition,




                                                 13
there is topcoding for some expenditure items.                  In order to minimize measurement error

associated with these factors, we trim the top and bottom 5 percent of spenders in our sample.

This does not appreciably change the substance of our results and leaves a sample of 32,519

households. Of these, about one-third are either partially insured or publicly insured: 2 percent

partially insured, 7 percent Medicaid, 25 percent Medicare. We drop these households from the

analysis.5 Our analysis focuses on the remaining 4,682 uninsured households and 16,842 fully

privately insured households, to whom we refer from now on as “the uninsured” and “the

insured,” respectively.



Measurement error in health insurance and medical care spending

    Since the CEX collects data on out-of-pocket spending only, both health insurance and

medical care spending are certain to be mismeasured for the insured because of employer-paid

health insurance premiums and direct payments from insurers to medical providers. This has

two implications for our analysis.            First, the observed spending differentials in these two

categories between the insured and the uninsured will understate the true difference in spending.

As long as we are primarily interested in other categories of spending (e.g., food and housing),

this just means that we should keep in mind that the estimated differentials for health insurance

and medical care are likely to be understated. Second, and more seriously, our measure of total

spending will be systematically underestimated for the insured but not for the uninsured. This

has the potential to bias our estimates of the insured/uninsured differential on other categories of

spending, like food and housing. This is because we are effectively comparing a richer insured



5
 The regression results do not change much if the partially insured are included with the fully insured. They are
also robust to categorizing households on the basis of reported policies only (i.e. households with a policy that
covers only some household members and positive health insurance spending are counted as partially insured).


                                                        14
household with a poorer uninsured household, even though both have the same observed total

spending.

    To bound the magnitude of this bias, we calculate an alternative set of estimates as follows.

Since workers directly pay, on average, only about 20 percent of health insurance premiums with

firms paying the remainder on their behalf (Krueger and Levy 1996), we assume that total health

insurance spending would actually be five times what we observe for each household in the

CEX. We re-estimate all the regressions using this alternative measure of health insurance

spending and the higher level of total spending it implies. This adjustment does not substantially

affect any of the results of the analysis presented below, so we conclude that the understatement

of health insurance and total spending for the insured is unlikely to be a significant source of

bias.



5. Results

        We begin our empirical analysis by stratifying the sample by total spending and

calculating the fraction with private health insurance at each spending level. These results are

presented in table 1.6 Consistent with the results of earlier work discussed above, we find that

the fraction with health insurance increases fairly smoothly with income. Moreover, even at the

ends of the distribution, the fraction with insurance is not close to zero or one. Among the

poorest two percent of households in our sample, 30 percent have private health insurance, and

seven percent of households in the top fifth of the expenditure distribution are uninsured. The

point here is that there does not appear to be a level of income that functions as a cutoff above



6
 All of the statistics and analyses we present have been weighted using the sampling weights provided with the
CEX so as to be nationally representative.



                                                       15
which everyone has private insurance and below which no one does, so income alone cannot

explain why some households are uninsured.

       Table 2 presents statistics on demographic and household composition by insurance

status. Comparing mean values of the household demographic characteristics for the different

groups reveals that uninsured households have lower total expenditures than fully insured

households: uninsured households have mean quarterly expenditures of only $5,077, compared

with $8,050 for fully insured households. Household heads in uninsured households have lower

educational attainment than the heads of insured households; 22 percent of uninsured household

heads are high school dropouts, compared with only 8 percent in fully insured households. They

are also more likely to be nonwhite (19.8 percent for uninsured versus 13.0 percent for fully

insured).

       Differences in employment and homeownership are more pronounced.             Uninsured

households are more than twice as likely as fully insured households to have no earner (8.4

percent versus 3.0 percent). Note, however, that this still means that the vast majority of the

uninsured are in households with at least one worker. Conditional on having an earner, heads in

uninsured households are less likely to work in the public sector (8.8 percent versus 13.7

percent) and more likely to be self-employed (8.6 percent versus 4.2 percent) than are heads in

fully insured households. The most striking difference, however, may be that the uninsured are

nearly twice as likely to be renters: 61.8 percent of the uninsured rent their homes, compared

with only 33.4 percent of the fully insured. To the extent that these household characteristics

drive spending patterns, it will be important to control for them in our analysis in order to

understand the differences between the spending of the insured and the uninsured.




                                              16
        Table 3 shows mean budget shares and mean real expenditures (in 1998 dollars) for all

households by insurance status. The three largest expenditure categories for both insured and

uninsured households are housing, food at home, and transportation. Insured households spend

just over three percent of their budgets, or $236 per quarter, on health insurance (recall that this

amount does not reflect payments made directly by an employer to an insurance company on the

household’s behalf).

        Comparing budget shares across insurance status reveals that the uninsured spend a larger

share of their budgets on food at home (16.9 percent) than the fully insured (12.8 percent). The

uninsured also spend a larger share on housing: 26.6 percent versus 25.4 percent for the fully

insured. The uninsured spend a substantially smaller share of their budgets on transportation

(15.7 percent versus 17.2 percent for the fully insured). Out-of-pocket medical care expenses

account for a slightly larger share of budgets for the insured (3.8 percent versus 1.9 percent for

the uninsured).7

        As we have already noted, insured and uninsured households do not differ only in their

health insurance status. As a first cut at comparing uninsured households with similar insured

households, we calculate mean expenditure shares separately for insured and uninsured

households in the lowest quartile (“low spenders”), the middle 50 percent (“middle spenders”),

and the top quartile of total expenditures (“high spenders”). The results are presented in table 4.

Among low spenders, the uninsured spend a larger fraction of their budgets on housing than do

the insured (28.2 percent compared with 26.1 percent), on food at home (19.5 percent compared

with 16.5 percent), and on education (3.5 percent compared with 2.4 percent). Low-spending

uninsured households also spend a larger share of their budgets on alcohol and tobacco (4.4


7
 Paulin and Weber (1995) report similar differences in spending patterns between insured and uninsured and
uninsured households in the 1993 Consumer Expenditure Survey.


                                                       17
percent compared to 3.3 percent) than do insured households. On average, the low-spending

uninsured spend $126 per quarter on alcohol and tobacco, which is more than the $119 that their

insured counterparts spend out-of-pocket on health insurance.         This is not to suggest that

uninsured households could actually purchase health insurance with the amount they currently

spend on alcohol and tobacco – as we have already noted, most health insurance premiums are

paid by employers, so that the actual price of health insurance per quarter is more likely to be

about $595 per quarter for these households.

       At the same time, low-spending uninsured households spend a smaller share of their

budgets on categories other than health insurance.           The low-spending uninsured spend

significantly less on interest, home maintenance, transportation, utilities, health care and personal

care than do insured households with similar total expenditures.

       The differences between spending patterns of the insured versus the uninsured are much

smaller for high spenders. In particular, the only categories on which uninsured high-spenders

spend a significantly larger share of their budgets than do insured high-spenders are alcohol and

tobacco (0.017 versus 0.014), transportation (0.320 versus 0.239), furniture and appliances

(0.063 versus 0.054) and education (0.035 versus 0.030). This is a striking contrast to the result

reported above for low-spending households; the differences between insured and uninsured

households’ consumption patterns are very different for poorer versus well-off households.



Regression Results

       Of course, the insured and the uninsured differ in many ways other than total spending;

for example, as shown in table 2, the uninsured have lower educational attainment and are more

likely to be non-white. In order to control for total spending as well as these observable




                                                 18
differences, we run multivariate regressions to estimate adjusted differences in spending using

the methods described above. Table 5 presents the coefficients on the “uninsured” dummy

variable from separate regressions (for each of the sixteen expenditure categories) corresponding

to equation (1) for all households.8              The coefficient on this “uninsured” dummy variable

measures the average difference in spending between insured and uninsured households for that

expenditure category.

         It is not obvious whether controls for employment, urban location and homeownership

ought to be included in these regressions, since all three of these characteristics could be

considered household consumption choices. One person might choose to own a home in Ithaca,

NY, for example, while another person with the same total budget might choose to rent an

apartment in Manhattan.9 Since it is not clear whether including these controls is appropriate, we

present results corresponding to three different specifications. The first specification includes

only basic controls—age, sex, race and education of the household head, and the number of adult

males, adult females, girls, boys and infants in the household and year and state dummies. The

second specification adds to these basic controls dummy variables reflecting whether a

household has zero, one, or two or more earners; the sector of employment of the primary earner

(private, public, self-employed, or unknown/no primary earner); and a set of dummies reflecting

whether the household lives in a Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) and whether the household

lives in an urban area. The third specification includes, in addition to the basic, employment, and

urbanicity controls, controls for homeownership.                   The homeownership controls consist of

dummies for whether the household owns a home without a mortgage, owns a home with a

8
 The complete set of results (that is, the coefficients on the independent variables in addition to the “uninsured”
dummy) corresponding to the basic regression in column one of table 5 is reported in Table A1 of the appendix.




                                                          19
mortgage, rents, occupies a home rent-free, or lives in dormitory. Columns (1), (2), and (3) of

table five report the linear regression results for the specifications including basic, employment

and urbanicity, and homeownership controls respectively.

         Since the results in table 4 suggested that the difference between insured and uninsured

households may look different depending on how well-off the households are, we also stratify

the sample by total spending and estimate complete sets of regressions on each subsample.

Tables 6, 7 and 8 present results of these regressions for households in the lowest quartile (“low

spenders”), middle fifty percent (“middle spenders”), and top quartile (“high spenders”) of the

total spending distribution respectively.

         Since more than half of the uninsured households in our sample (2,403 out of 4,682) are

low spenders, we begin by focusing on our results for this group, presented in table six. These

results confirm that for the low-spending households, the mean differences between uninsured

and insured households that were reported in table four persist when we control for a basic set of

household characteristics. In particular, according to the linear regression results, the uninsured

spend significantly more than do insured households on housing ($88), on food at home ($40),

on education ($35) and on alcohol and tobacco ($20). These results confirm that low-spending

uninsured households spend more on basic needs, plus alcohol and tobacco. The uninsured also

spend significantly less than the insured on several items besides health insurance: interest ($24

less), utilities ($22 less), home maintenance ($10 less), and personal care ($4 less). Figure two

summarizes these differentials graphically.

         What do these spending differentials suggest about whether the low-spending uninsured

may face higher prices than the insured for goods other than health insurance? Consider the

9
 One might argue that education and family composition are consumption choices as well. In practice, controlling
for these variables (the basic regression specification) yields the same qualitative result as the simple differences in


                                                           20
largest differential, the $88 more per quarter the uninsured spend on housing. Since housing is

inelastically demanded with respect to its own price (Hanushek and Quigley [1980]), the higher

housing expenditures of the uninsured are consistent with their facing higher prices for housing.

Alternative explanations for this differential include that the uninsured consume more or better

housing. We present evidence below that the uninsured do not consume more housing. Further

support for the idea that the uninsured may, in fact, face higher housing prices comes when we

add controls for housing tenure to the regression. The addition of employment and urbanicity

controls does not change the regression-adjusted estimates of the differences in spending

between insured and uninsured households; adding the homeownership controls, in contrast,

eliminates more than half of the difference in housing and home maintenance expenditures and

all of the difference in expenditures on utilities between insured and uninsured households. Thus,

the results for the low-spending uninsured (representing more than half the total uninsured in our

sample) raise the interesting possibility that high housing prices may partially explain the fact

that these households do not have health insurance.

        The differential between insured and uninsured middle-spending households look

somewhat different from those just discussed for the low-spending households. Among middle

spenders, uninsured households spend significantly more than insured households on

transportation ($172), education ($101), food at home ($31), and alcohol and tobacco ($25).

Adding controls for employment, urbanicity and housing tenure reduces some of these

differentials a bit (in particular, the education differential drops to $68 and the alcohol/tobacco

differentials drops to $14), but all remain significant. What is most interesting about these results

is that in contrast to the low-spending uninsured, who spent more than their insured counterparts

on a good that is demanded inelastically, the middle-spending uninsured spend more on goods


mean budget shares in Table 5.

                                                 21
that are likely to be demanded elastically: education and transportation. This means that higher

prices of goods other than health insurance are not a plausible explanation for lack of insurance

coverage in this group.

       The regression results for high spenders illustrate this point even more clearly. The only

two categories on which high-spending uninsured spend more than their comparable insured

households are transportation ($673) and furniture/appliances ($102). As long as these goods are

demanded elastically with respect to price, higher spending suggests that if the uninsured face

different prices from the insured these prices must be lower and therefore cannot explain why the

uninsured do not have health insurance. In common sense terms, it simply does not sound

plausible to suggest that the well-off uninsured do not buy health insurance because of the high

cost of transportation and furniture.

       Thus, analysis of spending patterns of the well-off uninsured does not offer plausible

candidates for goods other than health insurance that might help explain why these households

do not buy health insurance. Two possibilities remain. One is that the well-off uninsured face

higher prices of health insurance than the well-off insured. We have no way to test this

possibility with these data. Alternatively, we might conclude that the well-off uninsured simply

have different preferences than the well-off insured. If this latter explanation is correct, as we

have already noted, it is not obvious what role there is for policy intervention.



Detailed Analyses of the Housing Expenses of Low-Spending households

       The CEX data allow us to analyze the differences in housing spending for low-spending

insured and uninsured households in more detail. We have already demonstrated that the

inclusion of controls for housing tenure “explains” about half of the spending differential in the




                                                 22
sense that it drops from $88 to $38 in magnitude. We can also use more disaggregated data to see

exactly which components of housing expenditure are higher for the uninsured and to see

whether the uninsured consume more housing than the insured. Table 9 presents descriptive

statistics on components of housing expenditure and housing characteristics for low-spending

insured and uninsured households. The first two row of table 9 shows that uninsured households

spend a larger share of their budgets and a larger real dollar expenditure on housing than do

insured households—this is the same information reported in table 4. An examination of the

components of housing expenditure shows that this difference in total expenditure is being

driven primarily by differences in rent, which is the largest single component of housing

expenditure. Table 9 also shows that on average, the uninsured do not consume a larger quantity

of housing when quantity is defined as number of rooms: the uninsured living in housing units

with 4.3 rooms on average compared with 4.7 for the insured.

       To control for differences in homeownership status (though not other observable

differences between the insured and the uninsured), table 10 presents the same statistics on

detailed housing expenditures by insurance status separately for homeowners without a

mortgage, homeowners with a mortgage, and renters. Among homeowners with no mortgage,

there are no differences between the housing expenditures of insured and uninsured. Similarly,

among renters, uninsured households do not have higher expenditures. In fact, uninsured renters

spend $104 less per quarter than do insured renters. There are differences in expenditure

between insured and uninsured households among homeowners with a mortgage. Thus, the

overall differences in housing expenditure between insured and uninsured households are

primarily due to differences in homeownership status, plus slightly higher expenditure among

uninsured homeowners with mortgages.




                                              23
       Table 11 reports the coefficient on the “uninsured” dummy variable from a set of linear

regressions with the components of housing expenditure as the dependent variables. As in tables

5 through 8, the three columns correspond to specifications with basic controls (first column),

plus controls for employment and urbanicity (second column) and plus controls for

homeownership (third column). As we expect given the findings reported in table 10, the

addition of homeownership controls eliminates almost all of the differences between insured and

uninsured households not only for total housing expenditure but also for each of the components

of housing expenditure.



Detailed Analysis of the Transportation Expenses of High-Spending Households

       The fact that high-spending uninsured households spend a larger share of their budgets on

transportation than do high-spending insured households raises two questions: first, what

particular transportation expense is driving these differences? Second, is this result driven by the

fact that some households are incorrectly classified as “high spenders” by a one-time purchase of

a durable good like a car? To address the first question, table 12 reports the breakdown of

average transportation expenditures for insured and uninsured households into detailed

components. It appears that the differences between the insured and uninsured are primarily in

spending on used cars. Table 12 also shows that the uninsured do not have a larger stock of

vehicles than the insured; the uninsured have on average 2.2 vehicles compared with 2.7 for the

insured. Table 13 reports regression-adjusted estimates of these differentials that support the

same conclusion: the difference between transportation spending of insured and uninsured

households is due to used cars. The inclusion of additional controls for employment, urbanicity

and housing tenure has almost no effect on the estimated difference.




                                                24
       Table 13 also presents regression results that use household income rather than total

expenditures as a control in the regressions to address the possibility that houses are being

misclassified as high spenders by a transitory spike in spending due to the purchase of a car. The

last three columns of table 13 contain these results. It appears that the use of expenditures rather

than income does explain some (not quite half) of the difference in spending between the insured

and uninsured. Using income as a control, the regression-adjusted estimate of the differential is

between $289 (including all controls) and $430 (basic controls only), compared with $457 (all

controls) to $673 (basic controls) when including total expenditures instead of income. The

differentials remain significant, however.



6.     Discussion

       We have documented that there are differences in the spending patterns of insured and

uninsured households, and also that the spending differentials are quite different for low-

spending versus high spending households. For low-spending households, expenditures of the

uninsured relative to the uninsured are tilted primarily toward housing and food; for high

spenders, the differential is transportation and furniture/appliances. At what level of spending

does this crossover occur?     To answer this question, we aggregate expenditures into two

categories: basic needs and non-basic needs. We consider food at home, housing, and utilities to

be basic needs; all other expenditures are non-basic. The first row of table 14 reports the fraction

of our sample that is insured, and share of total spending allocated to basic needs for both the

insured and uninsured. The uninsured spend, on average, 54 percent of their budget on basic

needs compared with 48 percent for the insured. Of course, the main reason for this is that

uninsured households are poorer than insured households, on average, and basic needs are




                                                25
necessities. This can be seen in the first two columns of Table 14 which report the cumulative

fractions of the entire sample and the uninsured sample by expenditure level: the median

household has quarterly total expenditures between $6,500 and $7,000 while the median

uninsured household has quarterly total expenditures between $4,000 and $4,500.

       The fourth and fifth columns of Table 14 report the share of households’ budgets that are

spent on basic needs at a variety of total expenditure levels. For example, uninsured households

with quarterly total expenditures of less than $2,000 spend 60.4 percent of their budgets on basic

needs compared with 50.4 percent for comparable insured households.               At what level of

quarterly total expenditure do uninsured households begin to spend less on basic needs than

comparable insured households?        At a quarterly total expenditure of about $6,500, both

uninsured and insured households spend about 50 percent of their budgets on basic needs. At all

levels of total expenditure below $6,500 per quarter, uninsured households spend more on basic

needs than do insured households.        Moreover, 76.8 percent of uninsured households have

quarterly total expenditure levels of $6,500 or less. Therefore, one could consider about three-

quarters of the uninsured as falling below a spending level where insurance is in a very loose

sense being “replaced” by spending on basic needs.

       A regression-based approach to the same question is the following. We estimate the

share of spending devoted to basic needs as a function of total expenditures, a dummy for

uninsurance and total expenditures interacted with a dummy for uninsurance, controlling for

demographics and household composition. This regression captures the relationship between

spending on basic needs and total expenditures for insured and uninsured households; figure 5

depicts this relationship graphically. The idea is that at low levels of total expenditure, uninsured

households spend more on basic needs than do insured households, while at higher levels of total




                                                 26
expenditure, uninsured households do not spend more on basic needs than do insured

households. We want to know at what implied level of total spending an uninsured household

spends less on basic needs than do insured households. In figure 5, this level of total expenditure

is given by Y*, where the two lines intersect.

       The results of this regression are presented in table 15. The coefficient on the uninsured

dummy is 0.08365; the coefficient on total expenditures is –0.000019 and the coefficient on the

interaction of uninsured with total expenditures is –0.000011. This means that at low levels of

expenditure, the uninsured spend a higher fraction of their budgets on basic needs, but that this

differential gets smaller as total expenditure increases. At a total expenditure of $7,594 per

quarter, the uninsured begin spending a smaller share of their budgets on basic needs than do the

insured at the same level of total expenditure. That is, the value of Y* in figure 5 implied by this

regression is $7,594. Eighty-four percent of uninsured households fall below this threshold. Of

course, 53 percent of households with insurance also fall below this threshold.

       Our definition of “basic needs” is arbitrary. An alternative way to do this is to use the

economic definition of necessities versus luxuries. We estimate total expenditure elasticities for

each category of consumption and determine that the following expenditures are empirically

necessities (i.e. they have total expenditure elasticity of less than or equal to one; results are in

appendix Table A2): food at home, utilities, health insurance, alcohol and tobacco, personal care,

housing, interest, food away from home, and clothing.          Using this definition to aggregate

expenditures into necessities (except for health insurance) and luxuries, we find very similar

results to those using the “basic needs” dependent variable. These results also are reported in

table 15. We estimate that at total expenditures of $7,032, uninsured households begin spending




                                                 27
less on necessities than do insured households. Eighty percent of uninsured households and 47

percent of insured households fall below this threshold.



7. Conclusion

       Our main results and their implications for future research on the uninsured can be

summarized as follows. First, we find that income cannot be the whole story for why some

households do not have health insurance: the probability of coverage increases more or less

continuously with income. This result has appeared in the literature but it is worth emphasizing

that this means low income cannot be the only explanation for lack of coverage. Second, we find

that low-income uninsured households – comprising most of the uninsured – spend more than

comparable insured households on some necessities and, in particular, on housing. This raises the

intriguing possibility, which we plan to explore in future work, that high housing prices may help

explain why some households do not have health insurance. Third, high-income uninsured

households have higher spending only on transportation and furniture/appliances. This suggests

it is highly unlikely that price differentials for goods other than health insurance (such as

housing, food, utilities, or transportation) explain why they are uninsured.       Instead, either

preferences or high prices of health insurance must explain the lack of insurance coverage for a

small but nontrivial fraction of well-off households.

       What are the implications for policy? Firm recommendations for policy await more

conclusive results on the role of health insurance prices versus housing prices in explaining lack

of insurance coverage among the low-spending insured. But we believe that our preliminary

results should add two new dimensions to policy discussions about the uninsured. First,

heterogeneity within the population without health insurance highlights the dangers of treating




                                                28
“the uninsured” as a single group. Our results for low-spending uninsured households are quite

different from those for high-spending uninsured households.         High-spending uninsured

households are a minority of the uninsured (about ten percent) but represent a nontrivial number

of households: about four million. It may make more sense in thinking about public policy to

focus on the needs of the poor uninsured than simply the uninsured. Second, when we think

about why households are uninsured, the discussion should be extended beyond income and the

price of health insurance to include a role for the prices of other goods. Our results strongly

suggest a role for housing prices in explaining why some uninsured households lack coverage.

Modeling health insurance coverage as economic choice that requires weighing all possible uses

for income will help us better understand the choices households do – or don’t – make




                                              29
8. References

Bureau of Labor Statistics, U.S. Department of Census. 2002. Consumer Expenditure Survey:
Frequently Asked Questions. http://www.bls.gov/cex/csxfaqs.htm#q3, last modified Feb 22.

Cardon, James and Igal Hendel. 2001. “Asymmetric Information in Health Markets: Evidence
from the National Medical Expenditure Survey,” RAND Journal of Economics 32(2): 408-427.

Chernew, Michael, David Cutler and Patricia Seliger Keenan 2002. “Rising Health Care Costs
and the Decline in Insurance Coverage.” Manuscript.

Chernew, M.E., Frick, K. and C.G. McLaughlin. 1997. “The Demand for Health Insurance by
Low Income Workers: Can Reduced Premiums Achieve Full Coverage?” Health Services
Research: 32(4):453-470.

Chollet, Deborah. 2000. “Consumers, Insurers, and Market Behavior,” Journal of Health Politics,
Policy and Law (30).

Coate, Stephen. 1995. “Altruism, the Samaritan’s Dilemma, and Government Transfer Policy,”
American Economic Review 85(1): 46-57.

Cooper, Philip F., and Barbara Schone. 1997. “More Offers, Fewer Takers for Employment-
Based Health Insurance: 1987 and 1996.” Health Affairs (November/ December): 142-149.

Cutler, David and Jonathan Gruber. 1996. “Does Public Insurance Crowd Out Private
Insurance?” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111(2): 391-430.

Cutler, David. 2002. “Employee Costs and the Decline in Helath Insurance Coverage.” National
Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper 9036.

Farber, Henry S. and Helen Levy. 2000. “Recent Trends in Employer-Sponsored Health
Insurance Coverage: Are Bad Jobs Getting Worse?” Journal of Health Economics 19(1):93-119.

Gruber, Jonathan and Alan Krueger. 1991. “The Incidence of Mandated Employer-Provided
Insurance,” in Tax Policy and the Economy, vol. 5, National Bureau of Economic Research, 111-
143.

Gruber, Jonathan and Ebonya Washington. 2003. “Subsidies to Employee Health Insurance
Premiums and the Health Insurance Market,” National Bureau of Economic Research Working
Paper 9567.

Hanushek, Eric A. and John M. Quigley.“What is the Price Elasticity of Housing Demand?”
The Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 62, No. 3. (Aug., 1980), pp. 449-454.

Herring, Bradley. 2001. "Does Access to Charity Care for the Uninsured Crowd Out Private
Health Insurance Coverage?" Working Paper, Yale University.



                                              30
Krueger, Alan B. and Helen Levy. 1996. “Accounting for the Slowdown in Employer Health
Care Costs,” Proceedings of the National Tax Association, Eighty-Ninth Annual Conference
(1996), pp. 61-75.

Mills, Robert. J. 2000. “Health Insurance Coverage: 2001,” Current Population Reports P60-220,
US Census Bureau.

Pauly, Mark V. and M. Kate Bundorf. 2000. Is Health Insurance Affordable for the Uninsured?
Manuscript.

Rogers, John M. and Maureen B. Gray. 1994. “CE data: quintiles of income versus quintiles of
outlays,” Monthly Labor Review (117):12.

Shore-Sheppard, Lara, Thomas Buchmueller, and Gail Jensen. 2000. “Medicaid and Crowding
Out of Private Insurance: A Re-examination Using Firm-Level Data.” Journal of Health
Economics (19)1: 61-91.

Stigler, George J. and Gary S. Becker 1977. "De Gustibus Non Est Disputandum," American
Economic Review, Vol. 67 (2) pp. 76-90.

Thomas, Kathleen. 1994/95. “Are Subsidies Enough to Encourage the Uninsured to Purchase
Health Insurance? An Analysis of Underlying Behavior.” Inquiry 31: 415-424.

Yegian, Jill M., David G. Pockell, Mark D. Smith, and Eleanor K. Murray. 2000. “The Nonpoor
Uninsured in California, 1998.” Health Affairs 19(4): 171 – 177.




                                             31
                        Table 1
Fraction of households with insurance, by total spending



                    Sample fraction       Fraction
                       in cell:           insured:

            Total        1.000             0.779

          $2,000         0.020             0.303
          $2,500         0.039             0.437
          $3,000         0.046             0.485
          $3,500         0.057             0.568
          $4,000         0.058             0.645
          $4,500         0.059             0.675
          $5,000         0.055             0.737
          $5,500         0.056             0.795
          $6,000         0.055             0.793
          $6,500         0.049             0.820
          $7,000         0.048             0.847
          $7,500         0.046             0.840
          $8,000         0.041             0.887
          $8,500         0.038             0.877
          $9,000         0.034             0.909
          $9,500         0.033             0.888
         $10,000         0.029             0.915
         $10,500         0.024             0.898
        $10,500+         0.213             0.926

        Total sample size is 21,524 households.




                          32
                        Table 2
       Household characteristics by insurance status


                                   Insured     Uninsured
Basic control variables
Age of Reference Person              40.4          34.9
Family size                            2.6           2.3
Number of Adult Males               0.944         0.884
Number of Adult Females             0.969         0.807
Number of Boys                      0.303         0.256
Number of Girls                     0.298         0.265
Number of Babies                    0.073         0.068
Non-white                            0.13         0.198
H.S. Dropout                        0.082         0.215
H.S. Graduate                        0.29         0.313
Some College                        0.301         0.329
College Graduate                    0.206         0.101
Graduate degree                      0.12         0.043
Female Reference Person             0.343         0.387
Total real expenditures            $8,050        $5,077

Employment and urbanicity variables
No earner                           0.030          0.084
One earner                          0.416          0.602
Two earners or more                 0.554          0.314
Primary earner is private sector    0.814          0.801
Primary earner is public sector     0.137          0.088
Primary earner is self-employed     0.042          0.086
DK sector of primary earner         0.007          0.024
Non-MSA, rural                      0.058          0.056
Non-MSA, urban                      0.031          0.039
Non-MSA, DK urbanicity              0.118          0.160
MSA, urban                          0.331          0.343
MSA, DK urbanicity                  0.463          0.401

Housing variables
Own home, no mortgage               0.486          0.185
Own home, with mortgage             0.153          0.108
Rent                                0.334          0.618
Occupy home rent-free               0.016          0.047
Live in dormitory                    0.01          0.041

Sample n                           16,842          4,682




                            33
                                            Table 3
                                 Expenditures by insurance status


                                                                                       p-value on
                                                                        Difference      t-test that
                             Insured                   Uninsured         in means:   means differ:
Share spent on:          Mean          SD           Mean          SD
  Housing                0.254       0.135          0.266       0.155     -0.012        <0.0001
  Food In                0.128       0.069          0.169       0.106     -0.041        <0.0001
  Food Out               0.050       0.044          0.052       0.061     -0.003         0.0172
  Transportation         0.172       0.143          0.157       0.153      0.015        <0.0001
  Utilities              0.095       0.051          0.104       0.074     -0.009        <0.0001
  Furniture/Appliances   0.047       0.061          0.043       0.070      0.004        <0.0001
  Clothing               0.040       0.036          0.038       0.047      0.002         0.0229
  Entertainment          0.038       0.041          0.031       0.046      0.008        <0.0001
  Health Insurance       0.032       0.039          0.000       0.000      0.032        <0.0001
  Health Care            0.024       0.038          0.019       0.048      0.005        <0.0001
  Education              0.024       0.065          0.036       0.105     -0.012        <0.0001
  Alcohol and Tobacco    0.023       0.033          0.037       0.053     -0.014        <0.0001
  Home Maintenance       0.021       0.044          0.011       0.036      0.010        <0.0001
  Interest               0.016       0.026          0.010       0.025      0.005        <0.0001
  Personal Care          0.011       0.011          0.010       0.015      0.001         0.0085
  Other                  0.026       0.049          0.016       0.046      0.009        <0.0001

Real Expenditures on:
  Total                  8,052        3,930         5,077       3,083      2,976        <0.0001
  Housing                2,009        1,498         1,274       1,024        736        <0.0001
  Food In                  931          533           755         511        176        <0.0001
  Food Out                 388          388           251         311        137        <0.0001
  Transportation         1,574        1,991           985       1,661        589        <0.0001
  Utilities                684          341           480         351        204        <0.0001
  Furniture/Appliances     406          590           244         509        162        <0.0001
  Clothing                 322          324           194         271        128        <0.0001
  Entertainment            326          440           165         318        161        <0.0001
  Health Insurance         236          283             0           0        236        <0.0001
  Health Care              199          349           113         385         86        <0.0001
  Education                205          596           185         637         21         0.0145
  Alcohol and Tobacco      157          212           156         222          1         0.8771
  Home Maintenance         188          429            72         263        116        <0.0001
  Interest                 119          193            57         138         63        <0.0001
  Personal Care             79           78            47          71         32        <0.0001
  Other                    227          507            99         347        128        <0.0001

Sample n:                  16,842                 4,682




                                               34
                                                  Table 4
                             Expenditures by insurance status and total spending

                             Low spenders                    Middle spenders            High spenders
                         Insured     Uninsured            Insured      Uninsured    Insured      Uninsured
Share spent on:
  Housing                 0.261         0.282              0.257         0.258       0.242         0.198
  Food In                 0.165         0.195              0.134         0.151       0.095         0.092
  Food Out                0.055         0.056              0.050         0.049       0.046         0.042
  Transportation          0.127         0.118              0.151         0.175       0.240         0.321
  Utilities               0.124         0.113              0.100         0.100       0.068         0.062
  Furn. and Appliances    0.033         0.035              0.049         0.049       0.054         0.063
  Clothing                0.037         0.038              0.042         0.038       0.039         0.038
  Entertainment           0.030         0.028              0.038         0.032       0.044         0.038
  Health Insurance        0.036         0.000              0.035         0.000       0.024         0.000
  Health Care             0.020         0.015              0.025         0.024       0.025         0.026
  Education               0.024         0.035              0.020         0.037       0.030         0.035
  Alcohol and Tobacco     0.033         0.044              0.024         0.030       0.014         0.017
  Home Maintenance        0.012         0.007              0.021         0.015       0.027         0.025
  Interest                0.017         0.008              0.017         0.013       0.013         0.011
  Personal Care           0.012         0.011              0.011         0.009       0.009         0.007
  Other                   0.017         0.012              0.026         0.020       0.031         0.024

Real Expenditures on:
  Total                  $3,302        $2,984             $6,896        $6,264     $13,208      $12,841
  Housing                   867           844              1,771         1,594       3,176        2,521
  Food In                   537           573                906           916       1,227        1,161
  Food Out                  178           168                343           303         602          529
  Transportation            423           359              1,063         1,134       3,251        4,245
  Utilities                 407           337                672           612         883          779
  Furn. and Appliances      109           107                343           312         713          800
  Clothing                  123           114                290           242         507          477
  Entertainment              99            83                269           208         576          485
  Health Insurance          119             0                238             0         307            0
  Health Care                68            47                177           153         323          343
  Education                  73           108                143           238         405          425
  Alcohol and Tobacco       107           126                158           184         188          221
  Home Maintenance           40            21                149            92         354          310
  Interest                   56            26                115            82         168          137
  Personal Care              40            32                 75            58         112           93
  Other                      56            38                184           135         414          316

Sample size               2,978         2,403              8,894         1,868       4,970           411
Row percent               0.138         0.112              0.413         0.087       0.231         0.019




                                                     35
                                         Table 5
            Differences in spending: uninsured versus insured, all households

                                                       Work/urban
Dependent variable =                 Basic controls     controls        All controls
Quarterly spending on:                     (1)              (2)              (3)
Housing                                  -$38             -$43                3
                                          (19)            (20)              (19)

Food In                                    16               10               9
                                           (7)              (8)             (8)

Food Out                                    -6             -11              -17
                                           (6)             (6)              (6)

Transportation                            231              249              197
                                          (26)             (27)             (27)

Utilities                                  -49             -48              -25
                                           (5)             (5)              (5)

Furniture/ Appliances                      20               23               27
                                           (9)             (10)             (10)

Clothing                                   -16             -16              -19
                                           (5)             (5)              (5)

Entertainment                               -8               -6              -4
                                           (7)              (7)             (7)

Health Insurance                          -190             -199             -200
                                           (4)              (5)              (5)

Health Care                                 6                5               3
                                           (6)              (6)             (6)

Education                                  67               60               46
                                          (10)             (11)             (11)

Alcohol and Tobacco                        13               11               6
                                           (4)              (4)             (4)

Home Maintenance                            -7               -5              5
                                           (7)              (7)             (7)

Interest                                   -38             -34              -32
                                           (3)             (3)              (3)

Personal Care                              -10               -8              -8
                                           (1)              (1)             (1)



                                           36
Other                            9       12       10
                                (8)      (8)      (8)
Control variables included:
   Basic                           Y        Y      Y
   Employment and urbanicity       N        Y      Y
   Housing                         N        N      Y
Sample n                       21,524   20,625   20,625




                                37
                                      Table 6
       Differences in budget shares: uninsured versus insured, low spenders

                                                    Work/urban
Dependent variable =              Basic controls     controls       All controls
Quarterly spending on:                  (1)              (2)             (3)
Housing                                $88             $80               38
                                       (13)            (14)             (12)

Food In                                40               34               34
                                       (8)              (8)              (8)

Food Out                                5                0                2
                                       (6)              (6)              (6)

Transportation                         -17              -7                1
                                       (9)             (10)             (10)

Utilities                              -22              -19               -3
                                       (6)              (6)              (6)

Furniture/ Appliances                   9               11               13
                                       (6)              (6)              (6)

Clothing                                -2               1                1
                                       (4)              (4)              (4)

Entertainment                           -4               -3               -1
                                       (4)              (4)              (4)

Health Insurance                       -111            -114             -112
                                        (3)             (4)              (4)

Health Care                             0                -2               -2
                                       (4)              (4)              (4)

Education                              35               35               39
                                       (8)              (8)              (8)

Alcohol and Tobacco                    20               21               18
                                       (5)              (5)              (5)

Home Maintenance                       -10               -9               -4
                                       (3)              (3)              (3)

Interest                               -24              -21             -20
                                       (3)              (3)             (3)

Personal Care                           -4               -4               -3
                                       (2)              (2)              (2)



                                       38
Other                            -3      -1      1
                                (3)     (4)     (4)
Control variables included:
   Basic                          Y       Y      Y
   Employment and urbanicity      N       Y      Y
   Housing                        N       N      Y
Sample n                       5,381   4,902   4,902




                                39
                                      Table 7
      Differences in budget shares: uninsured versus insured, middle spenders

                                                    Work/urban
Dependent variable =              Basic controls     controls        All controls
Quarterly spending on:                  (1)              (2)              (3)
Housing                                -$14            -$21                8
                                       (23)            (24)              (22)

Food In                                 31               26              23
                                       (10)             (10)            (10)

Food Out                                 -1               -3             -12
                                        (8)              (8)             (8)

Transportation                         172              201             184
                                       (23)             (24)            (24)

Utilities                               -19             -19               3
                                        (7)             (7)              (7)

Furniture/ Appliances                   20               22              23
                                       (12)             (12)            (12)

Clothing                                -24             -21              -26
                                        (6)             (7)              (7)

Entertainment                           -14             -11              -11
                                        (7)             (8)              (8)

Health Insurance                       -227             -234            -237
                                        (6)              (7)             (7)

Health Care                             12                9               7
                                        (7)              (8)             (8)

Education                              101               86              68
                                       (12)             (13)            (13)

Alcohol and Tobacco                     25               20              14
                                        (5)              (6)             (6)

Home Maintenance                        -23             -22              -15
                                        (8)             (9)              (9)

Interest                                -31             -27              -26
                                        (5)             (5)              (5)

Personal Care                           -12             -10               -9
                                        (2)             (2)              (2)



                                        40
Other                            4         5        6
                                (9)      (10)     (10)
Control variables included:
   Basic                           Y        Y      Y
   Employment and urbanicity       N        Y      Y
   Housing                         N        N      Y
Sample n                       10,762   10,421   10,421




                                41
                                      Table 8
       Differences in budget shares: uninsured versus insured, high spenders

                                   Regression coefficient on “uninsured” dummy
                                                   Work/urban
Dependent variable =              Basic controls      controls      All controls
Quarterly spending on:                  (1)               (2)            (3)
Housing                                -419             -406            -220
                                       (89)             (91)            (85)

Food In                                 10                9                7
                                       (30)             (30)             (31)

Food Out                                -36              -46              -53
                                       (26)             (27)             (27)

Transportation                          673             668              457
                                       (131)           (133)            (131)

Utilities                               -58              -61              -26
                                       (17)             (17)             (17)

Furniture/ Appliances                  102               99              124
                                       (44)             (45)             (45)

Clothing                                 2               -3               -2
                                       (21)             (22)             (22)

Entertainment                           -39              -34              -21
                                       (33)             (33)             (34)

Health Insurance                       -293             -312            -317
                                       (17)             (17)            (17)

Health Care                             41               35               33
                                       (29)             (29)             (30)

Education                               51               65               15
                                       (49)             (49)             (48)

Alcohol and Tobacco                     19               17               11
                                       (13)             (13)             (13)

Home Maintenance                         0               -3               24
                                       (32)             (33)             (33)

Interest                                -45              -38              -32
                                       (12)             (13)             (13)

Personal Care                           -12             -10               -9
                                        (4)             (5)              (5)


                                        42
Other                            3      19       9
                               (39)    (39)    (39)
Control variables included:
   Basic                          Y       Y      Y
   Employment and urbanicity      N       Y      Y
   Housing                        N       N      Y
Sample n                       5,381   5,302   5,302




                                43
                                     Table 9
Detailed housing expenditures for low-expenditure households, by insurance status

                                                           Low spenders

                                                    Insured         Uninsured
                                                  Mean    SD       Mean    SD


Share of total expenditures on:
    Housing (total)                               0.261    0.149   0.282   0.163
    1. Rent and ownership expenses                0.199    0.172   0.249   0.179
            1a. Rent                              0.180    0.176   0.230   0.181
            1b. Tenant’s insurance                0.007    0.019   0.003   0.013
            1c. Housing for someone at school     0.005    0.041   0.008   0.044
            1d. Lodging while on trips            0.004    0.012   0.002   0.009
            1e. Rent received as pay              0.002    0.022   0.007   0.041
    2. Property taxes                             0.022    0.044   0.012   0.038
    3. Mortgage principal payments                0.012    0.036   0.007   0.028
    4. Mortgage interest payments                 0.025    0.071   0.014   0.055
    5. Special and lump-sum mortgage payments     0.000    0.007   0.000   0.004
    6. Home construction and improvement          0.002    0.015   0.001   0.007

Real expenditures on:
    Housing (total)                                $867    $528    $844    $531
    1. Rent and ownership expenses                  651     584     736     562
            1a. Rent                                592     594     678     563
            1b. Tenant’s insurance                   24      61       9      41
            1c. Housing for someone at school        15     117      22     134
            1d. Lodging while on trips               12      41       6      26
            1e. Rent received as pay                  8      78      21     125
    2. Property taxes                                74     146      37     117
    3. Mortgage principal payments                   43     126      22      93
    4. Mortgage interest payments                    91     261      46     193
    5. Special and lump-sum mortgage payments         2      24       0      16
    6. Home construction and improvement              6      49       2      25

Number of rooms                                      4.7     1.7     4.3     1.8

Housing tenure
   Own home, no mortgage                          0.170    0.376   0.081   0.273
   Own home, with mortgage                        0.208    0.406   0.117   0.321
   Rent                                           0.555    0.497   0.692   0.462
   Occupy home rent-free                          0.026    0.160   0.051   0.220
   Live in dormitory                              0.040    0.196   0.059   0.235

Unweighted sample size                             2,978           2,403




                                       44
                                                   Table 10
                         Detailed housing expenditures for low-expenditure households
                                    By insurance and homeownership status


                                              Homeowners:            Homeowners:
                                              No mortgage            With mortgage               Renters

                                           Insured    Uninsured    Insured    Uninsured    Insured    Uninsured

Share of total expenditures on:
  Housing (total)                             0.106        0.118      0.294       0.322       0.304        0.302
  1. Rent and ownership expenses              0.033        0.039      0.026       0.034       0.301        0.301
      1a. Rent                                0.010        0.027      0.005       0.015       0.285        0.281
      1b. Tenant’s insurance                  0.018        0.011      0.017       0.016       0.001        0.000
      1c. Housing for someone at school       0.000        0.000      0.000       0.000       0.008        0.009
      1d. Lodging while on trips              0.004        0.002      0.003       0.002       0.003        0.002
      1e. Rent received as pay                0.000        0.000      0.000       0.000       0.004        0.009
  2. Property taxes                           0.065        0.069      0.048       0.048       0.001        0.000
  3. Mortgage principal payments              0.001        0.001       0.07       0.079       0.000        0.000
  4. Mortgage interest payments               0.002        0.003      0.144        0.16       0.001        0.000
  5. Special mortgage payments                0.000        0.001      0.002       0.001       0.000        0.000
  6. Home construction and improvement        0.005        0.005      0.004       0.001       0.000        0.000

Real expenditures on:
  Housing (total)                             $337         $348     $1,041       $1,082       $996         $892
  1. Rent and ownership expenses               104          114         90          110        989          890
      1a. Rent                                  34           78         18           48        936          829
      1b. Tenant’s insurance                    55           31         61           54          3            1
      1c. Housing for someone at school          0            0          0            0         24           28
      1d. Lodging while on trips                15            5         11            8         12            6
      1e. Rent received as pay                   0            1          0            0         14           26
  2. Property taxes                            206          201        171          159          3            1
  3. Mortgage principal payments                 3            4        244          259          1            0
  4. Mortgage interest payments                  7           11        513          549          3            1
  5. Special mortgage payments                   1            2          8            2          0            0
  6. Home construction and improvement          16           16         15            4          0            0

Number of rooms                                 5.5          5.2        5.5          5.3        4.2          4.1

Unweighted sample size                         577          267        465           184      1,936        1,952




                                                      45
                                 Table 11
Housing expenditures for low-expenditure households: insured versus uninsured

                                                            Real spending
                                                  Basic      Work/urban        All
                                                 controls      controls     controls
Dependent variable:                                  (1)           (2)          (3)
Housing (total)                                    $88           $80          $38
                                                   (13)          (14)         (12)
Components of housing expenditures:
1. Rent and ownership expenses                    129           131           20
                                                  (15)          (16)         (11)

        1a. Rent                                  122           130           15
                                                  (15)          (16)         (11)

        1b. Tenant’s insurance                     -8             -9          -4
                                                   (2)           (2)          (2)

        1c. Housing for someone at school           4             0            3
                                                   (4)           (3)          (3)

        1d. Lodging while on trips                 -4             -3          -3
                                                   (1)           (1)          (1)

        1e. Rent received as pay                   15            13            8
                                                   (3)           (3)          (3)

2. Property taxes                                  -13           -18           2
                                                   (4)           (4)          (3)

3. Mortgage principal payments                      -9           -11           4
                                                   (3)           (3)          (2)

4. Mortgage interest payments                      -16           -20          12
                                                   (7)           (7)          (5)

5. Special and lump-sum mortgage payments           0             0            0
                                                   (1)           (1)          (1)

6. Home construction and improvement                -3            -2           0
                                                   (1)           (1)          (1)

Number of rooms                                    -0.3          -0.3        -0.1
                                                  (0.1)         (0.1)        (0.1)
Control variables included in specification:
        Basic                                      Y           Y              Y
        Employment and urbanicity                  N           Y              Y
        Housing                                    N           N              Y
Sample n                                          5,381        4,902         4,902



                                            46
                                       Table 12
 Transportation expenditures of the highest spending quartile: insured versus uninsured


                                                            Insured           Uninsured
                                                           Mean     SD       Mean     SD

Share of total expenditures on:
    Transportation (total)                                0.240    0.191    0.321         0.253
    1. Leased vehicles                                    0.013    0.045    0.010         0.043
    2. New vehicles                                       0.059    0.158    0.064         0.181
    3.Used vehicles                                       0.070    0.153    0.157         0.244
    4.Other private transportation
     (Registration fees, tolls, rental cars, etc.)        0.007    0.011    0.007         0.012
    5. Fuel and oil                                       0.033    0.020    0.033         0.028
    6.Vehicle maintenance and repair                      0.019    0.027    0.018         0.030
    7. Vehicle insurance                                  0.024    0.021    0.021         0.021
    8. Public transportation (includes airfares)          0.014    0.027    0.013         0.026

Real expenditures on:
    Transportation (total)                                $3,251   $2,839   $4,245        $3,590
    1. Leased vehicles                                       178      606      136           562
    2. New vehicles                                          848    2320       878         2511
    3.Used vehicles                                          961    2155     2081          3350
    4.Other private transportation
     (Registration fees, tolls, rental cars, etc.)            96      150      84            161
    5. Fuel and oil                                          425      247     419            432
    6.Vehicle maintenance and repair                         249      348     224            400
    7. Vehicle insurance                                     313      274     262            261
    8. Public transportation (includes airfares)             181      362     161            332

Number of vehicles                                           2.7      1.8      2.2           1.5

Unweighted sample size                                        4,970                 411




                                                     47
                                                   Table 13
            Transportation expenditures for high-expenditure households: insured versus uninsured


                                                 Total expenditure as control              Income as control
                                                           Work/                                Work/
                                                Basic      urban         All         Basic      urban        All
                                               controls   controls     controls     controls   controls    controls
Dependent variable:                               (1)         (2)          (3)         (4)         (5)        (6)

Transportation (total)                            $673        $668         $457        $430        $435        $289
                                                 (131)       (133)        (131)       (146)       (148)       (147)

1. Leased vehicles                                 -25           -32        -38         -21         -30         -35
                                                  (31)          (32)       (32)        (31)        (32)        (33)

2. New vehicles                                   -125        -216         -270        -269        -343        -366
                                                 (115)       (116)        (116)       (120)       (120)       (121)

3.Used vehicles                                    865         934          795         736         811         704
                                                 (113)       (115)        (115)       (115)       (118)       (118)

4.Other private transportation                        -5          -4           -7           1           1          -3
                                                     (8)         (8)          (8)         (8)         (8)         (8)

5. Fuel and oil                                      6            18         25          12          21          27
                                                  (13)          (13)       (13)        (13)        (13)        (13)

6.Vehicle maintenance and repair                    -3             1         -4          -1           1          -3
                                                  (18)          (19)       (19)        (18)        (19)        (19)

7. Vehicle insurance                               -42           -39        -40         -38         -36         -37
                                                  (14)          (14)       (14)        (14)        (14)        (14)

8. Public transportation (includes airfares)         3             6         -3          10          12           3
                                                  (18)          (19)       (19)        (18)        (19)        (19)

Number of vehicles                                -0.4           -0.3      -0.3        -0.4        -0.3        -0.2
                                                 (0.1)          (0.1)     (0.1)       (0.1)       (0.1)       (0.1)
Control variables included in specification:
        Basic (with total expenditure)           Y           Y            Y           N           N           N
        Basic (with income instead of exp.)      N           N            N           Y           Y           Y
        Employment and urbanicity                N           Y            Y           N           Y           Y
        Housing                                  N           N            Y           N           N           Y

Sample n                                       5,381       5,302        5,302       5,381       5,302       5,302




                                                           48
                                        Table 14
              Share of spending on “basic needs”, by total expenditure level


           Cumulative column          Fraction
              fractions:              insured:      Share on “basic needs”     Share on HI
                                                                               (for insured)
            Total     Uninsured                      Uninsured     Insured
   Total     1.00         1.00           0.778           0.539        0.477             0.032

  $2,000      0.020       0.063           0.303          0.604        0.504              0.035
  $2,500      0.059       0.162           0.437          0.602        0.564              0.031
  $3,000      0.105       0.269           0.485          0.600        0.554              0.037
  $3,500      0.162       0.380           0.568          0.581        0.568              0.033
  $4,000      0.221       0.474           0.645          0.586        0.538              0.038
  $4,500      0.280       0.560           0.675          0.560        0.535              0.039
  $5,000      0.334       0.625           0.737          0.561        0.534              0.036
  $5,500      0.391       0.677           0.795          0.550        0.518              0.040
  $6,000      0.446       0.728           0.793          0.515        0.509              0.037
  $6,500      0.495       0.768           0.820          0.516        0.500              0.039
  $7,000      0.543       0.801           0.847          0.463        0.484              0.036
  $7,500      0.589       0.835           0.840          0.471        0.483              0.034
  $8,000      0.630       0.856           0.887          0.466        0.474              0.035
  $8,500      0.668       0.877           0.877          0.464        0.474              0.033
  $9,000      0.702       0.891           0.909          0.464        0.469              0.030
  $9,500      0.735       0.907           0.888          0.427        0.454              0.029
 $10,000      0.763       0.918           0.915          0.388        0.443              0.028
 $10,500      0.787       0.929           0.898          0.354        0.439              0.028
$10,500+      1.000       1.000           0.926          0.352        0.400              0.023




                                           49
                                           Table 15
         Share of expenditures on basic needs or necessities other than health insurance

                                                     Dependent variable:

                                                                   Share on necessities other
                                  Share on “basic needs”             than health insurance

   Independent variables:          Coeff.           SE              Coeff.            SE
   Uninsured                        0.08365       0.00482            0.07657         0.00472
   Total expenditures              -0.00002      <0.00001           -0.00002        <0.00001
   Total expenditures *
   uninsured                       -0.00001      <0.00001           -0.00001        <0.00001
   Nonwhite                         0.01841       0.00289            0.00309         0.00283
   H.S. Graduate                   -0.00941       0.00353           -0.00267         0.00345
   Some College                    -0.02190       0.00359           -0.01114         0.00352
   College Graduate                 0.00672       0.00398            0.01562         0.00390
   Graduate Degree                  0.00904       0.00450            0.00987         0.00441
   Age of Reference Person          0.00168       0.00009            0.00118         0.00009
   Reference person is female       0.00082       0.00257           -0.00227         0.00252
   Number of Adult Males            0.01163       0.00198            0.01269         0.00194
   Number of Adult Females          0.02361       0.00195            0.02073         0.00191
   Number of Boys                   0.03086       0.00168            0.02342         0.00165
   Number of Girls                  0.03040       0.00171            0.02503         0.00167
   Number of Babies                 0.03256       0.00375            0.01707         0.00368

Notes:
   1. Sample size for both regressions is 21,524.
   2. “Basic needs” are defined as food at home, housing and utilities.
   3. Necessities are defined as food at home, food away from home, housing, utilities, alcohol
       and tobacco, interest, personal care and health care (i.e. all goods with elasticities with
       respect to total spending less than or equal to one, except for health insurance).




                                               50
                                          Figure 1
        Regression-adjusted spending differentials: uninsured – insured households
                                     All households


            Housing                               -$38


             Food In                                             $16


           Food Out                                       -$6


      Transportation                                                                      $231


             Utilities                        -$49


Furniture/ Appliances                                                $20


            Clothing                                 -$17


       Entertainment                                      -$8


    Health Insurance         -$190


         Health Care                                            $6


           Education                                                         $67


Alcohol and Tobacco                                              $13


  Home Maintenance                                        -$7


             Interest                             -$38


       Personal Care                                     -$10


               Other                                            $9


                     -$250           -$150        -$50                 $50         $150   $250




                                             51
                                        Figure 2
        Regression-adjusted spending differentials: uninsured – insured households
                               Lowest quartile of spenders



            Housing                                                                      $88



             Food In                                                               $40



           Food Out                                                   $5



      Transportation                                -$17



             Utilities                             -$22



Furniture/ Appliances                                                  $9



            Clothing                                       -$2



       Entertainment                                       -$4



    Health Insurance        -$111



         Health Care                                         $0



           Education                                                              $35



Alcohol and Tobacco                                                         $20



  Home Maintenance                                    -$10



             Interest                              -$24



       Personal Care                                       -$4



               Other                                       -$3



                    -$150           -$100   -$50                 $0                $50   $100   $150




                                             52
                                        Figure 3
        Regression-adjusted spending differentials: uninsured – insured households
                            Middle two quartiles of spenders


            Housing                                -$14



             Food In                                                 $31



           Food Out                                      -$1



      Transportation                                                                      $172



             Utilities                            -$19



Furniture/ Appliances                                               $20



            Clothing                             -$24



       Entertainment                               -$14



    Health Insurance-$227

         Health Care                                            $12



           Education                                                        $101



Alcohol and Tobacco                                                 $25



  Home Maintenance                               -$23



             Interest                           -$31



       Personal Care                               -$12



               Other                                           $4



                    -$250       -$150           -$50                  $50          $150          $250




                                           53
                                        Figure 4
        Regression-adjusted spending differentials: uninsured – insured households
                               Highest quartile of spenders


            Housing           -$424


             Food In                                              $9


           Food Out                                   -$37


      Transportation                                                                               $682


             Utilities                               -$57


Furniture/ Appliances                                                        $101


            Clothing                                              $2


       Entertainment                                  -$39


    Health Insurance                  -$294


         Health Care                                                   $41


           Education                                                   $50


Alcohol and Tobacco                                               $19


  Home Maintenance                                           $0


             Interest                                 -$45


       Personal Care                                    -$12


               Other                                              $3


                     -$700   -$500      -$300        -$100             $100         $300   $500   $700




                                                54
                                                    Figure 5
                            At what point does health insurance replace basic needs?




 Share of
 budget
 spent on
 basic needs




                                                                                           Insured



                                                                                           Uninsured




                                                                            Y*             Total expenditures

Y* is the level of total expenditures at which the uninsured devote a smaller share of their budget to basic needs
than do comparable insured households.




                                                        55
                                                 Appendix Table A1
                                                Expenditure regressions
                                                  All spending levels


                                                        Dependent variable is spending on:

                              Housing                Food In                     Food Out               Transportation

Independent vars.:      Coeff.          SE     Coeff.            SE         Coeff.           SE      Coeff.         SE

Uninsured               -37.9064   (19.3080)    15.5869       (7.3128)      -5.9960      (5.9417)    230.7422    (25.9008)
Total spending            0.2087    (0.0022)     0.0383       (0.0008)       0.0422      (0.0007)      0.3688     (0.0030)
Nonwhite                 13.8251   (21.5841)   -45.1813       (8.1749)     -59.5117      (6.6421)    146.6835    (28.9541)
H.S. Graduate            35.0704   (26.3178)   -29.0853       (9.9677)      29.8675      (8.0988)   -166.5681    (35.3041)
Some College             78.0328   (26.8215)   -41.4613      (10.1585)      49.5703      (8.2538)   -362.5114    (35.9797)
College Graduate        308.4823   (29.6937)   -39.5662      (11.2463)      89.0351      (9.1377)   -689.0636    (39.8327)
Graduate degree         356.0267   (33.6183)   -17.1603      (12.7328)      70.8395     (10.3454)   -908.5307    (45.0973)
Age of Ref. Person       -0.7882    (0.6927)     4.6653       (0.2624)      -1.1579      (0.2132)    -10.6330     (0.9293)
Female Ref. Person      -67.2464   (19.1710)    -5.0497       (7.2609)     -33.9766      (5.8995)     73.7332    (25.7170)
No. of adult males     -139.6310   (14.7700)   191.6482       (5.5941)       7.4606      (4.5452)    -67.4773    (19.8132)
No. of adult females    -71.6102   (14.5488)   167.1304       (5.5103)     -32.0233      (4.4771)   -131.8784    (19.5165)
No. of Boys              57.1458   (12.5404)   177.2750       (4.7496)     -31.9147      (3.8591)   -243.5403    (16.8223)
No. of Girls             83.3435   (12.7397)   148.6045       (4.8251)     -30.1112      (3.9204)   -279.1767    (17.0897)
No. of Babies           156.8869   (28.0081)    87.1419      (10.6080)    -115.9440      (8.6190)   -222.2687    (37.5716)




                                                            56
                                                   Appendix Table A1
                                                  Expenditure regressions
                                                    All spending levels


                                                          Dependent variable is spending on:

                             Utilities          Furniture & Appliances              Clothing             Entertainment

Independent vars.:     Coeff.            SE      Coeff.            SE         Coeff.           SE     Coeff.        SE

Uninsured              -49.3976      (4.8831)    20.1137        (9.4261)      -16.3305     (4.9262)    -8.1610    (6.6567)
Total spending           0.0335      (0.0006)     0.0631        (0.0011)        0.0346     (0.0006)     0.0461    (0.0008)
Nonwhite                45.2716      (5.4587)   -16.7308       (10.5373)       28.9652     (5.5069)   -87.9832    (7.4414)
H.S. Graduate           37.3256      (6.6559)     8.9773       (12.8483)        5.7344     (6.7147)    43.7458    (9.0734)
Some College            32.2350      (6.7833)     8.6282       (13.0941)       29.6972     (6.8432)    79.3763    (9.2471)
College Graduate        38.1797      (7.5097)    32.3800       (14.4964)       52.6008     (7.5760)   109.7812   (10.2373)
Graduate degree         30.5739      (8.5022)    44.5957       (16.4123)       54.8295     (8.5773)   137.6260   (11.5903)
Age of Ref. Person       5.4559      (0.1752)    -1.9158        (0.3382)       -1.4865     (0.1767)    -0.6779    (0.2388)
Female Ref. Person      10.0241      (4.8484)    -2.4371        (9.3592)       23.0246     (4.8913)    -1.7318    (6.6095)
No. of adult males      79.6974      (3.7354)   -29.9658        (7.2106)       -5.2403     (3.7684)   -24.0107    (5.0921)
No. of adult females   106.2697      (3.6795)   -17.1263        (7.1027)       46.3376     (3.7119)   -43.4789    (5.0159)
No. of Boys             37.6979      (3.1715)   -28.4615        (6.1222)       12.3310     (3.1995)    25.3726    (4.3235)
No. of Girls            44.4317      (3.2219)   -13.6130        (6.2195)       24.9878     (3.2504)    25.8876    (4.3922)
No. of Babies           27.8707      (7.0834)   -41.0591       (13.6735)       19.6286     (7.1459)   -44.3505    (9.6562)




                                                              57
                                                  Appendix Table A1
                                                 Expenditure regressions
                                                   All spending levels


                                                         Dependent variable is spending on:

                          Health Insurance         Medical Care                   Education          Alcohol & Tobacco

Independent vars.:      Coeff.         SE       Coeff.            SE         Coeff.           SE     Coeff.       SE

Uninsured              -190.4079     (4.2918)     6.4710       (6.0924)      67.2970     (10.4251)    13.3230   (3.6739)
Total spending            0.0097     (0.0005)     0.0241       (0.0007)       0.0381      (0.0012)     0.0107   (0.0004)
Nonwhite                 -4.8098     (4.7978)   -55.0701       (6.8106)      79.8119     (11.6541)   -57.4868   (4.1070)
H.S. Graduate             3.2426     (5.8500)    -1.0913       (8.3043)      17.5145     (14.2100)    -9.3921   (5.0077)
Some College              0.6311     (5.9619)     6.1468       (8.4632)     109.8005     (14.4819)   -30.7255   (5.1035)
College Graduate         -1.8742     (6.6004)    -3.8758       (9.3695)      88.2078     (16.0327)   -60.8803   (5.6500)
Graduate degree          12.4537     (7.4727)    14.9043      (10.6078)     146.4772     (18.1518)   -87.3065   (6.3968)
Age of Ref. Person        2.2555     (0.1540)     3.6314       (0.2186)      -6.7849      (0.3740)    -1.0274   (0.1318)
Female Ref. Person        0.3088     (4.2614)     6.7453       (6.0492)      11.2530     (10.3511)   -13.2526   (3.6478)
No. of adult males       34.2711     (3.2831)   -14.0593       (4.6605)      -6.7608      (7.9749)    18.2916   (2.8104)
No. of adult females     29.6629     (3.2339)    11.4368       (4.5907)       8.4003      (7.8554)   -38.5293   (2.7683)
No. of Boys              16.3559     (2.7875)    11.5310       (3.9570)     -13.9861      (6.7710)   -22.9820   (2.3862)
No. of Girls             14.3389     (2.8318)     5.5905       (4.0199)      -3.4170      (6.8786)   -21.5694   (2.4241)
No. of Babies            54.1174     (6.2257)    33.0035       (8.8376)      -0.7181     (15.1226)   -39.0654   (5.3293)




                                                             58
                                                Appendix Table A1
                                               Expenditure regressions
                                                 All spending levels


                                                       Dependent variable is spending on:

                        Home Maintenance               Interest               Personal Care                 Other

Independent vars.:     Coeff.        SE       Coeff.              SE       Coeff.           SE     Coeff.           SE

Uninsured               -6.9951    (6.7818)   -37.5078        (3.1529)     -9.7414      (1.2338)     8.9100      (8.0489)
Total spending           0.0315    (0.0008)     0.0104        (0.0004)      0.0056      (0.0001)     0.0348      (0.0009)
Nonwhite               -25.4158    (7.5813)     3.3548        (3.5246)     37.5910      (1.3792)    -3.3137      (8.9977)
H.S. Graduate            0.8689    (9.2440)    17.1300        (4.2976)      9.0944      (1.6817)    -2.4345     (10.9711)
Some College             4.8268    (9.4209)     9.0586        (4.3798)     13.0015      (1.7139)    13.6933     (11.1810)
College Graduate        19.6466   (10.4298)    -0.5144        (4.8488)     19.4003      (1.8974)    38.0608     (12.3784)
Graduate degree         61.8515   (11.8082)   -22.4916        (5.4897)     15.5412      (2.1482)    89.7701     (14.0144)
Age of Ref. Person       3.1650    (0.2433)    -0.9382        (0.1131)      0.2471      (0.0443)     5.9899      (0.2888)
Female Ref. Person      12.3038    (6.7337)   -10.6040        (3.1305)      3.3226      (1.2250)    -6.4171      (7.9918)
No. of adult males     -44.0649    (5.1879)    14.9074        (2.4119)      6.4398      (0.9438)   -21.5063      (6.1571)
No. of adult females   -40.0737    (5.1102)    23.5500        (2.3757)     18.9736      (0.9297)   -37.0408      (6.0649)
No. of Boys              1.9262    (4.4047)    -5.5674        (2.0478)      4.2519      (0.8013)     2.5646      (5.2277)
No. of Girls             5.8886    (4.4748)    -1.8318        (2.0803)     -1.4351      (0.8141)    -1.9189      (5.3108)
No. of Babies           87.1180    (9.8377)    10.7767        (4.5736)     -6.4712      (1.7897)    -6.6664     (11.6757)




                                                            59
           Appendix Table A2
 Expenditure elasticities for different goods


                                Elasticity

   Food In                          0.317
   Utilities                        0.388
   Health Insurance                 0.390
   Alcohol and Tobacco              0.504
   Personal Care                    0.572
   Housing                          0.835
   Interest                         0.730
   Food Out                         0.873
   Clothing                         0.870
   Health Care                      0.992
   Entertainment                    1.173
   Furniture and Appliances         1.259
   Other                            1.296
   Home Maintenance                 1.432
   Education                        1.401
   Transportation                   1.888
Source: Author’s calculations from CEX data.




                     60
