                                    NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




               AGGREGATION AND INSURANCE-MORTALITY ESTIMATION

                                               William H. Dow
                                             Kristine A. Gonzalez
                                              Luis Rosero-Bixby

                                            Working Paper 9827
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9827


                         NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                  1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                    Cambridge, MA 02138
                                         July 2003




We acknowledge funding support from NICHD R01 HD38330. We thank participants at the 2003 Annual Health
Economics Conference and the 2003 Population Association of America annual meetings for helpful comments.
The views expressed herein are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic
Research.

©2003 by William H. Dow, Kristine A. Gonzalez, and Luis Rosero-Bixby. All rights reserved. Short sections
of text not to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including
© notice, is given to the source.
Aggregation and Insurance-Mortality Estimation
William H. Dow, Kristine A. Gonzalez, and Luis Rosero-Bixby
NBER Working Paper No. 9827
July 2003
JEL No. I1, J1

                                             ABSTRACT

One goal of government health insurance programs is to improve health, yet little is known empirically

about how important such government interventions can be in explaining health transitions. We analyze

the child mortality effects of a major health insurance expansion in Costa Rica. In contrast to previous

work in this area that has used aggregated ecological designs, we exploit census data to estimate

individual-level models. Theoretical and empirical econometric results indicate that aggregation can

introduce substantial upward biases in the insurance effects. Overall we find a statistically significant

but quite small effect of health insurance on child mortality in Costa Rica.


William H. Dow                                          Kristine A. Gonzalez
CB# 7411, School of Public Health                       CB# 8120, Carolina Population Center
University of North Carolina                            University of North Carolina
Chapel Hill, NC 27599                                   Chapel Hill, NC 27599
and NBER                                                kgonzale@email.unc.edu
will_dow@unc.edu

Luis Rosero-Bixby
Centro Centroamericano de Población
Universidad de Costa Rica
San José 2060
Costa Rica
lrosero@ccp.ucr.ac.cr
INTRODUCTION

       As the monetary cost of health care decreases through health insurance, the demand for

health care increases, potentially improving overall health outcomes. Many countries around the

world are promoting health insurance coverage, in part because of these supposed health

benefits. Yet, existing literature examining health improvements caused by insurance-induced

increases in health care utilization is limited, particularly for developing countries.

       One country whose national health insurance plan is frequently cited as a health

“success” story is Costa Rica. The country’s health indicators are much higher than other

countries of a similar income level that do not have national health insurance, with life

expectancy equivalent to that of the United States, despite a per capita income of one-fifth that of

the United States. During the 1970s period when national health insurance was expanded to the

vast majority of the Costa Rican population, health indicators such as child mortality dropped

rapidly. Empirical studies that more closely examined the determinants of that mortality decline

indicate that expanded access to primary care appeared to play a substantial role (Rosero-Bixby

1986, 1990). Of central importance, however, is what role health insurance itself played, as

distinct from the many other changes in health programs and household behaviors that occurred

during this period.

       Recent work on Costa Rica’s child mortality decline by Dow and Schmeer (in press)

focused specifically on the role of health insurance and found that health insurance did not have

a large causal effect. But as with most other analyses in this literature, that work was limited by

its use of aggregated data with an ecological design. The present paper highlights two major

implications of this type of aggregation. First, it widens confidence intervals, and as a result

Dow and Schmeer (in press) could not rule out moderately sized impacts of insurance on




                                                  2
mortality. Second, and less recognized but potentially more pernicious, aggregation can amplify

model mis-specifications such as bias from omitting important confounders.

       The present study advances understanding of the mortality effects of insurance by

presenting an alternative analysis of the effects of Costa Rica’s national health insurance

expansion in the 1970s on child mortality. We first conceptually discuss the potential limitations

and biases of the common aggregated analysis approach, and explicitly link aggregation to the

more precisely defined instrumental variables estimator. We then use Monte Carlo simulation to

illustrate the nature of the bias from aggregated studies as compared to individual-level and

instrumental variables approaches. Finally, by exploiting unique features of Costa Rica’s census

data we are able to estimate individual-level models, both to compare them to our aggregated

estimates that parallel previous literature, and to produce more robust estimates of the causal

effects of health insurance expansions on child mortality.



CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK

       Based on a health production framework such as Schultz (1984), insurance is

hypothesized to reduce child mortality by increasing the demand for medical care. Mortality of

child i is a measure of health Hi, and health is a function of medical inputs Mi, non-medical

health inputs Si (such as sanitation and nutrition) chosen by the household, the health

environment Ec in community c, and the unobserved health endowment θi:

(1)    Hi = H(Mi, Si, Ec, θi)

       Insurance Ii increases medical input demand, which also depends on the community

health infrastructure Pc (price of quality adjusted medical care, including time dimensions




                                                 3
associated with geographic access), as well as socioeconomic characteristics Wi such as

household wealth and schooling levels, in addition to health and unobserved preferences πi:

(2)    Mi = M(Ii, Wi, Pc, Hi, πi)

Non-medical inputs Si depend on similar factors as M, although the cross-price effect of

insurance may be ignorable:

(3)    Si = S(Wi, Pc, Hi, πi)

       Finally, insurance may be considered as endogenous to the system, depending on factors

such as socioeconomic status, health care access barriers, health status, and unobserved

preferences for medical care:

(4)    Ii = I(Wi, Pc, Hi, πi)

       If insurance is in fact endogenous then it does not enter the reduced form health demand

function, but instead only enters the quasi-reduced form. In cases where insurance is exogenous,

however, the following may instead be interpreted as the reduced form health demand function:

(5)    Hi = H(Ii, Wi, Pc, Ec, θi, πi)

A complication, however, is that many of the relationships in (5) work in different directions,

making it often impossible to sign net omitted variables biases in observational data with

imperfect controls. For example, adverse selection would imply that less healthy individuals

would have a higher demand for insurance, causing health to be negatively related to insurance,

but positive selection of (healthier) higher socioeconomic status persons into positions with

health insurance could instead cause a positive relationship. Thus a central implication of this

model is that it is crucial for empirical research designs to take into account this potential

endogeneity of insurance. We next assess previous literature in light of this endogeneity issue.




                                                  4
PREVIOUS RESEARCH ON HEALTH EFFECTS OF INSURANCE

        A wealth of research indicates that health insurance increases health care utilization. A

recent Institute of Medicine (2002) report concludes that lack of health insurance is a major

barrier to health care access in the United States. The gold standard of studies on the demand

effects of insurance generosity is the RAND Health Insurance Experiment conducted in the

United States in the 1970s, which based on a randomized design found that demand did respond

significantly to the out-of-pocket cost of care, with an elasticity of about –0.2 (Manning et al.

1987; Keeler and Rolph 1988). There are fewer studies in developing countries with strong

causal designs, but literature on health care price elasticities of demand has generally found

significant elasticities (Jimenez 1995).

        More controversial is the extent to which health outcomes are affected by the type of

health care induced by insurance-driven decreases in out-of-pocket costs. A long literature has

debated the relative importance of health behaviors, public health interventions, and medical care

in driving health transitions. In relation specifically to insurance, the importance of medical care

is further questioned due to the fact that it is hypothesized that insurance would predominantly

increase utilization of medical services that have low perceived benefits, while high benefit

medical services would be more likely to be demanded regardless of insurance status. An

additional literature has debated whether insurance instead affects health by creating conditions

that speed technological change, but this is more relevant in fee-for-service systems at the

technological frontier such as the United States than in most low-income countries such as Costa

Rica.




                                                  5
       The empirical literature on the health effects of health insurance has been plagued by

poor methodological designs. In a recent survey of dozens of studies relating insurance to health

in the United States, Levy and Meltzer (2001) found only a handful with designs adequate for

inferring causality. Based on those they conclude that while insurance is not irrelevant to health,

in general the health benefits of insurance appear quite small. Again the gold standard study is

from the RAND Health Insurance Experiment, which found that the extra insurance-induced

medical care on average had no effect on a wide range of health indicators, although there did

appear to be some significant effects for certain vulnerable low-income groups (Brook et al.

1984). The RAND Health Insurance Experiment, however, was only designed to analyze

variations in copayment levels within a relatively low catastrophic cap, thus it is not clear how

generalizable the results are when considering the population that is completely uninsured.

Other reliable studies identified by Levy and Meltzer (2001) included natural experiment

analyses of Medicaid expansions indicating that insurance may be relevant for low-income

groups (Currie and Gruber 1996a, 1996b), and a study indicating that national health insurance

lowered infant mortality in Canada (Hanratty 1996).

       Within low-income countries there have been very few studies with reliable designs.

Furthermore, the literature has relied mainly on aggregated estimators. For example, Dow and

Schmeer (in press) use a difference-in-difference type design to estimate the effects of Costa

Rica’s 1970s insurance expansion, but because they use vital statistics data to measure mortality

they are forced to aggregate to the county as the unit of observation. In contrast, the present

study analyzes the same insurance expansion but draws mortality data from census mortality

questions, allowing direct comparison of individual and aggregated estimators. To better




                                                 6
interpret this comparison, we next discuss the properties of the common aggregated approach to

analyzing the insurance effects of mortality.



AGGREGATION

       There is a good deal of confusion among researchers regarding the effects of aggregation

on estimators. Robinson’s (1950) article on ecological correlations is still cited reasonably

frequently to argue that aggregated analyses produce biased results, despite the fact that as early

as Goodman (1953) it was shown that Robinson’s particular critique did not itself generalize to

the regression context. Ever since, however, there have been on-going debates over the merits

and limitations of aggregated regression estimators (see e.g. Guthrie and Sheppard 2001 for a

recent debate).

       To clarify the issues in the context of the insurance-mortality literature, we next present

several precisely specified special cases. The first case illustrates conditions under which

individual and aggregated estimators produce identical effects. The second illustrates the effect

of omitted group-level confounders, in which case aggregation exacerbates the omitted variables

bias. The third assumes an omitted individual-level variable, in which case aggregation may

ameliorate the resulting bias. Following Moffitt (1995), we next relate the aggregated model to

the instrumental variables model, which provides a well-understood framework for comparing

the estimators. Monte Carlo analysis is then used to further illustrate each case.



Case I: No aggregation bias

       We begin by specifying an individual-level regression model of health Hic for individual i

in community c as a function of the individual’s insurance Iic, the individual’s health endowment




                                                 7
θi, community-level health infrastructure Pc, and iid (independently and identically distributed)

error components µc and εic:

(6)     H ic = α ind + β ind I ic + γ ind θ ic + δ ind Pc + µ c + ε ic

The insurance coefficient of interest βind is interpreted as the effect on an individual’s health from

changing their own insurance status. Next consider an aggregated version of this model with the

community as the unit of observation, and each individual-level variable replaced by its

community mean:

(7)     H c = α agg + β agg I c + γ aggθ c + δ agg Pc + µ c + ε c

The insurance coefficient of interest βagg in this model is interpreted as the aggregate effect on

community health from increasing the community health insurance rate.

        There are several points to note in comparing (6) and (7). First, if (6) is indeed correctly

specified (appropriate functional forms, no measurement error, error components independent of

explanatory variables, etc.), then plim( βˆ ind ) = plim( βˆ agg ) : the individual-level and the aggregate

community-level insurance effects are equal. In this case it is possible to make unbiased cross-

level inferences, such as using the aggregated model (7) to estimate the individual-level

insurance relationship (6).

        Second, the assumption that the community error component in (6) is independent of

individual-level insurance implies that the community insurance rate I c is appropriately omitted

from the individual-level model (6). In the sociology literature this condition has been referred

to as the absence of cross-level effects (Firebaugh 1978), while in the economics literature this is

equivalent to assuming no general equilibrium or spillover effects. In our application, this could

be interpreted as assuming that the health care supply increases proportionately with the

community insurance rate; thus as insurance expands, previously insured individuals neither


                                                              8
suffer from additional facility crowding, nor do they benefit from insurance-induced

technological improvements.

        Third, if the community insurance rate did actually affect individual-level health

independently of the individual’s insurance status, such that ξ ind I c was an omitted term from (6),

then βagg would no longer equal βind, but would instead reflect the net combined effects of βind

and ξind. In this case cross-level inferences would be inappropriate. It would be a misnomer to

refer to this generally as “aggregation bias,” however, since for certain policy purposes of

evaluating community insurance expansions, the net community effect βagg from the aggregated

regression (7) may in fact be the quantity of interest.

        Finally, an important drawback of the aggregated model (7) is the fact that the

aggregation process leads to loss of variation in I, as well as increasing multicollinearity, which

both result in increased standard errors on the insurance coefficient.



Case II: Aggregation exacerbates omitted variables bias

        In contrast to the above model that was assumed perfectly specified, in other cases

aggregation can indeed have pernicious effects on regression coefficients. An important such

case that has recently been highlighted by Hanushek, Rivkin, and Taylor (1996) occurs when

community-level confounders are omitted from the model. Continuing the example of Case I,

assume that (6) and (7) are now modified such that the community-level health infrastructure

variable Pc is omitted from the estimation. Denote the insurance coefficients from these models

with omitted variables as β ind
                             OVcomm
                                    and β agg
                                          OVcomm
                                                 . Further assume that Pc indeed belongs in (6)

such that δ ind ≠ 0 , that it is correlated with the insurance variable of interest, cov( I ic , Pc ) ≠ 0 ,




                                                      9
but that Pc is uncorrelated with other explanatory variables. The bias from omitting Pc can then

be characterized in the individual-level equation as:

        β ind
           OVcomm
                  − β ind = δ ind cov( I ic , Pc ) / var( I ic )
(8)
                            = δ ind cov( I c , Pc ) / var( I ic )

and in the aggregated equation as:

(9)     β agg
          OVcomm
                 − β agg = δ agg cov( I c , Pc ) / var( I c ) .

The key difference between (8) and (9) is that the variance of the insurance variable is smaller in

the aggregated equation, implying that the omitted variables bias will be larger in the aggregated

model than in the individual-level model. Thus with an unobserved community-level

confounder, aggregation exacerbates omitted variables bias.



Case III: Aggregation ameliorates omitted variables bias

        It is not always true though that aggregation exacerbates omitted variables bias. Consider

instead an alternative extreme example in which the only mis-specification is an omitted

individual-level variable, such as an individual’s genetic health endowment θ ic . Assume that

cov( I ic ,θ ic ) ≠ 0 , such that the version of the individual level model that omits θ ic yields a biased

                                    OVθ
estimate of the insurance effect β ind  , due to adverse or positive selection.

        In addition, for expositional purposes assume that although θ ic varies across individuals

within a community, its community mean value θ c does not vary across communities. This is

plausible for a variable such as the genetic health endowment. The result of this assumption is

that there is essentially no variation in θ c left to be correlated with I c , implying that the

aggregated estimation with this particular omitted individual-level variable still yields unbiased



                                                               10
                                     OVθ
estimates of the insurance effect: β agg = β agg = β ind . Although this is an extreme example, and

the result will not hold for other individual-level variables that do vary at the community level, it

illustrates the important point that when omitted variables vary more at the individual-level than

at the community-level, aggregation can ameliorate omitted variables bias.



Aggregation and Instrumental Variables

       This third case also helps illustrate the close relationship between aggregated estimators

and instrumental variables estimators. Consider an individual-level instrumental variables model

in which insurance I ic is treated as an endogenous variable due to correlation with the error term

arising from omitted individual-level variable θ ic . One potential instrument set would be a

                            ~
vector of community dummies Dc , resulting in a first stage equation:

                              ~
(10)    I ic = α 10 + υ~c ,10 Dc + δ 10 Pc + ε ic ,10

and a second stage structural equation:

(11)    H ic = α IV + β IV Iˆic + δ IV Pc + µ c , IV + ε ic , IV

       The central point to note about (10) is that the predicted value Iˆic is essentially equal to

the community insurance rate I c (with an innocuous adjustment for Pc ). The implication of this

is that this instrumental variables estimator will be unbiased under very similar conditions as was

necessary for the aggregated estimator to be unbiased in Case III: First, there must be

community level variation in the insurance rate. Second, in order for the community dummies to

be valid instruments, there must be no omitted community-level variables in the error term of the

structural equation (11); this estimator will only help correct for certain omitted individual-level

variables. One requirement of this latter condition is that in Case III, there is no community-


                                                               11
level variation in θ c (the aggregated individual variables) that affects health. Another important

requirement of the latter condition is that the community mean insurance rate I c must have no

independent effect on individual health in (6) after controlling for the individual-level insurance:

ξ ind = 0 . In other words, this instrumental variables estimator will only be valid if there are no

general equilibrium (cross-level) effects of insurance.

       One reason why it is useful to compare the aggregated estimator to the instrumental

variables estimator is that it enables the use of well understood specification tests for choosing

between alternative models. In particular, the Hausman endogeneity test can be used for judging

whether estimates from instrumental variables models using grouped variation (similar to the

aggregated models) are significantly different from OLS (individual-level) estimates.

       One limitation to this testing approach is that if the Hausman endogeneity test rejects the

null hypothesis that the estimates are equal, it may not be possible to distinguish between

alternative causes of the rejection: (a) Rejection could be due to the presence of general

equilibrium or cross-level effects. In this case the aggregated estimates could only be interpreted

as reflecting the net aggregate community-level health effects of insurance expansion;

furthermore, the individual-level models should be re-specified to include community insurance

rates as an additional covariate. (b) Rejection could indicate omitted community-level variables,

in which case both individual and aggregated estimators would be biased, but the bias would be

exacerbated in the latter. (c) Rejection could indicate omitted individual-level variables, in

which case both estimators are again likely to be biased, but the relative sizes of the bias is more

ambiguous. If the bias is caused by variables that have a stronger correlation with insurance at

the individual-level than at the community level, such as in Case III, then the aggregated

estimator will have the smaller bias, but this will generally be difficult to discern.



                                                  12
        The Hausman endogeneity test result is perhaps more useful in this context when it does

not reject (assuming reasonable confidence intervals). In this case there is some small chance

that individual and aggregated estimators are truly different but they are biased in such a way

that they appear to coincide. However, this is a lower probability event. Instead it may be more

reasonable to infer from non-rejection that there are no significant biases and that there are no

general equilibrium or cross-level effects, and thus that aggregated estimators could indeed be

used to make either aggregate or individual-level inferences.



Monte Carlo Illustration of Aggregation

        Monte Carlo simulation is a useful tool for illustrating the previous points comparing

individual-level, aggregated, and instrumental variables estimators for each of the three cases

discussed above. To conduct this simulation we begin by assuming a true model reflected by

equation (6), and then design the data generating process to reflect the characteristics of the

actual Costa Rican data analyzed further below. In each of 100 communities we draw

variables I c and Pc from a multivariate standard normal distribution with correlation 0.5, and an

iid standard normal community error component µ c . We next create 100 individual observations

in each community, and then draw variables I i and θ ic from a multivariate standard normal

distribution with correlation 0.5, and an iid normal individual error component ε ic with standard

deviation 10. To complete the model, we generate the individual-level insurance

variable I ic = I i + I c , and the dependent variable H ic = I ic + θ ic + Pc + µ c + ε ic . Thus individual-

level insurance I ic is correlated with both the health endowment θ ic and the community




                                                      13
infrastructure Pc , and the true coefficients on these variables all equal one:

β ind = β agg = 1, γ ind = γ agg = 1, δ ind = δ agg = 1 .

        Estimates of the true models are shown in Table 1 columns [10]-[12], averaged over 500

replications. The individual-level model (6) reported in column [10] was estimated by OLS; the

standard errors in all of the OLS models were adjusted for the community-level error component

using Huber-type ex-post clustered corrections. The aggregated model (7) in column [11] was

estimated for 100 communities after collapsing each variable to its community mean; note that

the standard error of the coefficient on θ c is quite large, reflecting the fact that this variable was

designed to have no variation when aggregated to the community-level. The instrumental

variables estimator of the true model (equation 11 modified to also include θ ic in both stages) in

column [12] uses the vector of 100 community dummy variables as instrument in the first stage;

standard errors are again corrected for community-level clustering.

        The true models [10]-[12] illustrate two central results corresponding to Case I: First,

when there is no mis-specification (and no general equilibrium or cross-level effects), all three

estimators yield exactly the same point estimates. Aggregated estimators are unbiased in this

case, and can be used for inferring either the aggregate health effects of an insurance expansion,

or the equivalent individual-level effect of insurance on health. Second, the standard errors of

the insurance coefficient are substantially higher in models that discard individual-level variation

in insurance (either by aggregating the unit of observation to the community-level, or by using

only community-level instruments).

        Next, consider the results of Case II in columns [4]-[6], in which the community level

health infrastructure variable Pc is omitted from the models. The key result is that while the

individual-level estimator is biased up 29%, this bias is 50% in the aggregated estimator. In this


                                                            14
case, aggregation exacerbates the omitted variables bias. Furthermore, the instrumental variables

estimator is just as biased as the aggregated estimator; this is due to the fact that the omitted

community-level variable is in the error term of the structural equation, hence the community

dummies are not appropriate instruments since they are not validly excluded from the structural

equation.

       Finally, consider Case III in columns [7]-[9], in which the individual-level health

endowment variable θ ic is omitted from the models. In this case the individual-level OLS

insurance coefficient is again biased by 30%, but the aggregated estimator remains unbiased.

This is because θ ic was constructed to illustrate the special case of a variable that is correlated

with insurance at the individual-level, but not at the community-level. Another way of viewing

this example is that individual insurance choices are endogenous within communities, but that

variation in insurance rates across communities is caused solely by exogenous factors, and in this

case community-level dummies can serve as appropriate instruments to correct for this

endogeneity.

       The above has necessarily focused on stylized examples to illustrate some important but

frequently poorly understood properties of aggregated estimators. One of the implications of this

discussion is that a priori it is difficult to hypothesize whether or not aggregated models will

perform well in any given application, but that Hausman tests provide a useful tool for assessing

the relative performance of the estimators. Next, we apply the above insights to examining the

mortality effect of insurance in the particular context of Costa Rica’s 1970’s insurance

expansion.




                                                  15
COSTA RICAN SETTING

       Infant mortality rates fell dramatically in Costa Rica over the course of the 1960s and

1970s, dropping from approximately 70 per 1,000 in 1960 to 20 by 1980. Much of this decline

was in deaths from diarrhea, pneumonia, and vaccine-preventable diseases. Caldwell (1986) has

argued that important factors causing this decline include high levels of female education, a

strong primary care focus in the health care system, and the role of national health insurance in

eliminating financial barriers to health care access. Additional factors hypothesized by other

observers include water supply and sanitation interventions, advanced social development,

sustained economic growth, and political stability (Mohs 1985; PAHO 1998). These factors

were likely reinforced by the sharp fertility decline during the 1960s, which itself may have been

caused by many of these same factors.

       The factor that has received the most attention out of the above list has been Costa Rica’s

health care policies. For the purposes of the present paper we distinguish the national health

insurance expansion during the 1970s from the other potentially important primary and

secondary care interventions. While previous empirical work has documented that the policies

as a whole appear to have played a substantial role in reducing infant and child mortality

(Rosero-Bixby 1986), the only paper to look specifically at insurance has found its role to be

modest at best (Dow and Schmeer, in press).

       Mesa-Lago (1985) documents the evolution of national health insurance in Costa Rica.

Prior to the 1970s health insurance was primarily held by civil servants and professionals, with

very low coverage rates among agricultural workers and other laborers, despite a 1961

constitutional amendment to establish universal coverage. A key turning point was the

development of the first national health plan in 1971, which reinvigorated the goal of universal




                                                16
public health insurance. With political support from the government, insurance rates began to

climb rapidly starting about 1973, leveling off about 1980 when the third world debt crisis

began. Based on census data, health insurance coverage among children increased from 42% in

1973 to 73% by 1984. Those remaining uninsured were generally in marginalized households

with only unemployed or informal sector workers; in principle the most indigent households

were eligible for user fee and premium exemptions, but in practice many households are not

covered by these safety net provisions. The 30% of the population who obtained insurance as a

result of the 1970s expansion were generally in middle to lower socioeconomic status

households, who could reasonably be expected to benefit from improved financial access to care.

This change in financial access is likely to have been substantial, given that insurance granted

universal access to hospitals and widespread health facilities at zero prices with no deductibles,

as opposed to the uninsured who faced large out-of-pocket prices and user fees even in

government-run facilities.

       Concurrent with the insurance expansion were a number of other health sector changes.

First, primary health care programs targeted at the uninsured were initiated in selected rural areas

in 1973, and expanded to certain urban neighborhoods in 1976. Second, virtually all hospitals

were nationalized in the mid-1970s and placed under the control of the government agency that

administers universal insurance, the Caja Costarricense de Seguro Social. Third, the government

invested in a considerable expansion of primary health care personnel and facilities.

Consideration of these other health sector changes is important in our empirical analysis in part

because they may be correlated at the community level with insurance rate changes, and hence

should be controlled for in the regression analyses. In addition, these changes may affect the

likelihood of general equilibrium or cross-level effects of insurance. For example, if the supply




                                                17
side of the health care market does not expand sufficiently to meet the new demand induced by

an insurance expansion, then facility crowding could result in spillovers that cause individual-

level insurance effect estimates to be larger than the net community-level effects from

aggregated analyses. The fact that the government did expand health care supply along with

insurance lessens the likelihood of such general equilibrium effects. We next discuss in more

detail our econometric methods.



METHODS

       We analyze the effects of Costa Rica’s insurance expansion using variants of all three of

the econometric estimators discussed earlier: individual-level OLS, aggregated OLS, and

individual-level instrumental variables with community dummy instruments. Equation (6)

showed a stylized version of our estimating equation derived from the reduced form health

demand function (5). When moving from simulations to actual data, however, we must address

several omitted variables issues arising from unobservables.

       First, although we can explicitly control for individuals’ socioeconomic characteristics

and wealth Wic, and certain non-medical inputs such as water supply and sanitation Sic, our data

do not allow us to observe other individual characteristics such as health endowments θ ic . If

these unobserved health variables are in the error term then adverse or positive selection could

cause insurance to be endogenous, leading to biased estimates. To attempt to test for this we will

use the instrumental variables estimator; if the Hausman test fails to reject the null hypothesis of

exogeneity, then we will conclude that in our application insurance is not in fact endogenous.

       Second, our instrumental variables strategy allows us to test for the exogeneity of other

potentially endogenous variables as well, such as wealth, and water supply and sanitation.



                                                 18
Although non-medical health inputs such as sanitation may not belong in the reduced form health

demand equation per se, given our quasi-experimental design it is useful to include such

variables in the model simply as controls for unobserved heterogeneity that may be correlated

with insurance preferences. Such controls would not properly serve their purpose if they were

themselves endogenous, however, hence the importance of Hausman tests for their exogeneity.

       Third, we are likely to only partially observe important community-level variables such

as the community health environment Ec. As discussed above, this would cause exacerbated

omitted variables bias in the aggregated and instrumental variables models due to correlation

between insurance and the community error component µc. A fix to this could be to estimate

community-fixed effects versions of the model; however, with cross-sectional data this would

only be possible for the individual-level OLS model. Thus our solution to this problem is to

construct a synthetic panel dataset, based on repeated cross-sections of the Costa Rican national

census just before (1973) and after (1984) the main insurance expansion, which then allows all

three estimators to control for unobserved community-level fixed effects.

       These modifications result in the following estimation version of the individual-level

equation (6), where t indexes year Y (1973 or 1984):
                                                                         ~
(12)    H ict = α 12 + β 12 I ict + λ12Wict + δ 12 Pct + η12Yt + υ~c ,12 Dc + ε ict ,12

Our estimating equation for the aggregated model is the same as (12), but with individual-level

variables being replaced by the year-specific community mean:
                                                                      ~
(13)    H ct = α 13 + β 13 I ct + λ13Wct + δ 13 Pct + η13Yt + υ~c ,13 Dc + ε ct ,13

       It is worth noting that this aggregated estimator (13) is analogous to the state-year fixed

effects “difference-in-difference” models used by a number of United States studies which Levy

and Meltzer (2001) have referred to as producing some of the more valid estimates of insurance



                                                            19
effects on health. This is also the model used by Dow and Schmeer (in press) in the only other

work analyzing the effects of the Costa Rican insurance expansion.

        For the instrumental variables model, with communities observed in multiple years the

instrument set is expanded to consist of the year-specific community dummies. Thus after

including community fixed effects in the main equation (12), the model is identified by the

community × year interaction terms. This produces instrumental variables estimates that again

correspond quite closely to the difference-in-differences aggregated model (13). The first stage

equation is:
                                                             ~                ~
(14)     I ict = α 14 + λ14Wict + δ 14 Pct + η14Yt + υ~c ,14 Dc + ς~c ,14Yt × Dc + ε ict ,14

and the second stage structural equation is the same as (12) after substituting the predicted value

Iˆict from (14) for I ict .

        An additional econometric detail is that the aggregated estimator is implemented via

OLS, weighted by the community population size. Finally, Huber-type community-clustered

robust standard errors are reported in the tables.



DATA

        Data linking individual-level insurance and mortality outcomes are rare, which is one

reason why many studies resort to aggregated analyses. In this study we are able to analyze

100% microsamples of the 1973 and 1984 Costa Rican censuses, exploiting their unique feature

of asking each woman not only about the survivorship of her children, but also her health

insurance status. Although ideally we would prefer to observe the mortality experience of each

child, we only actually observe child mortality based on the mothers’ reports of total children

ever born and surviving, thus we follow previous literature such as Trussell and Preston (1982)



                                                            20
and estimate the determinants of infant and child mortality using mothers as the units of

observation.

       The main insurance expansion occurred between 1973 and 1980. Thus although we do

not have historical insurance information on each woman, in general insurance rates for women

were stable over the several years prior to each of these censuses. To focus on the mortality only

of recently born children, for whom current insurance measured in the census is plausibly an

indicator of insurance at the time of birth, we restrict our analysis sample to women ages 18 to

25. In addition, because of high non-response to the “children ever born” question among single

women, we restrict the sample to only ever married women. Finally, the sample is further

restricted to only those women who reported at least one live birth, resulting in an analysis

sample of 134,036 women (53,196 from the 1973 census and 80,840 from the 1984 census).



Dependent Variable

       Our child mortality dependent variable H is constructed from two standard census

questions regarding the number of live births a woman has ever had (B), and how many of those

children are still alive (L): H = ( B − L) / B . This dependent variable raises a number of analysis

issues. First, in order to make results generalizable to the population of children, rather than the

population of mothers, regressions are modified to incorporate weights reflecting each woman’s

number of children ever born.

       Second, there is likely to be some degree of under-reporting of births and deaths,

particularly for live-born children who died in the immediate postpartum period. A study of

national child national estimates from these census data found that the 1973 census results in

unbiased estimates, but the 1984 census slightly overestimates child mortality (Behm and




                                                 21
Robles-Soto 1990). Furthermore, it is possible that such under-reporting could differ for home-

births and hospital births, which could introduce bias given that the insurance expansion is

associated with a decrease in home births. Unfortunately the patterns of such under-reporting are

not well understood either in general or in our specific data, thus we simply raise this as a

potential caveat (a caveat that also applies to alternative data sources including vital statistics that

imperfectly observe in-home mortality).

        Third, mortality will increase with age because of the greater average number of child

years of risk exposure. Trussell and Preston (1982) have developed methods to adjust the

mortality dependent variable for exposure time; their methods are particularly useful for making

inferences about formal mortality rates in samples with wide age ranges. For our purposes of

regression estimation among a narrow age group, however, we prefer the less parametric

alternative method of simply correcting for exposure by including women’s age as a right-hand

side explanatory variable.

        Fourth, it is not self-evident to which time period and child's age this mortality ratio

refers. However, early studies by William Brass and other demographers suggest that child

mortality ratios of mothers aged 18 to 24 stand approximately for the probability of dying in the

first two years of life in a time point two years before the date of the survey or census (United

Nations 1983).



Explanatory Variables

        The main explanatory variable of interest is insurance status. Crucially, both the 1973

and 1984 Costa Rican censuses collect data on social health insurance status for each household

member. Because children generally have the same insurance status as their mother, the




                                                  22
mother’s insurance status is a good indicator of both whether a woman had access to insured

health care during pregnancy and childbirth, and whether the child had access to insured health

care after birth.

        The census also provides a rich array of individual and household-level control variables

corresponding to the constructs in the reduced form health demand equation (5). The specific

variables included in the analysis are further defined in Table 2. The mothers’ demographic and

socioeconomic characteristics Wi controlled for in the analysis include age, educational

attainment, migration status, and wealth. The final set of household-level variables, included in

the model as controls for unobserved heterogeneity correlated with insurance, are three water

supply and sanitation measures.

        Most of these variables are self-explanatory, with the exception of wealth. Wealth is

represented in the estimation as the first two principal components from a vector of eleven

housing quality and asset indicators. The first wealth principal component can be interpreted as

a wealth measure; the factor loadings on the second component make it more difficult to

interpret, but we include it in the model as an additional control variable. These indicators are

reduced to their principal components because of the degrees of freedom and multicollinearity

challenges arising in the aggregated models; the individual-level models, however, are not

substantively changed when instead including the eleven underlying variables directly.

        The last set of variables in the model are those that measure community-level health

infrastructure. These are not directly available from the censuses in Costa Rica, hence they have

been constructed from a variety of different survey and administrative data sources. These

include travel time to the capital city San Jose, the community proportion of individuals covered

by the post-1973 primary health care programs targeted at the uninsured, the community




                                                23
proportion of the population whose nearest health clinic was inaugurated between 1973 and

1984, and finally the proportion of deaths not medically certified is used as another proxy

variable for community access to care.

       An additional key variable required for the analysis is the definition of communities.

Extensive previous effort has been applied to this problem by Rosero-Bixby (1991), resulting in

the country being broken into a set of 99 mutually exclusive “counties” that are both

geographically and politically meaningful. This county grouping is applied in the present paper

as the definition of the community, and the community-level health infrastructure control

variables have all been constructed at this county level.



RESULTS

       Summary statistics for the insured and uninsured women in each of our two data years

are presented in Table 3. Insurance coverage rates among our sample women increased

dramatically between 1973 and 1984, from 46% to 74%. During the same period our child

mortality ratio fell even more markedly, from 53 to 18 deaths per 1000 live births. The

association between the insurance expansion and the national mortality drop has been noted by

many observers (e.g., Mesa-Lago 1985), but of course many other health determinants improved

over this time period as well. For example, the proportion of women ages 18-25 with any

secondary education doubled from 20% to 41%, the proportion of women living in households

without internal bathrooms dropped in half from 42% to 19%, and the proportion of women

living in households with a refrigerator doubled from 19% to 41% (Table 3).

       While the above results refer to the aggregate national level relationship, we see that at

the county level the relationship between the size of the insurance change and the size of the




                                                 24
mortality change over time is also large, before controlling for potential confounders. This can

be seen from the OLS aggregated regression in Table 4 column [2] that includes year and county

fixed effects but no other control variables (this regression is equivalent to a “difference-in-

differences” design). The coefficient from this regression indicates that the 29 percentage point

insurance expansion explains (before adding controls) 40% of the observed child mortality

decline between the 1973 and 1984 censuses ( − .0485 × .29 /(.053 − .018) = .4 ).

        This county-level aggregated effect is almost four times higher, however, than the

unconditional individual-level relationship shown in Table 4 column [1]. The standard error of

the insurance variable in the aggregated model is also much higher than in the individual model,

by a factor of 10. In order to further compare the different results between these models, Table 4

column [3] reports the individual-level instrumental variables regression that uses the 98

county× year interaction dummies for identification. The test of the joint explanatory power of

these instruments in the first stage is highly significant (as is the joint significance test for the

base county fixed effects dummies), implying that the instruments are strong enough to avoid

weak-instrument bias. As was illustrated in the Monte Carlo results from Table 1, when using

our actual data the estimated insurance coefficient from the instrumental variables model turns

out to be quite similar to the estimate from the aggregated model, in both size and precision.

Furthermore, the Hausman test rejects the null hypothesis that the instrumental variable estimate

(and by implication the aggregated estimate) is statistically equal to the individual-level estimate.

        As discussed earlier, there are multiple potential reasons why the Hausman test could

reject the equality of the individual and the aggregated estimates. This could be due to the

presence of general equilibrium or cross-level effects that cause the estimators to estimate

different underlying constructs, it could be due to omitted community-level variables which




                                                   25
result in exacerbated omitted variables bias in the aggregated estimator, or it could be due to

omitted individual-level variables that may cause insurance to be endogenous in the individual-

level model.

        Given that we do in fact observe a rich array of individual and community-level control

variables, we can further explore the relative inferences from individual versus aggregated

models by next considering estimates that include this complete set of controls. Table 4 column

[4] presents this individual-level OLS model, indicating that the insurance effect drops by half

after including controls, but is still statistically significantly different from zero. Control

covariates that also significantly affect child mortality in this model include mother’s education,

water supply and sanitation, and household wealth. Community health care infrastructure

indicators are less significantly related to child mortality, though not irrelevant.

        When next considering the aggregated results with the full set of controls (Table 4

column [5]), the key finding is that the insurance coefficient drops to virtually zero. Based on

the above theoretical discussion of omitted variables bias in aggregated models, this suggests that

the correlation between insurance and these controls may have operated mostly at the community

level, hence their omission led to a much larger omitted variables bias in the aggregated model

than in the individual-level model.

        In terms of standard errors, Table 4 indicates that with controls the aggregated model still

yields standard errors on the insurance coefficient that are an order of magnitude larger than the

individual-level model. Furthermore, virtually all of the control variables are statistically

insignificant in the aggregated model, arising from some combination of reduced variation and

multicollinearity. Based on the fact that the insurance standard errors in the aggregated model




                                                  26
changed little after adding the control variables, however, it does not appear that the insurance

coefficient itself was influenced by multicollinearity.

       Again the instrumental variables model can assist in formally testing the difference

between aggregated and individual-level results. Comparing models with controls, the

instrumental variables model (Table 4 column [6], which treats only insurance as endogenous) is

again quite similar to the aggregated model in terms of both the insurance coefficient and its

standard error, and hence has much larger standard errors than the individual-level model. The

exogenous controls in the instrumental variables model, however, have virtually the same

coefficients and precision as the individual-level model, given that these exploit the same level

of variation (this result was also found in the Monte Carlo simulation of Table 1). Formally

comparing these models with controls, the Hausman test now fails to reject the null hypothesis

that the instrumental variables and individual-level OLS models are equivalent. This is true

whether including all controls in this Hausman test, or running the Hausman test on the insurance

variable alone.

       As one final test, we explored a second instrumental variables model that additionally

treated the wealth and water supply and sanitation variables as endogenous (using the same set of

county× year instrumental variables as used to instrument insurance alone). One interpretation of

this model is that these potentially endogenous control variables now rely only on their

community-level variation to control for confounding. The results of this model (Table 4

column [7]) are virtually identical to the previous instrumental variables model that treated only

insurance as endogenous. The Hausman tests again cannot reject the null hypothesis that these

variables are jointly exogenous, or that the insurance variable alone is unaffected by their

endogeneity. This suggests that these variables appear mainly to be controlling for community-




                                                 27
level confounding, which again would explain why the aggregated model appeared to be much

more biased by their omission than did the individual-level model.



DISCUSSION

          The result of the above model comparisons and tests is that the OLS individual-level

specification with controls (and community fixed effects) is our preferred model (Table 4

column [4]). Furthermore, unless there happen to be countervailing remaining biases in the

various models, the results suggest that insurance is not endogenous in this preferred model after

including controls, and that there were no general equilibrium or cross-level effects of the

insurance expansion. This implies that the aggregated model with controls (Table 4 column [5])

would also yield unbiased effects that could be interpreted at either the aggregated or individual

levels.

          However, this aggregated model with controls is substantially inferior due to its larger

confidence intervals. When comparing the upper bound (in absolute value) of the 95%

confidence intervals on the insurance effect, the models yield somewhat different inferences.

The point estimate of insurance in the individual model implies that the 1970s insurance

expansion explained only 4% of Costa Rica’s marked child mortality drop between 1973 and

1984, and the 95% confidence interval can bound this effect to be under 6%. By contrast, the

95% confidence interval from the aggregated model can only bound this effect to be under 16%,

which would not be an insubstantial intervention.1 Translating these effects into more

generalizable magnitudes, the individual-level point estimates imply an insurance-mortality


1
 This estimate compares quite closely to Dow and Schmeer (in press). Based on vital statistics data on all births in
1973 and 1984, the aggregated estimates in that paper bounded the insurance effect to explain at most 20% of Costa
Rica’s infant mortality drop over this period. This suggests that sample limitations in the present paper to estimate
mortality for all children of only ever married women 18-25 did not lead to substantial biases.


                                                         28
elasticity of -0.10 with an upper bound of -0.14, as compared to the aggregated upper bound

elasticity of -0.37. Although not radically different in this application after controlling for a rich

set of observed confounders, the difference is indeed substantive.

       Furthermore, based on the fact that the individual and aggregated estimates were

radically different before controlling for confounders, our results do suggest the importance of

careful investigation of the effects of aggregation in any given application. As emphasized in

our theoretical consideration of the effects of aggregation, however, it would be a mistake to

blindly assume that aggregated estimators always yield more biased estimates than individual-

level estimators. One reason for interpreting aggregation as equivalent to an instrumental

variables estimator is to further emphasize the point that aggregation is not in and of itself

uniformly dangerous. As with instrumental variables techniques, aggregated estimators have

their place, with the same inherent possibilities for use and abuse. Every estimator has its

strengths and weaknesses, and applications that carefully compare across different levels of

aggregation may often prove the most convincing.

       Based on our analysis, we conclude that although insurance does have a statistically

significant effect on child mortality, this effect is quite small. If all else had been held constant

from 1973 to 1984 except for the insurance intervention, instead of the actual child mortality

drop from 53 to 18 deaths per 1000 live births, Costa Rica’s mortality would have dropped to

only 51.6. As a health intervention, expanding insurance coverage from 46% to 74% of our

population did not have much effect on child mortality.

       There are a number of potential reasons why the insurance expansion might have been

ineffective. For example, it could be that the treated group who became newly insured in fact

already had complete access to care even before the expansion, hence the insurance did not affect




                                                  29
utilization but operated only as a financing intervention. However, we find this explanation

unconvincing a priori, given that in settings throughout the world health care user fees have been

found to lower utilization (Jimenez 1995). We believe it is plausible that a substantial portion of

the large increase in national health care expenditures over this period could have been induced

by the price-effects of insurance.

       A second potential explanation of the lack of insurance effects is that the particular types

of medical care induced by insurance had very little effect on child mortality outcomes.

Economic insurance theory predicts that uninsured individuals will be willing to pay out-of-

pocket for the most cost-effective types of health care, hence insurance will increase utilization

primarily for less effective health care interventions that are not worth their full cost. For

example, if insurance primarily induces increases in expensive hospitalization, and if the

available hospital quality and technology yields relatively low health benefits, then although

insurance might have effects on selected health outcome measures, the insurance expansions

might not have major effects on aggregate health indicators such as mortality. Further research

on the exact types of health care demand induced by insurance would be particularly useful for

further exploring these issues.

       Also important will be to conduct similar analyses on the health effects of insurance in a

wider range of settings. Generalizability of individual studies can always be questioned due to

specific institutional features. For example, the fact that Costa Rica made available a wide range

of primary health care interventions regardless of insurance status may have contributed to a

smaller estimated effect of insurance than would be found in another setting that expanded

insurance prior to investing in expanded primary care programs. This of course begs the

question of whether such primary care programs would be more cost-effective at achieving




                                                 30
health gains, if costly insurance programs appear to have little mortality benefit beyond these

primary care programs. Clearly additional research is needed to better explore these and related

questions, such as the value of insurance in reducing the risk of catastrophic expenditures as

compared with the opportunity cost of insurance expansions crowding out alternative potentially

more effective health interventions.




                                                31
REFERENCES

Behm, H. and A. Robles-Soto. 1990. “El descenso reciente de la mortalidad infantil por grupos
socioeconómicos.” In Factores Sociales de Riesgo de Muerte en la Infancia. Santiago, Chile:
Centro Latinoamericano de Demografía (CELADE).

Brook, R.H., et. al. 1984. “Does Free Care Improve Adults’ Health? Results from a Randomized
Controlled Trial.” New England Journal of Medicine 309:1426-34.

Caldwell, J.C. 1986. “Routes to Low Mortality in Poor Countries.” Population and Development
Review 2:171-220.

Currie, J., and J. Gruber. 1996a. “Health Insurance Eligibility, Utilization of Medical Care, and
Child Health.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 111:431-66.

Currie, J. and J. Gruber. 1996b. “Saving Babies: The Efficacy and Cost of Recent Changes in the
Medicaid Eligibility of Pregnant Women.” Journal of Political Economy 104:1263-96.

Dow, W.H., and K.K. Schmeer. In press. “Health Insurance and Child Mortality in Costa Rica.”
Social Science and Medicine.

Firebaugh, G. 1978. “A Rule for Inferring Individual-Level Relationships from Aggregate Data.”
American Sociological Review 43:557-572.

Goodman, L.A. 1953. “Ecological Regressions and Behavior of Individuals.” American
Sociological Review 18:663-64.

Guthrie, K.A. and L. Sheppard. 2001. “Overcoming Biases and Misconceptions in Ecological
Studies.” Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series A 164:141-154.

Haines, M.R. and R.C. Avery. 1982. “Differential Infant and Child Mortality in Costa Rica:
1968-1973.” Population Studies 36:31-43.

Hanratty, M.J. 1996. “Canadian National Health Insurance and Infant Health” American
Economic Review 86:276-284.

Hanushek, E.A., S.G. Rivkin, and L.L. Taylor. 1996. “Aggregation and the Estimated Effects of
School Resources.” Review of Economics and Statistics 78:611-27.

Institute of Medicine. 2002. Care Without Coverage: Too Little, Too Late. Washington, D.C.:
National Academy Press.

Jimenez, E. 1995. “Human and Physical Infrastructure: Investment and Pricing Policies in
Developing Countries.” Pp. 2773-2843 in Handbook of Development Economics Vol. 3B, edited
by J. Behrman and T.N. Srinivasan. Amsterdam: Elsevier Science.




                                                32
Keeler, E.B. and J.E. Rolph. 1988. “The Demand for Episodes of Treatment in the Health
Insurance Experiment.” Journal of Health Economics 7:337-67.

Levy, H. and D. Meltzer. 2001. “What Do We Really Know About Whether Health Insurance
Affects Health?” Working Paper 6. Economic Research Initiative on the Uninsured. University
of Michigan.

Manning, W.G., J.P. Newhouse, N. Duan, E.B. Keeler, and A. Leibowitz. 1987. “Health
Insurance and the Demand for Medical Care: Evidence From a Randomized Experiment.” The
American Economic Review 77:251-77.

Mesa-Lago, C. 1985. “Health Care in Costa Rica: Boom and Crisis.” Social Science and
Medicine. 21:13-21.

Moffitt, R.A. 1995. “Selection Bias Adjustment in Treatment-Effect Models as a Method of
Aggregation.” Technical Working Paper 187. National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA.

Mohs, E. 1983. La Salud en Costa Rica. San Jose, Costa Rica: Editorial Universidad Estatal a
Distancia.

Pan American Health Organization. 1998. “Health in the Americas, Vols. I and II, Country
Health Profile.”

Robinson, W.S. 1950. “Ecological Correlations and the Behavior of Individuals.” American
Sociological Review 15:351-57.

Rosero-Bixby, L. 1986. “Infant Mortality in Costa Rica: Explaining the Recent Decline.” Studies
in Family Planning, 17:56-65.

Rosero-Bixby, L. 1990. “Socioeconomic Development, Health Interventions and Mortality
Decline in Costa Rica.” Scandanavian Journal of Social Medicine, Supp 46: 33-42.

Rosero-Bixby, L. 1991. Interaction Diffusion and Fertility Transition in Costa Rica. Ph.D.
dissertation, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor.

Schultz, T.P. 1984. “Studying the Impact of Household Economic and Community Variables on
Child Mortality.” Population and Development Review 10(Supp):215-35.

Trussell, J. and S. Preston. 1982. “Estimating the Covariates of Childhood Mortality from
Retrospective Reports of Mothers.” Health Policy and Education 3:1-36.

United Nations. 1983. Manual X. Indirect Techniques for demographic estimation. New York:
United Nations Publication ST/ESA/SER.A/81, pp. 76-81.




                                               33
Table 1: Monte Carlo Simulations of Effects of Omitting Individual and Community Level Controls
Variable Name
                   [1]         [2]           [3]         [4]          [5]       [6]        [7]           [8]          [9]         [10]     [11]     [12]
                  OLS         OLS            IV         OLS          OLS        IV        OLS            OLS          IV         OLS       OLS       IV
                  Indiv      Aggreg         Indiv       Indiv       Aggreg    Indiv       Indiv         Aggreg       Indiv       Indiv    Aggreg   Indiv

Insurance           1.504     1.499        1.499       1.286       1.496        1.496       1.294       1.005        1.005       1.005    0.999    0.999
                    (.096)    (.168)       (.164)      (.107)      (.169)       (.164)      (.092)      (.166)       (.161)     (.0994)   (.166)   (.161)

Individual Health                                      0.862        0.718       0.757                                            1.003    0.996    1.005
                                                       (.114)      (1.690)      (.131)                                           (.112)   (1.45)   (.129)

Community Infrastructure                                                                    0.859       1.002        1.002       1.003    1.006    1.005
                                                                                            (.148)      (.166)       (.160)      (.147)   (.166)   (.160)

Notes:
1. "OLS Indiv" are individual-level models estimated by OLS using 10,000 observations (100 individuals in each of 100 communities).
2. "OLS Aggreg" are community-level models estimated by OLS using 100 observations on community mean values.
3. "IV Indiv" are individual-level instrumental variables models using 10,000 observations, with 99 community dummies as instruments.
4. Individual-level OLS and IV models report Huber community-clustered standard errors.
5. Monte Carlo results are based on 500 replications, with true coefficients all equal to one.
Table 2: Variable Definitions and Summary Statistics for Ever Married Women Ages 18 to 25 with Live Births
                                                                                                             Standard
              Variable Name                                    Description                        Mean
                                                                                                             Deviation
Dependent variable
Child mortality                        Number of children died / children ever born               0.032       0.126

Kids ever born                         Number of children ever born                               2.025       1.213

Kids currently alive                   Number of children currently alive                         1.927       1.111

Independent variables
Individual characteristics
  Insurance                            Dummy = 1 if woman has health insurance coverage           0.631       0.483

 Age                                   Age of woman in years                                     22.289       2.100

 Educational Attainment
  None (omitted)                       Dummy = 1 if no education                                  0.044       0.205

   Primary education                   Dummy = 1 if primary education only                        0.625       0.484

   Secondary education                 Dummy = 1 if secondary or higher education                 0.331       0.470

 Migration status                      Dummy = 1 if woman has migrated in the past 5 years        0.247       0.431

Household sanitation characteristics
 No sanitation                         Dummy = 1 if household does not have own sanitation        0.186       0.389

 No bath                               Dummy = 1 if household does not have own bathroom          0.281       0.449

 No water                              Dummy = 1 if household does not have own piped water       0.336       0.472
Wealth indicators
  Cement roof                          Dummy = 1 if household has cement roof                     0.039       0.194

   Wood or tile floor                  Dummy = 1 if household has wood or tile floor              0.675       0.468

   Cement or brick walls               Dummy = 1 if household has cement or brick walls           0.233       0.422

   Electric light                      Dummy = 1 if household has electric lighting               0.722       0.448

   No light                            Dummy = 1 if household does not have any lighting          0.029       0.168

   Electric or gas cooking fuel        Dummy = 1 if household has electric or gas cooking fuel    0.499       0.500

   Stove                               Dummy = 1 if household has a stove                         0.600       0.490

   Refrigerator                        Dummy = 1 if household has a refrigerator                  0.322       0.467

   Radio and television                Dummy = 1 if household has radio and/or televesion         0.822       0.383

   Telephone                           Dummy = 1 if household has a telephone                     0.099       0.299
   Household density                    Number of persons per room in household                           1.424           1.006

 Wealth1                                First principle component of wealth indicators                    0.306           1.830

 Wealth2                                Second principle component of wealth indicators                  -0.037           1.149

Community characteristics
 Travel time to San Jose                Travel time to San Jose (capital city), hours                     3.230           3.021

 Primary health care programs           Proportion of population covered by post-1973                     0.357           0.343
                                        primary health care programs
 Nearest clinic opened after 1973       Proportion of population with nearest clinic                      0.225           0.349
                                        inaugurated since 1973
 Deaths not certified                   Proportion of deaths not medically certified                      0.164           0.202

Number of observations                                                                                         134036

Notes:
1. All data except community characteristics are drawn from the 1973 and 1984 Costa Rican censuses.
2. Wealth1 and Wealth2 are the first two principle components of cement roof, floor, cement or brick walls, electric
   light, no light, electric or gas cooking fuel, no stove, no refrigerator, no radio or tv, no telephone and household
  density*(-1).
Table 3: Summary Statistics by Insurance Status for Ever Married Women Ages 18 to 25 with Live Births
               Variable Name                                 1973                              1984
Dependent variable                             Insured Uninsured        All       Insured Uninsured      All
Child mortality                                  0.039      0.064      0.053       0.016       0.022    0.018

Kids ever born                                1.987       2.426      2.224       1.829       2.078      1.893

Kids currently alive                          1.869       2.215      2.056       1.785       2.011      1.842

Independent variables
Individual characteristics
  Insurance                                   1.000       0.000      0.459       1.000       0.000      0.744

 Age                                         22.349      22.047      22.186      22.432     22.141      22.357

 Educational Attainment
  None (omitted)                              0.030       0.101      0.069       0.018       0.055      0.028

   Primary education                          0.651       0.793      0.728       0.520       0.669      0.558

   Secondary education                        0.319       0.105      0.203       0.462       0.276      0.414

 Migration status                             0.264       0.278      0.271       0.221       0.259      0.231

Household sanitation characteristics
 No sanitation                                0.161       0.325      0.250       0.115       0.226      0.144

 No bath                                      0.263       0.549      0.418       0.147       0.318      0.191

 No water                                     0.241       0.498      0.380       0.267       0.420      0.306
Wealth indicators
  Cement roof                                 0.047       0.017      0.031       0.050       0.029      0.044

   Wood or tile floor                         0.780       0.639      0.704       0.672       0.612      0.657

   Cement or brick walls                      0.199       0.085      0.137       0.331       0.190      0.295

   Electric light                             0.807       0.457      0.618       0.843       0.641      0.791

   No light                                   0.018       0.030      0.024       0.024       0.054      0.032

   Electric or gas cooking fuel               0.552       0.257      0.392       0.632       0.387      0.569

   Stove                                      0.768       0.465      0.604       0.648       0.451      0.598

   Refrigerator                               0.277       0.116      0.190       0.465       0.246      0.409

   Radio or television                        0.844       0.720      0.777       0.891       0.738      0.852

   Telephone                                  0.072       0.031      0.050       0.147       0.086      0.131

   Household density                          1.381       1.780      1.597       1.208       1.606      1.310
 Wealth1                                         0.522       -0.765       -0.174       0.914        -0.225       0.623

 Wealth2                                         -0.279      -0.094       -0.179       0.048        0.083        0.057

Community characteristics
 Travel time to San Jose                         2.521        5.044        3.886       2.698        3.092        2.799

 Primary health care programs                    0.000        0.000        0.000       0.587        0.608        0.592

 Nearest clinic opened after 1973                0.000        0.000        0.000       0.362        0.405        0.373

 Deaths not certified                            0.171        0.352        0.269       0.088        0.114        0.095

Number of observations                           24411        28785       53196        60143        20697       80840

Notes:
1. The difference between 1973 and 1984 observations are statistically significant for all variables except no stove
   with a p-value <0.0001.
2. The difference between insured and uninsured women in 1973 and 1984 is statistically significant for all variables.
Table 4: Regression Results of Insurance Effects on Child Mortality for Ever Married Women Ages 18 to 25 with Live Births
               Variable Name
Independent variables                            [1]          [2]            [3]         [4]          [5]           [6]          [7]
                                                OLS          OLS             IV         OLS          OLS            IV           IV
                                                Indiv       Aggreg          Indiv       Indiv       Aggreg         Indiv        Indiv
Individual characteristics
   Insurance                                  -0.0131 **    -0.0485 **   -0.0535 **    -0.0049   **    0.0050      0.0004 †     0.0102 †
                                              (.0010)       (.0096)      (.0117)       (.0011)        (.0120)      (.0124)      (.0122)
  Age                                                                                   0.0021   **    0.0070       0.0021 **    0.0023 **
                                                                                       (.0003)        (.0096)      (.0003)      (.0004)
  Primary education                                                                    -0.0231   **    0.0076      -0.0235 **   -0.0161 **
                                                                                       (.0033)        (.0649)      (.0037)      (.0052)
   Secondary education                                                                 -0.0351   **    0.0180      -0.0358 **   -0.0246 *
                                                                                       (.0033)        (.0776)      (.0042)      (.0106)
   Migration status                                                                     0.0025   *     0.0166       0.0027       0.0024
                                                                                       (.0014)        (.0108)      (.0015)      (.0016)
Household characteristics
   No sanitation                                                                         0.0054 **     0.0092       0.0055 **   0.0128 †
                                                                                        (.0019)       (.0243)      (.0020)      (.0263)
   No bath                                                                               0.0066 **     0.0242       0.0069 **   0.0296 †
                                                                                        (.0017)       (.0183)      (.0017)      (.0199)
   No water                                                                              0.0062 **     0.0172       0.0063 **   0.0285 †
                                                                                        (.0013)       (.0191)      (.0014)      (.0219)
  Wealth1                                                                              -0.0016 **     -0.0015      -0.0019 *    -0.0001†
                                                                                       (.0005)        (.0048)      (.0007)       (.0050)
  Wealth2                                                                                0.0019 **     0.0037       0.0020 **   0.0080 †
                                                                                        (.0005)       (.0059)      (.0005)      (.0060)
Community characteristics
  Travel time to San Jose                                                               0.0063 *       0.0046 *     0.0065 *     0.0049 *
                                                                                       (.0026)        (.0021)      (.0026)      (.0024)
   Primary health care programs                                                         0.0024        -0.0014       0.0016       0.0019
                                                                                       (.0074)        (.0060)      (.0074)      (.0068)
   Nearest clinic opened after 1973                                                    -0.0033        -0.0009      -0.0036      -0.0036
                                                                                       (.0039)        (.0036)      (.0038)      (.0038)
   Deaths not certified                                                                 0.0496 **      0.0340       0.0517 **    0.0378
                                                                                       (.0168)        (.0175)      (.0184)      (.0197)
Year 1984                                     -0.0441 ** -0.0219 ** -0.0323 ** -0.0240 ** -0.0200 *                     -0.0240 **   -0.0270 **
                                              (.0027)     (.0036)    (.0042)    (.0037)    (.0090)                      (.0037)      (.0061)
Constant                                       0.0644 ** 0.0762 ** 0.0846 **     0.0234    -0.1546                       0.0214 **   -0.0118
                                              (.0016)     (.0044)    (.0060)    (.0066)    (.2227)                      (.0073)      (.0138)
Joint significance of county fixed effects   p<0.0001    p<0.0001   p<0.0001  p<0.0001   p<0.0001                     p<0.0001     p<0.0001
First stage instrument strength                                     p<0.0001                                          p<0.0001     p<0.0001
Hausman endogeneity test: all coefficients                           p=0.001                                           p=0.662     p=0.0750
Hausman endogeneity test: insurance coefficient only                p=0.0006                                          p=0.6626     p=0.2118
N                                             134036        198      134036    134036       198                        134036       134036

Notes:
1. *significant at 5%; **significant at 1% level (robust clustered standard errors in parentheses)
2. "Indiv" indicates individual-level unit of analysis; "aggreg" indicates county-year aggregated unit of analysis.
3. †Regressions 3, 6 and 7 treat insurance as endogenous; Regression 7 also treats no sanitation, no bath, no water, wealth1 and
   wealth2 as endogenous. County-year interaction dummies are used as the identifying instruments for all endogenous variables.
