                                   NBER WORKING PAPER SERIES




                 TRADE REFORMS AND WAGE INEQUALITY IN COLOMBIA

                                              Orazio Attanasio
                                            Pinelopi K. Goldberg
                                                Nina Pavcnik

                                            Working Paper 9830
                                    http://www.nber.org/papers/w9830


                        NATIONAL BUREAU OF ECONOMIC RESEARCH
                                 1050 Massachusetts Avenue
                                   Cambridge, MA 02138
                                        July 2003




We wish to thank Hector Mejia at DANE and Andreas Blom at the World Bank for providing us with the data.
We are also grateful to Cristina Gamboa, Adriana Kugler, Jairo Nuñez Mendez, and Ximena Pena for answering
our numerous questions about the data and the Colombian reforms, and to Eric Edmonds, Ravi Kanbur, and two
anonymous referees for useful comments and suggestions. Goldberg and Pavcnik gratefully acknowledge
financial support from the National Science Foundation Grant SES #0213459. Goldberg acknowledges financial
support from the Alfred P. Sloan Foundation through a Faculty Research Fellowship. Pavcnik acknowledges the
support from the Rockefeller Social Science Faculty Grant. The views expressed herein are those of the authors
and not necessarily those of the National Bureau of Economic Research

©2003 by Orazio Attanasio, Pinelopi Goldberg, and Nina Pavcnik. All rights reserved. Short sections of text not
to exceed two paragraphs, may be quoted without explicit permission provided that full credit including © notice,
is given to the source.
Trade Reforms and Wage Inequality in Colombia
Orazio Attanasio, Pinelopi K. Goldberg, and Nina Pavcnik
NBER Working Paper No. 9830
July 2003
JEL No. F10, F13, J31

                                              ABSTRACT
We investigate the effects of the drastic tariff reductions of the 1980s and 1990s in Colombia on the
wage distribution. We identify three main channels through which the wage distribution was affected:
increasing returns to college education, changes in industry wages that hurt sectors with initially lower
wages and a higher fraction of unskilled workers, and shifts of the labor force towards the informal
sector that typically pays lower wages and offers no benefits. Our results suggest that trade policy
played a role in each of the above cases. The increase in the skill premium was primarily driven by
skilled-biased technological change; however, our evidence suggests, that this change may have been
in part motivated by the tariff reductions and the increased foreign competition to which the trade
reform exposed domestic producers. With respect to industry wages, we find that wage premiums
decreased by more in sectors that experienced larger tariff cuts. Finally, we find some evidence that the
increase in the size of the informal sector is related to increased foreign competition n sectors with
larger tariff cuts and more trade exposure, as measured by the size their imports, experience a greater
increase in informality, though this effect is concentrated in the years prior to the labor market reform.
Nevertheless, increasing returns to education, and changes in industry premiums and informality alone
cannot fully explain the increase in wage inequality we observe over this period. This suggests that
overall the effect of the trade reforms on the wage distribution may have been small.

Orazio Attanasio                 Pinelopi K. Goldberg                    Nina Pavcnik
Department of Economics          Department of Economics                 Department of Economics
University College London        Yale University                         Dartmouth College
Gower Street                     37 Hillhouse Avenue                     6106 Rockefeller Center
London WC1E 6BT                  P.O. Box 208264                         Hanover, NH 03755
United Kingdom                   New Haven, CT 06520-8264                and NBER and CEPR
and NBER                         and NBER                                nina.pavcnik@dartmouth.edu
o.attanasio@ucl.ac.uk            penny.goldberg@yale.edu
1. Introduction
           Starting in 1985, Colombia experienced gradual trade liberalization that culminated in the
drastic tariff reductions of 1990-91. The trade reform was accompanied by major modifications
of the labor regime in order to reduce labor rigidities, and reforms in the financial sector for the
purpose of enhancing resource mobility. The purpose of the trade reforms was to expose
domestic producers to international competition, increase efficiency, accelerate growth and
reduce at the same time the prices faced by consumers. While the empirical evidence to date
suggests that the reforms have indeed been associated with increased efficiency and growth,
there have also been concerns that trade liberalization may have contributed to an increase in
income inequality. These concerns are partly rooted in the experience of Mexico, which
experienced a substantial rise in the skill premium and overall income inequality following the
trade reform of the mid-1980’s. While a causal link between the Mexican trade liberalization
and inequality was never established beyond dispute, the chronological coincidence of the
increase in wage dispersion with the trade reforms was nevertheless a disappointment to those
who hoped that globalization would benefit the poor in developing countries.
           The purpose of our work is to provide an empirical investigation of the relationship
between wage inequality and trade liberalization in Colombia using detailed micro level data
from 1984-1998. In particular, we exploit detailed data on workers’ earnings, characteristics and
industry affiliation from the Colombian National Household Survey (NHS) and link this
information to industry-level tariff changes and trade exposure. The main advantage of focusing
on Colombia is that Colombia, like other developing countries, had not participated in the tariff
reducing rounds of the GATT, so that tariff levels were high prior to the reforms. Trade reform
consisted primarily of drastic tariff reductions.1 Tariffs are both well measured and unlike NTBs
comparable across time. In addition, the period 1985-1994 includes multiple tariff reduction
episodes that affected not only the average tariff, but also the structure of protection across
industries.       Changes in the structure of protection reflected the country’s commitment to
economy-wide reforms that reduced tariff dispersion, and set tariff rates to levels comparable to
those in developed countries. These rates were negotiated with the WTO. Policy makers had
accordingly less room to cater to special lobby interests; from an individual industry’s
perspective, the final tariff rates were exogenously predetermined.

1
    Trade liberalization in Colombia also reduced nontariff barriers to trade (NTBs).


                                                            2
       We conduct our analysis in several steps. We start by documenting the basic facts
concerning wage inequality in Colombia over 1984-1998. We find that while inequality
gradually increased over this period, the increase was by no means as pronounced as in Mexico.
Next, we decompose inequality into a component that reflects changes in the returns to
education, and a component that captures inequality within educational groups. While, consistent
with the experience in other Latin American economies, the return to college education increases
over our sample period, this increase is modest compared to Mexico. At the same time, we
document an increase in inequality within educational groups, suggesting that the skill premium
alone cannot explain the rise in wage inequality.
       Next, we use regression analysis to identify, for each year, the effects that several factors,
such as industry affiliation, education, and various individual and job characteristics (e.g.,
informality) have on individual wages. Having many years of data, we can examine how the
coefficients on the above variables change over time. We show that individuals with the same
characteristics and skills receive different compensation depending on the industry sector in
which they work, the occupation they have, and whether their job is formal or informal.
Moreover, we show that industry premiums, and returns to education, occupation, and
informality change over time.
       This descriptive analysis motivates our focus on the skill premium, industry premiums,
occupations, and informality in the rest of the paper. For each of the above factors, we discuss
through which channels trade reform is expected to have had an effect, and then examine
whether our expectations are confirmed by relating the observed changes to changes in tariffs.
As our sample is representative of the urban workforce, we also analyze how its composition
changes in terms of skills, and how these changes differ across sectors. We again relate these
changes to the changes in tariffs and interpret our results in light of different theoretical models.
       Our main findings can be summarized as follows: First, we find that changes in skill
premiums are roughly the same across industries and cannot be related to changes in tariffs
across sectors. At the same time, we find no evidence of labor re-allocation across sectors. We
argue that this piece of evidence is inconsistent with the hypothesis that the skill premium
increase was driven by the adjustment mechanism indicated by the workhorse model of
international trade, the Heckscher-Ohlin model. This mechanism would suggest labor
reallocation from sectors that experienced larger tariff reductions (and hence a reduction in the



                                                  3
price of their output) towards sectors that were affected less by trade liberalization. However, the
industry employment shares remain stable over our sample period, and the small changes we
observe cannot be related to trade policy.
       Second, we find that the proportion of skilled workers rose in every industry, consistent
with the hypothesis of skill-biased technological change. At the same time, we find that skill-
biased technological change was larger in sectors that experienced larger tariff reductions,
suggesting that skill-biased technological change itself was partly an endogenous response to
increased foreign competition.
       Third, we find that the trade reforms impacted industry wage premiums. Wage premiums
represent the portion of industry wages that cannot be explained through worker or firm
characteristics. They can be interpreted as either industry rents, or returns to industry specific
skills that are not transferable in the short run, and are particularly relevant in the presence of
imperfect competition, and/or in cases in which labor mobility is constrained. We find that
sectors that were associated with proportionately larger decreases in protection experienced a
decrease in their wage premiums relative to the economy-wide average. This suggests an
additional channel through which the wage distribution in Colombia was affected. Our empirical
evidence suggests that trade liberalization was concentrated in labor-intensive sectors employing
a high percentage of low-skill labor. If these sectors experienced a decrease in their wage
premiums, then less-skilled workers were “hit” by the reforms twice: First they saw the average
return to their skill decrease, and second they saw the industry specific return in the sectors they
were employed go down. Moreover, the sectors that had the highest protection before the reform
were typically characterized by the smallest wage premiums. Our finding of a trade reform
induced reduction in wage premiums, therefore, explains, at least in part, the observed increase
in inequality.
       Finally, we find some evidence that the trade reforms contributed to an increase in the
size of the informal sector. Critics of trade liberalization have expressed the fear that intensified
foreign competition may induce large and medium-sized firms to cut worker benefits in order to
reduce costs. To this end, such firms may replace permanent by temporary workers, or outsource
activities to small, informal firms, including home-based and self-employed microenterpreneurs.
This view finds some support in our results, which indicate that sectors that experienced larger
tariff reductions and an increase in imports saw a rise in informal employment, though this effect



                                                 4
is concentrated in the years prior to the labor market reform. Because the informal sector does
not provide benefits and is believed to offer lower job quality, this trend would contribute to an
increase in inequality.
         Overall, we conclude that the trade reforms in Colombia did affect the wage distribution
(via their impact on skill-biased technological change, industry wage premiums, and
informality), but the overall effect was modest compared to other countries, especially Mexico.
1. Data
2.1 Data on Trade Reforms
         Colombia's trade policy underwent significant changes during the past three decades.
Although Colombia considerably liberalized its trading environment during the late 1970s, the
government increased protection during the early 1980s in an attempt to combat the impact of
the exchange rate appreciation and intensified foreign competition.2 As a result, the average
tariff level increased to 27 percent in 1984. The level of protection varied widely across
industries. Manufacturing industries enjoyed especially high levels of protection with an average
tariff of 50 percent. Imports from the two most protected sectors, textiles and apparel, and wood
and wood product manufacturing, faced tariffs of over 90 percent and 60 percent respectively.
This suggests that Colombia protected relatively unskilled, labor-intensive sectors, which
conforms to findings by Hanson and Harrison (1999) for Mexico. From 1985 to 1994, Colombia
gradually liberalized its trading regime by reducing the tariff levels and virtually eliminating the
non-tariff barriers to trade.
         Table 1a provides the average tariff across all industries, and across manufacturing from
1984 to 1998, the period of our study.3 The average tariff declined from 27 to about 10 percent
from 1984 to 1998. The average tariff level in manufacturing dropped from 50 to 13 percent
during the same period. The bottom part of table 1a summarizes the average NTBs in 1986,
1988, and 1992.4 In 1986, the average coverage ratio was 72.2 percent. As is the case with
tariffs, NTB protection varies widely across industries, with textiles and apparel industry and the



2
  High world prices of coffee, significant foreign borrowing by Colombia, and illegal exports all contributed to the
large appreciation of the peso during the late 1970s and early 1980s (Roberts and Tybout (1997)).
3
  The source of tariff information is the Colombian National Planning Department (DNP). Overall, they are
available for 21 2-digit ISIC industries. See Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003a) for details.
4
  The source of NTB information is the United Nation's publication Directory of Import Regimes. NTBs are
measured as coverage ratios. They are available for 17 2-digit ISIC sectors.


                                                          5
manufacturing of wood and wood products enjoying the highest level of protection. Between
1990 and 1992, the average NTB dropped to 1.1 percent.
           What is remarkable about the Colombian trade reforms is that they did not just reduce the
average level of tariffs and NTBs, they more importantly changed the structure of protection. As
a result, the correlation between the tariffs before and after the reforms is very low (for example,
the year to year correlation between tariffs in 1984, the year preceding the reforms, and 1992, the
year following the major reforms is .54). The same is true for NTBs; the correlation of NTBs
between 1986 and 1992 is not significantly different from zero (.10 with a p-value of .69). In
our empirical work we exploit this cross-sectional variation in protection changes to identify the
differential impact of the reforms on earnings in each sector, and examine whether these changes
contributed to the increase in inequality.
1.2 National Household Survey
           We relate the trade policy measures to household survey data from the 1984, 1986, 1988,
1990, 1992, 1994, 1996, and 1998 June waves of the Colombian National Household Survey
(NHS) administered and provided by the Colombian National Statistical Agency (DANE). The
data is a repeated cross-section and covers urban areas. The data provide information on
earnings, number of hours worked in a week, demographic characteristics (age, gender, marital
status, family background, educational attainment, literacy, occupation, job type), sector of
employment, and region. The survey includes information on about 18,000 to 36,000 workers in
a year.5 The industry of employment is reported at the 2-digit ISIC level, which gives us 33
industries per year.
           We use the household survey to create several variables. We construct an hourly wage
based on the reported earnings and the number of hours worked normally in a week. Using the
information on the highest completed grade, we define four education indicators: no completed
education, completed primary school, completed secondary school, completed college
(university degree). We distinguish between seven occupation categories: professional/technical,
management, personnel, sales, service workers and servants, blue-collar workers in
agriculture/forest, blue-collar industry workers. In addition, we control for whether an individual
works for a private company, government, a private household, or whether a worker is an



5
    We have excluded all workers for which one or more variables were not reported.


                                                          6
employer or is self-employed. Descriptive statistics for each year of the data are provided in
Table 1b.6
         Of particular interest in this table are the percentages of workers belonging to the various
education groups. First, note the low proportion of individuals with completed college education.
Second, the table indicates that while the proportion of individuals with college education and
high school degrees increases during our sample period, Colombia, like other countries in Latin
America, lags behind the economies of South East Asia in terms of human capital accumulation.
Moreover, there are no signs that the gap is closing. This is consistent with the evidence
presented in other papers. Attanasio and Szekely (2000) show that in the cohort of individuals
born between 1955 and 1959, the proportion of individuals with at least secondary education is
about 40% in Mexico and Perú, while Nuñez and Sanchez (2001) report that for the same
Colombian cohort, the number is between 30 and 40%. In contrast, this proportion is almost
twice as high in Taiwan. The aggregate numbers presented in Table 1b hide sizeable cohort
effects in the proportion of college educated and high school graduates. These are well
documented in Nuñez and Sanchez (2001) for Colombia, and in Attanasio and Szekely (2000)
for Mexico, Perú, Taiwan, and Thailand.
         Our data also provide detailed information on informality and workplace characteristics
unavailable in many other labor force surveys. First, the survey asks each worker whether a
worker's employer pays social security taxes.7 The employer's compliance with social security
tax (and thus labor market) legislation provides a good indicator that a worker is employed in the
formal sector. Given that between 50 to 60 percent of Colombian workers work in the informal
sector, the inclusion of information on informality seems crucial.                          Moreover, Colombia
implemented large labor market reforms in 1990 that increased the flexibility of the labor market
by decreasing the cost of hiring and firing a worker (see Kugler (1999) for details). These
reforms likely affected the incentives of firms to comply with labor legislation and their hiring
and firing decisions, as well as the worker's choice between formal and informal employment.
Descriptive statistics suggest that about 57 percent of workers worked in informal sector prior to
92. This is also the share of informal workers in 1992, however the share fluctuates significantly
thereafter from .51 in 1994 to about .6 in 1996 and 1997. Furthermore, the survey provides

6
  One potential shortcoming of the data on worker's characteristics is the lack of information on the union status.
Edwards (2001) suggests that unions are ineffective in most industries. See also the discussion in section 7.
7
  This information is not available in 1984.


                                                           7
several workplace characteristics. We create four indicator variables to capture whether a
worker works alone, whether the worker works in an establishment with 2 to 5 people, 6 to 10
people, or 11 or more people. We also use an indicator for whether a worker works in a
permanent establishment in a building (as opposed to outdoors, kiosk, home, etc.). These
workplace characteristics potentially control for differences in the quality of the workplace
across industries.
2. Measuring Inequality over 1984-1998
3.1 Basic trends
       We start by asking the basic question of whether inequality has increased over our sample
period. We use two measures of inequality. The first one is the standard deviation of the log
wages. The second one is the difference between the 90th and 10th percentile of the log wage
distribution. The aggregate trends are documented in Table 2a.
       Both the standard deviation of the log wages and the difference between the 90th and the
10th percentile suggest a modest increase in inequality between 1990 and 1996, and a
substantially larger increase between 1996 and 1998. In interpreting these trends, it is important
to remember that our sample is confined to the urban sector in Colombia, which accounts for
approximately 85% of the Colombian labor force. Accordingly, our inequality measures do not
adequately capture changes in the wage distribution that may result from changes in the relative
incomes of rural workers; as Johnston (1996) has shown, this may result in underestimating the
overall change in inequality. A further trend that is visible from table 2a is that the increase in the
90-10 differential over 1990-1996 is less pronounced than the increase in the standard deviation.
This indicates that most of the change in the standard deviation of the log wages is accounted for
by changes in the wages of the top 10% of the population. Given that these top 10% are
comprised primarily of college educated workers (the percentage of college educated individuals
in our data ranges between 7 and 14%), it is likely that the increase in the wage dispersion can be
partially accounted for by an increase in the returns to college education. The experience in other
developing countries, especially Mexico, that experienced a large increase in the college
premium in the aftermath of trade reforms, reinforces this interpretation. We investigate the
relevance of this explanation more rigorously later in the paper.
       To get a preliminary idea of whether changing returns to education are responsible for the
increase in inequality, we compute how inequality has changed within well-defined educational



                                                  8
groups. In particular, we distinguish between three groups: workers with completed primary, or
less than primary education; workers with completed secondary education (and maybe some
college); and workers with completed college education. For each group we compute the
standard deviation of the log wages within the group, and the difference between the 90th and
10th percentiles. The results are displayed in Table 2b.
         The basic conclusion that we draw from these results is that within group inequality
increased over 1990-1996 for all three groups, with the college-educated group exhibiting the
largest increase. Though the increase in the inequality measures for the college-educated group
may be exaggerated by changes in the top coding procedures in the NHS in the early 1990s, the
message the results in Table 2b send is clear: the college premium alone cannot explain the
increase in wage dispersion. Other factors, such as industry effects, or changing returns to
occupations, are potentially important.
3.2 Factor returns
         To investigate the contribution of alternative explanations in explaining wage dispersion
in Colombia over this period, we regressed log wages in each year against a series of
demographic controls, educational, occupational, and industry dummies, and workplace
characteristics. Under certain assumptions, the coefficients in these Mincer-type regressions can
be interpreted as the prices of different factors at different points in time. The results from these
regressions are displayed in Table 3.8
         The results in table 3 can be used to inform the investigation of inequality in two ways.
First, the increase in the R 2 of the regression as we successively include more controls gives
some indication as to which factors contribute most to explaining the variance of log wages. The
problem of course with this inference is that the covariates tend to be highly correlated with each
other, so that the contribution to the increase in the R 2 will depend on the order in which we add
controls. Nevertheless, one can obtain a rough idea as to whether there is a set of controls (e.g.,


8
  Because workplace variables and informality were not available for 1984, table 3 omits 1984. We have also
estimated table 3 for all years without workplace characteristics. Without such controls, our estimates of the college
premium increase. This is intuitive since college educated workers work primarily in the formal sector, and wages in
the formal sector are higher. The college premium then also captures the premium of working in the formal sector.
Moreover, we have also repeated the analysis only for males in an effort to eliminate the impact of selection effects
that are potentially important in female labor supply. The main difference between the full and the male-only
samples seems to be the magnitude of the estimated return to college education, which is higher for males only.
Nevertheless, the trends across years remain robust across the different samples.



                                                          9
occupational dummies or industry dummies) that seems to have particularly high explanatory
power. Our experimentation with various specifications in the above regressions failed to isolate
such a set of variables. In terms of our inequality discussion this implies that there is not a single
factor that we can attribute the increase in inequality to, but that the increase in inequality is the
result of several forces working in the same direction.
       Second, by examining the change in the coefficients across years, we can get a
preliminary idea as to which returns to which worker characteristics seem to have changed most
over this period. Given the experience in other developing countries, and the theoretical literature
on the effects of trade policy, there are four sets of variables that seem a-priori likely to have
been affected by the reforms:
       (1) Returns to education. Between 1986 and 1998, the return to college education
increases by ca. 11% relative to the return to the lowest educational category (less than primary
school); for the period 1990-1998, the effect is even larger (20%). The returns to secondary and
primary education remain relatively stable in comparison.
       (2) Industry wage premiums. These          are captured through industry dummies in each
year. While these dummies are not displayed in the tables for expositional reasons, the low
correlation of their estimates across years suggests that industry premiums have changed
substantially during this period, possibly because of the reforms.
       (3) Returns to Occupations. In their study of the Mexican trade liberalization, Cragg and
Epelbaum (1996) report significant changes in the returns to specific occupations, in particular
professionals and managers. In fact, changing returns to occupations explain in Mexico a large
fraction of the changing return to the college premium. However, this does not seem to be the
case in the Colombian data. The returns to various occupations remain relatively stable over the
1986-1994 period; the stability of the returns to professionals in particular is in sharp contrast
with the pattern reported for Mexico. Only in 1992 there is a substantial increase in the return to
managers. This is intuitive, and consistent with the interpretation given by Cragg and Epelbaum
for a similar finding for Mexico: During periods of substantial economic reforms managerial
talent is in high demand. Since the Colombian reforms were concentrated in the 1991-1993
period, the increase in the managerial premium in 1992 is consistent with an increase in demand
for managerial skill. Nevertheless, this increase gets reversed in later years, and it is not by itself
sufficient to explain the overall increase in wage dispersion.



                                                  10
       (4) Informality. The negative coefficients on the informality dummies imply that workers
employed in the informal sector earn less than workers with similar characteristics in the formal
sector throughout our sample period. However, the informality “discount” varies substantially
across years. From 1986 to 1994, the difference between the compensation of formal and
informal workers gradually declines; from 1994 on, however, the informality discount starts
increasing, and it reaches unprecedented magnitudes in 1996 and 1998. At the same time, the
informal sector seems to expand in the later years of our sample (the share of informal
employment rises from 56-57% to 59-60%). These trends contribute to the rise in inequality
since the informal sector employs a higher fraction of low-wage workers.
       Given these patterns we focus our discussion in the rest of the paper on three sets of
variables: the skill premium, the industry premiums, and the informality discount. In each case,
we start our discussion by indicating what the predictions of trade theory are regarding the
effects of trade liberalization on each of the above variables. Next, we contrast these predictions
with the data. We do not devote further attention to returns to occupations, both because (with
the exception of the return to managers in 1992) these do not seem to substantially change over
this period, and because it is unclear how trade reforms would affect particular occupations
through channels other than industry affiliation or changing returns to education.
3. The Skill Premium
       The discussion of the evolution of the returns to education in the previous section
suggests that the returns to secondary and elementary education remain stable over this period,
while the return to college education increases by 21% between 1990 and 1998. The increase in
the college premium could be driven by changes in the rents of specific industries that employ a
higher proportion of educated workers, or by changes in the returns to particular occupations that
are highly correlated with education. To examine, to which extent the increase in the average
skill premium can be accounted for by changes in occupational or industry returns, we compute
in Table 4 the average returns to education based on a series of regressions, each of which
controls for a different set of characteristics. The table includes two measures of educational
returns: the secondary school premium relative to elementary education, and the university
premium relative to elementary. If the rise in the skill premium were driven by changes in
occupational returns and/or industry rents, we would expect the increase in the college premium
to go down once we control for occupation and/or industry affiliation. However, this expectation



                                                11
is not confirmed in Table 4. In a regression without any industry or occupational controls, the
change in the university degree-elementary premium is 16.7% between 1986 and 1998 (top
panel). Controlling for both industry and occupational effects (bottom panel) reduces this
increase to 14.2%. This suggests that only a very small fraction of the skill premium increase can
be accounted for by changes in industry premiums and occupational returns.
       To put these numbers in context, it is instructive to compare them to the ones obtained by
Cragg and Epelbaum (1996), who conducted a similar exercise for Mexico. The increase in the
skill premium in Mexico over 1987-1993 is substantially larger than our estimate for Colombia:
the return to post-secondary education relative to secondary education is reported to rise by 60%
between the two years. However, a large portion of this increase is accounted for by changes in
the returns to occupations, the rising returns to managers and professionals in particular.
Controlling for occupation alone reduces the increase in the Mexican skill premium to 40%. In
contrast, the skill premium increase in Colombia is more modest, and cannot be accounted for by
occupational returns.
       A further exercise we conducted to investigate whether the increase in the skill premium
was tied to particular sectors was to interact educational dummies with industry dummies. Most
industry/college dummy interactions were insignificant. More of the interactions of industry
dummies with dummies for either college or secondary education were statistically significant,
but their inclusion did not affect the estimate of the average skill premium increase. Despite the
fact that these interactions were individually insignificant, F-tests reject the hypothesis that they
were jointly insignificant (the p-values were always 0.01 or smaller). To investigate whether
there is a relationship between trade policy and changes in sector-specific skill premiums, we
regressed the sector-specific skill premiums in each year (the college/industry dummy
interactions) against tariffs, sector fixed effects and time indicators. If the increase in the skill
premium was the consequence of trade liberalization, and if labor mobility was constrained in
the short run, we would expect sectors with smaller tariff reductions to be associated with a
larger increase in the (sector-specific) skill premium. All regressions, however, produced
statistically insignificant coefficients. This could be interpreted as evidence that trade policy was
not the primary reason for the skill premium increase. Alternatively, our results are consisted
with a scenario where labor was mobile across sectors, so that the returns to education were
equalized across sectors. In this latter case, trade policy might have led to an increase in the



                                                 12
economy-wide skill premium, but it would not have impacted sectors with larger tariff reductions
differentially. We investigate this possibility in the next section.
       To summarize, the results from this section lead us to conclude that the increase in the
skill premium we document in Table 3 represents an increase in the economy-wide return to
college education that cannot be accounted for by sector specific or occupation specific effects.
We now turn to the question of whether trade liberalization could be responsible for this change
in the economy-wide skill premium.
4.1 Was the Increase in the Economy-Wide Skill Premium Due to the Trade Reforms?
The link between trade liberalization and changes in the economy-wide skill premium is
provided by the workhorse model of international trade, the Heckscher-Ohlin model, and is
companion theorem, Stolper-Samuelson. The Hecksher-Ohlin model predicts that countries will
export goods that use intensively the factors of production that are relatively abundant, and
import goods that use intensively the relatively scarce factors of the country. The Stolper-
Samuelson theorem links factor prices to product prices. According to this theorem, trade affects
wages only through changes in product prices. In its simple 2x2 version, the theorem states that
a decrease in the price of a good will reduce the return to the factor that is used intensively in the
production of this good, and increase the return to the other factor. Because trade policies
change product prices, the Stolper-Samuelson theorem can be used to infer how factor prices
(e.g., wages) will respond to a change in the trade regime.
       While the sharp predictions of the 2x2 version of the model are typically lost in its multi-
factor versions, it is the logic of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem that led to the hope that trade
liberalization would benefit the poor in developing countries, and thus contribute to a decrease in
inequality. To illustrate the argument, consider a stylized view of the world in which there are
two countries, a developed and a developing one, and two factors of production, skilled and
unskilled labor. The developed country is relatively skilled-labor abundant, while the developing
country is relatively unskilled-labor abundant. According to Heckscher-Ohlin, the developing
country will export unskilled-labor intensive products, let’s say apparel, and import skilled-labor
intensive commodities, let’s say manufactures. Now consider the effect of a trade barrier
reduction in the developing country. The decrease in protection will lead to a drop in the price of
the import sector, and a price increase in the export sector. According to Stolper-Samuelson, the
price decrease in the import sector will hurt the factor that is used intensively in this sector



                                                 13
(skilled labor), and benefit the factor that is used intensively in the export sector (unskilled
labor). Note that the price changes affect only economy-wide, and not sector specific, returns.
This is because the factors of production are assumed to be mobile across uses within the
country, so that their returns are equalized across sectors; the relative price increase in the export
sector leads to an increase in the demand for the factor that is used intensively in this sector
(unskilled labor) and hence an increase in its economy-wide return. Labor mobility (along with
perfect competition and given technology) is thus an essential ingredient of this argument.
         Against this theoretical background, the experience in many developing countries that
witnessed an increase in the skill premium and overall inequality in the aftermath of trade
liberalization, has been both a disappointment and a puzzle. How can unskilled-labor abundant
countries experience an increase in the skill premium when trade barriers are reduced? This
pattern seems at first in sharp contrast with the prediction of the Stolper-Samuelson theorem.
         We argue that the increase in the skill premium in Colombia is not only “not puzzling”,
but also perfectly consistent with the Stolper-Samuelson theorem. The reason is simply that the
sectors that experienced the largest tariff reductions (and hence the largest reductions in the price
of their output) were precisely the sectors that employed a higher fraction of unskilled workers.
This is shown clearly in Figure 1 that plots the tariff decline between 1984 and 1998 for each
industry against the share of unskilled workers in 1984 (unskilled is defined as having at most
complete primary education). The graph shows a positive correlation between the size of tariff
reductions and the share of unskilled workers. A regression of the annual change in tariffs
against the share of unskilled workers in 1984 yields a coefficient of –.092 for the share of
unskilled workers (t-statistic=-2.4), and an R 2 of .18 (unlike in Figure 1, tariff cut is a negative
number in this regression). It is interesting to note that Hanson and Harrison (1999) report a
similar pattern for Mexico. Given this evidence, the increase in the skill premium is exactly
what Stolper-Samuelson would predict: since trade liberalization was concentrated in unskilled-
labor-intensive sectors, the economy-wide return to unskilled labor should decrease.9,10

9
   What is perhaps more surprising (and inconsistent in some sense with the simple 2x2 version of the Heckscher-
Ohlin model) is the fact that it was the unskilled-intensive sectors that were heavily protected prior to the reforms.
These sectors (especially textiles and apparel, and wood and wood products) are characterized by low imports. This
pattern of protection could be explained within a political economy model of protection such as Grossman and
Helpman (1994), or alternatively, by an extension of Heckscher-Ohlin to a three-factor (natural resources, unskilled,
and skilled labor) version (see Wood (1999) and Leamer et al (2002)).
10
   Given that the most protected sectors are unskilled-labor intensive, these sectors are potentially net exporters
producing differentiated products. Lower tariffs are likely to lead to lower wages even in the presence of product


                                                         14
         While the above argument demonstrates that the rise in the skill premium documented in
the previous section could in principle be attributed to the trade reforms, it does not of course
constitute proof that it was the trade reforms that led to this rise. In search for Stolper-Samuelson
effects on wages we take an indirect route. We check whether there is evidence that the general
equilibrium adjustment mechanism suggested by the Heckscher-Ohlin model is at work. The
mechanism at the heart of the Heckscher-Ohlin model implies a contraction of the sectors that
experience a (trade-barrier reduction induced) decline in their output price, and an expansion of
the sectors that experience a relative price increase. Accordingly, we would expect to see labor
reallocation from the sectors with the largest tariff reductions to the sectors with the smaller tariff
reductions. The left panel of table 5 shows the industry shares in total employment in 1984 and
in 1998. These shares remain remarkable stable. There is certainly no evidence of labor
reallocation across sectors. Regressing industry employment shares on industry tariffs, industry,
and time indicators confirms this conclusion: the tariff coefficient is small in magnitude (0.01)
and statistically insignificant. In sum, the employment patterns over 1984-1998 are not consistent
with an explanation that would attribute the rise in the skill premium to changes in trade policy,
operating through Stolper-Samuelson effects. Even though more general versions of the model
fail to deliver the sharp predictions of the 2x2 version, it is remarkable that in the face of large,
and differential tariffs reductions we see virtually no change in employment shares across
sectors.
         We should note that the stability of the employment patterns is consistent with the
evidence from Mexico; Revenga (1997), Hanson and Harrison (1999), and Feliciano (2001) all
report that the adjustment of the Mexican labor market to trade liberalization occurred through
relative wage adjustments and not through labor reallocation across sectors. This adjustment
process contrasts with the evidence from the United States, where Grossman (1986) and Revenga
(1992) find greater employment than wage sensitivity to trade shocks. The differences in the
adjustment mechanisms of Colombia and Mexico on one side, and the U.S. on the other, are
suggestive of greater labor mobility in the United States compared to the other two countries.




differentiation and intra-industry trade, as long as lower tariffs are not counterbalanced by higher export prices in
this sector. Because Colombia is a small country and it experienced a drastic unilateral liberalization during our
study, it is unlikely that trade liberalization was accompanied by a rise in export prices.



                                                          15
This is consistent with the view that labor market rigidities in developing countries might
obstruct labor reallocation in response to economic reforms.
         Finally, if Stolper-Samuelson forces were at work, firms would substitute away from
skilled labor with the rising skill premium, and we would expect to see the share of skilled labor
in industry employment decline. The right panel of Table 5 reports the share of skilled workers
in each industry and shows that this share has increased substantially in every industry between
1984 and 1998. This evidence is hard to reconcile with Stolper-Samuelson effects as the primary
mechanism leading to the rise in the skill premium. Instead, table 5 seems more consistent with
skilled-biased technological change.11 Evidence from several countries seems to suggest that the
latter has had important effects on the wage distribution in the last two decades (see Berman,
Machin, and Bound (1998), Pavcnik (2003)). However, the evidence in favor of skilled-biased
technological change does not imply that trade policy did not have an indirect effect on changes
in the wage distribution. To the extent that technological change was an endogenous response to
intensified competition from abroad (see Acemoglu 2002a12), one could argue that the trade
reforms were indirectly responsible for the increase in the skill premium.
         To investigate this claim, we regress in Table 6 the share of skilled workers in each
industry against industry tariffs, industry and time indicators. Table 6 reports the LS results and
2SLS to account for the potential endogeneity of trade policy (for example, in setting tariffs,
policy makers could be taking into account industry characteristics, such as the share of skilled
or unskilled workers, wages, etc.). To find appropriate instruments for tariffs we rely on the
history of protection in Colombia and the institutional details of the reforms.                              Anecdotal
evidence and World Bank reports suggest that the Colombian government initiated liberalization
in response to exchange rate fluctuations and the trade balance. The trade balance in Colombia


11
   Leamer has made the argument in several papers that it is sector-bias, and not factor-bias that is relevant for the
income distribution. Skilled-biased technological change that is concentrated in unskilled-intensive sectors would
benefit unskilled workers in the general equilibrium, while skilled-biased technological change concentrated in
skilled-intensive industries would benefit skilled workers. Motivated by this argument we regressed the annual
change in the share of skilled workers in each industry on the initial skill intensity of the industry in 1984. A positive
coefficient would suggest bias that would favor skilled workers (skilled-biased technological change would be more
pronounced in sectors that are initially skill-intensive). However, this regression did not produce a statistically
significant coefficient. If anything, the negative sign of the “initial skill-intensity” coefficient would suggest the
presence of skilled-biased technological change that is concentrated in low-skill sectors. Note, however, that
Leamer’s argument rests on the assumption of fixed product prices, which is unlikely to hold during trade
liberalization.
12
   This argument is also related to Wood (1995) and to the more recent paper by Thoenig and Verdier (2002) See
also the survey by Acemoglu (2002b).


                                                           16
has in turn always been heavily influenced by world coffee prices (see Roberts and Tybout
(1997)), since coffee is a major export of this country. This indicates that at the macroeconomic
level, exchange rates and world coffee prices are some of the factors responsible for the trade
policy changes.         However, exchange rates or coffee prices alone cannot explain why some
sectors experienced larger tariff reductions than others. In explaining the latter, two facts seem of
importance. First, before the onset of trade liberalization, there was substantial tariff dispersion
across sectors. As discussed earlier, in examining the cross-sectional pattern of protection we
find that the single most important determinant of tariff levels was the share of unskilled
workers: sectors with a high share of unskilled workers (where unskilled is defined as having at
most primary education) had higher tariffs. Second, the Gaviria government was committed to
economy-wide liberalization and aimed at reducing tariffs to the levels negotiated within the
WTO. As a result, the final tariff rate was almost uniform, implying that there was little (if any
at all) room for industry lobbying13; from an individual industry’s point of view, the tariff rate at
the end of the trade liberalization period was exogenously predetermined. This policy translated
to proportionately larger tariff reductions in sectors that had historically higher tariff levels. The
close link between the magnitude of tariff reductions and the initial level of protection in 1983 (a
year prior to our sample) is evident in a regression that relates the 1998-1984 tariff reductions to
the 1983 tariff levels: it yields a coefficient on the 1983 tariff of 1.06 (with a T-statistic of 26.3)
and an R2 of .97.          This discussion suggests that the 1983 industry tariff levels, and their
interaction with exchange rates (or coffee prices), are highly correlated with the industry tariff
reductions and may provide good instruments for the tariff changes. 14
         The results in columns 1-3 of Table 6 indicate that the share of skilled workers in each
industry is inversely related to protection; industries with larger tariff reductions experienced
more rapid skill-biased technological change, as measured by the proportion of skilled workers.15
We also estimate the relationship between the share of skilled workers and tariffs in first
differences and those results are reported in columns 4-6. These results confirm the negative
association between skill-biased technological change and tariff changes (but are at time
13
   In reality, some dispersion in tariff rates remained even after the trade reforms, but this dispersion is substantially
smaller than the pre-reform tariff rate dispersion. See standard deviations in table 1a.
14
   The exchange rate we use is the nominal effective rate (source: IMF) that is computed taking into account
Colombia’s major trade partners. IMF is also the source of coffee prices.
15
   Note that we cannot include the 1983 tariffs as an instrument in industry fixed effects 2SLS regressions because
the variable is time-invariant. As a result, we only use the interaction of the 1983 tariffs with the exchange rate
(coffee prices) as an instrument.


                                                            17
imprecisely estimated). Overall, the evidence in Table 6 is consistent with what Adrian Wood
has labeled “defensive innovation”; firms in sectors facing intensified import competition (and
these, in Colombia, are the sectors employing more unskilled workers) look for new methods of
production that economize on unskilled labor.
        In summary, our results suggest that the increase in the skill premium cannot be linked to
developments in particular sectors of the economy – it was an economy-wide phenomenon.
While this, in principle, opens the door for Stolper-Samuelson effects, we find no evidence of the
labor reallocation mechanism across sectors that should accompany such effects. However, we
do find evidence in favor of skill-biased technological change, which was more rapid in sectors
that experienced larger tariff reductions. To the extent that skilled-biased technological change
was induced, at least partially, by changes in the trade regime, we conclude that trade
liberalization may have had an indirect effect on the rise of the skill premium.
4. Effects of Trade Reforms on Industry Wage Premiums
5.1 Theoretical Background and Methodology
        As noted in Section 3, changes in the economy-wide returns to education can only
partially explain the increase in inequality, since wage dispersion also increases within each
educational group. To explain the rise in the within group inequality, we now turn to the role of
other factors, such as changing industry wage premiums. Our focus on industry premiums is
motivated by two considerations.
        First, our empirical results suggest that industry premiums (captured through industry
dummies in the regressions of Table 3) change substantially over this period. Year-to-year
correlations of industry premiums are as low as 0.14. This contrasts sharply with the evidence
on wage premiums in the U.S., where wage premiums have been shown to be stable across years
(year-to-year correlations are always estimated to be above 0.9).16 This raises the possibility that
the trade reforms changed the structure of industry wages.
        Second, there are good theoretical reasons to believe that trade reforms that changed the
structure of protection would affect relative, and not only economy-wide, wages. The focus on
economy-wide returns that underlies our discussion of the skill premium is premised on the
assumption that labor is mobile across sectors. Yet, this is an assumption that is unlikely to hold,


16
  See Dickens and Katz (1986), Krueger and Summers (1987) and (1988), Katz and Summers (1989), Gaston and
Trefler (1994).


                                                    18
especially in the short- and medium-run, and in developing countries like Colombia, where labor
markets are characterized by significant labor rigidities. Indeed, our results on employment
shares in Table 5 suggest limited labor mobility across sectors. In addition, there is substantial
evidence that wages for observationally equivalent tasks differ across industries; this inter-
industry variation is hard to reconcile with the assumption of perfect factor mobility.
        The perhaps most natural point of departure for thinking about the effects of trade on
relative wages is the specific factors model. This model is short-run by nature as it considers
factors of production immobile across sectors. It predicts that sectors that experienced relatively
large tariff cuts will see a decline in their wages relative to the economy-wide average, while
sectors with proportionately smaller trade barrier reductions will benefit in relative terms. The
medium-run (Ricardo-Viner) model yields similar predictions. Note that these implications of
models with constrained factor mobility differ from the ones of the Hecksher-Ohlin model,
which predicts that trade reform should affect only economy-wide returns to the factors of
production, but not industry specific returns, since all factors of productions are mobile across
uses.
        It is important to note that the above trade models assume perfectly competitive product
and factor markets. The existence of industry wage premiums is hence perfectly consistent with
perfect competition in the presence of industry specific skills. Introducing imperfect competition
opens up additional channels through which trade policy may impact wages. In the presence of
unionization, it is possible that unions extract the rents associated with protection in the form of
employment guarantees rather than wages (an idea developed in Grossman (1984)).
Liberalization induced productivity changes may further impact relative wages. There is by now
a voluminous literature on the effects of trade reform on firm productivity. While in theory the
effects of liberalization on productivity are ambiguous (see Rodrik (1991) and Roberts and
Tybout (1991, 1996) for a discussion), most empirical work to date has established a positive
link between liberalization and productivity (Harrison for Cote d’ Ivoire (1994), Krishna and
Mitra for India (1998), Kim for Korea (2000), Pavcnik for Chile (2002)). For Colombia
specifically, Fernandes (2001) estimates that the trade reforms up to 1992 had a significant
impact on plant level productivity. To the extent that productivity enhancements are passed
through onto industry wages, we would expect wages to increase in the industries with the




                                                19
highest productivity gains.           If these occur in the industries with the highest trade barrier
reductions, industry wages would be positively correlated with trade liberalization.
        The discussion above suggests that, based on theoretical considerations alone, it is not
possible to sign the effect of trade liberalization on industry wages unambiguously.                         To
investigate this effect empirically, we employ a two-stage estimation framework familiar from
the labor literature on industry wages. In the first stage we regress the log of worker i’s wages
(ln(wijt)) on a vector of worker characteristics Hijt (age, age squared, gender, marital status, head
of the household indicator, education indicators, literacy, location indicator, occupational
indicators, job type indicators, born in urban area indicator, time in residence, urban birth*time
in residence) and a set of industry indicators (Iijt) reflecting worker i's industry affiliation (the
regressions reported in Tables 3 correspond to this stage of the estimation): 17
                                ln( wijt ) = H ijt β Ht + I ijt * wp jt + ε ijt   (1)

The coefficient on the industry dummy, the wage premium, captures the part of the variation in
wages that cannot be explained by worker characteristics, but can be explained by the workers’
industry affiliation. Following Krueger and Summers (1988), we normalize the omitted industry
wage premium to zero and express the estimated wage premiums as deviations from the
employment-weighted average wage premium.18                           This normalized wage premium can be
interpreted as the proportional difference in wages for a worker in a given industry relative to an
average worker in all industries with the same observable characteristics. The normalized wage
differentials and their exact standard errors are calculated using the Haisken-DeNew and
Schmidt (1997) two-step restricted least squares procedure provided to us by John P. Haisken-
DeNew and Christoph M. Schmidt.19 The first stage regressions are estimated separately for
each year in our sample as the subscript t in equation (1) indicates. In the second stage, we pool
the industry wage premiums wpj over time and regress them on a vector of trade related industry
characteristics Tjt, and a vector of industry fixed effects, and time indicators Djt:
                wp jt = T jt βT + D jt β D + u jt                                            (2)


17
   We have also experimented with several other specifications (see Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003a)). The overall
conclusions are similar to those reported in this paper. Moreover, the above specifications were estimated using
both the log of the weekly earnings and the log of hourly earnings as dependent variables. The wage premiums
based on these two definitions were highly correlated. We therefore focus our discussion on hourly wage premiums.
18
   The sum of the employment weighted normalized wage premiums is zero.
19
   Haisken DeNew and Schmidt (1997) adjust the variance covariance matrix of the normalized industry indicators
to yield an exact standard error for the normalized coefficients.


                                                             20
We also estimate the second-stage regression in first-differences.20 Since the dependent variable
in the second stage is estimated, we estimate (2) with weighted least squares (WLS), using the
inverse of the variance of the wage premium estimates from the first stage as weights. This
procedure puts more weight on industries with smaller variance in industry premiums. We
account for general forms of heteroskedasticity and serial correlation in the error term in (2) by
computing robust (Huber-White) standard errors clustered by industry.
5.2 Second-stage Results and Their Implications for Wage Inequality
         Table 7 reports results from relating the wage premiums to tariffs. The industry fixed
effects results are presented in columns 1-2. First-differences results are presented in columns 3-
4. Because the two specifications yield similar findings, we focus our discussion on the first-
differences results. The coefficient on tariff in column 3 is negative and significant. This
implies that increasing protection in a particular sector raises wages in that sector.                            The
magnitude of the effect is also significant and suggests that a 50-percentage point reduction in
tariffs (.5) translates to a 6% (.1191*.5) decrease in the wage premium in this sector. For the
most protected sectors (91% tariff) this effect increases to 10.8% (0.1191 x .91).
         Note that because we condition our industry wage premium estimates on worker
characteristics in the first stage, our estimates of the relationship between tariffs and wages are
not driven by observable differences in worker composition across industries that also affect
industry ability to obtain protection. Moreover, to the extent that political economy factors and
sorting based on unobserved worker attributes are time-invariant, we control for them through
industry fixed effects or through first differencing.                     Assuming that political economy
determinants of protection do not vary much over relatively short time periods seems a
reasonable identification assumption in many cases.                   However, given that the structure of
protection changes over our sample period, time-variant political economy considerations are
expected to be important. For example, if protection responds to exchange rate pressures, and
exchange rates also have a direct effect on wages, one would expect the tariff coefficient to be
biased. Albeit the year effects included in (2) already control for the aggregate effects of


20
  Alternatively, we could combine the regressors in (1) and (2) and estimate the relationship between wages and
tariffs directly in one stage. In fact, we have implemented this one-stage approach, and the coefficient on tariff was
.081 and highly significant. However, because our individual level data are a repeated cross-section, we cannot
estimate the one-stage regression in first-differenced form. The main reason that we focus on the two-stage
approach is that it allows us to difference the industry level data (our preferred specification).


                                                          21
exchange rates (and other economy-wide shocks), unobserved industry specific time-varying
shocks could still bias our estimates. We address this concern in two ways.
         First, we control for variables such as lagged imports and exports, and their interactions
with the exchange rate. Because trade flows are arguably endogenous (they depend on factor
costs), we include the first lags of import and export measures in the estimation rather than their
current values.21 We interact the exchange rate with lagged trade flows because a-priori we
would expect the effects of currency fluctuations to vary depending on the trade exposure of the
sector. The first-differences results are reported in column 4 of table 7. The inclusion of these
additional controls hardly changes the coefficient on tariffs.
         Second, we account for the potential endogeneity of trade policy changes by
instrumenting for tariff changes in the first-differences specification with the pre-sample
protection measures (1983 industry tariff levels), and their interaction with exchange rates (and
world coffee prices).22         Columns 5-8 of Table 7 contain the 2SLS results.                       Although the
magnitude of the tariff coefficient changes, the positive (and statistically significant) relationship
between tariff reductions and declines in industry wage premiums is robust. The estimated effect
of liberalization on wages drops however from .119 in column 1, to .05 in column 7. The
coefficient of .05 implies that a 50-point tariff reduction would lead to a 2.5 percent decline in
wage premiums. Moreover, while the year indicators already control for the direct aggregate
effect of the exchange rate on wages, direct industry-specific exchange rate affect could still
potentially bias our 2SLS estimates (especially those that use exchange rate interacted with 1983
tariffs as an instrument). This omitted bias is however unlikely important because the coefficient
on tariffs hardly changes in columns 2 and 4 (relative to columns 1 and 2) after we control for
the interactions of the exchange rate with lagged exports and imports. Nevertheless, column 8
reports the 2SLS specification that includes lagged imports and exports and their interactions
with the exchange rate as controls and uses world coffee prices interacted with 1993 tariffs and




21
  Of course, to the extent that imports and exports are serially correlated, this approach does not completely
eliminate simultaneity bias. While we fail to reject that there is no serial correlation for exports, we reject the test
of no serial correlation in the case of imports (rho is .27 with p value of .001). However, the specification that
includes imports as a control variable is merely a robustness check and the coefficient on tariffs is not sensitive to
the inclusion of imports.
22
   See the discussion in section 4.1 that motivates the choice of instruments.



                                                          22
1993 tariffs as instruments. We continue to find that tariff declines are associated with declines
in wage premiums.
       These results suggest that trade policy had a significant effect on relative wages.
Workers employed in industries with larger tariff reductions experienced a decline of their wages
relative to the economy-wide average. This by itself does not imply an increase in inequality. If
the industries with the larger tariff reductions had been the industries with the initially highest
wage premiums, then trade policy would have reduced wage dispersion. However, our findings
suggest exactly the opposite pattern. The sectors that experienced the largest tariff reductions
were in fact the sectors with the highest shares of unskilled workers, and lowest wages (see
section 4.1 and Figure 1). In the manufacturing sector in particular, where most of the trade
liberalization was concentrated, the lowest wage premiums are estimated in textiles and apparel,
food processing, and wood and wood processing, all sectors that were heavily protected prior to
the reforms, and experienced the largest tariff cuts. In particular, textiles and apparel had tariff
cuts around 73 percentage points between 1984 and 1998, while the tariff reductions in food
processing and wood and wood processing were 29 and 49 percentage points respectively. These
tariff reductions are to be contrasted with the ones in the high wage premium sectors of coal
mining (tariff cut: 11 percentage points) and crude petroleum (tariff went actually up by 4
percentage points).
   The negative relationship between tariff reductions and pre-reform wage premiums is also
illustrated in Figure 2 that plots tariff reductions between 1984 and 1998 against the wage
premiums in the first year of our sample, 1984. A regression of annual tariff reductions against
wage premiums in 1984 confirms the impression conveyed by Figure 2: the wage premium
coefficient is negative and statistically significant (coefficient: -.064; p-value: .069) indicating
that the larger the wage premium the smaller the tariff cut (note tariff cuts are positive numbers
in this regression). The trade reform induced changes in the wage premiums could thus only
increase inequality.
6. Effects of Trade Reforms on Informality
       As noted in section 3, trade reforms could lead to an increase in inequality by expanding
the size of the informal sector. In Colombia, the informal sector employs 50 to 60 percent of the




                                                23
labor force and has been expanding during the 1990s.23 The presence of a large informal sector
provides an additional margin through which labor markets can adjust to external shocks in
developing economies. An emerging concern in many Latin American countries is that trade
liberalization has contributed to the rise in the number of informal workers (Stallings and Peres
(2000)). In particular, opponents of globalization have argued that firms exposed to increased
international competition may try to reduce costs by cutting worker benefits. To do this, large
and medium-sized firms, or multinationals, may outsource activities to small, informal firms,
including home-based and self-employed microenterpreneurs. Alternatively, they may replace
permanent, full-time workers, with temporary and/or part-time labor. Currie and Harrison
(1997), for instance, indeed find that after the trade liberalization in Morocco firms started hiring
more temporary workers. Consistent with this view, Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003b) present a
theoretical model that formally shows that permanent trade liberalization can result in an
increase in the informal employment.
         Because the informal sector does not provide benefits and it is believed to provide lower
job quality, a trade reform induced rise in informality may then contribute to the rise in
inequality, where inequality is broadly defined as the gap between those who have well paid jobs
with benefits and high job quality, and those who face lower wages, no benefits, and worse
workplace conditions. This claim is controversial. There is a large literature that claims that
employment in the informal sector is voluntary and should not therefore be considered an
inferior option. However, a special module in the 1994 NHS contains questions about work
conditions and job satisfaction that allow us to assess the validity of the claim that informality is
associated with lower job quality. We find that working in the informal sector is indeed
negatively correlated with job satisfaction, good workplace conditions, good employee relations,
and job training. The negative correlation between informality and various measures of job
quality suggests that it is potentially important to account for the informal sector in a study of
inequality.
         While the concerns about informality have received a lot of attention recently, there is no
sound empirical evidence linking the trade reforms to the increase in informal employment and

23
  An interesting feature of the Colombian data is that informality is present in all industries. This contrasts with the
widely held view that informality is a feature of specific sectors, such as wholesale and retail trade. While these
sectors do have the highest shares of informal workers in our sample (76 and 67% respectively), the share of
informal employment in manufacturing is 48%. Moreover, this share has increased over time in manufacturing,
peaking in 1996 and 1998.


                                                          24
addressing the possible effects increased informality may have on wage inequality. Our data set
with its detailed information on the informal sector is ideal for filling in this gap. As described
in section 2.2, the main criterion we use to assign firms to the informal sector is compliance with
labor market regulation. The NHS June waves ask workers whether their employer contributes
to social security. This information is an excellent proxy for formality, as it indicates whether or
not the employer complies with labor legislation. Furthermore, this definition has an obvious
appeal to trade economists as it relates to the debate on how labor standards/legislation affect
prices of tradable goods, and trade flows.
       We examine the claim that trade liberalization leads to an increase in informality by
employing a two-stage empirical framework similar to the one in section 5, but with an indicator
for whether a worker is employed in the informal establishment as the dependent variable. In the
first stage, the informality indicator is regressed against the same regressors as in equation (1).
The coefficient on the industry indicator captures the variation in the probability of informal
employment that cannot be explained by worker characteristics, but can be explained by
workers’ industry affiliation. We can these coefficients industry informality differentials. We
then express the informality differentials as deviation from the employment-weighted average
informality differential.   This normalized informality differential can be interpreted as the
percentage point difference in probability of informal employment for a worker in a given
industry relative to the average worker in all industries with the same observable characteristics.
Equation (1) is estimated separately for each year of our sample. In the second stage, we pool
these industry informality differentials across years and relate it to trade policy as in equation (2).
If the likelihood of employment in the informal sector increases with the magnitude of the tariff
reductions, trade liberalization will have contributed to the increase in informality.
       We should note that it is crucial to exploit both the cross-industry and time variation in
the trade policy changes to look at how informality relates to trade reforms. During the early
1990s Colombia implemented labor reforms that are thought to have significantly reduced the
rigidities in the formal labor markets and to have contributed to a shift from the informal to the
formal sector (Kugler (1999)). The use of the cross-sectional and time variation in the trade
policy changes enables us to separate the effects of industry specific trade policy changes from
the effects of economy-wide labor reforms. All our specifications include year indicators, which
capture the effect of economy-wide labor reforms, exchange rates, and other macro shocks. In



                                                  25
addition, as is the case in the analysis of wage premiums, because we condition our industry
informality differential estimates on worker characteristics in the first stage, our estimates of the
relationship between tariffs and informality are not driven by observable differences in worker
composition across industries that also affect industry ability to obtain protection. Finally,
industry fixed effects (or first-differencing) control for the unobserved time-invariant industry
(or worker) characteristics that might independently affect informality and tariffs.
         Table 8 presents the findings. Columns 1-3 report the results from the industry fixed
effects regressions. In all specifications the effect of tariffs on informality is negative and
significant. To interpret the size of the tariff coefficients, consider an industry from the
manufacturing sector with an average level of tariffs in 1998 (13%). Suppose that we conducted
the conceptual experiment of reducing tariffs to zero in this industry. Then the estimated
coefficient in column 1 suggests that the probability of this worker having an informal job would
rise by 1.1 percentage points (0.13 x .087). The corresponding effect in 1984, when the average
tariff was 50%, would be 4.4 percentage points (.5*.087).24
         Increased exposure to foreign markets could affect the probability of informal
employment through channels other than tariff reductions such as import competition. Column 2
of Table 8 reports the results from regression specifications that include the first lags of imports
and exports. The results contain two noteworthy findings. First, the tariff coefficient seems
robust to the inclusion of the additional trade controls.                 Second, the positive sign on the
coefficient on imports suggests that the probability of informal employment increases when an
industry faces higher import penetration.               This supports the view that increased foreign
competition forces domestic firms to become more competitive and reduce cost by either
subcontracting in the informal sector or by firing workers that in turn seek employment in the
informal sector. In column 3 of table 8, we allow the impact of imports and exports on
informality to vary with exchange rate fluctuations. We control for exchange rate fluctuations by
interacting the exchange rate with lagged values of imports and exports. While the inclusion of
exchange rate hardly changes the magnitude of the coefficients on tariff, the coefficients become
statistically insignificant. Moreover, our results continue to suggest that probability of informal
employment increases when an industry faces higher import competition.

24
  As in the case of wage premiums, we have also estimated the relationship between informality and tariffs in one-
step approach. This yielded similar conclusions as the two-stage industry fixed effects regressions. The coefficient
on tariff was -.126 and highly significant.


                                                         26
       We also estimate the relationship between informality and trade policy in first-differences
form and those results are reported in columns 4-6. Interestingly, while the positive association
between import competition and informality continues to hold, first-differences results suggest
no relationship between industry informality differentials and tariffs. In Goldberg and Pavcnik
(2003b) we investigate the discrepancy between the industry-fixed-effects results and first-
differences results further. We find that the labor market reform in 1990 that reduced the costs
of firing and hiring a worker and increased labor market turnover (see Kugler (1999), Heckman
and Pages (2000)) plays an important role. In particular, we allow the relationship between
informality and trade policy to differ before and after the Colombian labor market reform. Those
specifications yield interesting findings:    Tariff reductions are associated with increases in
informality before labor market reform in both the industry-fixed-effects and first-differences
specifications. However, we find no statistically significant (or a small positive association)
between informality and tariff changes after the labor market reform. These differences in the
results indicate that labor market institutions play a potentially important role in how trade
reform affects informal employment. In sum, we find that tariff declines are associated with an
increase in informal employment, but only in period before the labor market reforms.
       Given that the “discount” of informality increases in the later years of our sample, we
also examined if this increase was driven by changes in the return to informality in specific
sectors of the economy that were affected more by trade policy. To this end, we allowed in the
framework described above interactions between industry premiums and informality, and related
these interactions to industry tariffs. The tariff coefficients in these specifications were, however,
not statistically significant, indicating that the effect of trade policy on industry wages did not
vary across the formal and informal sectors. Put differently, the falling wages in the informal
sector cannot be attributed to decreasing wages in the informal sectors of industries that
experienced larger tariff reductions.
       In summary, our results provide some suggestive evidence that trade liberalization
contributed to an increase in the size of the informal sector in Colombia in the period before the
labor market reform. Because jobs in the informal sector do not provide benefits and are
associated with lower job satisfaction and quality of work, the rise in informality contributes to
the increase in inequality.
7. On the Role of Labor Market Institutions



                                                 27
   Our analysis so far has abstracted from the contributions of labor market institutions, such as
minimum wages and unions, to wage inequality. Changes in the minimum wage could
potentially affect the skill premium by compressing the lower end of the wage distribution.
However, while evidence suggests that the minimum wages are binding in Colombia (see Bell
(1997)), changes in minimum wages are of secondary importance during our sample period in
Colombia. The most significant increases in the minimum wage took place in the late 1970’s
and early 1980’s (see Bell (1997), Table 2). The changes in the late 1980’s and 1990’s were in
comparison small. Moreover, the minimum wage is set in Colombia at the national level, so that
minimum wages do not vary by industry. As a result, changes in the minimum wage cannot
explain the relationship between tariffs changes and changes in wage premium (or changes in
informality) in our study. Note that any effects minimum wage changes may have had on
industry wages (or probability of informal employment) through compositional channels, for
example because some industries employ more unskilled workers than others, are already
controlled for in our approach in section 5 and 6, since the first-stage regressions control for
industry composition in each year, and allow the returns to various educational and professional
categories to change from year to year.
       Regarding unionization, our individual level data do not provide information on the union
membership of each worker.           Unfortunately, detailed industry-level information on union
membership is also not available. As a result, the economy-wide increases in skill premium over
time documented in this paper could potentially reflect changes in union power (for example,
increases in skill premium could be attributed to unions if unions usually increase the relative wages
of the unskilled workers and the union power has declined over time). While in the absence of
industry-level union data we cannot formally address this issue, we believe that changes in
unionization are unlikely to be of concern during this period (especially in the analysis that related
industry-specific tariff changes to various labor market outcomes). Anecdotal evidence suggests that
unions do not have significant power in most Colombian industries (public sector and the petroleum
industry are the exception). In his book on Colombian reforms, Edwards (2001) confirms these
anecdotal reports. More importantly, there is no evidence (or even a claim) in the literature that
union strength changed during the period of trade liberalization. We therefore believe that changes
in unionization are unlikely to be driving our results.




                                                 28
       Finally, our discussion is premised on the existence of labor market rigidities in Colombia.
While we do not attempt a formal investigation of the role of such rigidities, their existence seems a-
priori relevant in Colombia, a country characterized by one of the most restrictive labor market
regimes in Latin America.      Indicatively, Heckman and Pages (2000) report that the cost of
dismissing a worker in Colombia is approximately 6 times the monthly wage at the end of the
1980’s, and 3.5 times the monthly wage at the end of the 1990’s (after the labor market reform).
Kugler (1999) reports similar findings on the costs of firing workers in Colombia. In addition,
several of our results seem consistent with the view that labor markets in Colombia are rigid, and
labor market regulation is to some extent binding.         For example, we fail to find big labor
reallocations in the aftermath of a major trade reform, from sectors that experienced large protection
declines to sectors that were less affected by liberalization: regressions of changes in sectoral
employment shares on tariff changes fail to detect any relationship between trade liberalization and
sectoral employment. This stability of industry employment shares seems consistent with
constrained labor mobility. Still, the lack of labor reallocation seems rather surprising given the
existence of a large informal sector in Colombia that does not comply with labor market regulation.
One possible explanation is that labor is more mobile across the formal and informal sectors, than
across industries. Indeed, in a related paper (Goldberg and Pavcnik (2003b)), we find that, while the
share of informal workers increased in Colombia in the aftermath of the trade reforms, the entire
increase is accounted for by within-industry changes from the formal to the informal sector, rather
than by between-industry shifts of informal workers.
8. Unemployment
       Up to this point, we have abstracted from the relationship between trade policy and
transition into unemployment. Table 9 reports the unemployment rate in urban Colombia during
our sample based on June waves of NHS Montenegro and Peña (2000) report similar trends in
overall unemployment based on the Department of National Planning data.                   Because
unemployment may be an important component of the adjustment mechanism to trade shocks, at
least in the short run, the natural question arises whether trade policy contributed to these
unemployment changes. Table 9 suggests that the urban unemployment rate declined from about
14 percent 1984 to 9.7 percent in 1994. Until the very end of our sample period unemployment
rates were remarkably stable and particularly so during the years around the tariff cuts. Only in




                                                29
1998, at the beginning of the worst recession in Colombian recent history and with no changes in
tariffs, did unemployment increase to 16%.
       Although the aggregate statistics seem to suggest that tariff reductions are unlikely to be
the main cause of the unemployment surge during the late 1990s, inferences based on
macroeconomic trends can be misleading. The link between trade policy and unemployment
could be better identified by relating detailed industry tariff changes to changes in industry
unemployment in an analysis parallel to the study of the relationship between informality and
tariffs in section 6.   Unfortunately, the lack of detailed data on industry affiliation of the
unemployed in the NHS precludes such an analysis. In particular, the unemployed workers that
were previously employed report the last industry of employment at the 1-digit ISIC level.
Similarly, the unemployed individuals who were not previously employed report the industry in
which they are seeking employment at the 1-digit ISIC level.             This leads to 9 industry
observations per year and only 6 out of 9 of these industries have available tariffs. Most
importantly, most of the time-variation in tariffs occurred within the manufacturing industries,
which are now treated as a single sector. As a result, we cannot pursue such an approach.
       To get a rough idea whether trade policy changes could be associated with increases in
unemployement, we instead check whether the increase in the probability of being unemployed
was greater for workers employed in traded-good sectors (such as manufacturing) than for
workers with the same observable characteristics in non-traded-good sectors (such as wholesale
and retail trade, restaurants, hotels, construction, etc.). We perform this analysis for two years at
a time, using a year before and after the major trade reforms in 1990/91. In particular, we
regress an indicator for whether an individual is unemployed on 1 digit ISIC industry indicators
(wholesale and retail trade, restaurants/hotels (ISIC 6) is the omitted category), an indicator for a
year following the trade reform, the interaction of industry indicators with the year indicator, and
a set of worker characteristics (age, age squared, male, married, head of the household, education
indicators, literate, lives in Bogota, born in urban area, time in residence, urban birth*time in
residence). If the probability of being unemployed increased relatively more over time in
manufacturing relative to a sector such as wholesale and retail trade and restaurants and hotels
(i.e. the coefficient on the interaction of the manufacturing indicator with year indicator is
positive and significant), this could provide some indirect (and suggestive) evidence that trade
reforms were associated with increases in the probability of unemployment.



                                                 30
       Table 10 presents the results.     Column 1 focuses on the changes in probability of
unemployment between the first and last year of our sample, 1984 and 1998 respectively. Two
findings emerge. First, as expected, the coefficient on the post trade reform year is positive and
significant, which reflects the aggregate increase in unemployment in Colombia during the
1990s. Second, the coefficient on the interaction of manufacturing indicator and the post trade
reform indicator is negative and insignificant.      This suggests that conditional on worker
characteristics, the probability of unemployment did not change in a statistically different way in
manufacturing sector relative to the non-traded reference sector. In fact, with the exception of
the transportation sector, we find no statistical differences in changes of the probability of
unemployment across industries between 1984 and 1998. This analysis seems to support the
view that the probability of unemployment did not change significantly in the manufacturing
sector relative to most non-traded sectors over the long run, even though the manufacturing
sector experienced drastic tariff declines. However, the above analysis might potentially miss
short-term adjustments to trade reform that occur during times closer to trade reform. As a
result, in column 2 we consider the unemployment adjustment in periods right before and after
the major tariff declines by focusing on changes in unemployment between 1988 and 1992.
While the coefficient on the interaction of the manufacturing indicator with the post trade reform
year continues to be negative, its magnitude increases in absolute value and is now statistically
significant (this could be potentially due to exchange rate depreciation in 1990/91 that lowered
the demand for nontraded goods relative to traded goods).
       In sum, albeit we cannot directly identify the effects of tariff declines on the probability
of employment, our data suggest that increases in the probability of unemployment before and
after tariff reductions were not larger in traded sectors (such as manufacturing) than in non-
traded sectors (such as wholesale and retail trade). If anything, the short-term changes in
unemployment suggest the opposite.
9. Conclusions
       In this paper we investigated the effects of the drastic tariff reductions of the 1980s and
1990s in Colombia on the wage distribution. We identified three main channels through which
the wage distribution could have been affected: increasing returns to college education, changes
in industry wages that hurt sectors with initially lower wages and a higher fraction of unskilled
workers, and shifts of the labor force towards the informal sector that typically pays lower wages



                                                31
and offers no benefits. Our results suggest that trade policy played a role in each of the above
cases. The increase in the skill premium was primarily driven by skilled-biased technological
change. However, as the sectors with the largest reductions in tariffs were those with the
sharpest increase in the share of skilled workers, we argue that this change may have been in part
motivated by the tariff reductions and the increased foreign competition to which the trade
reform exposed domestic producers.
       With respect to industry wages, we find that wage premiums decreased by more in
sectors that experienced larger tariff cuts. As these were the sectors with the lowest premiums,
this shift increased inequality. Finally, we find some evidence that the increase in the size of the
informal sector is related to increased foreign competition – sectors with larger tariff cuts and
more trade exposure, as measured by the size their imports, saw a greater increase in informality,
but only in the period prior to the labor market reform. Nevertheless, increasing returns to
education, and changes in industry premiums and informality alone cannot fully explain the
increase in wage inequality we observe over this period. This suggests that overall the effect of
the trade reforms on the wage distribution may have been small.
       Much work remains to be done. The two items that should be at the top of the research
agenda in this area are the study of the flows into unemployment (as this is bound to be an
important component of the adjustment mechanism, at least in the short run), and the effect that
unemployment -- to the extent that it is not randomly distributed -- may have on measured wage
inequality. Unfortunately, our current data is not well suited for answering this question. In
addition, the difference between the Colombian and Mexican experience is interesting and worth
further exploring, as it provides a fruitful ground for studying the conditions under which
policies aimed at promoting growth and efficiency have no (or relatively small) adverse effects
on the wage distribution. One potential explanation for the larger effect of the reforms on wage
inequality in Mexico hinges on the role of foreign direct investment, which was large in Mexico
(see Cragg and Epelbaum (1996) and Feenstra and Hanson (1997)). We do not attempt to resolve
these issues in this paper, but we leave them as a topic for further research. Finally, the effect
that competitive pressures may have on technology adoption and therefore on the demand for
skills is, in our opinion, a particularly important question deserving further investigation.




                                                 32
References


Acemoglu, D. (2002a): “Patterns of Skill Premia”, forthcoming Review of Economic Studies .


Acemoglu, D. (2002b): “Technical Change, Inequality, and the Labor Market”, Journal of
Economic Literature, Vol. 40, pp.7-72 .


Attanasio, O. and M. Szekely (2000): “Household Saving in East Asia and Latin America:
Inequality Demographics and All That”, in: Annual World Bank Conference on Development
Economics.


Bell, L. (1997): “The Impact of Minimum Wages in Mexico and Colombia”, Journal of Labor
Economics, Vol. 15, pp. S103-135.


Berman, E., Machin, S., and Bound, J. (1998): Implications of skill-biased technological
changes: International Evidence. Quarterly Journal of Economics 113, 1245-1279.

Cragg, M.I. and M. Epelbaum (1996): “Why has wage dispersion grown in Mexico? Is it the
incidence of reforms or the growing demand for skills?”, Journal of Development Economics,
Vol. 51, pp. 99-116.


Currie, J. and A. Harrison (1997): “Trade Reform and Labor Market Adjustment in
Morocco”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, pp. S44-71.


Dickens, W.T. and L.F. Katz (1986): “Interindustry Wage Differences and Industry
Characteristics”, NBER Working Paper No. 2014.


Echavarria, J., C. Gamboa and R. Guerrero (2000): "Escenarios de reforma a la estructura
arancelaria de la comunidad Andina", Fedesarrollo, manuscript.




                                              33
Edwards, S. (2001): The economics and politics of transition to an open market economy:
Colombia. OECD: Paris and Washington, D.C..

Feenstra, R. and G. Hanson (1997): “Foreign Direct Investment and Relative Wages: Evidence
From Mexico’s Maquiladoras,” Journal of International Economics, 42(3-4), pp. 371-393.


Feliciano, Z. (2001): “Workers and Trade Liberalization: The impact of trade reforms in Mexico on
wages and employment”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 55, No. 1.


Fernandes, A.M. (2001): “Trade Policy, Trade Volumes and Plant-Level Productivity in
Colombian Manufacturing Industries”, Yale University, manuscript.


Gaston, N. and D. Trefler (1994): “Protection, Trade and Wages: Evidence from U.S.
Manufacturing”, Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Vol. 47, No. 4, pp. 574-593.


Goldberg, P. and N. Pavcnik (2003a): “Trade, Wages, and the Political Economy of Trade
Protection: Evidence from the Colombian Trade Reforms”, manuscript, January 2003.


___________________________ (2003b): “The Response of the Informal Sector to Trade
Liberalization,” Journal of Development Economics, forthcoming.


Grossman, G. (1984): “International Competition and the Unionized Sector”, Canadian
Journal of Economics, Vol. 17, No. 3, pp. 541-556.


Grossman, G. (1986): “Imports as a Cause of Injury: The Case of the U.S. Steel Industry”,
Journal of International Economics, 20(3-4), pp. 201-223.


Grossman, G. and E. Helpman (1994): “Protection for Sale”, American Economic Review,
Vol. 84(4), pp. 833-850.




                                              34
Haisken-DeNew, J.P. and C.M. Schmidt (1997): "Inter-Industry and Inter-Region Wage
Differentials: Mechanics and Interpretation", Review of Economics and Statistics, Vol. 79, No. 3,
pp. 516-521.


Hanson, G. and A. Harrison (1999): “Who gains from trade reform? Some remaining
puzzles”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 59, pp. 125-154.


Harrison, A. (1994): “Productivity, Imperfect Competition and Trade Reform: Theory and
Evidence”, Journal of International Economics, Vol. 36 (1-2), pp. 53-73.


Harrison, A. and E. Leamer (1997): “Labor markets in developing countries: An agenda for
research”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, pp. S1-19.

Heckman J. and Pages C. (2000): “The Cost of Job Security Regulation: Evidence from Latin
American Labor Market,” NBER Working Paper 7773.

Johnston, L.N. (1996): “Trade Liberalization and Income Distribution: Insight from the
Colombian Reform”, Chapter 1 of Ph. D thesis: “Returns to Education, Human Capital and
Income Inequality in Colombia”, Harvard University.


Katz, L.F. and L. H. Summers (1989): “Industry Rents: Evidence and Implications”,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Microeconomics, pp. 209-275.


Kim, E. (2000): “Trade Liberalization and Productivity Growth in Korean Manufacturing
Industries: Price Protection, Market Power and Scale Efficiency”, Journal of Development
Economics, Vol. 62(1), pp. 55-83.


Krishna, P. and D. Mitra (1998): “Trade Liberalization, Market Discipline and Productivity
Growth; New Evidence from India”, Journal of Development Economics, Vol. 56(2), pp. 447-
462.




                                               35
Krueger, A.B. and L.H. Summers (1987): “Reflections on the Inter-Industry Wage Structure”,
in Lang, K. and S. Leonard (eds.): Unemployment and the Structure of Labor Markets, Basil
Blackwell, pp. 17-47.


Krueger, A.B. and L.H. Summers (1988): “Efficiency Wages and the Inter-Industry Wage
Structure”, Econometrica, Vol. 56, pp. 259-293.


Kugler, A. (1999): “The Impact of Firing Costs on Turnover and Unemployment: Evidence
from The Colombian Labour Market Reform”, International Tax and Public Finance Journal,
Vol. 6, no. 3, pp. 389-410.


Leamer, E. (1994): “Trade, Wages and the Revolving Door Ideas”, NBER Working Paper,
#4716, 1994.


Leamer, E. (1996): “What's the use of factor contents?” NBER Working Paper #5448, 1996.


Leamer, E. (1998): “In search of Stolper-Samuelson Effects on U.S. Wages,” in S.Collins, ed.,
Exports, imports and the American economy, Brookings, 1998.


Leamer, E., H. Maul, S. Rodriguez, and P. Schott (2002): “Does Natural Resource
Abundance Cause Latin American Inequality?” Journal of Development Economics, 59(1), pp.
3-42.


Montenegro, S. and X. Pena (2000): “Labor reforms, macroeconomic imbalances, and
unemployment in Colombia,” manuscript, Los Andes University.


Nuñez Mendez, J. and F. Sanchez Torres (2001): “A Dynamic Analysis of Household
Decision Making in Urban Colombia, 1976-1998”, manuscript, Bogota, Colombia.


Pavcnik. N. (2002): “Trade Liberalization, Exit and Productivity Improvements: Evidence from
Chilean Plants ”, Review of Economic Studies, 69, January 2002, pp. 245-76.



                                              36
Pavcnik. N. (2003): “What explains skill upgrading in less developed countries? ”, Journal of
Development Economics forthcoming.


Rodrik, D. (1991): “Closing the Productivity Gap: Does Trade Liberalization Really Help? ”,
in: Helleiner, G. (ed.) Trade Policy, Industrialization and Development, Clarendon Press,
Oxford.


Revenga, A. (1992): “Exporting Jobs? The Impact of Import Competition on Employment and
Wages in U.S. Manufacturing”, Quarterly Journal of Economics, 107(1), pp. 255-284.


Revenga, A. (1997): “Employment and wage effects of trade liberalization: The Case of
Mexican Manufacturing”, Journal of Labor Economics, Vol. 15, pp. S20-43.


Robbins, D. (1996): “Evidence on Trade and Wages in the Developing World,” OECD
Technical Paper No. 119.


Roberts, M. and J. Tybout (1991): “Size Rationalization and Trade Exposure in Developing
Countries”, in Baldwin, R. (ed.) Empirical Studies of Commercial Policy, University of Chicago
Press.


Roberts, M. and J. Tybout (eds.) (1996): Industrial Evolution in Developing Countries: Micro
Patterns of Turnover, Productivity and Market Structure, Oxford University Press, New York.


Roberts, M. and J. Tybout (1997): "The Decision to Export in Colombia: An Empirical Model
of Entry with Sunk Costs", American Economic Review, Vol. 87, pp. 545-564.


Robertson, R. (1999): “Inter-Industry Wage Differentials Across Time, Borders, and Trade
Regimes: Evidence from the U.S. and Mexico”, Macalester College, manuscript.




                                               37
Stallings, B. and W. Peres (2000), “Growth, Employment and Equity. The Impact of the
Economic Reforms in Latin American and Caribbean”, Economic Commission for Latin
American and Caribbean, Brookings Institution Press, Washington.


Thoenig, M and T Verdier (2002): “A Theory of Defensive Skill-based Innovation and
Globalization”, forthcoming American Economic Review.


United Nations (1994): Directory of Import Regimes Part I: Monitoring Import Regimes,
United Nations, Geneva.


Wood, A. (1995): “How Trade Hurt Unskilled Workers”, Journal of Economic Perspectives,
9(3), pp. 57-80.


Wood, A. (1999): “Openness and Wage Inequality in Developing Countries: The Latin
American Challenge to East Asian Conventional Wisdom”, in: Baldwin, R. et-al. (eds.) Market
integration, regionalism and the global economy, Cambridge University Press, pp. 153-181.




                                             38
                                         Figure 1—Tariff Reductions and Share of Unskilled Workers


                            80
                                                                                                                                32




                            60
Tariff Decline 1998-1984




                                                                                                                                33

                                                                                                                  39
                            40
                                                                            34                          38                 36
                                                                                                                      31

                                                                                 35                               37
                            20
                                                                                                                 11        12             13
                                                                           21                     29
                                                           23

                                                                           41
                             0     22                       83                                                                                 95
                                                      61

                                                                            94
                           -20
                                        30      40          50        60         70        80                                             90        100
                                                           Share of Unskilled Workers 1984




                                        Figure 2—Tariff Reductions and Initial (1984) Wage Premiums

                           80
                                                                            32




                           60
Tariff Decline 1998-1984




                                                                      33

                                                                           39
                           40
                                                                      36              38
                                                                            3 13 4

                                                                                           3375
                           20
                                        13                                       12 11
                                                                                                       29                            21
                                                                                                                                     23

                                                                                            41
                            0                                                                                                                  22
                                                                 95                   83
                                                                                                                 61

                                                                                                  94
                           -20
                                 -.4            -.2                   0                                     .2                            .4
                                                                Wage Premium 1984




                                                                                      39
                 Table 1a--Trade Policy Summary


     Year            N        Mean          S.D.         Min          Max
Tariffs
All Industries
     1984           21         27.4         24.8          0.0         91.0
     1985           21         22.2         16.7          0.0         50.1
     1988           21         20.7         16.0          0.0         48.7
     1990           21         17.5         14.0          0.0         38.7
     1992           21         10.6          4.1          5.0         17.7
     1994           21          9.7          4.8          0.0         17.8
     1996           21          9.8          5.1          0.0         17.9
     1998           21          9.9          5.1          0.0         17.9

Manufacturing
     1984             9        49.8         19.0         29.2         91.0
     1985             9        36.6          9.5         22.5         50.1
     1988             9        33.5         11.1         17.1         48.7
     1990             9        29.1          9.1         15.2         38.7
     1992             9        12.9          3.4          8.4         17.7
     1994             9        12.9          3.6          8.0         17.8
     1996             9        13.0          3.9          7.5         17.9
     1998             9        13.1          3.8          7.8         17.9

NTBs
All Industries
     1986           17         72.4         15.3         38.5         89.5
     1988           17         72.9         16.1         37.7         93.7
     1992           17          1.1          1.2          0.0          4.5
Note: N stands for number of 2-digit ISIC industries with available data.
Authors' calculations based on tariff and NTB data provided by DNP and the
UN.
                                   Table 1b--National Household Survey Summary Statistics


                                         1984         1986         1988         1990         1992        1994         1996         1998
Hourly wage (current pesos)             115.4        168.7       259.1        430.5        686.9       1337.6       1850.6   2725.0
log hourly wage                            4.4          4.8         5.2          5.7          6.1          6.7          7.0      7.4
Weekly wage (current pesos)            5109.0       7158.4     11396.0      18787.2      30000.1      59260.2      79884.4 112281.7
log weekly wage                            8.2          8.5         9.0          9.5          9.9        10.5         10.8     11.2
Male                                     .622         .619        .601         .606         .587         .591         .589     .553
Age                                      33.7         33.8        33.9         34.3         34.3         34.7         35.2     35.6
Married                                  .427         .413        .385         .411         .392         .357         .358     .356
Head of the household                    .471         .468        .453         .474         .459         .462         .464     .457
Literate                                 .970         .973        .978         .980         .978         .985         .982     .981
No complete schooling                    .218         .197        .178         .155         .144         .121         .118     .119
Elementary school complete               .489         .479        .480         .479         .473         .465         .434     .393
Secondary school complete                .218         .238        .250         .264         .282         .304         .326     .350
University complete*                     .076         .087        .092         .102         .101         .109         .121     .137
Lives in Bogota                          .434         .435        .424         .429         .402         .524         .439     .386
Occupation Indicators
Professional/Technical                    .103         .103        .107         .109         .113         .111         .121         .135
Management                                .012         .013        .013         .018         .020         .020         .016         .021
Personnel                                 .138         .133        .128         .126         .124         .137         .130         .132
Sales                                     .180         .186        .195         .192         .190         .191         .201         .196
Servant                                   .194         .196        .188         .185         .191         .172         .174         .194
Agricultural/Forest                       .013         .013        .015         .016         .013         .009         .010         .010
Manual Manufacturing                      .360         .356        .354         .353         .348         .360         .347         .312
Job Type Indicators
Private Employee                          .530         .550        .551         .546         .564         .585         .569         .523
Government Employee                       .118         .116        .107         .108         .099         .080         .085         .089
Private Household Employee                .064         .067        .058         .054         .050         .035         .032         .047
Self-employed                             .242         .220        .227         .227         .224         .234         .261         .282
Employer                                  .046         .047        .056         .065         .064         .066         .053         .059
Place of work characteristics
single-person establishment                            .250        .244         .253         .247         .252         .263         .311
2 to 5 person establishment                            .218        .223         .192         .215         .193         .205         .196
6-10 person establishment                              .080        .093         .063         .083         .085         .078         .073
11 or more person establishment                        .451        .440         .492         .455         .470         .454         .420
Work in a building                                     .597        .600         .674         .608         .615         .616         .597
Informal sector                                        .577        .568         .574         .564         .516         .609         .590

Number of observations                 36,717       28,481       31,006      25,950       27,521       18,070       27,365       30,092
Note: The reported means are weighted using survey weights. We define complete university if a person completes 5 or more years of post
secondary education.
 Table 2a--Aggregate Wage Inequality


Year    Std. Log Wage     90-10 Percentile

  84              .809                 1.881
  86              .816                 1.938
  88              .793                 1.841
  90              .773                 1.833
  92              .812                 1.938
  94              .816                 1.857
  96              .820                 1.897
  98              .893                 2.164
       Table 2b--Wage Inequality Within Education Categories


           Std. Of Log Wage                      90-10 Percentile

      no school/                          no school/
     elementary secondary university     elementary    secondary university

84        .722       .652       .673          1.650       1.519      1.611
86        .742       .670       .706          1.695       1.504      1.747
88        .696       .690       .734          1.609       1.455      1.792
90        .675       .656       .702          1.540       1.447      1.828
92        .717       .687       .695          1.649       1.553      1.757
94        .680       .718       .845          1.482       1.571      1.920
96        .694       .699       .789          1.584       1.558      1.879
98        .754       .742       .798          1.735       1.658      1.897
                                   Table 3--Estimates of Earnings Equation



                                         1986       1988       1990       1992       1994       1996       1998

age                                      .033       .030       .028       .032       .022       .026       .030
                                       [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]    [0.002]
age squared                            -.0003     -.0003     -.0003     -.0003     -.0002     -.0002     -.0003
                                      [0.0000]   [0.0000]   [0.0000]   [0.0000]   [0.0000]   [0.0000]   [0.0000]
male                                     .119       .142       .107       .124       .059       .077       .085
                                       [0.010]    [0.009]    [0.010]    [0.010]    [0.013]    [0.010]    [0.010]
married                                  .102       .098       .076       .076       .078       .083       .092
                                       [0.009]    [0.008]    [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.011]    [0.009]    [0.009]
head of the household                    .065       .076       .081       .068       .098       .095       .082
                                       [0.010]    [0.009]    [0.010]    [0.010]    [0.012]    [0.010]    [0.010]
elementy school                          .225       .194       .165       .219       .210       .191       .189
                                       [0.011]    [0.010]    [0.011]    [0.012]    [0.016]    [0.013]    [0.013]
secondary school                         .512       .456       .428       .483       .490       .448       .474
                                       [0.014]    [0.013]    [0.014]    [0.015]    [0.019]    [0.015]    [0.015]
university degree                        .878       .849       .784       .877       .955       .921       .984
                                       [0.023]    [0.020]    [0.021]    [0.022]    [0.027]    [0.022]    [0.022]
literate                                 .190       .229       .183       .186       .115       .152       .157
                                       [0.023]    [0.023]    [0.026]    [0.026]    [0.038]    [0.029]    [0.028]
lives in bogota                          .128       .112       .130       .087       .071       .177       .241
                                       [0.009]    [0.008]    [0.009]    [0.009]    [0.010]    [0.010]    [0.013]
Professional                             .397       .457       .476       .479       .477       .480       .459
                                       [0.022]    [0.020]    [0.020]    [0.020]    [0.027]    [0.021]    [0.021]
Management                               .600       .742       .836       .935       .701       .671       .613
                                       [0.040]    [0.038]    [0.035]    [0.035]    [0.040]    [0.036]    [0.037]
Personell                                .127       .120       .111       .143       .141       .144       .097
                                       [0.018]    [0.016]    [0.017]    [0.017]    [0.022]    [0.017]    [0.018]
Sales                                    .155       .156       .147       .191       .218       .198       .149
                                       [0.019]    [0.018]    [0.018]    [0.018]    [0.023]    [0.018]    [0.019]
Blue collar worker Agriculture           .117       .210       .156       .153       .257       .116       .143
                                       [0.050]    [0.046]    [0.049]    [0.049]    [0.065]    [0.056]    [0.051]
Blue collar worker Manufacturing         .075       .092       .071       .104       .100       .110       .032
                                       [0.016]    [0.015]    [0.015]    [0.015]    [0.020]    [0.016]    [0.016]
private firm employee                   -.468      -.499      -.478      -.433      -.525      -.433      -.425
                                       [0.020]    [0.017]    [0.018]    [0.018]    [0.023]    [0.019]    [0.019]
government employee                     -.379      -.401      -.356      -.327      -.368      -.312      -.264
                                       [0.027]    [0.025]    [0.025]    [0.026]    [0.035]    [0.028]    [0.028]
private HH employee                     -.298      -.223      -.341      -.224      -.317      -.084      -.213
                                       [0.032]    [0.029]    [0.032]    [0.031]    [0.044]    [0.034]    [0.032]
self-employed                           -.527      -.496      -.394      -.402      -.459      -.336      -.498
                                       [0.024]    [0.021]    [0.024]    [0.024]    [0.031]    [0.024]    [0.023]
born in urban area                       .053       .051       .079       .070       .043       .058       .076
                                       [0.020]    [0.019]    [0.020]    [0.022]    [0.028]    [0.022]    [0.025]
time in residence                        .000      -.001      -.001      -.002      -.002      -.003      -.001
                                       [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]
urban birth*time in residence            .001       .002       .001       .002       .002       .002       .000
                                       [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]    [0.001]
informal sector                         -.045      -.056      -.058      -.036      -.017      -.131      -.116
                                       [0.011]    [0.010]    [0.009]    [0.010]    [0.013]    [0.010]    [0.011]
establishment with 2-5 people           -.015      -.016       .011       .025      -.035       .070       .016
                                       [0.017]    [0.015]    [0.019]    [0.019]    [0.026]    [0.018]    [0.017]
establishment with 6-10 people           .044       .096       .128       .124       .043       .139       .088
                                       [0.022]    [0.020]    [0.025]    [0.023]    [0.031]    [0.023]    [0.022]
establishment with 11 or more p.         .117       .129       .169       .190       .088       .181       .130
                                       [0.020]    [0.019]    [0.022]    [0.022]    [0.028]    [0.020]    [0.019]
works in a building                      .150       .176       .134       .117       .156       .138       .113
                                       [0.011]    [0.010]    [0.011]    [0.011]    [0.014]    [0.011]    [0.011]
Number of Observations                  28481      31006      25950      27521      18070      27365      30092
R2                                         .37        .40        .41        .40        .37        .39        .41
Industry Indicators                       yes        yes        yes        yes        yes        yes        yes
                                    Table 4--Returns to Education relative to Elementary School

                                                                                                                                    Change
                                              1986        1988         1990         1992        1994         1996         1998     1998-86
No Industry or Occupation Indicators
secondary school-elementary                   .370         .345         .350        .343         .352        .322         .346        -.024
university degree-elementary                  .942         .961         .963       1.007        1.070       1.038        1.109         .167

Industry Indicators
secondary school-elementary                   .342         .316         .327        .321         .333         .301        .322        -.020
university degree-elementary                  .887         .899         .905        .956        1.025         .988       1.049         .162

Industry Indicators*(Secondary or College Education) Interaction
secondary school-elementary        .399     .348       .335      .338                            .408         .311        .368        -.031
university degree-elementary       .927     .917       .892      .956                           1.088         .985       1.083         .156


Occupation Indicators
secondary school-elementary                   .302         .275         .274        .272         .290         .268        .295        -.007
university degree-elementary                  .680         .680         .650        .681         .776         .755        .818         .138


Industry and Occupation Indicators
secondary school-elementary        .287                    .262         .263        .264         .280         .257        .285        -.002
university degree-elementary       .653                    .655         .619        .658         .745         .730        .795         .142


Note: Entries are the differences between estimated education returns for secondary school and elementary school (university degree and
elementary school) based on education coefficients from regressions that always include the following regressors: age, age squared, male,
married, head of the HH, literate, lives in Bogota, job type indicators (private firm employee, government employee, private HH employee, self-
employed), informal, establishment with 2-5 people, establishment with 6-10 people, establishment with 11 or more people, works in a building.
                            Table 5--Industry Employment


                  Industry Share in Overall               Share of Skilled Workers in
ISIC Code               Employment                                  Industry
                            1984            1998                    1984             1998
            11             .0130            .0091                    .247            .289
            12             .0001            .0001                    .194            .272
            13             .0003            .0006                    .110            .481
            21             .0015            .0005                    .421            .537
            22             .0015            .0017                    .738            .899
            23             .0002            .0001                    .522            .371
            29             .0005            .0005                    .317            .380
            31             .0358            .0343                    .230            .498
            32             .0908            .0763                    .167            .336
            33             .0194            .0166                    .171            .321
            34             .0158            .0120                    .414            .603
            35             .0241            .0211                    .394            .621
            36             .0107            .0097                    .200            .490
            37             .0034            .0031                    .232            .389
            38             .0348            .0280                    .283            .471
            39             .0063            .0053                    .237            .505
            41             .0049            .0047                    .422            .665
            42             .0028            .0016                    .295            .701
            50             .0691            .0570                    .141            .267
            61             .0108            .0155                    .565            .625
            62             .1932            .1955                    .249            .456
            63             .0354            .0406                    .133            .278
            71             .0560            .0624                    .233            .416
            72             .0054            .0109                    .502            .830
            81             .0219            .0202                    .776            .947
            82             .0058            .0057                    .752            .918
            83             .0436            .0564                    .512            .685
            91             .0425            .0369                    .545            .851
            92             .0017            .0015                    .328            .502
            93             .0883            .1078                    .705            .857
            94             .0132            .0175                    .410            .626
            95             .1469            .1461                    .063            .194
            96             .0003            .0005                    .555            .953
Note: Skilled workers are workers with complete secondary or university education.
                                        Table 6--Share of Skilled Workers and Trade Policy

                                    (1)                (2)              (3)               (4)              (5)             (6)
Nominal tariff                      -0.172**           -0.156**         -0.232**          -0.046           -.0798          -0.2110**
                                    [0.076]            [0.072]          [0.104]           [0.069]          [0.0945]        [0.0906]
                                                                                                           tariffs 83,
                                                        exchange                                           exchange        tariffs 83,
                                                       rate* tariffs     coffee price*                     rate* tariffs   coffee price*
Instruments                         none               83               tariffs 83        none             83              tariffs 83
First differences                   no                 no               no                yes              yes             yes
Year Indicators                     yes                yes              yes               yes              yes             yes
Industry Indicators                 yes                yes              yes               no               no              no
Note: ** and * indicate 5 and 10 % significance, respectively. Reported standard errors are robust and clustered on industry. Columns 1-3 are
estimated with industry fixed effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated in first differences. N is 168 in columns 1-3 and 147 in columns 4-6.
                                                     Table 7-- Industry wage premiums and trade policy
                                (1)           (2)               (3)           (4)                (5)           (6)               (7)               (8)
Nominal tariff                  0.0660** 0.0682**               0.1191**      0.1356**           0.0444**      .0416             0.0496*           0.0401**
                                [0.0125]      [0.0161]          [0.0257]      [0.0251]           [0.0120]      [0.0244]          [0.0241]          [0.0158]
Lagged Imports                                -0.00008**                      .00002                                                               .00002
                                              [0.00002]                       [0.00005]                                                            [0.00003]
Lagged Export                                 .00004                          .00007                                                               -.00002
                                              [0.00011]                       [0.00017]                                                            [0.00013]
Lagged Imports*Ex.Rate                        .0000003                        .0000001                                                             .0000001
                                              [0.0000004]                     [0.0000005]                                                          [0.0000004]
Lagged Exports*Ex.Rate                        0.0000005**                     0.0000015*                                                           .0000008
                                              [0.0000002]                     [0.0000008]                                                          [0.0000006]

                                                                                                 exchange                       tariffs 83,      tariffs 83,
                                                                                                 rate* tariffs tariffs 83, ex. coffee            coffee
Instruments                     none          none              none          none               83            rate* tariffs 83 prices*tariffs83 prices*tariffs83
First differences               no            no                yes           yes                yes           yes               yes               yes
Year Indicators                 yes           yes               yes           yes                yes           yes               yes               yes
Industry Indicators             yes           yes               no            no                 no            no                no                no
Note: ** and * indicate 5 and 10 % significance, respectively. Reported standard errors are robust and clustered by industry. Columns 1-2 are estimated with industry
fixed effects. Columns 3-8 are estimated in first differences. N is 168 in columns 1-2 and 147 in columns 3-8.




                                                                                 15
                             Table 8--Probability of informal employment and trade policy

                                 (1)              (2)            (3)                (4)            (5)              (6)
Nominal tariff                   -0.087**         -0.096*        -.0930             .0180          -.0110           -.0040
                                 [0.038]          [0.053]        [0.059]            [0.012]        [0.033]          [0.033]
Lagged Imports                                    0.00025** 0.00044**                              0.00009*         0.00035**
                                                  [0.00006]      [0.00009]                         [0.00004]        [0.00008]
Lagged Exports                                    -0.00033*      -.00031                           -0.00022**       -.00008
                                                  [0.00017]      [0.00027]                         [0.00010]        [0.00009]
Lagged Imports*Ex.Rate                                           -0.0000026**                                       -0.000002**
                                                                 [0.0000007]                                        [0.000001]
Lagged Exports*Ex.Rate                                           -.0000002                                          -0.000002*
                                                                 [0.0000012]                                        [0.000001]


First differences                no               no             no                 yes            yes              yes
Year Indicators                  yes              yes            yes                yes            yes              yes
Industry Indicators              yes              yes            yes                no             no               no
Note: ** and * indicate 5 and 10 % significance, respectively. Reported standard errors are robust and clustered on industry. N is
147 in columns 1-3 and 126 in columns 4-6. Columns 1-3 are estimated with industry fixed effects. Columns 4-6 are estimated in first
differences.
1     Table 9--Aggregate Unemployment


         Year            Unemployment
          84                              .1369
          86                              .1459
          88                              .1193
          90                              .1097
          92                              .1113
          94                              .0974
          96                              .1175
          98                              .1584
    Note: Share of unemployed in total labor
    force based on June waves of NHS.
                   Table 10--Probability of Unemployment




                                                        (1)              (3)

agriculture, hunting, forestry (ISIC 1)                 0.059**          0.026**
                                                        [0.012]          [0.011]
mining/quarrying (ISIC 2)                               0.087**          .026
                                                        [0.028]          [0.022]
manufacturing (ISIC 3)                                  -.006            -0.009*
                                                        [0.004]          [0.004]
electricity/gas/water (ISIC 4)                          0.029*           -.005
                                                        [0.017]          [0.016]
construction (ISIC 5)                                   0.097**          0.046**
                                                        [0.007]          [0.008]
transportation/communication (ISIC 7)                   0.016**          .008
                                                        [0.006]          [0.006]
Financing/insurance/business services (ISIC 8) 0.036**                   0.046**
                                                        [0.007]          [0.008]
Community/Social/Personal Services (ISIC 9) -0.044**                     -0.031**
                                                        [0.004]          [0.004]
ISIC_1*post trade reform year                           -.014            -.003
                                                        [0.019]          [0.017]
ISIC_2*post trade reform year                           -.041            .047
                                                        [0.041]          [0.037]
ISIC_3*post trade reform year                           -.008            -0.018**
                                                        [0.007]          [0.006]
ISIC_4*post trade reform year                           -.035            .014
                                                        [0.025]          [0.023]
ISIC_5*post trade reform year                           -.016            -.001
                                                        [0.011]          [0.011]
ISIC_7*post trade reform year                           -0.033**         -.010
                                                        [0.009]          [0.009]
ISIC_8*post trade reform year                           -.010            -0.028**
                                                        [0.010]          [0.011]
ISIC_9*post trade reform year                           .005             -.006
                                                        [0.006]          [0.006]
post trade reform year                                  0.026**          .005
                                                        [0.004]          [0.004]
age                                                     -0.015**         -0.012**
                                                        [0.000]          [0.000]
agesq                                                   0.000**          0.000**
                                                        [0.000]          [0.000]
male                                                    -0.042**         -0.043**
                                                        [0.003]          [0.003]
married                                                 -0.032**         -0.017**
                                                        [0.002]          [0.002]
head of the HH                                          -0.075**         -0.064**
                                                        [0.003]          [0.003]
elementy school                                         0.015**          0.009**
                                                        [0.003]          [0.003]
secondary school                                        0.009**          .005
                                                        [0.004]          [0.004]
university degree                                       -0.035**         -0.037**
                                                        [0.004]          [0.004]
literate                                                0.011*           0.016**
                                                        [0.007]          [0.006]
lives in bogota                                         -0.022**         -0.023**
                                                        [0.003]          [0.003]
born in urban area                                      0.027**          0.023**
                                                        [0.006]          [0.006]
time in residence                                       0.001**          0.001**
                                                        [0.000]          [0.000]
urban birth*time in residence                           -0.001**         -0.001**
                                                        [0.000]          [0.000]

Years Used                                              1984, 1998       1988, 1992
Post Trade Reform year                                  1998             1992
Number of Observations                                  91393            79807
Note: ** and * indicate 5 and 10 % significance, respectively. ISIC 6 (wholesale and
Retail Trade and Restaurants and hotels) is the excluded 1-digit ISIC industry.
